

Chapter 4
CONFRONTING POLICIES
The CNAA had been created as a policy instruments to increase access to ‘higher’ or university-level education outside the universities, and simultaneously to guarantee or raise standards in appropriate institutions.
Irrespective of the certainties or ambiguities in the roles that it had begun to develop, the CNAA was also — as a policy instrument — incomplete.
It could oversee the substantial new academic development but it could not determine the shape of the sector of higher education it performed only one part in developing.
The government's decision — a rough mixture of logic and irrationality — to establish a ‘binary’ system of higher education completed, at least for the foreseeable future, the policy diagram which contained the CNAA.
From the second half of the 1960s the CNAA was increasingly involved in the award of degrees for students on courses which it had approved, in a sector of education whose boundaries were being drawn from elsewhere.
A central feature of the government's binary policy and the concept of a ‘public sector’ was the decision to concentrate a good deal of advanced work in a new generation of ‘polytechnics’— a title borrowed from an earlier response to technological and economic demand — the generation of polytechnics created in London in the last two decades of the nineteenth century.
The polytechnics of the new binary policy were to be a key group of partners for the CNAA from roughly the beginning of the 1970s: the Assistant Director of Hatfield Polytechnic spoke of the polytechnics and the CNAA as ‘inseparable…
Theirs is a symbiotic association’.
Operationally, the CNAA was crucial to the binary policy and to the establishment of the polytechnics, but the CNAA had no part in shaping the policy itself.
The ‘rough mixture’ from which the policy derived was neither advocated nor forecast by the Robbins Committee, nor an inevitable outcome of the creation of the CNAA.
It was one option chosen by Tony Crosland and his advisers from 1965.
The question to be faced after the Robbins deliberations was whether the solutions they had proposed for the CATs constituted a model for future action.
Was ‘promotion’ to university status to be the goal of all ‘developing’institutions in association with the CNAA?
Having settled one set of problems and delineated a pattern for higher education, had Robbins left the way open for a succession of what Eric Robinson called ‘small cadet universities’—; some of which were in fact very similar to the CATs, and others of which might see no future except in aspiring to enter the university sector?
On the other hand, was the local authority segment of higher education constantly to lose its premier institutions to the universities, and be left with a permanently subordinate pattern of further education colleges doing a proportion of advanced work?.
The options and the commitments were various, and some form of rationalization, clarity or working hypothesis became essential once the Robbins proposals for immediate action were endorsed.
It is clear that on the Conservative side, before defeat in the 1964 General Election, Edward Boyle was attracted to a binary solution and in March of that year put a paper on it to a Cabinet committee.
By the time Tony Crosland became Secretary of State (following Michael Stewart, Labour's first Secretary of State for Education) he was overcoming his initial resistance to the binary idea, and was quickly to become a firm advocate.
There is little doubt also that within the DES the binary solution had been canvassed for some time, and throughout the life of the Robbins Committee interest in it was being shown in the Association of Teachers in Technical Institutes and elsewhere.
The Robbins proposals, however, pointed towards a system of CNAA tutelage for those institutions which might have university aspirations but which had not, like the CATs, yet earned their spurs.
The choice of a binary direction, along which there would be two types of higher education, was far from what the Robbins Committee had intended.
Robbins insisted that the Committee had not intended to erect a barrier of that kind, and deplored Crosland's establishment of ‘a rigid line between them never again to be crossed’.
He confessed:
I just can't understand what has happened.
Here you have a Labour government which is attempting, for good or for bad, to introduce the comprehensive principle into the schools…
At the same time, they are deepening the existence of lines of division in higher education and actually announcing…that these divisions are to be permanent.
In the House of Commons Sir Edward Boyle argued similarly the case for a ‘continuing place for the non-autonomous sector within our national system of higher education’, but, he reflected, ‘I was careful to preach no ‘doctrine of eternal separation’, as Lord Robbins called it'.
In the meantime, however, Crosland was propounding and enacting an increasingly committed version of the binary policy, the philosophy and the detail of which were worked out and announced essentially between April 1965 and April 1967.
In April 1965 he argued the case for maintaining two separate sectors, without automatic movement ‘upwards’ from one to the other.
The  ‘public sector’ had its own traditions and characteristics, and could respond to the need for vocational or professional preparation.
It would be unhealthy to have a sector constantly depleted by institutions moving into what he called ‘the University Club’, and it was desirable to have a sector ‘under social control, and directly responsive to social needs’.
It was a buoyant pronouncement, suggesting that the new sector would be Britain's answer to the industrial and vocational needs served in some other countries by long-established, high-status technological institutions.
Over the next two years the language of the policy was toned down, but the policy itself was sharpened.
It came to include the policy for polytechnics, that is — a measure of concentration — announced in the 1966 White Paper, and more or less finalized in a Parliamentary statement in April 1967, when Crosland announced confirmation of a list of twenty-eight polytechnics in England and Wales, leaving open the possibility of two more.
The White Paper had stipulated that once the list was announced there would be no further designation of polytechnics for at least ten years.
Notes for Guidance were distributed together with the Parliamentary statement, indicating how individual schemes were to be prepared with the object of creating ‘institutions which can be developed as comprehensive academic communities offering a wide range of disciplines and catering for full-time, sandwich and part-time students at all levels of higher education’.
Guidance was given on the government and academic organization of polytechnics: the system of government needed to be suitable for institutions serving national as well as regional and local needs, and to be attractive to staff who would be able to ‘share fully in their government and management as academic communities’.
Governing bodies needed to have ‘a large measure of autonomy’, and appropriate responsibilities needed to be delegated to Directors, Academic Boards and the staff directly concerned.
A note on research in polytechnics was to have considerable significance in the history of the polytechnics.
It began:
The main responsibilities of the polytechnics will be as teaching institutions, but it will be necessary to make provision for research which is essential to the proper fulfilment of their teaching functions and the maintenance and development of close links with industry…
The Secretary of State believes that Polytechnics — and indeed other colleges which are suitably staffed and equipped — should be able to make a valuable contribution to the research needs of industry on their own distinctive lines and particularly in specialist fields of direct interest to industry in their areas.
The Secretary of State hoped that qualified members of the teaching staff would pursue research that would contribute to the ‘better performance of their teaching duties’, but he did not envisage that ‘in the ordinary way it will be necessary for members of the academic staff to devote the whole or most of their time to research’.
Underlying these policy statements, and  spelled out clearly in January 1967 in another speech by Crosland, was a portrayal of the distinctive history and character of the technical colleges — an emphasis which suggested both the positive virtues and potential of the polytechnics and the public sector in general, and the uncertainties and limitations involved — as highlighted by the ambiguities of the statement on research.
The 1966 White Paper made it clear that the polytechnics were not to have a monopoly of higher education in the public sector, but they were to have priority development in resource allocations for this purpose.
The polytechnics were from this point onwards to have greater opportunities for development than other colleges, as a result of the operation of two factors.
First, the procedure for approving the establishment of courses —; before their being submitted for academic validation by the CNAA — was administered by HMI through the Regional Advisory Councils (RACs), and this procedure was operated in favour of the polytechnics.
Secondly, the pooling system for higher education expenditure amongst local authorities was one which protected those authorities in which the newly-designated polytechnics happened to be situated.
As one former polytechnic director comments: ‘the polytechnics made good use of their favoured position’, but ‘the course approval policy was about the only positive assistance the DES gave; their capital programme allocations never matched the role given to the polytechnics’.
Although the CNAA acquired this new set of privileged partners, it also retained those institutions which shared to one extent or another in the provision of higher education.
The other colleges were equally committed to the provision of full-time and part-time advanced education, and to the pattern of combined advanced and non-advanced education which enabled students to progress easily through the system.
The CNAA's commitment was as much to sustaining and enhancing advanced further education in these institutions as in the polytechnics.
There are two important aspects of the emergence of the binary policy and the concentration of a significant proportion of advanced level work in polytechnics — attempts to explain the policy and its philosophy, and responses to it.
Crosland's own public explanations rested, as we have seen, on the argument from separate traditions — though there is no inevitability about preserving separate traditions.
He also argued from the virtues of a sector under ‘social control’(though given the later usage of that term what he clearly meant was ‘greater public control’), and the possibility of greater responsiveness to economic or other national need.
Other explanations have, however, to be considered.
Robbins thought they included a form of resolution of a conflict for power between the DES and the local authorities.
Carswell describes an ‘informal coterie’ which met at Crosland's house, ‘with a standing membership of Labour sympathisers drawn from the educational world’, and to which senior civil servants were occasionally invited.
It was here that the resolution was reached ‘that no  further institutions of higher education could be wrested from local authority control’.
Crosland had realized ‘the impossibility, as he saw it, of a Labour Secretary of State taking institutions from urban local education authorities which were predominantly controlled by Labour, and bringing them under the same regime as the universities’.
Although that sense of political strategy may be true, it is not the whole explanation of the binary policy in general, or of the polytechnic part of it.
Crosland no doubt shared with Boyle a sense of the need to reexamine the basis of higher education and ensure that the concept of social responsiveness was not forgotten among the range of its purposes.
Parliament, in Boyle's formulation, ‘does not take a narrowly vocational view of educational advance…
But except for that small minority who are going to spend a lifetime in academic pursuits, there must come a time when education for the great majority needs to become more vocational, more concerned with professional training’.
Part of the justification ‘for greatly increased expenditure on universities must be their success in strengthening the professional infrastructure of our society’.
One element in Crosland's policy was clearly the belief that at least to some extent the future of the vocational or professional ‘infrastructure’ lay with a sector with an explicit commitment to promoting it.
It is likely that there was also a sense that higher education on a wider basis could be provided more cheaply outside the universities, though it is likely that at the time any such view would have been based on guesswork rather than hard information.
The Vice-Chancellor of Brunel University, Dr Topping, with his long experience of the NCTA, thought ‘it may be cheaper in the non-university sector, but we do not know’.
Eric Robinson expresses the view that Michael Stewart's decision not to implement the Robbins proposal to put teacher training under the universities in fact ‘committed the Wilson government to a ‘binary’ policy in higher education'.
The binary policy, which is central to the history of higher education from its elaboration in the second half of the 1960s, and intimately related to the history of the CNAA's own policies and operations, is explained by many or all of these factors, but cannot be separated from perceptions of the roles and attitudes of the universities that we have previously discussed, and which were part of the decision-making environment of the mid- and late 1960s.
Despite the universities' expansion, including in science and engineering, there were still strong — and perhaps even growing — doubts about their ability to respond appropriately to the needs of a rapidly changing society.
At senior levels of the universities, including at the CVCP, there was resentment at the interpretation of the universities in general as somewhat effete and isolated institutions.
In 1965 Robbins, for example, reflected on the possible views of the DES:
I don't know what the Department thinks about the universities.
I do think, however, that there are still prevalent many gross  misconceptions of what universities do and what they should do in the modern age: and it may be that some of these misconceptions still drift about the corridors of the Department.
The binary policy was perhaps a product of the search for power by the DES and the LEAs, but partly also a result ‘of mistaken conceptions of what is appropriate for universities to do in the modern age’.
There were still people who saw the life of a modern university as ‘some community of pure scholar-students pursuing their work regardless of its bearing on their subsequent careers, and of staff having the sole duty of inculcating appropriate habits of thought and advancing knowledge with no practical application’.
Christopherson, who, apart from his roles in the CNAA, also had a CVCP perspective, recalls that Crosland's chief adviser at the DES, Toby Weaver, the Deputy Secretary, was, ‘we thought, continually representing to the Minister a totally false impression of what the universities were like’.
Boris Ford, strongly opposed to the binary policy and the new role of the CNAA, described the policy as deriving its impetus from ‘an oddly outmoded view of universities as remote, anti-professional and unresponsive to social needs’.
Whether or not Crosland actually shared this view of the universities it is possible, as Carswell points out, to deduce from Crosland's 1965 Woolwich speech that the universities were somehow ‘placed in isolation, seeking after truth, persuing learning for its own sake, and getting a lot of money for it’.
As the binary policy gained momentum, it remained possible to have that impression.
From within the universities there were stern voices of anti-vocationalism and resistance to public demands for responsiveness, strengthening the impression.
The binary policy can to some extent be interpreted, therefore, as either an attack on, or at least a misreading of, the universities — as seen from the universities themselves.
Writing in 1966, Edward Boyle felt it necessary to defend the House of Commons — and Crosland in particular— from the accusation of being hostile to the universities: ‘there is little envious ill-will towards the universities in the present House of Commons’.
He did not see Crosland hinting at wanting to ‘nationalize’ or exert control over the universities, and he did not see the DES as being ‘jealous of the universities as is sometimes suggested’.
In September 1966 The Guardian published an article by Brian MacArthur under the title, ‘Running down the universities’.
It began: ‘There is deep concern in the universities about the government's present policy on higher education’.
Many vice-chancellors believed that the universities were being run down ‘in order to build up the state system of higher education of colleges and polytechnics, headed by the Council for National Academic Awards’.
Students were being deliberately channelled into the state system;
What worries me, said one Vice-Chancellor, is that the policy of the government is to leave the universities autonomous, as they are, with the implication that they are irresponsible, to stew in their own  juice, while an attempt is made to build up a rival system, via the CNAA.
The fact that, for various reasons, Crosland opposed suggested ‘transbinary’ mergers — including Lancaster and the University of Warwick, Brighton and the University of Sussex — strengthened the feeling that the new public sector was being protected or singled out for special development.
It is possible, nevertheless, to take quite a different view of the relationship between the binary policy and perceptions of the universities — a view which would have resonances in the developing higher education systems of many other countries.
This is that the policy was not an attack on the universities so much as a defence of their interests — whether or not correctly understood by officials and ministers.
This is the view that the creation of a second, lower-status sector of higher education, capable of absorbing large numbers of less able, full-time and part-time students, would protect the universities and their traditional roles and processes from being swamped and distorted.
This is a policy intention that has been attributed to Toby Weaver, and which (as Sir Toby) he largely confirmed in an article in 1982.
The universities, he suggested, were ‘for the most part…perhaps irreversibly, tight groupings of subject specialists properly intent on the possession, expansion and transmission of the knowledge they guard’.
The problem was how to protect that function ‘compatibly with meeting the educational needs of the population’.
The wider function of a higher education, which Weaver defined as education for ‘capability, creativity or communion’ was incompatible with the organization of the universities.
In the key part of his argument, he faces the need for a solution:
…the increasingly articulate demand of society, voiced by parents, employers, politicians and the students themselves is for just this wider service — wider in aims, wider in curriculum and wider in access.
I believe that the polytechnics and other public service institutions should leave to the universities the essential functions of pursuing and transmitting specialist knowledge through research and scholarship and that, drawing on this knowledge should concentrate on the no less difficult and important task of meeting this wider demand from potential learners from 18 to 80.
He recognized that he could be accused of a conservative, ‘indeed reactionary’, direction for the universities, and of condemning the public sector to second-class status, but ‘unrepentant I shall believe that in the long run this represents the logical development of both the Robbins principle and the binary policy’.
It is possible to regard the perceived characteristics of the universities as both strengths and weaknesses, to applaud or to regret their commitment to the ‘guardianship’ of knowledge and their resistance to performing the ‘wider service’, and in both cases to end up with the binary policy.
It is  unlikely that Weaver's views in 1982 were significantly different from those he held when he was involved in creating that binary policy in the mid-1960s, and it is likely that his arguments reflect one of the elements in the decisions made.
The origins of the decisions are probably complex, and inevitably the responses were diverse.
Many thought the policy confused or at least unfortunate in not allowing what Peter Venables called the ‘natural evolution’ of institutions to university status.
Boris Ford thought that Lord Robbins and his Committee had to accept some of the blame ‘for the ease with which the grey eminences at the Department have been able to enlist radical ministers like Sir Edward Boyle and Mr Crosland in support of policies that are socially and academically reactionary’.
There were those — and Ford was one — who thought the binary system and the role of the CNAA would prevent a more natural local or regional grouping of institutions.
Ford believed, in fact, that putting colleges with the CNAA rather than their local university meant for students that ‘academically they might as well take the train to London’.
Lord Kings Norton had a different view of alternatives to a rigidly conceived binary divide:
My personal hope is that we shall move away from a formalised dichotonomy of university and non-university institutions, and that there will be a less obvious division: two groups of educational organisations with parity of esteem in the public mind.
I hope it is not too fanciful to think in terms of the old universities, the civic universities, the former colleges of advanced technology, and the polytechnics grouped like the colours in a spectrum each with its distinctive character but with no barriers.
Even where the binary policy was welcomed — for instance in the Association of Teachers in Technical Institutes (ATTI) and the local authorities — there were often reservations, either about the rigidity of the binary boundary, or about the possibility of the ‘public sector’ acquiring  sufficient resources or status.
The Inner London Education Authority expressed anxiety about the ability of the polytechnics to reconcile the DES pressure for them to retain their sub-degree work and the CNAA search for an academic environment appropriate to degree-level work.
The CVCP indignantly pointed out that all universities were vocational and responsive, and that ‘higher education’ consisted of three parts, not two, the third being the colleges of education.
Sir Lionel Russell, with a view from within the CNAA and the local authorities, said that he had never understood Crosland's Woolwich speech and why he made it, and had doubts about the concentration in polytechnics because of the disappointment it meant to other colleges.
At a meeting of the CNAA Council the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Exeter said that he was ‘not enthusiastic’ about the binary policy, and that many other vice-chancellors shared his view.
In the consideration given to the new policy, the position of the CNAA inevitably came under scrutiny, particularly what now appeared to be  the permanent and powerful role it would develop in relation to the formally established public sector.
Robbins summarized the intentions of his Committee in this regard as being to encourage a ‘more or less continuous spectrum in the developing system of higher education’, and within that spectrum to have institutions that would gradually acquire university status: ‘our recommendation of the creation of the National Council for Academic Awards was designed to be part of such a continuous  system ‘.
Describing the CNAA in 1965, Venables said of the wider powers given to it than those of the NCTA, that it was apparent that ‘it is government policy for the CNAA to exert a central role in the rapid development of a quasi-university system within ‘the public sector’.
It may at least be surmised that such a role was not envisaged for the CNAA by university representatives in the discussions which led to its being proposed and established'.
Lionel Elvin, Director of the University of London Institute of Education, had, as a member of the Robbins Committee, framed its recommendations for the teacher training colleges (as they were called before the committee's recommendation that they be renamed colleges of education) to be brought within the universities' ambit.
He was also strongly opposed to the CNAA being responsible for the development of a rival system to that of the universities, rather than the safety net for the universities that he had envisaged.
Instead of an awarding body for the ‘small cadet universities’ as conceived by Robbins, the CNAA had become a ‘permanent major degree awarding body for very large institutions…of a new kind’— and therefore, as Eric Robinson suggested in 1973, the universities now had to share the apex of the educational system with the polytechnics and the CNAA.
While Robinson applauded the development, Boris Ford condemned the transition of the CNAA from a body simply working with institutions which had ‘not yet been upgraded and which could not obtain a degree through a neighbouring university’ and therefore working in tandem with the universities, to a body which had become ‘a fully blown alternative to the university system’.
The Vice-Chancellor of the University of Manchester, speaking in Canada, was cautious and ambivalent.
The CNAA, he explained, would take pressure off the University of London, and if other universities were not prepared to enter the field of external degrees ‘they could not complain at the creation of the new body’.
What had not been foreseen was the linking of the CNAA with a public system of higher education ‘as rigidly conceived as it is implemented by present governmental policy’.
He was not blind to the dangers of ‘a private and a public sector in higher education, both largely financed from the public purse’.
He was not going to become unduly agitated about all of this: ‘vigilant, yes, but not agitated’.
It has been important to review the establishment of a binary system and some of its implications, as although the CNAA was created in 1964, it was the binary policy and its implementation that set the seal on the CNAA's operations for the next two decades.
The CNAA's own response to the binary policy was remarkably muted, given probably that the policy  in effect simply enlarged and extended the CNAA's existing and developing pattern of activity.
Its Charter was unaffected, the range of its subject interests was in any case growing, and the basic nature of its validation relationships with colleges was not affected in the short term by the designation of any of them as polytechnics.
In January 1966, following receipt of a DES memorandum on the future of the further education system (containing the suggestion of the designation of thirty or so ‘polytechnic centres’), the Council ‘welcomed the proposal of concentrating resources in a limited number of major centres’, as this would ‘greatly assist the achievement of higher standards for the Council's degrees’.
It hoped that the final proposals would be flexible enough to allow advanced work to continue, however, in other colleges where the need existed in other centres of population.
The DES memorandum suggested that the new institutions be called ‘polytechnic institutes’(another throwback to the late nineteenth-century institutions) but the Council expressed a preference for ‘polytechnic colleges’— and neither nomenclature in fact survived.
The Council's response to the policy and to the creation of the polytechnics was expressed most firmly in relation to research.
The notes of guidance accompanying the Secretary of State's announcement on the polytechnics in 1967 were considered by the Council to be ‘considerably more liberal than the original draft which had been amended since the Chairman of the Council had made representations about the matter to the Secretary of State’.
Although it was still a disappointing document and discouraging, it was agreed that the terms of the statement would enable the colleges to ‘develop research in the way that they wished’.
When Pimlott addressed the Council on the White Paper in September 1966, members of the Council had been ‘very disturbed by Mr Pimlott's statement that research would not be a primary activity of the colleges’.
An emphasis on its own policy for research was to be one of the CNAA's most tangible responses to the development of a public sector of higher education.
The CNAA's developmental policies focussed, as intended, on the range of subjects which colleges proposed to offer, and on the questions of quality with which the Council and its committees were concerned from the beginning.
The functioning of the polytechnics, as their schemes began to be accepted and formal designations made, was to become of increasing interest to the CNAA, and the issues surrounding relationships were to become increasingly prominent, with regard to such matters as the roles of Academic Boards, resource allocation and internal evaluation.
Following a statement to Parliament and his Woolwich speech in March and April 1965, Crosland set up an informal planning group under the Minister of State, Reg Prentice, ‘to discuss the future pattern of advanced work in the further education system’ and ‘the related question of the best arrangements for the government of such colleges’.
Frank Hornby was invited to be a member of this group — like the others also, in his personal capacity.
The group in fact discussed the questions of polytechnic  internal government and other questions covered in Crosland's Parliamentary statement on the polytechnics and the administrative memorandum of April 1967.
Although the CNAA was not itself formally involved in this planning, it was involved in the consultations, and at various points it linked in with the continuing policy developments.
As the Chairman of the CNAA wrote in 1970:
It has been suggested recently by a press commentator that without the CNAA there would be no polytechnics, and undoubtedly if the Council did not exist some similar body would be necessary to give the new institutions the opportunities they need for their full development.
By the time the polytechnics were formally designated (the first provisional designation of eighteen polytechnics was announced in May 1968 and the designations continued into the early 1970s), the CNAA already had several years of experience of validation procedures, of evaluating the quality of courses and their institutional environments.
Although the CNAA was not now to oversee a rolling programme of promotions to the ‘university club’, how much autonomy the new polytechnics would want and acquire — from their local authorities and the CNAA — was to be a feature of debate from the creation of the first polytechnics, and from the decision to set up a Committee of Directors of Polytechnics in December 1969 and its formal establishment in April 1970.
In one critical sense none of the new policy-making affected the CNAA: its purpose remained to validate degrees and other awards in institutions other than universities — whether or not they were designated as polytechnics.
The CNAA was overwhelmingly concerned with the approval or otherwise of courses submitted to it.
In ensuring that these were of comparable standard with that of the universities, the CNAA became inevitably — though its Charter did not make this explicit —; concerned with those institutional features, beyond the details of the course itself, which affected judgment of the quality of the student experience.
In this respect the CNAA's central concerns would have remained the same whatever policy governments formulated, so long as there were ‘non-university’ institutions seeking approval for their courses under the terms of the CNAA's Charter.
The creation of the polytechnics was, however, to influence the range of subject areas validated by the CNAA — notably by the subsequent history of courses in art and design.
From its inception through the late 1960s and into the 1970s the courses proposed to, and approved by, the CNAA remained predominantly in science and technology.
In September 1968 the CNAA had approved a total of 213 courses, of which 175 were undergraduate courses and 12 were MSc courses.
Of the 15,547 students enrolled on CNAA courses three-quarters were in science and technology.
By this stage the Committee for Science and Technology had twelve subject boards, and was approving courses in new subject and interdisciplinary areas, many  described as of‘considerable industrial importance’— including for the first time instrumentation and control engineering, and computer systems engineering.
In 1967–8 interdisciplinary courses were approved in environmental engineering (involving collaboration between scientists, engineers, architects, public health officers and industrial management), engineering geology and geotechnics, and statistics and computing.
The six MSc courses approved in that year were in areas directly relevant to industrial research and development, including diesel engine design, molecular science of materials and operational research.
In the late 1960s, in the arts and social studies areas there were more good intentions than successful proposals.
Even at the time the study group that was planning the establishment of the Committee for Arts and Social Studies met in April 1965 there were proposals waiting to be processed in business studies, languages, sociology, psychology, administration, economics, law and ‘combined subjects’, with business studies leading the field in both honours and ordinary degree course proposals by a wide margin.
By September 1968 the nearly 4000 students enrolled on arts and social studies courses included students of librarianship and the sociology of education, textile marketing and social and public administration.
Twenty-three of the courses approved by this point were sandwich courses, and 12 per cent of the students enrolled had qualifications other than the General Certificate of Education (as compared with 33 per cent in science and technology).
The following year the Council reported that ‘the average number of first year enrolments in arts and social studies is forty-seven per course entry while in science and technology it is twenty-seven.
This situation reflects the great demand for degree places in Arts and Social Studies and a number of the colleges could have admitted many more well qualified students if they had the resources to cope with them’.
In business studies there were generally six or so applicants for each place.
The Committee for Arts and Social Studies confirmed at its third meeting, in April 1966, that ‘it was established that courses submitted to the Council would not necessarily have to be directly vocational in nature’.
The only criterion was that ‘all courses approved should be comparable in standard to those of a university’.
It then, in October, expressed its concern that a high proportion of courses in subjects other than business studies were being turned down, and it suggested that one of the reasons making it difficult for such courses to be approved might be that ‘the Council's present structure of honours and ordinary degrees was not so appropriate for courses in those fields’ as in science and technology.
The controversy over ordinary and honours degree pathways was to smoulder between CASS and CST, and the CASS pressure for the ending of the policy was countered consistently by CST with the argument that in science and technology it was appropriate to have two types of course, and that in general it considered students with lower abilities and attainments were more suitably educated ‘in courses specially designed to make a different intellectual demand’.
CASS was also  encouraging the development of part-time degrees, a policy which won an expression of DES approval for these and other CNAA efforts in this direction, since they would appeal to married women wishing to return to study (and presumably helping to solve a shortage of school teachers).
The rapidity with which the CNAA sought to respond to the demand for business studies courses can be judged by the fact that the Business Studies Board, which began to meet in March 1965, had held five meetings by July.
The Crick Committee, which had been appointed in 1961 and reported on A Higher Award in Business Studies in 1964, had originally been looking for an equivalent of the DipTech, but had waited for the Robbins Report before issuing its recommendations.
It did so around its central conception of what an appropriate ‘high level’ qualification in business studies should offer:
an advanced education which, while comparable to a university honours degree course in quality and standard, differs from it in method.
While the aim is to offer a good general education in subjects relevant to business, the method is the systematic linking of academic study with practical experience.
This points to the sandwich form of education and training as being the only suitable form for the courses we have in mind.
Economics, sociology, mathematics, law and accounting were suggested as the essential subjects, and although colleges could provide liberal studies also, ‘we would stress the importance we attach to a liberal treatment of the whole curriculum’.
There was no doubting the eagerness of many colleges to respond to the challenge and the opportunity, and the Board — containing a number of lively young university people and interested employers — was torn between its anxiety to go ahead quickly and the need to ensure that it established what it called at its first meeting ‘lasting standards’.
Something like 80 per cent of proposed courses were turned down when first submitted in the late 1960s.
Between March and July 1965 the Board looked in detail at the first six courses before it, conducted visits and pondered policy.
There was, the Board felt, a need to reconcile two ‘separate images’ of a degree course in business studies, ‘that of intellectual rigour presented in the university pattern, and that of a new range of studies designed to meet the needs of the business world’.
The early meetings of the Board were preoccupied with the details of visits, attention to the content of courses — including, for example, law, office organization and communication studies — and the balance of what was being proposed.
At the sixth meeting members agreed that ‘as a result of their examination of the first six courses they had established certain standards for assessment and were now able to make an objective judgment upon the courses submitted’.
They decided therefore that at their next meeting they would devote themselves to matters of ‘general policy affecting courses in business studies’, and they did in fact, in September, consider a draft memorandum  on courses leading to first degrees, and questions regarding board membership and procedures for the consideration of courses.
The Board, which became the Economics and Business Studies Board in 1966, continued to be concerned primarily with the detail of proposed courses, examination arrangements and revisions to courses not approved.
It also began to look at proposals for MA courses, and at its November 1966 meeting, for example, it expressed the view that a proposed MA in Business Administration at Portsmouth College of Technology did not meet the CNAA's criterion that the content should be substantially postgraduate in character: too much of it was introductory work, insufficiently rooted in the basic disciplines.
The approach adopted by the Board and its parent bodies was both a response to the Crick recommendations and acceptable to the appropriate institutes for exemption and to the employers.
Its influence on the colleges, including the future polytechnics, was also important.
HMI Baker, who had been a Ministry of Education assessor on the Crick Committee, commented in 1968:
The CNAA will exert — indeed has already exerted — a significant influence over the thinking of teachers in the polytechnics.
In the past the attitude of the majority of teachers has been one of ‘tell us what you want and we will provide it’.
Today they are asked to think out their own courses in their own way, and to justify their thinking before a visiting panel of experts from the CNAA committee.
Not everything in the CNAA's and the colleges' procedure was conducive to innovation, but the ripple effect from groups of staff having ‘to think out their own courses’ was probably one of the most immediate invitations to innovation in the early years of the CNAA.
The CNAA and its board structure were beginning to respond to proposals for courses in what the annual reports termed ‘rarer subjects’ or subjects ‘not traditionally covered by universities’, including printing business law, town planning, surveying and a range of technologies.
In January 1968 the Council considered information from Huddersfield College of Technology (soon to become Huddersfield Polytechnic) that it intended to submit a degree course in music.
HMIs had already expressed a view that there was a prima facie case for the proposal, and the Council agreed that it would mean setting up a music board or at least an exploratory committee — and the DES music panel had offered suggestions of possible members.
Degrees in pharmacy were approved to the point at which an article in the Times Educational Supplement in 1971 could comment:
About one third of the 1971 crop of pharmacy graduates will hold C.N.A.A.
degrees.
Since 1964 six polytechnics and colleges have taken the opportunity afforded them by the Council for National  Academic Awards to design and develop courses culminating in the C.N.A.A.
B.Sc.
degree.
It quoted from the Pharmaceutical Journal, which had commented that CNAA degrees were to be comparable with those of the universities, and ‘teachers in pharmacy are confident that this is, and will remain so’.
One of the important new professional areas that grew under CNAA auspices was librarianship.
A sub-committee then a Librarianship Board was established in 1966.
The Board had long debates about whether the content of degrees in the areas should be for or in librarianship, what the academic content of study should be, and what career opportunities would be open to students if they were not subject graduates.
Interlock with the requirements of the professional association was a crucial theme, and the Library Association expressed its willingness to accept CNAA degrees for postgraduate entry.
Various possible approaches to course syllabuses were outlined in 1967, and a paper submitted in that year by one member of the Board on deliberations that had taken place in the Library Advisory Councils indicated that ‘they would welcome the development of CNAA first degrees in librarianship or in librarianship associated with other disciplines’.
There was an explicit determination to ensure that all course elements studied and assessed were at degree level, and there were criticisms of ‘traditional’ submissions.
A review of the Board's work in November 197 1 indicated that in the previous five years it had approved six courses in librarianship and two in information science at a total of six colleges.
The Board had from the start been conscious of its pioneering role.
Although the main CNAA developments in teacher education and in art and design belong to the 1970s, the history of both really begins in 1965.
Hornby, as we have seen, was in that year emphasizing both the approaches to the CNAA by many colleges to explore validation of teacher education courses, and the caution with which the CNAA moved.
By May 1966 the Council agreed to treat teacher education, because of the existing roles of the universities and institutes of education, ‘with care and circumspection’, and the Council's Chairman was to keep the CVCP informed of developments.
He wrote to the CVCP, in fact, explaining that the CNAA would be considering courses ‘in Education’, that it intended to approach the whole question with care, and that although the Council ‘was not taking the initiative in seeking to extend its work in the field of Education, several colleges of education had made informal approaches which could not be ignored…
I can assure you that the Council will not move very far without consulting representatives of all the interested parties, including the institutes of education’.
These consultations were, in fact, already well under way.
A meeting between the CNAA and the DES had taken place in June 1965, and there were further meetings.
In January 1966 Hornby met with representatives of the Conference of Institute Directors, and in February 1966 the Association of Education Committees asked the CNAA to look  sympathetically on approaches from colleges of education.
A key development in 1966 was the decision by the DES to begin teacher training in five of the technical colleges.
By 1970 there were to be education departments in seven polytechnics in England and one in Northern Ireland.
The CNAA knew from the first meeting of its sub-committee to discuss courses in education, in July 1965, that the DES was moving towards a policy of teacher education in some technical colleges, and that the DES thought it reasonable that they should come to the CNAA for validation.
The DES also believed that the colleges of education should seek validation from the universities before turning to the CNAA.
Protracted discussions began with Worcester College in 1966, as the test case of the CNAA's intentions and possibilities.
Worcester was disappointed with the University of Birmingham's responses to the College's degree proposals and submitted an application to the CNAA.
The new Committee agreed to ask the University of Birmingham to comment on the application, visits were made to the College, and discussion of the proposals and their implications continued.
In 1970 Worcester decided not to continue with the CNAA application because Birmingham was reviewing its BEd and the new arrangements would probably be acceptable to the College.
Worcester, in Christopherson's expression, ‘was the experiment’.
The CNAA had to decide not only the merits of the particular case, but whether it would be willing and able (under its Charter) to validate a teachers' certificate as well as a degree, and how it might relate to the Area Training Organizations which had some responsibility for the teaching practice component of existing courses.
Of a different nature was a proposal from Enfield College of Technology, the first such to be considered, for a part-time BA in Social Science for qualified teachers.
This also led to protracted discussions, including meetings and visits jointly with the Sociological Studies Board before the course was finally approved.
Other proposals for teacher education courses were submitted before the end of the decade, but none was approved.
St Osyth's College of Education at Clacton-on-Sea proposed a BEd in 1969 and by December of the following year it had been turned down on the grounds that the College did not have an ‘appropriate academic structure’, more thought about the objectives of the course (it was for teachers of Home Economics) was needed, the staff needed strengthening, the library expanding and laboratory facilities improving.
The first course to be approved was in fact in Scotland, and was submitted to the CNAA with the support of the Scottish Education Department in 1970.
The proposal, from Notre Dame College, a Catholic college in Glasgow, was received sympathetically, but was not approved at a visit to the College in December.
A meeting was arranged with the College Principal and officials of the SED to discuss the College environment, staff numbers and ‘capacity’.
Enough progress had been made by March 197 1 for a BEd ordinary degree to be approved.
Didsbury College, Manchester, Dunfermline College, Edinburgh, and  others were talking with the CNAA in 1970, in the former case about a certificate as well as a degree, but national policies on teacher education were now coming under the microscope, and there were no other approvals in this field until after the James Committee on teacher education had reported in 1972.
In 1971 the CNAA gave evidence to the James Committee expressing its willingness to take on the validation of the Teachers Certificate if there was a need for it to do so.
For six years or so the CNAA had moved with caution — indeed, only one of its officers, Francis Hanrott, had any previous experience involving contact with teacher education, and he was given responsibility for the various levels of negotiation.
The teams that visited Worcester, Notre Dame and elsewhere were large ones, and in some cases — proposals for movement and dance at Worcester, for example— the territory was new.
University — and particularly institute of education — suspicion of the entry of the CNAA into the field also spurred the universities to take up the challenge to validate the BEd that Robbins had thrown down.
By the time the James Committee met, the CNAA was not only prepared, but experienced enough, to respond rapidly to opportunities and demands.
In art and design the position was somewhat different.
The National Council for Diplomas in Art and Design (NCDAD)(the Summerson Council) was established in 1961.
The question of the relationship with the CNAA was provoked in 1965 by an approach to the CNAA from the Scottish Woollen Technical College at Galashiels to validate a degree in textile design.
The NCDAD did not operate in Scotland, and it could not award degrees — working, as the NCTA had done, on the basis of a Deed of Trust, not a Charter.
If approved, would the Galashiels course be a precedent?
Would the Diploma be devalued?
Would there be two bodies operating in the same field?
Discussion in the NCDAD raised the question of the possibility of its seeking a Charter, but also the possibility — some thought the spectre —; of amalgamation between the NCDAD and the CNAA.
Some — including the ATTI — were in favour of an amalgamation.
Opinion in the NCDAD was generally hostile, among other reasons because it was feared that degrees in art and design would mean raising the entry qualifications.
Two meetings were held, involving the Chairman and Chief Officer of the CNAA, the Chairman and other representatives of the NCDAD, and the DES.
The CNAA's preoccupation was with future arrangements regarding proposals for combined courses in technology and art and design, but the question of possible amalgamation was bypassed, not to be reopened from 1966 until the early 1970s.
The historian of these events believes that the CNAA may not have shown sufficient flexibility: ‘if the same attitude as was adopted in the early 1970s by its new Chief Officer, Edwin Kerr, had been taken, amalgamation might have occurred sooner’.
Of considerable relevance for the future of art and design were the decisions regarding the establishment of the polytechnics.
Some of these institutions were to be the outcome of local amalgamations — including  colleges of art.
The polytechnic proposals suggested the possibility of federation as well as amalgamation, but in practice the DES was hostile to federation, and none was approved.
The colleges of art, therefore, were in many places faced with the proposal to become departments of designated polytechnics, and from the outset the NCDAD and the colleges were opposed, even violently opposed, to the development.
In November 1966 the NCDAD wrote to the DES in response to its draft memorandum on the government and academic organization of the polytechnics:
The Council is of the opinion that the proposals in the main set forth in the Department's document…are inimical to the best interests of advanced art education.
The Council is of the opinion that a federated system of colleges should be permitted…
Extensive correspondence took place between the National Council and the colleges, as well as with the local authorities and the Secretary of State.
Pressures from the DES and what in some cases amounted to directives from local authorities, led the colleges concerned to move away from outright hostility to testing out what degree of autonomy and protection for art and design would be forthcoming within the polytechnic structure.
At the West of England College of Art, for example, the Chairman of the Governing Body and some other members were — like the Principal and staff of the college — strongly opposed to the proposed merger into Bristol Polytechnic, but the proposals ultimately went forward ‘without acrimony’.
The Principal wrote in November 1967 that the only recourse was ‘to ensure that every possible safeguard should be written into the constitution of such a scheme’, and following local negotiations he considered that ‘we have gone as far as we are able so far to safeguard the courses and attitudes of this College and we have confidence that the LEA are making every effort to ensure that Diploma in Art and Design (DipAD) courses and developments will be given the fullest support, and will not be undermined in any way by the Polytechnic proposals’.
At Liverpool the Principal wrote, also at the end of 1967, that within the new polytechnic ‘there will be complete autonomy in respect of the academic work of the Faculty of Art and nothing that has been said causes me to have any misgivings on this score.
While negotiations with the CNAA had been discontinued, the position of art and design within some newly emerging polytechnics inevitably raised the question of the status of the diploma alongside degree awards, and of multiple validation of degree-level awards.
By the beginning of the 1970s the relationship was therefore again under scrutiny.
In November 1970 the CNAA was informed that the NCDAD had written formally to request a joint meeting to explore ‘interrelationships’.
Stewart Mason, Chairman of the NCDAD, was at the same time proposing to write to polytechnics and colleges with DipAD courses, in advance of a meeting of the London Colleges Alliance the following month, to raise the possibility of the two bodies ‘getting closer together’, and suggesting that they would ‘probably  amalgamate’.
David Lloyd Jones at the DES was shown a draft of the letter and objected to the reference to amalgamation, as ‘precipitating certain apprehensions’.
Mason's rejoinder was that he was not going ‘to be gagged’ about amalgamation.
The battle, he wrote, ‘is not one for the future but is on NOW…
I am not going to write to the Colleges themselves one week with bureaucratic non-talk and then come into the clear the following week…if there is going to be an outburst I believe the sooner we get it over the better.
It is like going into Europe — the important thing is by reiteration to make people think, whether they are for it or against it, that it is inevitable’.
At its meeting in February 1972 the CNAA endorsed an initiative by the Chairmen of the two bodies to suggest entering into discussions about the possibility of an amalgamation — which finally came about in 1974.
Although in some subject areas there were complaints that proposals from the colleges were too ‘traditional’(and a belief by some colleges that this was the best way to ensure success with the ‘traditional’ members of subject boards), there were developments unrelated to specific subjects that were new and — in validation terms — difficult.
This was particularly true of interdisciplinary and unit-based or modular courses.
These presented problems for the validation process, and raised sharp questions about coherence — particularly from members of visiting teams suspicious of departures from standard university structures.
Some of the officers concerned were also unsure at the time that such courses had been sufficiently thought through.
There were proponents in the colleges, however, who believed both in the virtues of the courses and in the likely positive impact on departmental separatism in the institutions.
Business studies and town planning were examples of early interdisciplinary courses approved by the CNAA.
City of London Polytechnic and Oxford Polytechnic were two of the institutions which sought to combine an interdisciplinary approach with a modular structure.
By 1970 the former was negotiating an ambitious first degree scheme with the CNAA, which was explained by the Vice-Provost as more fully meeting the needs of students, employers and society, and was presented in the belief that ‘polytechnics should develop a degree pattern which includes an increasing amount of interdisciplinary study’.
The City of London plan was for students in the first semester (sixteen weeks) to take three basic courses, followed by a second semester in which three introductory courses stemming from the basic courses would be followed.
Advanced course units would then be taken, with a combination of twelve of them in one subject area leading to an honours degree, twelve in two subjects to a joint honours, and various other ‘less demanding combinations’ to ordinary degrees:
If it is felt that this smacks too much of the ‘green shield stamp’ approach, it should be realized that it is intended that the scheme will operate with a substantial element of vocational and tutorial guidance using specialized staff.
Discussing the need for greater student mobility and the advantages of unit courses for a ‘national degree system’, the Dean of the Faculty of Educational Studies at the Open University suggested that the basis of a unit-based, credit transfer system already existed since ‘inside the CNAA we already have one of the elements required: that, we have a national degree system.
The CNAA is constitutionally able to approve suitable courses without altering its charter’.
Modular degrees were to become more widespread in the 1970s as the colleges of education — including those validated by universities —; diversified, but some of these substantial programmes introduced by polytechnics and gaining CNAA approval were pioneering new curricular patterns at the undergraduate level.
By the beginning of the 1970s the sandwich course commitment was accompanied by a variety of difficulties.
There is no doubt about the commitment.
As Sir Alan Richmond recalls it: ‘we were very hot on sandwich courses, almost dogmatic about it for a time’.
In the early years of the CNAA it was almost impossible for a course in engineering to gain approval unless it was a sandwich course: ‘there was a big argument within CNAA when the first courses on the university pattern started to emerge’.
Brighton caused controversy by proposing to teach full-time and sandwich students together for part of the time.
The integration of industrial experience and the college course was ‘always very important but always very tenuous in analysis and judgment’.
Some made a good job of the sandwich element, but many paid it lip service.
In 1967–68, the Council's Training Panel looked at the problems and set up two sub-committees to be concerned with the practical training element of sandwich courses in arts and social studies, and in science and technology.
The Panel's aim was to help colleges to establish more effective integration of the practical training and academic study, and more effective supervision of training and assessment of students' work.
The question of the assessment of practical training was a difficult one.
The assessment did not contribute to the student's final classification, and whether and how it might do so was neither clear nor a welcome issue in the colleges.
The Coombe Lodge conference of mainly polytechnic staff in 1970 heard the Chairman of the Training Panel argue the case for assessment, though also for much discussion and the introduction of a scheme slowly.
The report of the discussion that followed his lecture indicates the strength of feeling: it was ‘received by the conference with total scepticism’.
Members viewed the creation of the Industrial Training Panel as an attempt ‘to force upon colleges what they already vociferously deny they want’.
The majority saw little future for college-based sandwich courses, let alone the assessment of the industrial part.
Colleges were experiencing great difficulty in finding industrial placements for students.
Administrative complications and the high cost of running the course had resulted in a ‘heavy swing of opinion away from the sandwich to the full-time course’.
There was in the polytechnics and colleges, as there had also been in the colleges of advanced technology, some general  discussion about the validity of sandwich courses as such, given the possibility that they might be a means of perpetuating outdated practices.
Some leading figures in engineering, for example, were in two minds about sandwich courses and about the quality of practically-oriented polytechnic graduates in competition with more ‘imaginative’ university graduates.
Although there were some reservations of this kind in both industry and the institutions the balance of opinion was with the sandwich course, and within the Committee for Science and Technology and its boards the commitment to sandwich courses remained strong.
Despite the problems and doubts, sandwich courses remained a central feature of the polytechnics — even as some institutions began to press for full-time courses to replace or to accompany them.
In terms of difficulty and controversy it was, however, the CNAA's policy of complementary and contrasting studies, enshrined in Statement No. 3, that occupied the centre of the stage within the CNAA almost from the adoption of the policy until 1971.
What the statement laid down —; following the NCTA tradition — was that all courses had to include ‘studies which by complementing or contrasting with the main subjects studied will help to provide a balanced education’.
Science and technology students might be introduced to social and economic problems, and arts students might ‘gain an appreciation of science and technology in modern life’.
It was often possible, the statement continued, to bring out in all courses:
the fact that scientific method, in the sense of a critical and sceptical approach to enquiry and a readiness to test hypotheses, enters at many points into so-called arts subjects, and that equally the spirit of speculative enquiry, the exercise of creative imagination and the capacity for making value judgments are important in the activities of the scientist and technologist.
Both the policy and the range of practices in the colleges raised questions.
Those who taught the ‘liberal studies’ components were often accused of being unsympathetic to ‘the activities of the scientist and technologist’.
The CNAA's policy was viewed as ad hoc and unresearched.
Students were often resistant to these components of their courses.
Within the CNAA the controversy was, to say the least, lively.
When a joint committee of CST and CASS was set up during the debates, it was chaired by Sir Alan Richmond, who described it as ‘the most difficult committee I have ever chaired in my life’.
The basic issue was compulsory complementary and contrasting studies for arts students.
Many of the university members of CASS and its boards were opposed to the principle, especially as it had been adopted before the arts and social studies had any real influence in the CNAA.
Critics saw the policy as a legacy of the NCTA and applicable perhaps to technical but not higher education.
The concerns became explicit in 1967 when CASS considered Statement No. 3, and suggested that a joint sub-committee with  CST was needed to discuss the issues.
Views continued to be expressed in CASS regarding the inappropriate nature of the CNAA's principle when applied in particular to interdisciplinary and wide-ranging courses like business studies and town planning.
Some subject board chairmen were adamant that they were not prepared to implement a policy that they had had no hand in shaping.
In the Joint Committee that was set up the conflict was, in Hanrott's words, ‘played cool’, but it was conflict nevertheless.
There were threats of resignation over what some saw as an issue of academic freedom.
The debate continued within CASS and CST and in a sub-committee of each.
The issue was discussed, in fact, at ten meetings of CASS, and three meetings of each of the sub-committees.
It was clear that the policy could not survive in its existing form, and in 1970 agreement was being reached on a new approach.
The CNAA announced that its policy of requiring the inclusion of complementary or contrasting studies in courses in order to provide a balanced educational experience had been ‘under review’, and that changes would shortly be announced intended to respond to recent developments in the colleges and allow greater flexibility.
In January 1971, after the considerable discussion in its committees, the Council adopted a new formulation, dropping the stipulation of a specific requirement.
Courses were still expected to provide ‘as balanced an educational experience as possible’, and to aim at developing in students a number of abilities:
to think logically, communicate clearly, and read critically and with understanding.
To make the student aware of the limitations of his disciplines and their methods and to provide opportunities for him to understand, make, and criticize, value judgments.
To give the student an understanding of the significance of science and technology in modern society, of the contribution they can make to improve material conditions and in widening man's imaginative horizons and his understanding of the universe.
While the CNAA had been debating and arriving at a new policy statement, a considerable diversity of approaches had developed in the institutions.
Some had strong traditions of liberal studies inherited from the NCTA arrangements.
Some had made the original policy an enthusiastic part of their provision.
Some — in areas like librarianship — had little or no provision in complementary and contrasting studies.
The removal of the requirement, while retaining the broad objectives, ended the controversy as a question of principle and placed the  responsibility on the subject boards and their panels to monitor the ways in which institutions and their courses interpreted the changed policy.
Compulsory ‘liberal studies’ was, however, not to remain a distinctive feature of CNAA degrees as they had been of the Diploma in Technology.
By the early 1970s the CNAA had established and reviewed policies; framed a pattern of degrees and made the revisions which resulted, for example, in the adoption of the degree and degree with honours, branching from a common foundation, to replace the essentially two-track ordinary and honours structure; and arrived at a broad and growing diversity of subject areas to validate, with a potential to make a major contribution in additional areas.
It had also introduced postgraduate diplomas and higher doctorates to supplement the undergraduate, masters and doctoral degrees it had decided on at an early stage.
It had set up a Committee for Research Degrees in 1965, as well as a study group on research degrees to look at policy for this activity, and had developed research degree relationships with industrial firms and research establishments.
The CNAA had become not just the ‘safety net’ validating body envisaged by the Robbins Committee and others, but also a major factor in the implementation of the new binary policy and the promotion of colleges, not to ‘university status’by inclusion in the existing pattern of universities, but to a major element in a binary approach to what constituted ‘higher education’.
It had entered into these relationships with the new category of institutions while retaining its role for the validation of degree-level courses from whatever direction they might come outside the universities.
Whether or not this was all a move towards a system of ‘state universities’ on the American model, was a genuine attempt to provide an alternative and distinctive system, or was a retreat from and a weakening of the Robbins approach to a ‘unitary’system of higher education was to remain a matter of debate at the policy level.
In procedural terms also there was to be no shortage of room for ambiguity.
Chapter 5
SHAPING A SYSTEM
The CNAA's central concern was with standards, with the negotiation, approval and reapproval of courses through explicit validation procedures, with the quality of the student's academic environment.
The balance it had to seek between guarding standards and promoting institutional development was worked out in the constant attention to the details of courses and the means of their delivery, in subject areas pioneered by the NCTA, and in the new — and sometimes unique — programmes being considered and approved.
By the end of the 1960s the CNAA was able to review its own substantial experience in establishing and maintaining degree level standards.
Its validation procedures were being debated — not least among polytechnic directors — in the context of the newly, if not unambiguously, acquired status of some of the more experienced institutions.
The balance established by the CNAA could not be a permanent one as institutions grew and changed, and as all the partners in the exercise responded to changing policies and experience.
It is important at this point to have in view the position reached at the beginning of the 1970s by the validation procedures of the CNAA, the procedures of the colleges and polytechnics themselves, and the issue of institutional ‘autonomy’ or ‘independence’.
These were three salient and interconnected issues for the CNAA and its institutions at the end of the 1960s and the beginning of the 1970s.
They were to persist, amidst changing circumstances and judgments into the 1980s.
The CNAA did not, as the historian of one institution put it, ‘make it easy’.
The validation procedures were designed to be rigorous, and all levels of the CNAA took the question of rigour extremely seriously.
The Council was at this stage receiving not only reports from its committees but also the reports of visiting parties.
It remained difficult to obtain CNAA approval for courses at first submission, and officers and members of boards and panels were frequently engaged in lengthy attempts to give advice and assistance.
One of the difficulties in the procedure for the institutions was the constraint on planning of not knowing — often for long periods of time — when or whether courses would be able to begin, or even whether they  would be allowed to continue.
Even major institutions with developing reputations were unsuccessful in their first-time submissions — and this was bound to be particularly true in arts and social studies where members were anxious to ensure appropriate standards of course content and all that related to it — including staffing and other resources.
At one meeting in 1967, for example, the Committee for Arts and Social Studies turned down degrees in applied social science at Hatfield, town and country planning at Lancaster, international marketing at Woolwich, applied social studies at Constantine, European studies and textiles and marketing at Huddersfield, and applied languages at Sunderland.
Some committee, board and panel chairmen acquired a reputation for being especially rigorous, and in some cases angry responses from institutions focussed on the alleged biases or eccentricities of panel members as much as on the nature of the judgments made about the courses.
The general consensus, however, was probably that teams and committees had to be seen to be operating tough but fair standards.
University members of boards in particular were regularly to agree that the process was more rigorous than those in their own universities.
In 1970, the manager of professional and commercial training at the Ford Motor Co., offering a ‘consumer's view’ of the polytechnics, described how he began to consider ‘the use of polytechnics’when even the CNAA was new.
He needed a ‘hardness test’ for both.
The outcome of the test is revealing:
Two would-be polytechnics unwittingly supplied a gauge — syllabi softer than butter, one in business studies and one technological.
Being fascinated with the problems of developing highly professional staff, and having many years of experience in recruiting from almost every British campus, I could not accept them as good building stone and felt obliged to turn them down.
So did the C.N.A.A.
Later I was to see this body investigating a syllabus elsewhere.
They passed it, but their audit was gruelling.
The ‘gruelling’, or at least rigorous, element in the approval process made it frequently a long one, and was often accompanied by the traumatic shock or disappointment of rejection.
It appeared to be, and in many respects was, an adversarial situation, despite efforts by officers and members not to make it so.
It was a learning situation for all concerned, and in the processes of meeting and debating, reporting and being reported on, there was a substantial measure of self-scrutiny — in relation not only to the content of courses, but also to the procedures being followed within institutions and in the CNAA.
Pressures on the CNAA's machinery were growing, and at the beginning of 1968 it complained that it was being overburdened with unsuitable applications.
Before obtaining CNAA approval, courses had to have authorization under further education regulations from the Regional Advisory Councils, the machinery used by the DES for this purpose.
In response to the CNAA's complaint the DES agreed to circularize colleges  warning them that they had to be prepared to satisfy CNAA requirements, and indicating that the DES would not be prepared to entertain new courses in excess of likely demand.
The validation procedure had become what one of the officers described as a ‘treadmill’, sometimes with two or three visits a week.
While members were also sometimes heavily involved, the compensation was often seen as the academic and professional networks established through the board and the visits.
The extent of the process can be judged by the fact that in 1970–71 there were 117 meetings of subject boards, 113 visits, 253 courses considered and 159 approved (of the ninety-four rejected thirty-four were still under consideration at the beginning of the next academic year).
The process depended on the willingness of large numbers of members to serve voluntarily in the various capacities concerned.
The nature of the involvement was by no means uniform, but some idea of it can be judged from a single case.
Maxwell Smith, at the Brixton School of Building from 1963, joined the Surveying Board of the CNAA some five years later.
This Board was formed from two previous panels — Quantity Surveying and Estate Management — and he was a member or Chairman of the Board for twelve years, as well as being a member of the Committee for Science and Technology by virtue of his Board chairmanship.
The Board itself involved at least three meetings a year, plus briefings with the secretary, membership of ad hoc meetings and working parties, and the preparation and conduct of visits (as Chairman he initially went on all visits).
The process was particularly time consuming as this was, in that period, one of the CNAA's busiest boards in terms of the number of proposals processed.
There was close affinity between the CNAA and the professional associations concerned, principally the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, of which Smith had been an active member and Chairman of its Education and Membership Committee.
This was particularly important as it was a field in which full-time education was only just emerging, and the development coincided with the early days of the CNAA.
Although the Board was time consuming, therefore, the involvement was not extraneous to the central professional concerns of education for surveying.
He also saw the process from both ends.
Brixton itself was one of only two colleges which had nationally recognized diplomas in the field (it was one of only four specialist institutions in the field), and as a member of the School he experienced the ‘shock of rejection’, when its degree proposals were turned down in 1967–68.
Hornby on the occasion rebuked Brixton for not looking properly at the CNAA's regulations — and the College was subsequently to have its proposals approved.
Smith's reflection was that the work:
involved discussions in all sorts of disciplines (within the professional body, with the educational institutions and within the CNAA itself, many of which were  decidedly uncomfortable at the time).
Any measure of ‘success’ must be qualified: but I am  unrepentant in my support for peer group review systems of the kind that CNAA established.
He was never as happy, it should be added, about the CNAA's institutional scrutiny, which he considered to have dealt out a ‘rough justice,.
From the beginning, indeed, the CNAA had been concerned with the college as a whole, though there were no specific powers in the Charter to oblige it to do so.
Frank Hornby describes how, at the first meeting of the Council the question was asked: ‘were we concerned with the college?’.
Lord Kings Norton, who had been primed, said: ‘of course, very much indeed, and I take it we always shall be, don't we?’.
He put the question round the room and people concurred.
The responsibilities of the head of department and of the college entered into the picture.
Quinquennial, institutional review visits became more prominent, and Hornby commented: ‘I shoved this as hard as I could go’.
Hanrott was made responsible for the first ‘Council’ visits, at which they saw some quite ‘unsuitable environments’, information from these visits being fed at first into the subject boards rather than into the Council itself'.
There were visits of this kind at which institutions were told flatly not to come back to the CNAA for validation, for a variety of reasons.
There were places where it was effectively not the Principal but the local authority that was running the college — a tradition of detailed local authority control over further education Institutions that it was difficult to break even in developed institutions.
Difficulties on a visit to Paisley were connected with the involvement of the local authority.
At Liverpool, the Principal was not allowed to choose his own secretary.
From these early visits the CNAA developed a keen interest in the role of the institution's academic board.
In many of the colleges this was a new concept, or one that was implemented only cursorily.
Many of these institutions had in their histories as further education colleges operated with strong hierarchical traditions, and these structures had often been accompanied by very authoritarian behaviour by their principals.
What the CNAA was looking for, therefore, was evidence of a changed organizational and  administrative environment, an academic machinery that could exercise responsibility for the continuing scrutiny and health of courses, and this was particularly important in the case of the newly-designed polytechnics, given the emphasis on academic boards and ‘a large measure of autonomy’ for institutions under their governing bodies in the government's 1967 statement on polytechnics.
The question was often a difficult and delicate one given radically different perceptions of what was necessary or right in the changed circumstances, the different styles of polytechnic directors and their senior staffs, different approaches to organizational development.
In Hornby's view, for example, Hatfield ‘had a sort of Academic Board but it was not a very coherent one’, and yet Hatfield's Academic Board was at that stage probably the farthest advanced in its production of a development plan.
A Council visit to Hatfield made adverse judgments on  its organization and administration that conflicted basically with the views and approaches of the Polytechnic's Director and his colleagues.
Another set of problems at the level of institutional approval was created for the CNAA by the decision of the University of London to run down its external degrees, and the CNAA's agreement to take up the reins where possible and appropriate.
The problem was to be with those institutions which had no previous connection with either the NCTA or the CNAA, and where the London degree had been a part-time one.
The first of these ‘non-polytechnics’ in that position to approach the CNAA was High Wycombe College of Technology in 1972, and concern about the ‘college as a whole’in this and other cases was to become part of the Council's expanded range of involvement and interests following the report of the James Committee in that year.
Dissatisfaction with and criticism of validation procedures were paralleled by a recognition that the CNAA had succeeded through those procedures in gaining a wide measure of recognition and acceptance for its degrees, and for the institutions where they were offered.
The CNAA, in the words of one commentator in 1971, was far from perfect, ‘but it is the best procedure for devising innovative courses we have found so far’.
The CNAA was establishing its own organizational shapes.
In terms, for example, of the membership of its committees, it began modestly in including college representatives on its committees and boards.
In July 1966 these contained eighty-six from colleges with CNAA courses (thirteen of them from Lancaster, by far the largest contingent from a single institution), and fifty-three from colleges without such courses.
Since the CNAA approved external examiners, it is worth noting that in 1968–69 the number of examiners from universities was 461, with eight from colleges and forty-three others.
The CNAA machinery in the late 1960s and 1970s was powered substantially by its university membership, with major inputs from its ‘industrial’ members, including its first Chairman, Lord Kings Norton, and Michael (later Sir Michael) Clapham, who took over as Chairman in 1971.
The Council itself came under criticism in the late 1960s as containing too few members from the colleges and polytechnics, especially members other than principals and directors.
The Council's agendas for the late 1960s were preoccupied not only with the validation procedure and its outcomes, but also with relations with the University of London and its external degree, and with the binary policy, teacher education and the Council's committee and board sub-structure and operation.
The Council's name, as we have seen, was another preoccupation, and in 1968, while the issue was still a live one, members were asked to submit suggestions, and the following were made, either at a meeting or in writing:
Royal Council for University Awards
Prince Philip University Council
University Council for Colleges of Higher Education
National Council for University Awards
The Elizabethan University
University of Westminster
Elizabethan University Council
The Shires University
University Council of the Polytechnics
Council for National Academic Degrees
Royal (or British) Council (or Institute) for University Degrees
The Polytechnic University
The National University Council for Degrees and other Awards
In addition to its regular meetings and activities the Council was also responsive to other policy issues, setting up sub-committees of its own and taking part in working parties elsewhere, including those discussions generated by the Schools Council and other bodies on the sixth-form curriculum and related issues.
It established liaison committees on, for example, matters to do with schools, and it developed liaison arrangements with the Open University and others.
The Council's senior officers were involved in frequent contacts with other bodies: meetings were held on an officer basis with the UGC and the CVCP, the DES, and the professional bodies in those fields covered by the CNAA's validation work.
Michael Lane was appointed as a Senior Assistant Registrar in 1970 — in his case in science and technology — and whatever the differences amongst them they operated broadly in similar ways.
Lane was Secretary at various times to between twelve and  fifteen subject boards, and all of his work was very strongly committee-related.
This meant, among other things, correspondence with the colleges, a great deal of travelling, and a small but growing advisory role.
It meant a close working relationship with the chairmen of the boards, who were key figures in the developing CNAA.
Officers were allowed to take part in board discussions, and they saw one of their main roles as being to help prevent negative decisions from being taken for trivial reasons.
In the early days there was, he felt, a ‘gentleman's club’ atmosphere about the CNAA, and the main work was done by the boards — with no real role for the higher level committees.
He, like his colleagues, had informal conversations with HMIs — who sometimes wanted to become too involved in visits, where they were ‘in attendance’.
On behalf of the CNAA he was a member of the Standing Conference for University Entrance, the Schools Council Science Committee, a working part of the Science Research Council, and others.
With fifty or so subject boards and panels operating by the beginning of the 1970s there were serious problems of managing and regulating the processes concerned.
In 1968 the Council moved from the premises in Park Crescent it had inherited from the NCTA to larger offices in Devonshire Street (formerly occupied by the Tavistock Institute of Human Relations).
The work of the officers was obviously intensive and complex, and the boards played the key role in determining in practice what constituted CNAA policy.
Because of their relationships with the institutions, and the  professional networks that developed around them, the boards were in fact becoming powerful instruments.
A 1971 CNAA document on the work of the subject boards, while describing the process with some care, also expressed warnings about excessive detail and going beyond the board's remit.
For example, the reading lists supplied by colleges were intended ‘merely to illustrate how the aim of the course will be implemented.
subject board members are encouraged to view syllabuses and reading lists in this light, and not to undertake a detailed critique of each one’.
The assessment of the suitability of the college to undertake CNAA degrees was carried out by the Council, and board members would be kept informed of the Council's views when relevant: ‘it frequently becomes unnecessary for a subject board to consider any matters other than those directly related to the operation of a particular course of study.’
Officers, members, committees, boards, and the Council itself, were defining their own and one another 's roles.
The CNAA's involvement with Scotland was on a smaller scale than in England.
The designation of the Polytechnic of Wales was to provide the main focus of the CNAA's work in the Principality, and the creation of Ulster College, The Northern Ireland Polytechnic, did the same in this province.
Describing the Central Institutions — the main provider of higher education in Scotland outside the universities and the colleges of education — a Director of one of the CIs wrote in 1971 that ‘during recent years the most significant development has been the growth of CNAA courses — including in business studies, architecture, various sciences and branches of engineering, marketing, computing with operational research and pharmacy’.
Courses in other colleges included opthalmic optics and science with industrial studies.
The approach to the CNAA in 1965 from the Scottish Woollen Textile College for the associateship in textile design to become a degree raised the questions we have already discussed regarding the position of art and design, but it also raised the question of submissions from colleges where entry standards had not been at the level of the DipTech, and where issues of the college environment needed to be discussed.
Some of the CIs were establishing themselves as being at the level of the English polytechnics, but in some respects were more specialized.
They moved more slowly in arts and social studies, and indeed were not authorized to develop degrees in the humanities as the English polytechnics were doing.
If this was a restriction, it was also a strength in focussing attention on the content of courses in science and technology and related areas of study.
In 1972 The Scotsman carried an article by Colm Brogan on the demise of the London external degree and problems of ‘sub-university’ status of colleges.
It began:
Mention the initials CNAA to a committed and teaching technologist and the result is instant.
Eyes light up, the conversation becomes more intense, team spirit takes on all the zeal of an ideology, facts flow, and one ends up getting the impression of being a part of…a Great Dawn.
All in all, very understandable, for CNAA…equals a new status for Scotland's more advanced technological colleges.
Instead of imposing a university model ‘what CNAA does…is to forget the university bit, and concentrate on evolving standards that will gain acceptance as of degree status.
Surely a much more sensible attitude to resources all round?’
Although the CNAA system had been in operation since 1964, ‘it is only recently that it has made almost total inroads as far as the central, advanced colleges of technology in Scotland are concerned’.
Paisley and Napier were the examples chosen, the latter pointing to the ‘wholehearted acceptance by industry of CNAA degrees’, and emphasizing the difficulty of gaining course approvals.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s the activities of the CNAA were obviously related closely to the complex developments of the polytechnics.
Successive Secretaries of State formulated their own versions of what the polytechnics should be, and in doing so established a substantial amount of ambiguity.
There was no doubt in the minds of the directors of the polytechnics as they received their formal designations from the end of the 1960s that the polytechnics were to remain distinctive.
Ministers believed the same, asserting as had been asserted when they were created that they were in some way different from the universities.
They were, as Secretary of State Ted Short said in 1968, ‘strongly identified with the LEA system’:
Any kind of progression from the LEA system into a university of the kind accomplished by the CATs would be completely alien to the concept…the polytechnics were centres of comprehensive tertiary education for those over the age of 18…they must offer a full range of courses, including some with modest entry qualifications designed for mature students…
It was important…for polytechnics to develop as viable alternatives to universities in areas where they overlapped, and not as pale reflections.
While Short and others emphasized the ‘full range of courses’, his predecessor, Patrick Gordon Walker, had recently offered a different formulation:
In some ways the polytechnics will be like universities.
The intention is, for example, that they should concentrate on higher education.
Where other levels of work are being done they will be given up as soon as satisfactory alternative arrangements can be made.
Lower level courses were, in fact, being transferred to other further education colleges, but in that situation what was meant by a concept of ‘comprehensive’ tertiary education with a full range of courses, including for those with modest entry qualifications?
In practice the polytechnics were initially mainly second-choice institutions for students unable to obtain entrance to universities, but as their reputations grew and they launched courses different from or not available  at universities, they attracted more able students.
There was a struggle for the polytechnics to define, in private and in public, what the characteristics of the polytechnics were and should remain.
They were, in the eyes of many people, ‘primarily teaching institutions’, second-chance institutions, concerned more than the universities with the applications of knowledge.
Eric Robinson pinpointed the differences in terms of their financing and degree-awarding powers, their legal independence and range of studies, the existence of professors in the universities, and the strong further education links of the polytechnics.
George Bosworth, Director of Newcastle Polytechnic, thought that those who advocated a form of education in the polytechnics that was different from that in the universities had been ‘singularly uncommunicative on the nature and extent of the difference’.
He offered the suggestion that the universities were ‘subject-orientated’ and that the role of the polytechnics should be to prepare people ‘to enter sectors of activity rather than extending the availability of subject-orientated courses of a highly specialist kind’.
The polytechnics, other colleges validated by the CNAA, and the CNAA itself in scrutinizing courses for approval, certainly took seriously the question of employment outcomes for students.
They took their teaching role seriously enough also to inaugurate staff development programmes of various kinds.
The first graduates from degree courses validated by the CNAA were beginning to enter industry and the professions, and to study for postgraduate awards in the universities, and were thus establishing the credibility of CNAA degrees — including in non-science subjects.
An industrialist's view of the polytechnics, and incidentally of the CNAA, was offered in 1970 by Sir Arthur Norman, President of the Confederation of British Industries.
Given their prior, distinctive relationship with industry and commerce, the polytechnics were in a position to provide courses ‘that are more relevant to industrial and commercial needs than the traditional academic courses at universities’.
He recognized the complexity of both ‘industry's view’ and the changes in higher education — including the development of university courses ‘more closely allied with national needs for qualified manpower’, and pointed to some particular possible roles for the polytechnics:
Industry will especially be looking to the polytechnics to provide a further and much needed stimulus to innovations already taking place in higher education; in particular, in the development of mixed degree courses, modular courses coupled with practical experience, and of the sandwich system of education and training generally, and in the opening up of opportunities for women in all branches of higher education, not least science and technology.
In the diversification of roles between the universities and the polytechnics, the latter would develop the ‘highest levels of education’ closely linked to employment in industry and commerce — in which ‘the Council for National  Academic Awards would be the central pivot’.
Perceptions of the polytechnics, as of the CNAA and of the changing roles of the universities, fuelled and continued to refocus debate about the liberal and the vocational in higher education.
That debate was now not only about traditions and values, but also about the structure of higher education itself, and the declared or perceived missions of the new institutions and the whole new sector.
The defence and definition of, or hostility towards, the polytechnics, was partly associated with questions of standards, partly with the nature of vocational emphases, and in fact with the connection between the two.
The polytechnics were having to carry into the 1970s a defence and assertion of their particular — though not necessarily homogeneous — values and procedures, and in doing so made necessary a constant reaffirmation of the vocational or service roles that had aroused fierce passions throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as new institutions and new sectors had come into existence in many countries.
As the Director of Leeds Polytechnic put it in 1971: ‘the very existence of the new polytechnics must signify the end of the general assumption that a liberal education is the only peak to which a higher education can aspire’.
The recurring question was: in what ways were the polytechnics the same as the universities, and in what ways different?
Differences might be imposed, most notably in the case of the continuing ambivalence of Ministers and the DES about research, following the CNAA Council debates and actions around the 1966 White Paper.
Differences were constantly defined by the polytechnic directors and others in terms of the funding differentials between the two sectors.
Differences were described in polytechnic prospectuses and submissions to the CNAA in terms of tradition, employment-orientation, relationships with industry and employers generally, and commitment to effective teaching.
However much both sectors might underline their commitment to high-quality education for students and other values of higher education as a whole, the struggle to define and remove boundaries at the same time led to uncertainty and ambiguity, tension and even ‘ill-will’ between the sectors.
By the early 1970s the CDP, the individual polytechnic directors and voices in and around the CNAA were proclaiming the achievements of the new sector, despite the difficulties of course recognition or underfunding.
From the polytechnics themselves the constant message was what had already been achieved, and the potential — in educational, economic and other terms — for doing more if given adequate support from government and local authorities.
In 1968 Brian MacArthur suggested in The Times that of the two major educational developments under the Wilson government since 1964 the movement towards a national system of comprehensive education had received most attention: ‘yet the development of the polytechnics, some of which will start with around 5000 students, is potentially the more revolutionary’.
Within the institutions, however, there was a growing sense of revolution unfulfilled: the decisions taken by  government did not amount to policy, and the roles nebulously defined for the polytechnics could not be carried out and development sustained without public policies underpinned by finance.
Critics pointed out that at the time of the White Paper and in the process of polytechnic designation there had been little or nothing in the shape of academic planning.
Michael Locke pointed out that criticism sometimes levelled at the CNAA in fact constituted a critique of ‘the lack of a polytechnic policy’.
Also towards the end of 1971, Tyrrell Burgess was discussing ‘what went wrong with the polytechnics’ under the title ‘The lost opportunities’.
The blame lay with the DES, which had thought that ‘establishing polytechnics was just an administrative exercise’.
Little thought had been given to the question of what sort of institutions they were going to be:
Only a few years earlier, the new universities had all been started through academic planning boards which established in general terms their objectives…
Each polytechnic should have been required to work out its educational objectives and the means by which it proposed to achieve them…
The Department, however, believed that there was no sense in planning, indeed no way of planning, until the new directors and governing bodies were installed…
There was no reason why the existing staff of the institutions concerned could not have produced academic development plans…
As William Gutteridge had pointed out in 1969, the ability of the new polytechnics to match up to the universities was drastically hampered by their lack of resources of all kinds:
The fact that the polytechnics have largely grown out of a technical college tradition, geared to different ends, means that they have practical problems of a kind unfamiliar to the universities today.
Both by comparison and in absolute terms, there is serious underprovision of necessary administrative, and clerical help.
There was a shortage of well-qualified academic staff, poor library and other facilities, heavy teaching loads and other obstacles to academic development and student recruitment.
In these circumstances each polytechnic evolved as best it could in the various contexts within which it had to operate — for finance, primarily its local authority; for permission to develop a course, the Regional Advisory Council; for course approval, the CNAA and other validating bodies.
The polytechnics faced different local conditions, and established their own different policy priorities.
Ulster College, the Northern Ireland Polytechnic, started from scratch — with two colleges of education and a college of art joining later, in 1971.
It saw the CNAA connection as being ‘with the substance, not the shadow’, and CNAA degrees as being not ‘a caste mark to be sought or scorned but…an opportunity to shape courses that will  help those who follow them to live with the caprices of economic and social change’.
At the time of formal designation, in April 1971, Teesside Polytechnic (formerly Constantine College), had 1117 full-time students, and a complement of nearly 8000 including part-time students of various kinds.
It had seventeen degree courses in operation, and was setting itself a target of 6–8000 full-time student equivalents by the early 1980s.
It had at last been able to start building a hall of residence which had been in abeyance for six years, and the Director was underlining that student accommodation was in short supply in Teesside, and ‘unless something is done by the provision of fiats, hostels, etc., to supplement the supply of digs, I can see this being a factor which could really inhibit our development’.
Oxford Polytechnic, deriving from a further education institution with poor facilities, had a struggle to establish itself with the CNAA.
By May 1969, the Oxford College of Technology, as it still was, had submitted six courses for CNAA approval, had received three visits, and had had nothing approved.
The Chief Officer was instructed by the Council to have discussions with representatives of the Oxford authority.
The Council pointed to ‘serious weaknesses of academic control and coordination in the College’, and thought it ‘in need of external advice, perhaps through an academic advisory committee’.
At the same meeting, the Council received reports of visits to Borough Polytechnic (soon to become South Bank Polytechnic) by three of the Council's boards and by the Council itself, and the combined visiting party had ‘expressed complete satisfaction about the organization of the College’ and its facilities, with the exception of its inadequate computing facilities.
Lancaster Polytechnic was by the end of the 1960s one of the premier public sector institutions, with one in six of all CNAA degrees (more than any other college or polytechnic).
It had been operational as Lancaster College of Technology since 1960, conceived by the local authority in Coventry as a major institution, and had rapidly developed a reputation as such, expanding rapidly, and playing an important part in the committees and boards of the CNAA.
Most of the polytechnics were created by institutional mergers.
Bristol, for example, was formed from the Bristol Technical College, the College of Commerce and the West of England College of Art.
The first meeting of the Academic Board of the Technical College took place in April 1966, and considered a proposal to develop courses for CNAA awards as soon as possible, given that Plymouth was already doing so.
As the Bristol local authority set about creating a polytechnic in 1967, the Technical College was still trying to establish a policy regarding CNAA degrees in the context of the South West, including the emergence of a second university in the area.
Its Academic  Board was emphasizing the  importance of research, otherwise there was ‘little hope of recognition for CNAA degrees.
By the time the three colleges were meeting as a prospective polytechnic, from May 1969, it was clear that CNAA courses could not begin until 1971 at the earliest.
Hanrott visited the Polytechnic in December to meet with senior  staff and answer questions about procedures for the approval of CNAA courses, and throughout 1970 the Polytechnic was preparing submissions.
An Academic Development Officer was appointed and an Academic Development Committee set up, and in 1971 the Polytechnic was approved by the CNAA as a centre for its awards for the next five years.
The Polytechnic was anxious to ensure, however, that its commitments to diploma and other work were not overshadowed by the CNAA departure (and it is important in this respect to remember the fears nationally of colleges of art entering into polytechnic amalgamations).
The Academic Board was ‘concerned with ensuring that CNAA degree work did not form too large a proportion of the total Polytechnic commitment’.
Brighton Polytechnic was established in April 1970 with the formal designation ceremony being held in February 1971.
It had resulted from a merger between a Brighton Technical College and Brighton College of Art.
The Technical College had been disappointed in not being nominated a college of advanced technology, and the Principal wrote in 1965 that ‘prior to the publication of the Robbins Report we confidently expected to be designated as one of the colleges of advanced technology…
We have been a college of technology in everything but name’.
A series of contacts with the CNAA from 1965 produced the controversies over the attempt to introduce full-time courses in various disciplines, and to combine them with sandwich courses, with Brighton's first full-time courses in engineering being approved at the end of that year.
By 1968, with the CNAA withdrawing approval of the honours degree in quantity surveying, the College had not overcome some of its early difficulties.
A CNAA visit to the College in 1969 was critical of a range of matters, including the operation of the Academic Board.
The College was itself uneasy about the lack of ‘coordinated opinion’ among three engineering boards which had recently visited it, and an Academic Board sub-committee considered that undue emphasis had been given to the question of policy for full-time and sandwich courses, ‘to the detriment of more important issues involved in the preparation of courses of degree level’.
A June visit resulted in a report particularly critical of the Academic Board's lack of policy for the coordination of departments and for the planning and control of resources, and in July the College was informed of the Council's concern about the relationship between full-time and sandwich courses.
The Principal responded initially by agreeing to redesignate courses as full-time, and explaining that the Academic Board had come into existence after departments had been constructed to match DipTech requirements, but had in fact gone a long way towards the Council's view — further than the report on the June quinquennial visit had acknowledged.
In October the Principal wrote further to express the Academic Board's disagreement with the visitors' findings.
The Board, he pointed out, had met monthly for the past two years, and controlled the work of the College.
Heads of departments had thereby been deprived of ‘a large measure of independence’.
A Planning Committee had been meeting  weekly in 1969, but the College had not wanted to be too rigid in imposing teaching methods.
A development plan had been accepted by the governing body and HMI as realistic, but clearly reorganization would be necessary when the Polytechnic came into existence.
One of the university members of the June visiting party wrote in some detail about his impressions of the College.
He thought it appeared less like a college than a ‘set of separate departments’.
Collaboration over academic policy was nil, and over other matters it seemed minimal.
They did not seem to have any idea of what a sandwich course was about; they seemed to pretend that their students were all mature men with industrial experience.
Many of the staff were ‘rather pugnacious characters — it's a pity this dynamicism can't be channelled into a less reactionary form’.
The College had good features but there was a ‘lack of central planning and a lack of collaboration.
I doubt whether they should run sandwich courses until they have learned what the words mean’.
There were other difficulties that Brighton and other polytechnics had to face, apart from such academic and organizational ones, at the point of transition to polytechnic status.
The planning at Brighton revealed some of the unease in relations with the local authority.
An initial scheme not to include the College of Art in the Polytechnic was turned down by the DES.
The CNAA was aware of strong controlling tendencies by the local authority, and indeed the Director of Education, who was retiring, was known to ‘have ideas about becoming Director of the Polytechnic’.
The response of the CNAA officer who visited Brighton was ‘frankly incredulous…the position in Brighton is a difficult one and an unpromising basis for the launching of a new polytechnic’.
Major improvements were being noted two years later, and it was expected that these would be carried further when the Polytechnic was transferred to the East Sussex Local Authority following county boundary changes.
New accommodation was being built, and a new faculty structure was coming into place.
The Principal and other staff of the College and then the Polytechnic were playing a part in committees of the CNAA: in 1971, for example, the Academic Board congratulated one of its members on being invited to chair the CNAA Physics Board.
The College tried, and failed, to persuade the CNAA Council to nominate an academic member of the College's Governing body.
The Hatfield Polytechnic, which began life as a technical college in 1952, was one of the first to be designated — in 1969.
As soon as the 1966 White Paper was published, however, the Principal, six department heads and the Registrar went into a retreat in a local hotel and began the process which resulted in a development plan, the first, policy-focussed part of which appeared in December, written by the Principal and Polytechnic Director designate, Norman (later Sir Norman) Lindop.
This was a conscious attempt to produce what had been known largely in the United States as a ‘mission statement’.
Information was sought from other polytechnics-designate, and some other polytechnics — Sheffield, for example— were attempting similar  plans in the late 1960s.
The 1966 decision of the Hertfordshire Education Committee to nominate the College as a polytechnic was the challenge taken up by the development plan.
The CNAA had already approved a dozen of Hatfield's courses for honours degrees, and it was to have twenty degree courses by 1968, establishing a pattern of honours degree, degree and sub-degree courses.
The central aims of the new polytechnic should be, ‘within the context of a committed involvement with industry and commerce and public affairs, to educate all our students so that they acquire: high professional competence; an appreciation of the unity of knowledge; a strong sense of social responsibility and moral awareness, both in professional practice and in private life, and a determination to use their skill and knowledge for the enrichment of human life’.
In seeking to make these aims operational, the plan set out the general characteristics of the proposed polytechnic: it was to be a ‘broadly-based institution catering for a wide range of higher education for the over-18 age groups’, giving priority to sandwich courses, but providing courses other than degree courses for those able to benefit from ‘advanced courses of a specialist nature’.
The institution would have national, regional and local commitments.
The plan set out to establish what was distinctive about polytechnics, and what was specifically so about Hatfield.
In general terms a polytechnic, while sharing many of the functions of universities, would emphasize the close relationship ‘between the type and content of the courses provided and the role which its graduates are expected to fulfil…the closest possible links with industry, commerce and the professions, the research institutions and the schools…the development of a truly comprehensive academic structure…the provision of a range of part-time courses, and the provision of postgraduate, post-experience, refresher and retraining courses.
The special features of Hatfield were its strong tradition of integrating general studies within technological studies, and of synthesis of academic studies in engineering, through the development of design and creative talents; ‘meaningful research’, particularly in certain fields of chemistry; close integration with industry in relation to student projects, and the inclusion of computer and information studies in undergraduate courses.
The Polytechnic would seek to integrate library and computer facilities, recruit women students in all subjects, develop links with particular overseas regions, focus on retraining courses and exploit its geographical position to develop new kinds of extra-mural studies.
The 1966 plan, and two subsequent parts dealing with academic organization and administrative structure, and library and information services, looked in detail at such areas as target size and accommodation, the curriculum, research policy, outside relationships, academic standards, governance and structure.
By 1972 Hatfield had over 1800 full-time students and 1000 part-time students, a quarter of whom were working for bachelors or masters degrees and the others for higher technician or professional qualifications.
It had 300 residential places (and had had those for only a year).
It was building  on its strengths in aeronautical engineering and other areas, and had developed one of the country's first degree courses in computer science.
It saw itself as primarily a teaching institution and Lindop underlined that ‘we are at pains to ensure that we recruit staff who share our view of the primacy of teaching’, and the Polytechnic was requiring new and inexperienced staff to attend an in-service training programme of about 250 hours in their first year.
Although there would be pressures and prospects for independence ahead, Lindop emphasized that the CNAA had been ‘one of the most significant features in our development’.
It had ‘provided the opportunity for colleges like Hatfield to serve their apprenticeship and come of age in the academic sense’.
The transition from London external degrees to a ‘virtually internal system’, had meant great benefits:
…the staff of the College have realized that the future and reputation of the institution were in their hands and they have undergone the transmutation which occurs when full academic responsibility is placed upon professionally competent individuals.
These differences amongst institutions, and amongst their environments and perceptions of direction and identity, were to account in part for the differences of speed and conviction with which they raised the question of independence or autonomy — or, in the terminology of the time, academic freedom.
For the CNAA's relationships with the polytechnics in the 1970s the uncertainties surrounding this question, and the different interpretations of it by different polytechnic directors and within the CNAA itself, were to be of central importance.
The role of the CNAA, as we have suggested, in sustaining a balance between guiding the sector and accounting for the quality of its degrees on the one hand, and delegating ‘full academic responsibility’ on the other hand, was inevitably a difficult one to fill.
Its machinery had to be capable of carrying out the role in relation to those institutions now designated as polytechnics — which, as we have seen, were far from homogeneous — and in relation to a large variety of other institutions with one or another proportion of its work at the level of CNAA degrees.
From its first policy statement it was clear that the initiatives for college courses and development was to come from the institutions themselves.
Many of the colleges with which CNAA committees and visiting parties were dealing — including the new polytechnics — had traditions of autocratic management which the DES did a great deal to undermine with the notes for guidance it issued in connection with the proposed designation of polytechnics.
The CNAA was from the beginning anxious to ensure progress towards greater democratic government in institutions, particularly, as we have seen, in the creation and proper functioning of academic boards.
James Topping reflected: ‘Yes,[the CNAA]had a great deal of influence on the development of academic boards.
Quite often we found we went to places where there wasn't such a thing’.
Lancaster College of Technology  was the first of the future polytechnics to have established an Academic Board, in 1962.
When Glamorgan College of Technology, the future Polytechnic of Wales, was visited by the CNAA in 1967, it had recently set up an Academic Board, and the visiting party felt that ‘very belatedly the College is developing towards an academic structure’ and towards the kind of academic independence now ‘established for some time in most other Colleges’.
Given the responsibilities the CNAA shouldered by virtue of its Charter, given its anxiety to ensure that its procedures safeguarded standards as fully as possible, and given the diversity of the institutions with which it had to deal, the CNAA moved cautiously in its discussions about relinquishing or reducing control over any aspects of the work its procedures were designed to monitor.
From the early 1970s debate about autonomy, validation and partnership was to gain momentum.
From the outset, as we shall see, the CDP adopted strong, but often confused and contradictory, policies aimed at securing greater autonomy for the polytechnics.
The CNAA's first serious consideration of the issue as a matter of policy was in 1968–69.
In November 1968 the Council considered a memorandum on ‘Future relationships between the Council and the Colleges’.
This document, written by Hornby, emphasized that the Council had set up a procedure for dealing with proposals which began with a detailed scrutiny of documents from the college and involved painstaking work by the subject boards, so that the Council ‘might establish the standards of its degrees’.
There was now, however, a need to streamline the procedure:
…as CNAA degree work expands in a college concurrently with the growth of a college academic community capable of accepting further freedoms and responsibilities, there may well come a point where much of the detailed work now necessary can be dispensed with and a somewhat different relationship established between college and Council.
The CNAA would have to take account of the different rates of institutions' development, but a move in this direction would enable committees and boards to have ‘more time at their disposal to explore new developments and policy’.
The Council received the memorandum, and set up a sub-committee to consider it, with Lord Kings Norton in the chair.
The sub-committee reported back to the Council in July 1969 that within its Charter, or minor modifications of it, changes should be possible with a result that a college, ‘as it reaches an appropriate state of excellence, should be subject only to that minimum of control by Council consistent with the duties imposed by its Charter’.
Putting this principle into operation was to prove more difficult and contentious than may have been foreseen, and it was to be several more years before the CNAA was to consider changes in practice and begin consultations towards a new balance of ‘minimum of control’ with the duties imposed by the Charter.
By 1971 the Council was confronting more fully the implications of the earlier discussion.
Hornby, as Chief Officer and Vice-Chairman of the Council, issued the further particulars to candidates for the post he was intending to vacate the following year.
The Council, the notes explained, aimed ‘to afford colleges conducting courses the same freedoms as universities have in the framing of curricula and syllabuses and the selection, teaching and examination of students’.
As the colleges ‘grew in excellence’, their measure of freedom would increase.
It was essential ‘that the Chief Officer should be entirely in sympathy with these aims’.
The Council not only considered proposals for degrees and other awards, it gave assistance and advice in the early stages of the formulation of courses, and in amending them if they were rejected by the Council.
The Chief Officer needed to contribute to this work and to help the Council maintain the influence in higher education it had developed in the previous six years, and to develop public awareness of the Council's aims and activities.
The main emphasis of the notes was on the role of the Chief Officer and the Council in developing academic standards and institutional freedom.
At the meeting when the Council approved this document it also received a paper entitled ‘Academic freedoms which might be granted to colleges’, directed towards ‘relaxing controls’.
The paper was, however, limited in scope, since it was felt that there were major changes in higher education ahead — the James Committee on Teacher Education was sitting, for example— and the items most prominent in the document were a proposal to reduce the amount of paper work for renewals of course approval, and the possibility of delegating authority for the registration of MPhil students.
A discussion at a second meeting underlined the relationship between possible changes and the forthcoming heavy work load at the CNAA.
A revised version of the paper was produced for a November meeting, at which a new committee with the same name as the 1968 committee was set up.
This time, however, its brief included considering the possibility of major changes to the Charter, and proposing them if necessary.
The meeting made it clear that the main reason for changes in relationships between the Council and the colleges was ‘the need to give greater independence to colleges rather than the pressure of work at the Council’.
The intention was to move away from detailed course scrutiny as colleges ‘grew in excellence’.
It had now become clear both that significant moves towards greater academic independence for the colleges meant Charter changes, and that proposals for improvements in relationships had to be worked out in greater detail.
The more detailed proposals were forthcoming in 1972, and were to initiate the consultation process over ‘partnership in validation’.
It is important, in reviewing the early history of the CNAA's relationships with the colleges, to emphasize the consistent role played by Frank Hornby in pressing for greater academic independence.
He was concerned with this as an issue almost from the beginning.
He had discussions with the CDP about the issue, and the establishment of Research Degree Committees in  the polytechnics was one of the first freedoms to be given to them ‘under the Hornby plan’.
From the late 1960s he was convinced that the CNAA should shed the more experienced colleges and help the others to be ready to be shed.
He told a Coombe Lodge conference that he hoped for a curtailment of the role of the CNAA, and that the polytechnics would be bound to have Charters in the long run.
He believed, however, that in the short run — whatever time that might be — they had much to gain ‘from the support and strength which they derive from the CNAA’— and a look at American accreditation had reinforced his view.
Although the question of autonomy was a complex and confusing one, Hornby contributed to the process of keeping seriously on the agenda that part of the CNAA's role which involved delegating responsibility within the limits currently imposed on the CNAA, and expanding those limits as it became possible.
By the early 1970s the CNAA was in various respects consolidating its position, looking at future developments and beginning to respond to criticism and pressure.
It was beginning to take over from the London external degrees, and had already established a substantial range of subject areas in which it could work.
Having begun as what Hanrott describes as an ‘adventure in higher education’, it was both encouraging of innovation and cautious in its development.
It was interested in curriculum development and course planning, research and staff training, resources and teaching methods.
In some areas, teaching methods for example, the dialogue between the Council's committee and panels and the colleges was more substantial than in others.
New teaching methods were more easily discussed in business studies or applied social science than in an area like engineering with an established body of knowledge and longer traditions of teaching.
The Council had by this stage resolved the issue of its degree classification, so that separate degrees with separate admission for honours and ordinary students were no longer to be offered.
The Council was increasing the number of part-time courses available, and confronting questions of employment opportunities and the ability of students to meet ‘the caprices of economic change’.
From 1969 it was awarding honorary degrees.
The criticisms it was encountering had to do, for instance, with the composition of the Council (whether or not there was adequate representation of polytechnic teachers or local authorities), or with the slow rate at which it was held to be devolving authority to the institutions.
The number of students on CNAA courses was increasing rapidly, and exceeding its own and the institutions' forecasts.
The Times Higher Education Supplement began an editorial on the CNAA in 1972 with the statement: ‘The Council for National Academic Awards must be one of the few unqualified success stories in higher education in the past eight years — sharing that honour perhaps with the Open University’.
It considered the success to be tangible, for example in the number of degree courses, but also intangible, given the difficulty of measuring ‘the effect of the liberation of many colleges from the more restrictive control of London external degrees’.
The CNAA had  come a long way since 1964: ‘from being a shy bureaucracy it has become an important and an innovatory force in higher education’.
It commented in the same year that, ‘while recognizing the considerable contribution that Mr Hornby has made in building up the Council to its present position of eminence within the colleges, it was now time for the CNAA's influence to be more widely felt’.
It was in a unique position to analyze educational trends and the development of specific subject areas: ‘the publishing of such information would give guidance to colleges and reduce the isolation that many inevitably feel’.
A more imaginative interpretation of the Charter than was appropriate for the 1960s was needed for the 1970s.
There were suggestions that the CNAA might — alone or in conjunction with the Open University — be turned into a National University.
In 1971 Michael (two years later to be Sir Michael) Clapham succeeded Lord Kings Norton as Chairman of the Council, and Edwin Kerr was appointed to take over from Frank Hornby in 1972.
Clearly these early years of the organization had been intensive and exciting for many people.
For Kings Norton they had been ‘exciting at the time’, and ‘always amicable’.
For Jean Rossiter it was a ‘most exciting period’, for Maxwell Smith they were ‘enormous fun’.
For Christopherson it was an ‘exciting time, especially for engineers’, since engineering was at the time underrepresented and low priority in the universities.
Although there was some criticism of the CNAA as being overpopulated with university representatives, for most people associated with the CNAA there was considerable gratitude for the role played by many university people in establishing and supporting the CNAA and in helping and defending the polytechnics.
Some were prominent in their disciplines, some became chairmen of CNAA committees or boards.
Donald MacRae, a professor of sociology, for example, was seen as lending substantial support to the development of the polytechnics.
Maurice Peston a professor of economics, Harold Edey, a professor of accounting, and many others accepted the CNAA system, worked on its behalf, and — in Hanrott's formulation —‘people in polytechnics did not always appreciate how much they owe to them’.
Peston told members of the Parliamentary Select Committee and others that CNAA degrees were better than many in the universities.
Kings Norton was aware of the quality of the people with whom he worked — Christopherson, Richmond, Hornby…— and felt that Sir Lionel Russell was the person whose judgment he most admired.
The CNAA was now dealing with the new generation of polytechnics but also with Scottish institutions, and institutions as diverse as the Royal Air Force College, Cranwell, and the London Bible College.
It was concerned with the status of itself as an organization and of the degrees it awarded: the question of status was, in Christopherson's words, ‘there, but not written in minutes!’
All of the issues involved in the development of the CNAA as an element in the shaping of the new sector were present in some form in countries also developing ‘alternative’ sectors of higher education.
Apart from the American connection, Australia was featuring in the CNAA's  discussions and relationships.
Hornby was invited to a conference on Australian Colleges of Advanced Education in 197 1, and met with Australian visitors at the CNAA.
Hornby was anxious that the CNAA machinery in general and the office in particular should remain modest in scale.
Neither he nor the Council was fully aware of the pressures for expansion that were to intensify from 1972, or of what might be involved in a response to such injunctions as those of the THES to make the influence of the CNAA more widely felt.
Chapter 6
REDRAWING BOUNDARIES
In the early 1970s the CNAA moved from constructing a system to redrawing boundaries.
In establishing major new configurations of subjects, courses and areas of professional preparation it was caught between pressures to expand and to retract boundaries.
The next chapter will consider the protracted demands and efforts to redefine the balance of CNAA-institution relationships — towards greater partnership or complete institutional autonomy.
Here it is important to look at extensions of the CNAA's wider involvement with subjects and institutions.
It did not diminish its established commitments, but the impression gained from the annual reports for the early 1970s is that the CNAA was preoccupied with the validation of an ever expanding number of newly-associated institutions and a widening range of subjects — from Chinese studies to computer technology, from housing studies to occupational hygiene.
At the beginning of the 1970s the Council had four committees and sixty-four boards and panels, and a staff of thirty-six, with an inevitably increasing workload.
The subject areas with the most rapidly growing number of courses were business studies, combined studies (science), mechanical engineering, social science, town planning, and combined studies in arts and humanities.
Roughly two-thirds of all students enrolled were in science and technology, the fields which remained particularly dominant in part-time first degree courses.
In 1973–74, for example, 872 students were enrolled on fourteen part-time courses in arts and social studies, as against 2178 on sixty-eight part-time courses in science and technology.
It was natural, however, that the CNAA's discussions —; as distinct from its day-to-day validation activities — should focus, in the first half of the 1970s, on the most substantial new developments — either initiated by the CNAA or in response to initiatives elsewhere.
The most significant areas of development in this respect proved to be teacher education, art and design, the creative and performing arts, and management studies.
One of the most noteworthy outcomes of the James Committee Report of 1972 on teacher education was, in fact, the central involvement of the CNAA with the validation of courses of teacher education, with the new Diploma of Higher Education, and with the diversification of the colleges  of education.
Not that the James Committee was convinced that the CNAA would or could accept a validating role for the colleges and the field of study.
The CNAA, as we have seen, was cautiously approaching a possible role in teacher education from 1965, and with the beginnings of its Committee for Education the following year.
In the early 1970s that committee was, in one officer's words, ‘a committee waiting for a job’.
And as the Chief Officer, Edwin Kerr, told a conference on teacher education in 1976, ‘if a meeting on teacher education had been held four years ago, the Council would not have been invited to attend’.
What the James Committee placed on the agenda of public discussion — even though its own recommendations were in general not widely popular among teacher educators — was the reshaping of the education of teachers.
Its proposals included ways to eliminate the certificate and introduce a new structure of undergraduate and in-service education, incorporating an integrated phase of probationary service.
The first two years of education were to be the academic years, and there were proposals for these two years also to be seen as discrete and eligible for a Diploma of Higher Education.
A National Council for Teacher Education and Training, with a regional structure, would have responsibilities which included validation, though this might ‘quite rapidly’ be assumed by the CNAA and, in some cases, by universities.
The Committee was generally critical of the universities' past role, and clearly hoped that the CNAA might be persuaded to take on what might prove to be a very substantial validating function.
Few of the specifics of the James proposals were implemented in the forms envisaged, but government acceptance of the principle of a degree structure to replace the certificate became the focus of debate and planning in the colleges and departments of education.
For the CNAA the question was now clear and urgent.
Was the Council willing to embark on a major new undertaking in a field in which it had only limited experience, none of it in the validation of teacher education itself?
The Committee for Education was crucial to the CNAA's internal discussion, but the issues were wider than its remit and a special committee to consider the response to the James Report was set up.
Throughout 1973 and 1974 the Council was engaged in debate about the DipHE and the BEd, relationships with the colleges of education, standards, procedures, and liaison with the universities.
Discussions of many kinds took place with the DES, and even as Chief Officer-designate, Kerr had seen Margaret Thatcher, Secretary of State for Education and Science, to discuss the possibility of CNAA involvement.
In July 1972 the Council's response to the James Report and subsequent debate was to affirm categorically that it would be willing to establish the award of a Diploma of Higher Education, and a three-year degree including practical professional experience:
The Council…believes strongly that a first degree course in Educational Studies lasting three years may be designed to lead to  an Honours award…the concept of a three-year degree course in Educational Studies, leading to an Honours or an unclassified degree, will be acceptable provided it combines an adequate period of practical experience in the classroom with a requisite minimum of academic studies.
It was important that the colleges should have ‘considerable freedom’ to interpret the overall requirements, and the Council itself would determine the title of the new degree.
The Council was opposed to the idea of setting up interim validating bodies, and it would be willing to share validation with the universities.
The Council was aware of the ‘high degree of priority and urgency’ to be attached to this work, but in making the commitment it pointed out also that leaving freedom to colleges to devise and conduct their courses meant that ‘the consequent interaction between College and Council can stretch over a fair amount of time’.
It considered that the James Committee had not taken sufficiently into account the experience and potential of the polytechnics in teacher education.
The conception of a three-years honours course incorporating as many as fifteen weeks teaching practice was the component of the response that produced the most controversy inside the CNAA.
For the purpose of teacher training regulations the CNAA would now need to become a ‘relevant organization’ on the same footing as the Area Training Organizations.
Given the parallel problems that the CNAA and the universities would face as validators of the DipHE and/or the new BEd, Edwin Kerr and Sir Kenneth Berrill, Chairman of the UGC, took the initiative to propose that the two organizations should convene a conference to discuss the DipHE and the BEd.
The conference took place at the Polytechnic of Central London in January 1973, with Kerr and Berrill each chairing one of the sessions.
The conference agreed to set up a joint study group to look at the particularly urgent question of the DipHE, to be followed by a similar study group on the BEd.
The BEd report was issued in December, after a second conference had discussed the DipHE report in June.
The report accepted that the entry qualifications for the new degree and its standards should be as for other first degrees, but a majority of the group could not accept that it was possible to combine a professional and academic education to honours standard in three years.
It recommended that the honours course for full-time students should be four years in length, and it called on the DES to explore and resource such a departure — which was eventually to prove to be the pattern adopted.
The anticipation of having to respond to a considerable amount of interest from the colleges, and of the ‘fair amount of time’ the interactions would take, both proved to be accurate.
By February 1973 the Chief Officer was reporting to the Council that the CNAA had already had discussions with over fifty colleges — about a third of the total.
In 1972 Christopherson, as Chairman of the Committee, saw that ‘there was going  to be a flood’, and that the work of the Committee was going to become much more like that of other CNAA committees.
The pressures on the CNAA as colleges showed interest in coming to it for validation were of various kinds.
It was a new subject area for the CNAA, and a rapidly changing one, and the colleges had no previous experience of the CNAA.
Since a high proportion, normally at or near 100 per cent, of their work was in teacher education, looking at BEd proposals meant in fact judging the institution as a whole, and the CNAA knew from the outset that many of the colleges hoping for validation would not be adequately staffed, experienced and resourced to teach at degree level.
An additional problem for the CNAA was its own structure — given the complexity of the BEd and DipHE proposals that were being designed.
The CNAA could not establish boards for every subject component of degrees in education, and in the event for the first few years the Committee for Education, using a range of specialist panels in support, itself carried out the validation work.
When it also rapidly became clear, following the 1972 White Paper, Education: A Framework for Expansion, that there was to be in fact a massive reduction in teacher education and an opportunity to diversify to fill the gaps created, the CNAA began to be faced with proposals for degrees in other subjects, often combined or modularized degrees, and often with an attempt to build both a BA and BEd degree on top of a two-year Diploma.
The proposals were numerous, almost always complex, and generally extremely ambitious.
In all of these situations, therefore, the pressures on the CNAA included the need to conduct preliminary discussions, to explain the CNAA procedures, to advise and guide, to ascertain the local conditions with regard to the university, to explain rejection, and to encourage or discourage resubmission.
The colleges themselves, of course, took part in these processes often with some trepidation and nervousness, not knowing how well the CNAA would understand them as institutions or how sympathetic it would be to their approach to teacher education.
In the session 1972–73 the expected workload of the Committee as judged in October 1972 consisted of fifteen proposals for full-time or part-time BEd courses, as well as one for a full-time Diploma in Educational Technology and a Further Education certificate.
Trent Polytechnic and the Polytechnic of North London had come forward with proposals for full-time BEd courses.
Sunderland and Huddersfield Polytechnics were discussing honours degree courses in science and education.
Part-time BEd courses were being proposed by The Hatfield Polytechnic jointly with two colleges of education, Manchester Polytechnic, Gipsy Hill College of Education, and others.
Didsbury, St Osyth's, Worcester and others which had previously had discussions with the CNAA were either already back in discussion, or were soon to be so.
Didsbury and Berkshire College of Education (soon to be renamed Bulmershe College of Higher Education) were to be the first to submit ‘major’ complete schemes for full-time BEd courses.
Some submissions were to clear the initial hurdles relatively quickly, even when they fell at the first one.
Manchester Polytechnic's part-time BEd, for example, was turned down by the Committee in January 1973 with a recommendation that it should be resubmitted.
The Committee was informed in May that this was happening, and in July it was approved.
The increasing numbers of colleges approaching the CNAA had to do in part with difficulties over validation by universities — particularly those which were unwilling or reluctant to validate honours degrees — and in part with the attraction of the CNAA as a validating body which could consider a range of courses, including those in the areas of proposed diversification.
Some ran into trouble as they severed their lifelines with universities, only to find their initial proposals to the CNAA turned down.
For the CNAA itself there was also the problem of the transitional situation in which the new BEd degree would run in parallel with the existing certificate courses, and the Committee laid down that ‘the new BEd must be established as an award of degree standard, distinct from the Certificate course which it is intended to replace’.
Normal entrance requirements for degree courses should apply, and parallel courses should make differentiated demands on students.
The CNAA was in fact now beginning to approve a variety of different types of education course, including certificates as part of a four-year honours degree, the Postgraduate Certificate of Education, and specialist certificates — notably the part-time, in-service further education certificate.
The way was far from smooth, and some colleges were to find the path of validation for their BEd proposals — and then for their diversified courses — through the universities.
Until 1978 the Committee for Education operated through panels and working parties, with the core membership of visiting parties to institutions drawn from the Committee, and from other subject boards.
Four boards were created in 1978 — for in-service, undergraduate initial training postgraduate initial training, and further education, together with a range of specific panels for areas such as educational technology.
By the end of the 1970s, with Norman Lindop having taken over the chairmanship from 1974, the Committee had established itself as a unit which functioned in parallel with those for science and technology, arts and sciences, and research.
From the mid-1970s the Committee and its officers were engaged in a process of sponsoring debate and planning, including through such conferences as one on school experience and the assessment of practical teaching, held in York in October 1976 — a pioneer conference from which emerged a CNAA-funded research project which reported three years later.
From the mid-1970s, indeed, comments one of the officers, ‘the teacher education area of the Council was very active as a focus and sponsor of discussion concerning course development for some seven or eight years’.
The Committee was not laying down patterns of teacher education to be followed, but was contributing, at a time of considerable difficulty and change in the system, to debate about future directions.
In 1975 the Council agreed to the award of the degree of Master of Education, on condition that it was not taken as a precedent for a variety of other masters' degree titles.
Two years later a new Diploma in Professional Studies in Education was approved, for the first of which — in health education — guidelines were approved in December 1977.
The developments in teacher education were inseparable from those relating to the Diploma of Higher Education (DipHE) and to the diversification of the colleges.
The intake to initial teacher training in the colleges was 30,000 in 1975.
In 1976 the figure was set at 20,000, and it was expected in that year that the figure would not exceed 15,000 in the following and subsequent years.
The DES was suggesting that 30,000 places could be used for diversification.
The DipHE, recommended by the James Committee as a first stage in teacher education, was interpreted more broadly by the 1972 White Paper.
It was to fill a gap in the provision of two-year courses, was to be offered as ‘a genuine and useful addition to those forms of higher education already available’, would have the same entry qualifications as for degrees, and could be either a terminal qualification with which to enter appropriate forms of employment, or provide a foundation ‘for further study and be designed, where appropriate, in such a way as to earn credit towards other qualifications, including degrees and the requirements of professional bodies’.
The objectives would be achieved more readily ‘if courses were developed on a unit basis’.
The CNAA was to interpret this to mean that most DipHE programmes would be designed to have ‘two distinct outlets for their successful Diplomates.
These may be into existing degree schemes in the same college or another, into specially planned third-year academic or professional courses, or into employment’.
The CNAA committed itself to the Diploma.
The universities did not.
The CNAA made ‘a tacit political bargain with the DES…for the CNAA to have had a dagger in its hand and kill off the government scheme would not have done’.
Whether the colleges saw the DipHE as a genuine alternative to existing provision, or as a structural device for redesigning their curriculum, is open to doubt.
It was problematic for those institutions committed to ‘concurrent’ teacher education, where a Diploma might mean devoting the first two years to ‘academic study’without related professional work and school experience.
The modular possibilities, on the other hand, were attractive.
As the meeting convened by Edwin Kerr and Sir Kenneth Berrill in January 1973 discovered, much discussion of the DipHE revolved around such questions as when students on college DipHE courses would be able to make their decisions about training for teaching, and differences for the training of primary and secondary teachers.
At the same time there were anxieties about such matters as uniformity of standards and transferability between institutions.
When the CNAA consulted its related institutions and others about the future guidelines for the DipHE many of the polytechnics pointed out that the emphasis on an ‘interlock’ between the Diploma and degree programmes prevented the Diploma from being seen as an award in its own  right, and devalued it: it appeared to be a failed degree.
Following the work of the joint UGC/CNAA DipHE Study Group which was chaired by Walter (the following year to become Sir Walter) Perry, Vice-Chancellor of the Open University, the CNAA set up a DipHE Group, chaired by James Porter, Principal of the Berkshire College, with half of its membership from the universities and half from colleges or polytechnics with an interest in teacher education.
It was to act as a subject board, consider and where appropriate approve proposals which fitted the CNAA-university guidelines.
The Group would review all proposals with an eye to determining issues of policy.
The Group met for the first time in March 1974 with several proposals already before it.
It decided to visit North East London Polytechnic, for example, but declared a Huddersfield proposal to be unacceptable in its present form.
It had reservations about a proposal from Crewe and Alsager, and in the case of the Berkshire College recognized that the proposed DipHE linked with a BEd proposal undergoing revisions for a 1974 start, and with a BA that had not yet been submitted.
It decided to join the team visiting Berkshire to discuss the BEd revisions.
At its next meeting the Group received a paper from Joyce Skinner on ‘A possible college of education model’— one of several ‘models’, including a university model by Professor John Ziman.
Skinner thought that the Diploma might have particularly useful currency outside teaching for young women.
There was a rapid increase in the number of proposals before the Group in 1975, and James Porter recalls taking part in two-day visits roughly every other week.
The first proposals to be approved were Berkshire's own scheme and a more radical one from North East London Polytechnic within the framework of its School for Independent Study.
The DipHE did not become a major feature of the higher education landscape.
Given the commitment to its having the same entry qualifications as the degree, it did not become a clear alternative for large numbers of students.
The universities ignored it.
The difficulty from the outset was that the Treasury would only give approval for mandatory awards for DipHE students if it had a two ‘A’ level entry.
With the DES having to settle for this, and with the Diploma being seen in higher education as merely equivalent to the first two years of a degree programme, it became not an alternative track in higher education, but an ambiguous poor relation to the degree.
For the colleges and polytechnics attempting to implement it the DipHE raised problems of ‘interlock’ with other programmes, and transferability to other institutions — with a need for considerable attention to student counselling.
The number of students nationally obtaining the CNAA's Diploma of Higher Education in 1977 was only 293, of whom approximately half transferred to ‘linked’ or ‘top-up’courses in the same institution.
Only thirty diplomates transferred to other institutions.
At a conference on academic diversification in higher education in 1977 William Gutteridge suggested that the main questions regarding the DipHE now included: its purpose within higher education; the problem of the coherence  of a two-year programme and modular structures; possibilities for outlets and transfer, and the feasibility of a one-year ‘top-up’ course of study to produce a degree.
In discussion which followed ‘many members remained sceptical as to the feasibility of the Dip.H.E. and commented on the ephemeral interest in existing Dip.H.E.s…enrolment for future courses would depend on the flexibility exercised in allowing entrants with qualifications other than two ‘A’ levels to enrol, and members regretted the intransigence of the DES in this matter'.
Later the same year James Porter presented a document on the Dip.H.E., on behalf of the Group, to the Council, suggesting, among other things, that a national ‘transfer agency’ was needed to deal with the problems of students wishing to move from a DipHE in one institution to a degree course in another.
In the small number of institutions where the DipHE was established and survived there was both strong commitment and, at least initially, interest by schools, further education colleges and the press.
It never satisfied the White Paper's interest in another, shorter, flexible model of higher education.
It did, however, form an important element in the thinking of the new generation of ‘colleges of higher education’ which emerged out of the cross-currents of the early and mid-1970s.
It was one element in the search, on occasion the scramble, for diversification.
Even less than with the designation of the polytechnics was the CNAA in the 1970s confronting a policy-driven situation.
The polytechnic developments had at least been the outcome of clear-cut decisions, however weakly the intentions were defined and followed through with sustained resources.
The position with the colleges after 1972 was simply one of confusion in which the only clarity was the haste to cut teacher education by whatever means.
The colleges or institutes of higher education, as the diversified colleges became known, were not ‘designated’.
They were shuffled, whether they were local authority or voluntary colleges, into an uncertain status with an increasing sense of urgency in reshaping themselves if they were to survive.
The overriding mission of the mid- and late 1970s was in fact to survive, to engage in the politics of remaining ‘free-standing’, of amalgamation or extinction.
If the DES had any policy beyond the contraction of the system it was not declared.
No sooner were the colleges given the signal to diversify than limits were placed on diversification.
Colleges only recently opened were closed.
The colleges grappled with widespread early retirements of staff in teacher education, permissions to prepare courses from the DES in the case of teacher education, and from the Inspectorate and the Regional Advisory Councils for other courses.
They had entered the new world of changed qualifications for teacher education, and the  negotiation of validation by a university which they knew or the CNAA which they did not.
There were constant announcements of further cuts and closures, an unending stream of private message and public ambiguity.
The number of colleges was reduced from 159 in 1972 to 52 in 1982, either by closure, mergers between colleges, amalgamation with polytechnics or, in a small  number of cases, with universities.
For the CNAA there was the problem of ascertaining standards and realistic intentions in institutions besieged daily with signals of instability.
In the three years to 1975 the CNAA's workload more than doubled, and that of the Combined Studies (Humanities) Board increased even faster.
As the colleges sought to establish degree courses other than in teacher education it was naturally towards the humanities that they mainly turned, and attempts to use their existing strengths in those areas, together with opportunities for combined and modularized courses, resulted in often extremely complex proposals.
One senior officer's reflection on the processes that took place in the colleges and in the CNAA was:
It has been my experience that Boards, with depressing regularity, have received submissions which on a first reading look structurally ingenious but on close analysis are found to be padded out with individual syllabuses that are academically lightweight and have little or no functional relation to the structure they are supposed to illuminate…something is disastrously wrong with planning procedures when staff only partially understand or accept the rationale of a course and a visiting party finds a farrago of assorted bits and pieces behind a facade occasionally breathtaking in its baroque audacity.
Fortunately not all the colleges were as over-enthusiastic, though most were entering uncharted territory, and the CNAA recognized and confronted the difficulties, particularly in 1976 and 1977.
It did so not only through the stringent processing of applications and the guidance it offered individual institutions, but also through more general analysis of the problems faced by institutions making the transition from ‘monotechnic’ to diversified colleges.
At two meetings in January and May 1976 the Council discussed a paper presented by the Chief Officer on ‘Diversification in the former colleges of education’.
The essential message of the paper was that of multiple difficulties.
The problems of diversification had been enormously increased ‘because the interdependent conditions have not been fulfilled’.
There had been a shortfall in applicants and in funds:
Teacher training places have been slashed and in-service plans postponed.
The diversified courses that have started are limited in number and, in competition with existing courses, are not all recruiting well.
The DipHE, perhaps the key to diversification, has likewise suffered from the contracting situation.
Colleges had closed.
Others were ‘in jeopardy’.
The DES had laid down that diversified courses should be ‘wholly or mainly constituted of elements common to existing or proposed courses of teacher education or to other advanced courses already approved and…no addItional staff is required’.
The structure of many BEd courses, however, made this impossible.
The paper went on to describe the difficulties encountered by the CNAA's boards.
The quality of staff for the type of work proposed ‘often leaves much to be desired’.
Some of the departments were small and without sufficient staff with relevant expertise in areas it was proposed to teach.
Schemes were over ambitious, the majority of them being for BA (Hons), when it would have been more realistic to start with something less demanding.
Colleges were inexperienced in designing BA courses, had under-resourced libraries in many cases, and were trying to ‘do too much too quickly’.
The Combined Studies (Humanities) Board had found it difficult to ensure comparability of standards across different boards and panels, given the complex arrangement of joint validation with the Committee for Education.
Norman Lindop, as Chairman of the Committee for Education at this stage, considered that the Council had been placed in an impossible position by the sudden introduction of a new range of institutions ‘and the need for urgent action to solve problems externally created’.
The Council had already, the previous year, requested a meeting with the DES, and the Chief Officer, the Chairman of the Combined Studies (Humanities) Board (Gutteridge), the Chairman of the DipHE group (Porter) and the Senior Assistant Registrar responsible for Arts and Humanities subject boards, Ann Ridler, met with a group of six DES representatives.
In response to an outline of the CNAA's difficulties the DES officers expressed the view that the difficulty lay with the Committee for Education, ‘which appeared to take a divergent and insufficiently flexible view’ on the question of devising course units in common between the BEd and other courses.
Gutteridge pointed out that the Combined Studies Board was not opposed to common teaching for the two degrees, but underlined the difficulties in practice.
The CNAA took other steps.
Following its discussion of the Chief Officer's paper the Council held a conference for the colleges on ‘Planning for academic diversification’.
The Committee for Education gave special attention to the question of college libraries and set up a working party in 1974 to advise on provision in colleges proposing to diversify their courses, and over the next three years it offered guidance on ways of assessing the quality of provision, emphasized the importance of the standing of the head of the library service or resource centre, of consultation with the library in course development, and of initiating students into making effective use of the library and learning resources.
The rate of approvals continued, however, to be slow, provoking press comment, notably in 1976, on the differences between the CNAA and the universities in their approval rates.
In The Times Higher Education Supplement David Hencke reported that many college and polytechnic directors believed that universities ‘are relaxing their validation standards to enable former colleges of education to start new arts and science degrees’, and quoted Edwin Kerr as being confident that colleges succeeding with CNAA validation would consider it to have been worthwhile.
A leading article described the CNAA process  as ‘sticky and demanding’ and believed that when the Council finally approved diversified courses in the colleges they would find the efforts to have been beneficial.
An article in The Times Educational Supplement on the same day talked of bitterness among college principals at CNAA treatment, and their turning to universities for approval.
Whatever the problems for the CNAA and for the institutions, and however irritating it was for DES officers or some college principals, the CNAA was working methodically to ensure that complex questions of comparability of standards were resolved to the satisfaction of the various parts of the validating machinery.
The very existence of this new and substantial element of ‘public sector higher education’ was politically sensitive in various ways.
For the polytechnics, still struggling to establish their place in the pattern of higher education, the advent of this group of diverse institutions could be seen as ‘jeopardizing’ their position, given what the CDP considered an ill-defined interpretation by the DES of ‘advanced further education’.
The CDP presented an image, not only to the colleges of higher education, but also to many people in the CNAA, of a privileged club, not wanting the colleges to come under the CNAA, and bent on ensuring that the colleges had a secondary role in the public sector of higher education.
Conservative MP Keith Hampson expressed the view in 1977 that the new institutions had not been planned as part of an integrated post-school system, but by default.
He thought it scandalous that a new type of higher education had emerged ‘as a result of piecemeal decisions, often ill-prepared, and taken in conditions of near total secrecy, and which is simply not geared to meeting the country's most pressing requirements’.
Whether or not the criticism was justified, British higher education had now been extended by a considerable addition to its ‘advanced further’ and ‘public’sector.
The ‘piecemeal’ entry of the former colleges of education and some other colleges which had not previously secured polytechnic status was not quite along lines that the Robbins Committee had proposed, but the picture of higher education that had been developing from the early 1960s was now broader and more complex.
So were the CNAA's commitments.
At the same time as teacher education and the new colleges of higher education were becoming a major component of the CNAA's repertoire of subjects and institutions, the Council and the NCDAD were coming closer together.
Stewart Mason, the new Chairman of the NCDAD, was — as we have seen — convinced by the early 1970s that a merger was both inevitable and desirable.
Through informal contacts in 1971 and 1972 and formally in 1972 agreement was reached in principle to amalgamate.
The final stages of the negotiations coincided with the presence of Michael Clapham as Chairman of the Council, and Edwin Kerr as Chief Officer, both of whom played influential parts in the process.
Clapham was a committed negotiator, and Kerr did a great deal to assuage the anxieties that existed in the NCDAD and its institutions.
The major traumas of the merger of many colleges of art into polytechnics were now past.
Goodwill had been encouraged by  reciprocal representation on validation visits, but there was still strong opposition when Kerr accepted an invitation to meet the NCDAD at its premises at Park Crescent — having been warned by some polytechnic directors that he was going into the lion's den and would be devoured.
In the event the NCDAD accepted Kerr's and the Council's assurances.
In January 1973 the NCDAD wrote agreeing the merger ‘in principal,(sic!), on the grounds of the incorporation of many colleges of art in polytechnics, the parallel validation processes, and the growing interest in cross-disciplinary and joint subject courses at degree level.
The merger was to take effect in September 1974.
A further statement in April 1974 indicated that the CNAA's necessary Charter changes had been completed, and that other titles for the combined organization had been considered but that the CNAA's title would be retained.
A fifth CNAA Committee would be set up for Art and Design, and pending a reconstitution of the Council's committees and boards in 1975 the present NCDAD members were being asked to serve as  a nucleus of the future committee.
From September 1974 the Diploma would become a BA with Honours, and students on existing courses or with a DipAD awarded between 1966 and 1974 could convert it to a BA if they wished.
There would be no retrospective recognition of the Higher Diploma as an MA.
The NCDAD's Chief Officer was retiring, and his deputy, Robert Strand, and an Assistant Officer, Frank Hatt, transferred to the CNAA.
At its meeting in May 1974 the Council agreed that when the respective premises of the NCDAD and the CNAA had been disposed of, the newly-combined organization would move into premises in Gray's Inn Road.
The CNAA was not aware that the new premises were on part of the site of what was once the Home and Colonial Infant School Society, which from 1836 had been one of the country's first teacher training organizations, and had occupied 334–54 Gray's Inn Road in 1839.
To allow more time for new procedures to come into effect, the reapproval of the DipAD courses due to take place in the autumn of 1975 was postponed for a year.
The new Committee for Art and Design was then faced with a major review of 127 first degree courses.
One hundred and forty committee and board members took part, and the colleges and departments had to face a different kind and volume of documentation.
Twenty-one of the 127 courses received renewal for less than five years.
At the same time as negotiating this amalgamation and setting the new machinery in place, the NCDAD and the CNAA were dealing with what Strand calls the ‘large and prickly subject’ of the validation of the major art colleges in Scotland.
In January 1973 the Scottish Education Department, on behalf of the four Central (Art) Institutions, formally approached the CNAA with a proposal for their Associateship and Diploma courses to be recognized for a classified degree in art and design.
The CNAA's provisional Committee for Art and Design was willing only to accept the Honours Associateship for a classified honours degree, and the Associateship for an unclassified degree.
This was to be the major stumbling block in  difficult and often angry negotiations, in which Stewart Mason played a key part — anxious to avoid a precedent for unclassified degrees in other parts of the United Kingdom.
Long battles ensued, with an intensification of the controversy when the CNAA approved a BSc sandwich course in Industrial Design (Technology) at Napier College, Edinburgh — not one of the Central Institutions.
For this and other reasons Edinburgh College of Art withdrew from negotiations with the CNAA and obtained university validation.
The other three — Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen — together with the Scottish College of Textiles, Galashiels, achieved recognition for their courses in stages.
The developments in art and design coincided with one phase of the CNAA's involvement with teacher education and the colleges of education.
Developments in the creative and performing arts coincided with only a slightly later phase.
Whereas in art and design the CNAA was negotiating with an established, parallel validating body and with institutions operating courses accepted as being of degree standard, in the creative and performing arts it was moving further into complicated and confused territory.
The arts were represented in the CNAA both as elements in some combined humanities courses, and increasingly in teacher education courses.
There was also mounting interest, however, in the early 1970s in the possibility of CNAA validation of ‘professional’ courses in the areas of drama, music and dance.
The Gulbenkian Foundation was exploring training for the performing arts, and by the middle of the decade the CNAA found itself confronting the complex range of elements of the creative and performing arts in its existing courses, and expressions of interest by institutions proposing specialist courses — notably in drama and in dance and movement.
In this whole area the initiative for development came from the CNAA itself, which acted, in the phrase of one key participant in the developments, as ‘a watering can’, with one of the officers, Ann Ridler, very much involved.
A drama panel was set up in 1974, in order to consider schemes which avoided the polarization of practical courses on the one hand, and the literary aspects of dramatic art on the other hand, and attempted to integrate the two.
In June 1975 a meeting of all those who chaired humanities and arts boards and panels discussed the validation of theatre courses and a range of arts courses.
A Creative and Performing Arts Panel, meeting for the first time in February of that year, became a Board, and from the outset was looking at proposals such as that from Middlesex Polytechnic for a BA and BA(Hons) in Performance Arts, an ambitious proposal which was greeted with reservations but encouragement, as was a proposal for such a degree in Creative Arts at Trent Polytechnic.
The panel was initially established under the chairmanship of the late John Holden, Deputy Director of Manchester Polytechnic, to assist the Combined Studies (Humanities) Board in the consideration of ‘creative and performing arts components of combined studies or arts and humanities schemes’, and combined courses in the creative and performing arts, to act as a focus for  discussion of interdisciplinary matters in the field, and to promote research.
When it became the Combined Studies (Creative and Performing Arts) Board it set up its own panels, including, in November 1975, a Movement and Dance Panel under the chairmanship of Peter Brinson.
The complex and intensive developments in this general field in the 1970s can be seen by taking this panel as an illustration.
Brinson, before taking over the Gulbenkian Foundation in London in 1972 had chaired an arts committee of the Foundation, set up to discuss and provide financial help to the performing arts, and particularly to dance, which had had, in his words ‘a raw deal’.
It was logical, when he took over the Foundation, to concentrate on dance, and Gulbenkian in Lisbon approved.
From early 1973 some £250,000 a year was awarded to choreographers, designers, dancers and others, beginning with travel scholarships.
The sums increased, and funding was provided for a choreography department at the London School of Contemporary Dance and at the Royal Ballet School.
Brinson had by this stage, therefore, acquired a reputation of not being committed to any one institution, and enquiries pointed to him as a neutral Chairman of the new panel, which he was asked to chair, and by virtue of his chairmanship he also became a member of the Creative and Performing Arts Panel, and then Board.
The purpose of the dance panel was to assess applications for degrees in dance, and as Brinson emphasizes, 1975–76 was still a period when it was possible to envisage the development of subjects and the availability of resources.
The panel therefore looked at proposals from such institutions as the West Sussex Institute of Higher Education, Dartington College of Arts, the Laban Centre for Movement and Dance, Worcester College of Higher Education, and Ilkley College of Higher Education.
The Ilkley proposal did not get far, and the Worcester course, having been approved, later had validation withdrawn.
The Movement and Dance Board, as the Panel became, was responding to a movement in higher education to develop the performing arts.
A Standing Conference on Dance in Higher Education began with a wide membership, but contraction by the end of the 1970s left the organization with a much depleted membership.
From the outset the work of the Panel and Board was intensely time consuming.
The institutions did not know what the criteria or standards were, and the process of validation normally meant two or three visits to the institution — with the first visit being a learning process for the institution, to hear what the process was all about.
The Combined Studies Board was also time consuming: the CNAA was ‘greedy for time’.
Brinson could cope with the work only because he was at the Foundation, where people could see him, which had concerns close to those of the CNAA, and which allowed him time to take part.
Others were not so fortunate, and the Director of the Laban Centre had to give up membership because of the pressure of time.
The validation process depended, in Brinson's account, on Ann Ridler's well-prepared prior documentation, and the ability of  himself and members to pay the two or three visits needed in each case.
There is no doubt that the CNAA's concern with the assurance of standards was understood in the approval process of a new area such as this.
Experienced and ‘honoured’ teachers of dance had to be told that their courses could not be approved.
Dartington had to change its course considerably in order to gain approval.
The Laban Centre, which finally gained approval for the country's first BA in Dance, failed to obtain approval when initially submitted.
Wherever the initiatives for these developments came from — and John Holden at Manchester played a significant part — Brinson is emphatic that:
…once the CNAA even began to lend its support to this development, there literally was a kind of explosion, and plainly institutions had been looking and waiting for validation in this field…
John Holden took a most catholic attitude towards the arts…
The CNAA was a marvellous learning process which…drove me into intimate contact with a wide range of higher education courses, in dance primarily, which taught me the criteria for judging dance as a higher education subject…
I would say that the CNAA was responsible for establishing the arts in higher education, first as subjects valid for higher education, and second as subjects valuable to the country, in other words it helped to establish a national reputation for the arts at this level, which had never existed before.
Previously they had been assumed to be something that belonged to the Royal College of Art, the Slade School, the Royal Ballet School, and so on.
In doing so, the CNAA ‘made its most valuable contribution’.
In establishing them as higher education subjects it expanded ‘the notion of the nature of knowledge’.
Before all these developments it was widely accepted that knowledge was something that was ‘transmitted by words and absorbed by words’, and suddenly when faced with ‘establishing the criteria for the arts as higher education subjects…we were forced to look at these subjects…and at what way they contributed to the role of higher education…
The whole area of non-verbal knowledge was opened up…
That may be the major contribution of the CNAA in this field’.
By 1980, when the network of institutions offering courses in the creative and performing arts included other colleges and polytechnics, there were difficulties.
The Combined Studies Board in October of that year set up a special working party to discuss a variety of difficulties being encountered, including resource constraints facing the BA in Music at Huddersfield Polytechnic, acute accommodation difficulties facing the creative arts course at Newcastle Polytechnic, and poor recruitment and various kinds of dissatisfaction at some other institutions.
The opportunities of the mid-1970s were struggling to survive — and the role of the CNAA, having established its commitment to the arts — was to continue to  encourage and promote, but also to be critical, to investigate, and when necessary to withdraw approval.
The fourth major indication of the increasing scale and complexity of the CNAA's validation role was its acquisition of responsibility for the Diploma in Management Studies.
This diploma had, since the beginning of the 1960s, been under the control of a Committee for the Diploma in Management Studies, for England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and a Scottish Joint Committee for Diplomas in Management Studies.
A proposal emerged in 1974 that the work of the two committees should be transferred to the CNAA, a working party of the three bodies was set up, and in November 1975 the CNAA's Management Studies Board considered a statement of intent.
The working party had foreseen ‘a growing potential overlap of courses and qualifications’.
To avoid confusion for polytechnics and colleges, students and employers, a single range of management awards under the CNAA was envisaged.
The Management Studies Board was to be reconstituted appropriately, and was ‘to report to the Council and the two Committees upon the machinery which may be necessary to ensure a continuity of standard and of provision of courses at diploma level’.
It was not intended that colleges should have to resubmit or revise their current schemes at the point of transfer.
The transfer took place in September 1976, before which the Standing Conference of Heads of Management Departments had held a two-day conference on ‘The DMS and the CNAA’.
Unlike the arrangements for the transfer of the Diploma in Art and Design, which involved a change to a degree award, there was no immediate programme of revalidation in this case, and a five-year review programme was introduced, with the intention of integrating the DMS into the work of the Council as much as considering the courses themselves.
Direct responsibility for DMS policy in England and Wales was initially that of a panel (a panel for Scotland remained separate for several years) and this became a Board after the Committee for Arts and Social Studies was split in 1978 and a Committee for Business and Management Studies created —; a decision which produced some controversy.
Professor MacRae, retiring Chairman of CASS, thought the move would isolate business and management studies from the human dimension of social studies.
The CNAA, he and others believed, had made great progress in improving the standards of business studies, and had begun to do the same for management studies, but ‘the job of improving management studies has hardly begun.
To improve standards it should remain within the arts and social studies committee’.
Others, including Edwin Kerr and the Reverend Dr George Tolley, Principal of Sheffield City Polytechnic and Chairman of the new Committee, believed that the split would enable greater attention to be given to business and management courses, and make it possible to involve the business and management community more in the work of the Committee.
From 1976 the Panel or Board, and its parent Committee, were concerned with discussions about the future of management studies, providing advice to external examiners drawn from business and industry, extending CNAA  influence in the field, and holding meetings for members who were involved in visits.
In its guidelines on the DMS and other ‘courses for managers’ issued in 1979 the Council defined access to the Diploma — which had been seen from the outset as a postgraduate award — in terms of flexible entry: in addition to the broad treatment of management studies and its supporting disciplines it incorporated
opportunities for applied studies in an area of activity appropriate to candidates' interests and experience.
The standard of a course is reflected in the pace and the treatment of the material, which makes it appropriate for graduates, but other managers of equivalent ability but who are not graduates are also eligible for selection.
All DMS candidates must have had work experience of a kind which will enable them to benefit from and contribute to the course.
When the CNAA took over the DMS there were nationally some 6600 students enrolled on courses, and that was to be the order of magnitude of enrolments through the late 1970s and 1980s.
While business studies had become a major component of CNAA-validated undergraduate courses, the DMS was the stepping stone into concern for part-time continuing education in the management field.
What the acquisition of responsibility for the DMS illustrates is the way an area of study could rapidly ‘come of age’ in the CNAA.
In 1971 Cynthia Iliffe succeeded Jean Rossiter as Senior Assistant Registrar for Arts and Social Studies, and when, six months after her appointment the responsibilities were divided she took charge of business and social studies.
At that point the CNAA was still primarily concerned with the validation of new degree courses in business studies, with few at the stage of application for renewal of approval.
The Business Studies Board was primarily concerned with matters relating to the curriculum and to adequate resourcing, and as Cynthia Iliffe describes it:
We'd be saying things like ‘you need three extra staff…’.
We were concerned with the start-up and whether people had the right idea about business studies…
They were very much discipline-based degrees in those days, there was very little functional expertise…
I think we really forced the institutions to be much more thorough with the disciplinary underpinning to the degree.
Maurice Pocock, Head of the School of Business and Social Studies at Ealing College of Technology, who had by then taken over the chair of the Board from W.F. Crick (‘who kind of invented the business studies degree’), was very concerned that ‘the degrees should be for business and not about business, that they should be integrated, that the sandwich placement should be fully worked out…’
For the Registrar:
it was a straightforward job.
It sounds like an enormous amount, but what one actually did was: documents came in, documents went  to boards (of which there were a number in the business and social studies area), boards commented on them, you sent a minute off to the institution, you went on a visit, you wrote a report, and that was that.
There was very little interchange with staff in institutions.
There was little or no overt resistance to the development of business studies degrees, for two sets of reasons.
The Board Chairman and members were enthusiasts and adopted a ‘proselytizing’ role:
My recall of those early days is that there was tremendous enthusiasm to get the degree courses off the ground.
There was a lot of stress on resources, and by resources I don't just mean books in libraries, I mean staffing resources primarily…and we used to be very fierce about the quality of course leadership, for example.
In the institutions themselves the position was that the degree proposals were being put together by people in different discipline-based departments, and the development of departments of business studies or business and management studies came later —;
so you would actually be talking to economists, lawyers and accountants, and very often you had a feeling that the first time they had come together to talk to each other was when the CNAA arrived.
Cynthia Iliffe shared with the Board a feeling that it could be rather ‘a hybrid sort of degree course at first’, but Pocock and the Board really believed in it, understood that the Crick model of a discipline-based degree had provided it with an academic foundation, but even then ‘we talked a lot about integration’.
It is against that background that the DES approach to the CNAA to take over responsibility for the DMS has to be seen.
A major development of the area had taken place, the CNAA was being seen to be ‘fierce’ in its approach, and institutions were being obliged to be ‘thorough’.
The negotiations over the DMS brought the CNAA members and officers into closer contact with people from various professional bodies, and the national profile of the CNAA in the field of business studies was therefore high by the mid-1970s.
With enthusiastic Board members, an experienced Registrar and a small staff, and the accumulated validation experience of the late 1960s and early 1970s, the scene was set for the acquisition of a major award in the field, and the continued development of business and management studies that we have seen.
The basis in this case was the CNAA's own confident development of the field from the outset — unlike the other cases of amalgamation, or responses to different kind of initiative or pressure.
These illustrations give some idea of the range of CNAA validatlon work and subject development in the 1970s.
There are other significant examples.
Computer technology was giving rise to a variety of innovative developments, and the field was in general pioneered by the CNAA and its institutions before the universities took up the challenge.
The Hatfield  Polytechnic was moving towards computer instruction for all students because, said Norman Lindop in 1971, ‘the computer is a part of modern culture’, and in 1970 Computer Weekly was drawing attention to the CNAA's contribution to computer availability in Scotland.
By the mid-1970s the CNAA and its institutions were making a major contribution to legal education: a survey in 1976/77 showed that there were then thirty-two university law schools and twenty-two polytechnics and other colleges offering undergraduate law degree courses, the most recent being at the Polytechnics of North East London and Preston in 1975, and the Polytechnic of Wales in 1977.
The transfer of courses from London external to CNAA was by then complete, but there had also been a growth of CNAA part-time law degree courses — at Ealing, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle and Wolverhampton — with others in the pipeline.
By the end of the 1970s the CNAA had established a Diploma in Professional Studies in Nursing, joining the twenty courses now in existence for the Diploma in Professional Studies in Education.
Science and technology still accounted for the largest group of students, though recruitment for technology was encountering difficulties in Britain generally.
The increasing diversity of studies in this area was reflected by the creation in the 1970s of new CNAA boards to cover such fields as Combined Studies (Science), Computing and Informatics, Environmental Studies, Health and Medical Services, and Transport.
Food Science became Food, Accommodation and Related Sciences.
The growing diversity in the structure of degrees was reflected in the creation of an Interfaculty Studies Board (there was some argument about whether it should be a full committee) in 1977, reporting to all the committees that had an interest in its activities.
The relevant work of the DipHE Group transferred to this Board, whose existence indicated the extent of the thinking taking place about broad ranging degrees in and between science, technology and the arts and humanities — as well as in education.
None of these new and developing areas of study was without its problems, and the committees and boards had to be constantly confronting difficulties of either a general and continuing or a highly specific kind.
Bryan Overy, who joined the CNAA as one of two Senior Assistant Registrars in Science and Technology in 1968, underlines the kinds of difficulties that had to be faced.
First, the boards and the Committee for Science and Technology had the problem of deciding ‘how far a subject was ‘degree worthy’, because new subjects started springing up like grass in a corn field’:
I remember housing studies, for example, was one of the crunch points as to whether you could actually make a degree out of something of that kind.
And then people would point to odd things like paper technology that some of the universities had had for years, and said —‘Well, what's odd about housing studies?’
At a more specific level there were matters like the involvement with the Military College at Shrivenham, where students were military employees  and where the College wished the students to handle security classified material in their courses and possibly even to examine them on classified material.
One corner of the Instrumentation and Control Board activities was concerned for weeks or months with grappling with the problem.
And thirdly there was the long problem of the changeover from the NCTA honours degree equivalent to a system in which there were honours and unclassified degrees.
Different areas of the CNAA wrested with this ‘in radically different ways’:
The technologists, in handling any new, slightly practically oriented subject, like quantity surveying and estate management, tended to adopt a ‘walk before they can run approach’ in approving unclassified degrees fairly extensively, until they found that arts and pure sciences were, for whatever reason, not going down that road to any extent.
We appeared to have students of the same native wit coming to courses in the arts and the sciences and the technologies, and the technologies were requiring quite a lot of these colleges to kick off with unclassified degrees, and finally began to weaken a little, I think, when they found that business studies and art and design were doing no such thing.
And this remained a very difficult area for a long time.
There were conceivably differences in the quality of the students entering the courses, but there seemed to be ‘different appraisals of the market, and what an honours degree was all about’.
The making and implementing of CNAA policy for the introduction of new subject areas and the extension of established ones were therefore constantly faced with a range of problems which had to be faced at officer and board levels, and in debate in committee and Council.
The CNAA was constantly having to negotiate on uncertain frontiers, and interpret and define forms of higher education for which there were no clear precedents or guidelines.
An integral part of the ‘new frontier’ activities — and therefore of the diversification of higher education — was the widespread development of academic and professional networks, not only through the validation machinery, but also through conferences and meetings devoted to curriculum and subject development.
From the mid-1970s in particular the CNAA became increasingly involved in organizing and participating in conferences directly or indirectly related to its role in broadening access, widening curricula and enhancing standards.
In 1976, for example, the Combined Studies (Science) Board held a conference on the problems of designing, validating and operating combined studies courses in science (with addresses and seminar discussions on such topics as modular degree schemes, interdisciplinarity, project-orientated courses, course management and science, industry and the professions).
The CNAA conference on School Experience and the Assessment of Teaching had been held the previous month.
In 1977 the Council arranged the conference on Planning for  Academic Diversification in Higher Education, a meeting to discuss the need for and design of undergraduate courses in transport studies, a seminar to discuss the problems of including art and design in courses which contained other subjects, and a conference on mathematical education — including particularly mathematics and computer studies at the postgraduate level.
A meeting on sports and recreational studies was held at the end of 1977, at a time when there was no formal CNAA organization to consider courses in this area.
A Recreation and Sports Studies Board was set up in 1978, and in the same year a further conference was held on human movement studies — with support from the Gulbenkian Foundation.
By the time the conference was held in September approval had already been given for undergraduate and postgraduate courses at six colleges and polytechnics in England, Ulster Polytechnic and Dunfermline College of Physical Education.
Also in 1978 was a conference — held at Stratford-upon-Avon, and again with Gulbenkian support — on the possible impact on the arts and education of the seven recently-approved CNAA degree courses in the creative and performing arts.
Some of these activities related to institutional developments (for example, on diversification), others to new ways of approaching familiar ground (for example , on school experience), others to new approaches to the packaging of knowledge and its applications (for example , a conference on communication studies held in 1978), others to the representation of existing activities for the first time in higher education (for example , in the creative and performing arts), and yet others on the mechanics of the CNAA's own work in validating courses and seeking to assure standards (for example , a conference on the role of external examiners held in October 1978).
Over the space of a decade the CNAA had become a different organization.
It was capable, in Edwin Kerr's words, of dealing with large and small.
It had followed the logic of its foundation by expanding its subject and institutional frontiers, embracing studies it believed important for access to and provision of higher education, and for routes into diverse employments in industry, commerce and the professions.
In doing so it also extended and sharpened the tools by which it assured standards across the growing territory of higher education, but at the same time it struggled with the problem of those institutions which increasingly felt that they had served a long enough apprenticeship.
The logic of the CNAA was not simple and uni-directional.
The next chapter considers the specific question of the CNAA's relationships with its associated institutions, and the policy pressures operating from and towards the Council, and carries that account through to the 1980s.
Before doing so it is important to underline the fact that the Council's preoccupations in the 1970s extended beyond the essentially curricular ones considered so far.
The CNAA was becoming increasingly involved, for example, with validation in Scotland.
In 1976, in response to a White Paper on devolution to Scotland and Wales, the CNAA commented that it had always been sensitive to the specific conditions and needs of Scotland, and that it might be appropriate for the CNAA to set up a Scottish Committee.
It considered, however, that ‘there is no academic case for making special arrangements for Wales’, given the similarity of the educational system in Wales to that in England.
At the point, in July 1978, when the Council agreed in principle to create a Committee for Scotland, the CNAA was validating courses with a total enrolment of approaching 9000 students at thirteen Scottish institutions.
The Committee met for the first time in Edinburgh in October 1979.
The Council continued to be concerned with a range of general issues, including research.
A working party under Professor Rochester produced a report which was published in 1974 on Resources for Research in Polytechnics and other Colleges.
The Report emphasized what had been the Council's interpretation of its Charter and Statutes from the outset — if the Council's degrees were to be of comparable standard to those awarded by universities then:
colleges must provide facilities for staff to further their knowledge by advanced study, research, consultative work or secondment to other fields of employment.
Hence the Council expects a significant proportion of staff involved in teaching of courses leading to its awards to be engaged in research; moreover, colleges are expected to provide a high standard of specialized accommodation, library provision, academic, technical and administrative staff and good working conditions generally.
As a result, it is widely accepted that the Council has assisted significantly in the improvement of all these factors in colleges offering courses leading to its degrees.
The Council sought to encourage ‘a broad range’ of research and related activities, including fundamental and applied research, consultancy and curricular development, private study and creative work in the arts.
A central conclusion of the report was that colleges should assume that all academic staff teaching for the Council's degrees would ‘undertake some definite activity falling within the various categories of research’ that it had outlined.
There was ‘value in avoiding a rigid division between those who ‘do research’ and those who ‘carry the teaching load’’.
The strength and breadth of these definitions and emphases were to prove encouraging to many institutions, and people in institutions, struggling to establish their own research policies and activities.
The Council considered papers and had discussions on the design of modular courses and issues affecting sandwich courses, responded to policy documents on sixth forms and engineering, surveyed its own past work and considered its future roles, discussed resource constraints and perceptions of its institutional visits and the work of the subject boards.
The CNAA at the same time agreed a ‘reciprocal transfer’ of credit with the Open University, and related to, and negotiated with, a variety of other bodies in higher education.
Most of the debate between the CNAA and the CDP concerned ‘self-validation’, the CNAA's role, progress towards  autonomy or some particular aspect of the relationship between the CNAA and the polytechnics — and the discussions were on an ad hoc basis.
Not until 1980 was there a proposal to establish a permanent liaison committee between the two organizations.
CDP participation in the 1970s discussions of this relationship, and notably of moves towards ‘partnership in validation’, will feature in the next chapter, but it is important to note that the CDP, with an established office and secretariat, and the authority of the first in the field, was never matched by the Standing Conference of Principals and Directors of Colleges and Institutes in Higher Education.
The polytechnic directors were often deeply divided over policies, but the CDP was able to take part in higher education debate as the putative rival to the CVCP.
It lobbied the Secretary of State, gave evidence to Parliamentary Select Committees, debated everything from student wastage rates to student militancy, from application forms to computer provision.
It met with HMIs and DES officers, set up its own committee machinery, and by 1978 could present a view of ‘the polytechnics’ fulfilment of the purposes for which they were created'.
A decade after the White Paper had defined their purposes, they had successfully recruited students; provided sandwich courses; established themselves in science and technology, administrative, business and social studies, and other subjects; focussed on vocationally-oriented courses; sustained a commitment to part-time courses, and secured a firm basis for further growth.
In the document which outlines this progress, and elsewhere, the CDP was anxious to distance itself from other institutions in the public sector.
Almost all of its meetings discussed relations with the CNAA.
A Committee for Academic Policy (CAP) was created by the CNAA in 1978, with the aim of advising the Council on policy issues of general concern and to coordinate activities which spread across subject areas.
A parallel Committee for Institutions was created the following year.
From July 1972 a Committee of Officers met at regular intervals.
At its inception only seven senior officers were involved, to assist the Chief Officer who had been delegated particular functions by the Council, and to act as a senior management team.
It would provide an opportunity to discuss drafts of papers for committees and consider policy issues for which boards and others might need guidance.
Given the rapid expansion of the CNAA's activities the Committee had a membership of eighteen officers by September 1974, twenty-five by March 1977, and thirty-three by the beginning of 1979.
Given also the considerable reliance of the Council and its committees and boards on the officers to prepare discussion papers, and the contributions of the officers to conferences and elsewhere, these meetings served both as a staff development exercise and as a forum in which ideas and formulations could be clarified.
It looked at the problems of the validation machinery itself, for example in conditions of the expansion of teacher education and the array of complex diversified courses which raised logistical and other problems for the CNAA.
It was an opportunity to raise  concerns about everything from external examiners to the assessment of modular courses, from a pamphlet on mature students to course regulations.
It occasionally spent a whole day on ‘policy review’ discussions, and by the end of the 1970s was itself devolving more discussion to the individual operational units.
A sense of the role of individual officers in the Council's policy formulation and implementation processes at this stage of its history can be derived from a single indicative case.
Ann Ridler joined the CNAA in 1969 as an assistant to Jean Rossiter, Senior Assistant Registrar for Arts and Social Studies, and became Assistant Registrar (the first appointment with that title in the CNAA) in that area in 1971, and Senior Assistant Registrar in 1973 — a title commuted for all its holders to Registrar in 1976.
She was responsible for the CNAA's response to the James Report, and acted as Secretary to the joint CNAA-NCDAD group in 1972–73.
With the diversification of the colleges the workload increased substantially in the arts and humanities particularly, and the rapid growth of the CNAA's work in arts and social studies was fuelled by the transfer of courses from London external degrees.
Her responsibilities extended to cover the creative and performing arts, communication and cultural studies, and recreation and sports studies.
There were meetings with HMIs on diversification, meetings of committees and working parties, and what she describes as ‘the massive amount of advisory work we undertook with staff from institutions as part of their preparation for validation.
It could be two or three substantial consultations a week in parallel with two or three visits or Board meetings a week’.
The ‘atmosphere of the job’ changed from about 1974, as new fields of study were validated and the CNAA organization became more complex:
The horror year in my memory was 1975–76.
I had three-quarters of an Assistant Registrar and spent sixty-five nights away from home on Council visits.
The work of planning visits to massive multi-subject degrees from colleges of education largely new to CNAA work, the huge amount of advisory work involved and the sheer quantity of report writing was horrendous.
From the start, however, visits took place in ‘a campaigning spirit’—; campaigning for better facilities, higher standards, improved staff workloads in the institutions.
Local authorities listened and were generally responsive.
What was particularly at stake, and what made the job particularly attractive, was that the outcome was educational opportunities for the under-privileged, increased chances to study for degrees.
In both its policies and practices the CNAA was revealing the promises and the tensions of the system.
In the specific cases discussed — especially the rapidly changing colleges of education and new subject areas — the Council's machinery, standards and purposes were often being put to the test, giving rise to frustration and controversy.
The University College at Buckingham was one such case.
Established as a privately-financed institution  by a Planning Board which first met in January 1969, UCB had at an early stage to consider what awards it might offer in advance of the Charter it hoped to obtain.
It first approached the CNAA in 1971, and after some initial doubts on the part of the Council, it was told the following year that the CNAA might be able to consider a formal approach on condition that the new institution was not called a ‘university’— since the CNAA was precluded by its Charter from the validation of universities.
Detailed discussions took place in 1973.
Professor Max Beloff, Principal of the College, wrote in June welcoming assurances that there were no legal impediments to applying for the ‘accreditation’ of courses, and in November the CNAA considered that the College had agreed various conditions, and the Council approved a statement of principles to be communicated to Buckingham.
To the chagrin of Buckingham, however, because it meant the postponement of the opening of the College, the CNAA declined in 1974 to approve Buckingham courses in general and a law degree in particular.
There was a hostile reaction at the CNAA's General Committee — its ‘inner cabinet’— in April to Buckingham's proposal to operate on the basis of an eighty-week, two-year degree programme.
The CNAA's Charter required the degrees it approved to be ‘comparable’ with those of universities, and the General Committee — and Council itself — thought that two-year degrees would stretch the interpretation too far: students would be under too much strain, and British degree courses were in any case already shorter than in most other countries.
Further discussion with Buckingham resulted in a report to the Council commenting that the College representatives had presented ‘a low level of academic argument’.
The CNAA visitors, led by a university vice-chancellor, considered that the resources, accommodation, library and staffing were inadequate, but it was the two-year proposal —; strongly defended by Buckingham — that proved the sticking point, and following the protracted negotiations the College decided to withdraw.
The issue of two-year degrees had led to long discussions on the Council.
The UGC had been asked for and supplied a list of existing two-year courses, of which there were few, and all required more than two ‘A’ levels as an entry qualification (most were, in fact, conversion or second-degree courses).
The majority of the Council considered that the proposal would conflict with its Charter obligations.
It responded therefore on the basis of a principle and judgment of quality, and was accused of political prejudice.
The new frontiers were not without their hazards.
By any measure the contribution of the CNAA and its associated institutions in the 1970s was considerable.
The decade had begun with the consolidation of the polytechnics and the transfer to the CNAA, with varying degrees of difficulty, of the external degrees of the University of London.
Edwin Kerr came to the Council early in the decade committed both to reforming validation procedures, and to rethinking the balance between the CNAA and the institutions:
No one can deny that the Council has done a great deal to improve  the quality of education.
I still believe that even for the most senior colleges, there is value in an external incentive — provided that the Council does not continue for ever its inspectoral function, and becomes instead more of an advisory body in partnership with the colleges.
In an early paper for the Council he adumbrated what he was later to name ‘partnership in validation’: final authority should remain in the hands of the Council, but academic boards in ‘experienced institutions’ could be authorized ‘to reach decisions in defined areas’, decisions to be reported to the Council and normally accepted by it as ‘acts of the Council’.
Responsibility delegated to institutions could include the registration of PhD degree candidates.
Throughout the 1970s all of these elements were to feature in the Council's attempts to find the appropriate balances under its Charter, and to handle the increasingly complex range of subjects and institutions.
With what degree of innovation this entire process took place it may be difficult to judge in retrospect, but it is important to note that to many observers at the time the very act of establishing the CNAA and its institutions firmly in the picture of higher education was a major innovation, apart from any judgments about the specifics of the CNAA's activities.
There was comment throughout the period on the innovative aspect of the rapid development of the CNAA and public sector higher education.
Sir Alex Smith, Director of Manchester Polytechnic and Chairman of the CDP, addressing a conference of principals of Colleges of Advanced Education in Australia in 1975, underlined the strengths of the polytechnics — and of the binary system — in overcoming, among other things, ‘the anaemic state of our economy’.
He saw himself as one of a ‘new strain of educators’, a ‘polytechnician’, in a sector that was concerned not only with scholarship but with something more: ‘it is design, it is action, it is synthesis, it is professionalism, it is the application of knowledge’.
Of importance in all of this was the CNAA, and it ‘is steadily being recognized how significant an innovation this was in education’.
In the same year Peter Chambers, at West Midlands College, from amidst the ‘ encircling gloom’ of the colleges of education, and recognizing the CNAA's own ‘in-built conservative practices’, felt that ‘the overall impact of the CNAA has been beneficial for the colleges and that its commitment to innovation is a major factor in curriculum innovation within the colleges of education.
It would seem no coincidence that the colleges with perhaps the greatest reputation for innovation are moving towards the Council's fold’.
In the following year, Maurice Peston told a committee of the House of Commons that ‘those who doubt the innovatory possibilities of British education and the capacity of the DES and the LEAs to help things forward should study the CNAA and the polytechnics over the past decade.
There have been remarkable achievements here which must not be blurred by the fact that there remains a long way to go’.
One of the crucial questions emerging for the CNAA during the 1970s  was in fact the extent to which it could take initiatives as well as being responsive.
The Council's Charter did not formally require it to initiate, to enter policy arenas, to sponsor development, and in fact it prescribed the CNAA's role in the ‘diffusion and extension of the arts, sciences and technologies’ as being through the approval of courses of study and the granting of awards.
The CNAA was finding, however, that to ‘determine the conditions governing the grant of such awards’ meant to see courses in broad institutional, academic and professional contexts.
It meant taking initiatives which would ensure the maintenance and enhancement of standards through subject and curriculum development, and opportunities for the improvement of teaching and assessment, and for the consideration of new approaches to course structures and management, interdisciplinary, vocational and other issues in the development of public sector higher education.
While the major policy-making and orientation roles rested with the members of the Council and its multiplicity of committees, the search for promotional roles in association with the institutions was inevitably a key part of the activities we have seen the CNAA's officers playing.
The Council was in the 1970s recruiting a large number of relatively young staff, who saw the job, in the words of one of them, as ‘a creative experience’, engaging in curriculum development, relating to senior academics on the Council's committees and working with peers in the polytechnics and colleges, generating ideas, disseminating good practice, advising on the planning and monitoring of courses, and in general developing an identity for the CNAA which combined the validation role with access to professional networks, research and advice on evaluation and other processes contingent on the validation relationship.
The Duke of Edinburgh retired from the Presidency of the CNAA in January 1976, to be succeeded by the Prince of Wales.
Prince Philip had stipulated a maximum of ten years for his period in office, and had extended it by a year to enable Prince Charles, who was serving in the Royal Navy, to take over at an appropriate moment.
The Council's first President had taken the position extremely seriously, and in addition to his ceremonial duties had invited the Chairman and Chief Officer at regular intervals, often twice a year, to meet with him, to discuss matters of interest to him, and to bring him up to date on the Council's activities.
Sir Michael Clapham described the process as subjecting them to ‘regular viva voce examination’.
On leaving the office of President, Prince Philip wrote:
I am delighted that the CNAA has developed into such a sturdy institution in such a relatively short time.
It has definitely become an accepted and essential part of the whole structure of higher education.
Prince Charles was installed as President at a degree congregation in Edinburgh in 1976, and Sir Michael took the opportunity to underline to him that whatever ‘the tribulations of our staff, who deal with the paper  work of over 80,000 students and over 1000 courses, the Council itself and its committees and subject boards are concerned with one thing only, and that is quality’.
The Prince of Wales would be presiding over what was now by far the largest degree awarding body in the United Kingdom.
Sir Michael Clapham himself retired as Chairman at the end of 1977 having served on the Council from its beginning in 1964 (and he was at this point the only remaining member from the original Council), and been its Chairman for seven years.
The CNAA, he had thought at the outset, was something that ‘ought to happen’.
He had seen the CNAA establish itself in the eyes of many — though employers in the more conventional industries had been slow to recognize the public sector and adapt their recruitment policies.
He had ‘believed passionately’ in innovation, as had many of the polytechnics.
He had strongly espoused the idea of contrasting and complementary studies whereby arts students would have some basic science and science students complementary studies of some kind.
The notion had not been popular with many of the arts people in the Council, and he recalls one lady saying in a meeting that she would ‘not give up one page of Beowulf for all the science in the world’.
That, said Clapham, ‘was the sort of trouble one had in Council’.
Sir Denis Rooke, Chairman of the British Gas Corporation, became Chairman of the Council at the end of 1977, with its student numbers still rising by anything from 6 to 13 per cent a year.
Its total numbers on taught courses reached almost 140,000 by the end of the decade.
Of the 1703 courses in operation in 1980–81, 1201 were first degree courses.
The students on first degree courses numbered 45,759 in science and technology, 33,274 in arts and social studies, 15,361 in art and design, 12,911 in education, 12,782 in business and management, and 3142 on interdisciplinary courses.
Over 35,000 of them were on sandwich courses and over 13,000 were part-time.
The Prince of Wales was presiding over, and Sir Denis Rooke was chairing, what was indeed by far the largest degree granting body in the United Kingdom.
Chapter 7
INTERPRETING PARTNERSHIP
Partnership, self-validation, academic independence, delegation, greater responsibility, sharing of responsibility, academic freedoms…this is some of the pervasive vocabulary within the CNAA and between the CNAA and its institutions in the 1970s.
We have already noted that the polytechnic directors were seeking a larger measure of academic independence almost from the moment of designation — most publicly through the CDP press statement in July 1971 expressing a wish for the polytechnics to secure charters.
The CNAA's annual report for 1970–71 recognized the search for greater independence.
In fact, within months of the creation of the CDP in December 1969 it was agreeing that the obtaining of charters was a ‘legitimate aim’.
The CDP's 1971 statement suggested five years as the period within which some of the polytechnics could realistically hope to obtain a charter.
From the outset the polytechnic directors were divided on matters of strategy, on the nature of future relationships with the CNAA, on the precise nature of the aims.
Some were more impatient than others.
In July 1971 the Chairman of the CDP wrote to three polytechnic directors who were apparently intending to make a direct approach to Mrs Thatcher, as Secretary of State, ‘in relation to the possible granting of degree awarding powers to your polytechnic’: individual initiatives, he considered, were premature.
The decade had begun with the CNAA not only on the brink of some of the expansive changes we have discussed, but also in increasingly strong cross-currents of debate about validation and relationships.
The CNAA, with the uncertainties born of divided interests and aims within the Council and between different levels of the CNAA's own expanding machinery, was looking for ways to pursue the goal of greater academic independence for the institutions.
In practice this aim meant some form of relaxation or simplification of the validation procedure in cases where college development justified it.
In November 1971 the Council set up a committee to consider its future relationships with the colleges —‘to consider what changes are desirable to afford greater independence to polytechnics and colleges in planning and operating courses leading to the Council's degrees’.
In an interim report in July 1972 the Committee  recommended that the main aims should be: ‘(a) easier approval or re-approval when this is justified by the strength of a college;(b) the development of a partnership between Council and colleges based on a reduction in the inspectoral function and a development in the advisory role of the Council;(c) less documentation from colleges’.
On this basis the Council issued a statement the following year on Procedure for Validation of Courses of Study, the kernel of which was the CNAA's wish to respond differently to institutions which themselves differed widely in range of work and in experience: ‘an application from a college where the staff for the proposed course is of known academic quality and experience may not require the same scrutiny of detail by the Council as in other cases’.
The document ranked in order of importance the factors it wished to take into account in a new procedure: its knowledge of the institution ‘as a whole’, the quality and experience of the staff, and the papers submitted for the proposed course (the last justified by the fact that ‘the discipline involved in preparing and documenting a proposal for the approval or re-approval of a course of study is extremely valuable to the College submitting it’).
The procedure focussed essentially on the work of the subject boards and their mode of operation, and a range of approaches was envisaged:
At one end the Council may approve a proposed course on the basis of the documents submitted by the College and without a visit to it, while at the other end the Council may consider a proposed course in full detail as at present.
In between these two bounds there can be a series of different approaches to meet each case on its merits.
It is hoped that more and more of the applications for renewal of approval will be such that they can be granted without any extensive dialogue on them being necessary, and indeed that many of them can be granted without any visit being made to the College by representatives of the Council or vice versa and without any special conditions being attached to the approval.
The general principles of the document were spelled out in some detail.
The CNAA's focus at this point was on building up a picture of institutions that would enable it to relax the rules in some cases: the focus was smoother course approval as a reward for experience.
This could clearly, however, not be sufficient in the long run.
Assuming that the Council would continue to retain ‘final authority’, Edwin Kerr nevertheless pointed out, at the end of 1973, the logic of the decisions the Council had made.
One path to go down might begin from the priority the Council had given to its knowledge of the particular institutions: ‘it seems that we should now begin to build even more positively on this and consider a move in which certain institutions were granted particular responsibilities…the academic board in an experienced institution engaging in work of high quality should be authorized by the Council to reach decisions in defined areas’, and within understood frameworks of report and action.
On the very day his paper went to the General Committee the polytechnic directors were meeting in conference at Coombe Lodge, together with Toby Weaver and others from the DES.
Some of the directors present were opposed to pressing for charters at that stage.
Weaver talked of ‘gradual disengagement from more detailed control by CNAA’.
G Those discussions were fitted into a regular CDP meeting which itself discussed ‘polytechnic autonomy’, and in which a variety of views were recorded — the institutions were at different stages of development; the CNAA had established national status and its degrees were accepted currency; the CNAA was known to be giving serious attention to ways and means of giving greater freedoms to experienced colleges; emphasis should not be placed on charters as such….
The only conclusion the meeting was able to reach was ‘that guidance be sought from officers of DES as to ways in which greater academic autonomy might be achieved’.
For the next two or three years the directions, possibilities and practicalities continued to be discussed, with those polytechnic directors on the Council and its committees having a particularly difficult part to play in formulating policy.
The CDP explored ways of countering what many of its members considered the continuing, excessive domination of the relationship by the subject boards, which were often — in spite of the tensions involved — seen in a more positive light by academic staff, appreciative of the peer contacts they entailed.
One proposal emanating from the CDP Academic Affairs Standing Committee was that ‘self-validation’ might be achieved by instituting polytechnic Academic Advisory Committees, on the model of those for the CATs and the new universities —; such AACs ‘initially involving representatives of the CNAA’.
The majority feeling in the CDP was moving towards support for development within the CNAA.
A 1974 CDP paper talked of ‘a transitional process’ from dependence on a validating body to self-validation ‘within a relationship with CNAA’.
It talked, as Kerr had done, of responsibility for individual course validation being delegated to Academic Councils or Boards: ‘the Boards would become agents of CNAA’— what the paper described as a ‘process of accreditation’.
Such a change ‘need not mean the conclusion of our relationship with CNAA.
On the contrary, we believe it offers the prospect of evolving a new and useful relationship’.
The Council was not, however, willing to accept a form of accreditation of this kind.
In 1974/75 the CDP pursued the ideas of self-validation and delegated authority in the form of accreditation as a first stage towards the autonomy they were seeking.
It welcomed the direction CNAA discussions were going, held a joint meeting to discuss the CDP's ideas, but the Committee learned at a meeting in June 1975 that the CNAA had not supported a CDP paper on ‘accreditation’.
The CNAA's ideas were taking a different shape in 1975, showing an unwillingness to go as far as delegating authority for the approval of courses, but pursuing the idea of ‘internal validation’.
Several drafts of a paper on  ‘Extensions of Validation Procedure’ were debated amongst officers and in Council meetings in the first half of 1975, and in July at Kerr's suggestion its title was changed to ‘Partnership in Validation’.
Early drafts referred to the Council's feeling that the ‘time is ripe’ or ‘now is an appropriate time’to ‘grant a greater degree of responsibility’to institutions which were ready to ‘receive’or ‘assume’it.
At its July meeting the Council heard some members complain that the proposals did not go far enough and would not lead to greater freedoms for institutions, and heard others wonder if the long-term aim was in fact ‘complete autonomy’.
Partnership in Validation was immediately published, and institutions and the Council's committees and boards were asked to submit comments by January 1976.
The Council proposed to produce a revised document by July 1976 and receive applications from institutions in the following academic year — a timetable that in the event was overshot by some three years.
Partnership in Validation envisaged a dynamic relationship with institutions, the prospect of a closer partnership in which ‘the procedures leading to validation are progressively transferred to them’.
Particular institutions were to be authorized to carry out the ‘main validation procedures’ leading to the Council's approval of courses in their ‘well established subject areas’, with their freedom to organize their affairs in this way being subject to a quinquennial review:
The system would bring about a close association between the Council itself and the institutions in which academic strength would be recognized and aspirations for academic freedom met in a way different from the traditional one of creating wholly autonomous chartered institutions.
The Council would consider seeking modifications to its Charter to allow it to delegate added powers.
The time was ripe, in this formulation, not to ‘grant’, but to ‘move towards granting’, more responsibility for the validation of courses.
The Council recognized
the existence within a number of institutions of high quality academic work, experience, maturity, constructive self-criticism, and effective and thorough academic decision-making processes.
The emphasis was therefore on the internal procedures of the institutions — a way of sharing the Council's procedures.
The Council intended to specify subject areas in which responsibility could be delegated to an institution, to authorize institutions to modify existing courses and introduce new ones in subject areas for which the Council had given prior agreement, and to determine the criteria and methods for specifying subject areas and conducting quinquennial reviews.
Crucial to the operation of the scheme was the CNAA's recognition that some institutions had established successful ‘internal validating committees’ as sub-committees of Academic Boards, ‘responsible for considering schemes on their behalf before they are  submitted to the Council’, and others had developed faculty or school machinery to do the same.
Adopting this model, the CNAA decided that institutions using the proposed new procedures ‘would be expected to have a particularly effective internal procedure: the Council would require the formation of an Institution Validating Committee’.
Whatever the ultimate aim might be, for the moment the CNAA was going as far only as delegating or sharing aspects of the validation process — which meant accepting the limitations of the CNAA's existing Charter.
One step that the CNAA had taken, and one that many polytechnic directors and others considered a basis on which to build, was to promote the development of college research degrees committees.
From 1972, where an institution had sufficient experience of conducting and supervising research work, and had an established committee geared to the vetting of research proposals, it could be authorized to register candidates for the CNAA's degree of MPhil, without going through the CNAA's own degree registration machinery.
Registrations for the degree of PhD were still to be through the CNAA.
In 1972 eleven colleges were granted delegated authority for MPhil registrations.
In the discussions of the mid-1970s it was hoped in some institutions that this step might be the forerunner of others involving greater delegation of powers.
The CDP had welcomed the broad direction in which the CNAA's discussions had been going in 1975, but liked little or nothing in the Partnership in Validation document.
Its Academic Affairs Committee began its draft response —‘Since the document is generally at variance with CDP policy, the Academic Affairs Committee felt unable to recommend its acceptance by CDP’.
That Committee, and the CDP itself, took issue with the proposal to authorize internal validation related to specific subject areas and not to institutions as a whole.
The Committee complained thai no real freedom was being offered, and indeed that more constricting mechanisms were involved.
The CDP considered the paper from its Academic Affairs Committee, and agreed that ‘the CNAA should be informed that the CDP did not wish to accept the form of partnership proposed in the discussion document’: the notion of a different approach leading to a better form of partnership should be explored.
Although the CDP continued to be critical of the partnership proposals and of other aspects of CNAA's operations — including perfunctory and over-large visits and ‘undue attention…being accorded to criticisms of the management of polytechnics’— it was unable to agree on the policy direction in which to go.
At a CDP conference there was ‘a divergence of opinion’ amongst directors on the issue of self-validation.
Some felt the present arrangements to be satisfactory, believing that ‘there had been a marked change for the better in the CNAA system over the years and felt that subject boards fulfilled a useful role’.
Others thought the CDP ‘should not back down from accreditation as this would seem to suggest that CDP were not a body to be taken seriously’.
It was difficult to reach an agreed policy and the CDP  was now waiting for the CNAA to make the next move'.
The criticisms from the CDP, and from a meeting of heads of institutions recently visited, together with some Council members, focussed on the quality and unclear roles of visits, over-concern with resources, the reporting process, and other issues, and the Council decided to review the position in these respects under the continuing discussion of the partnership scheme.
The comments received on Partnership in Validation from institutions and the Council's committees and boards were summarized, presented to the Council, published and circulated.
It was concluded from the responses that the majority ‘considered that the benefits which the present system had provided should not be discarded in favour of a far less obviously secure form of validation’.
The Chairman thought two main ‘extreme counter-arguments’ had emerged and the remainder lay somewhere between:
1
The view that rested on the belief that the only true and ultimate test of academic responsibility lay in an institution validating and awarding its own degrees.
Many polytechnics were now as large as many of the universities and in a similar, if not better, condition than the CATs were at the time they became universities.
To keep them in tutelage to the CNAA was both humiliating and unfair.
2
The belief that self-validation was not an ideal system and that it prevailed in universities for historical reasons only.
The system offered by the CNAA had the advantage that it drew upon much wider academic expertise than any single institution could offer.
Broadly speaking the responses were taken as a reaffirmation of the existing partnership at two levels — between the Council and institutions, and between subject boards and academic staff: ‘the mechanisms proposed in the paper for modifying the partnership had clearly been rejected’, but the rejection of the proposals did not mean that the matter could there rest.
The number of responses opposed to the proposals on the grounds that they did not go far enough towards independence was very small — only a few academic boards of institutions had expressed that view.
There had been general endorsement of the broad aims of Partnership in Validation to respond to increasing maturity on the part of associated institutions, but dislike of the detailed machinery.
The Council could not in these circumstances follow the schedule it had outlined.
It asked the officers to reflect on the discussions which led up to, and followed the issue of, Partnership in Validation, and subsequently accepted the advice offered in an officers' paper to set up a working party to pursue the discussion further and report back in May 1978, after consulting the Council's committees and boards.
The CNAA, like the CDP, had momentarily achieved stalemate.
The Working Party on Partnership in Validation met seven times  between November 1977 and May 1979, and submitted an interim report as expected in 1978 — only to find its proposals rejected by the Council.
The working party reviewed the existing system, roles, alternatives and the range of views being expressed — from allowing institutions to stand alone to preserving the CNAA's role in maintaining standards.
It explored the meanings of ‘independence’ and confronted the argument that the Council was itself a myth and the reality was the powerful and almost autonomous subject boards.
A good deal of discussion focussed, in the early meetings, on whether and how to reduce the ‘all-pervading’ influence of the subject boards, and at its second meeting discussed an officers' draft paper which sought to undermine the boards and considered the pros and cons of the CNAA relating primarily to institutions as a whole.
In the later meetings, and after the rebuff by the Council, opinion moved towards the creation of a CNAA ‘Committee for Institutions’, as Hugh Glanville, Registrar for Institutional Reviews, proposed it in January 1979 — a Committee to have oversight of review visits, to coordinate institutional reviews and course validation, to give priority to consideration of the reports of visits, and to monitor the ‘interplay between the internal procedures of the institutions and the Council's procedures for the approval of courses’.
A proposal canvassed in the CDP by David Bethel, Director of Leicester Polytechnic and a member of the CNAA's working party, was for an individual ‘Institutional Committee’ for each institution designated as having achieved ‘mature status’, to act on behalf of the CNAA, to consult with the institution and to replace institutional visits — another CDP proposal which did not gain CNAA support.
The working party adopted the proposal for a Committee of Institutions — as did the Council, and in due course it was established.
As a counterweight to this strengthening of relationships at the CNAA-institutions level the move to weaken the role of subject boards was reversed and the proposals adopted provided for greater integration of the boards than at first suggested.
It also placed greater emphasis on what it termed ‘interdependence’ rather than autonomy — the need for public sector institutions to relate to one another— perhaps through regional groupings — within the system.
The Council considered the report of the Working Party in detail in February 1979.
Some polytechnic directors on the Council — including Geoffrey Hall from Brighton and Norman Lindop from Hatfield — found the report to be ‘depressing’ and lacking in any radical solutions.
Hall considered that any development that could meet the expectations of the institutions should have the aim of assisting them ‘in achieving full maturity’.
The CNAA was acting as a deterrent by preventing difficult decisions from being taken internally.
It was important to reduce the CNAA's workload, establish an ‘alternative means for maintaining standards’, and provide institutions with a basis ‘from which independence might be achieved’.
Bethel explained that the Working Party had not felt that the Council would be prepared to support such radical views, and other Council members  supported the report.
It was an ‘evolutionary’ model that was being proposed, and it was endorsed by the Council, which asked for further work to be done on some details, and for the proposals to be published.
A model for further development of the concept of partnership had been agreed, and Developments in Partnership in Validation — the ‘blue book’ as it was nicknamed from its cover — was in circulation by September.
Before this phase of the process was brought to a conclusion, however, an event occurred — in September 1978 — which heightened the sensitivities involved in some of the debates.
Teesside Polytechnic began life as Constantine College and in 1978 merged with the Teesside College of Education.
It was a small Polytechnic, had a history of poor local authority support, and the CNAA had had occasion to be critical of it as an academic community.
An institutional review visit was scheduled for May 1978, and Hugh Glanville, newly-appointed from within the CNAA as Registrar for Institutional Reviews, had the job of making the arrangements.
He was already aware of the possibility of situations in which approval would not be the automatic outcome of such visits, and indeed the CNAA had already, as a result of institutional visits, imposed stern conditions to be met in some instances if approval was to be continued.
The CNAA was soon to face the situation in an even more dramatic way.
Before the visit to Teesside took place Glanville went up to the Polytechnic to discuss plans for the visit, and returned to London after whit he describes as ‘a bizarre day’.
The Polytechnic was in the process of amalgamating with the College, and in a discussion in the Director's office the College Principal was obviously shocked to hear things said by the Director that had not been previously shared with him.
The Director seemed to know nothing about the College.
The papers prepared by the Polytechnic for the visit were ‘abysmal’.
Glanville indicated in a memo to Kerr that he thought there were problems ahead.
On the two-day visit things in fact ‘got progressively worse’.
Each member of the visiting party, which was chaired by Edwin Kerr, reported back to the group on separate initial discussions with the faculties these were in some disarray.
In general meetings the Director attracted all problems to himself and found himself in difficulties.
The visiting party, including an HMI in attendance, was horrified, dropped their agenda for the second day and went through the problems as they had perceived them with the management group and the Academic Board:
hoping that someone would tell us we were wrung — nobody would.
Not even the Director would say we were wrong.
We finally debated at great length whether it would be possible to avoid making explicit reference to the Director.
It was finally agreed while still in Teesside that it would have to be done, and the only way was by explicit reference to the role of the Director, quoting the Articles of Government.
At the final meeting between Kerr, Glanville and the Director, Kerr told  him what would be in the report, and it was a brief meeting because the Director said ‘he had nothing to say’.
Kerr reported on the visit at the July meeting of the Council, drawing attention to ‘the adverse criticisms contained in this report’, emphasizing that it had been a strong visiting party, and that it had reached its conclusions unanimously.
He summarized:
The Polytechnic was beset with resource problems but the cause of the Visiting Party's overriding concern was the poor quality of the leadership and the lack of initiative being taken by the Academic Board.
There was no real Academic plan and there were no grounds for confidence that the resource levels necessary to support the standards of the courses leading to the Council's awards would be maintained.
Despite these serious reservations it was recognized that there was some good academic work being done.
A Council member who had been on the visiting party supported the statement and endorsed the Chief Officer's leadership on the occasion of the visit.
The Academic Board
had been given ample opportunity to respond constructively but had palpably failed to do so.
Neither had they demonstrated an adequate awareness of the essential problems which they had to resolve.
There was some concern expressed at the Director being singled out for criticism, but the Chief Officer considered that the criticism was necessary ‘since it was the leadership which was stifling academic development and progress’.
The Council accepted the report, amending one sentence to-read: ‘For reasons which are apparent from the rest of this report the Visiting Party could not feel assured that the Director was fully and properly exercising his responsibility for the ‘internal organisation and management and discipline of the Polytechnic’, in accordance with the Articles of Government'.
The final version of the report was sent to the Polytechnic and — with Kerr assuring the Council that the responsibility could not have lain with the CNAA itself — was leaked to the Times Higher Education Supplement and appeared in its issue of 8 September, under the headline: ‘Closure threat to poly in CNAA's toughest-ever report’.
Copies of the report, it indicated, had been ‘circulated confidentially to Cleveland County Council and members of the Governing Body and the Academic Board’:
It describes the Polytechnic as dispirited, poorly led and understaffed.
The computer unit is on the verge of ‘complete collapse’, the library is inadequate and the relationship with the local authority is bad.
‘On visiting the departments and faculties members found a polytechnic which still contains some academic work of a high standard, but which in general is dispirited, confused and without confidence’, the report says.
The Council was understood to have taken legal advice before inserting the section on the Director, Dr John Houghton.
Because of poor management the Polytechnic had not had the same ‘close and supportive relationship with the authority that the College of Education had enjoyed’.
The THES added in an editorial that the withdrawal of CNAA recognition could result in the grave consequence of the closure of an institution in the largest conurbation in Europe without a university:
The real failure of the Polytechnic is that it has not established a community of academics with a corporate identity and with sound machinery for democratic decision making.
Over the next few days the CNAA report was national news.
For the TES ‘Poly faces closure after report’, for the Daily Mail ‘Chaos college faces collapse’, for The Daily Telegraph ‘Degree threat to polytechnic over low standards’, for The Guardian ‘Poly may be left out on academic limb’.
The Sunday Times ran a feature on ‘The college where key books are on four-hour loan’, reporting that:
members of the academic staff last week agreed vehemently with many of the Council's criticisms and expressed relief that the polytechnic's problems were being brought into the open at last.
‘The management system is the most atrocious I have experienced’, said one.
‘Nobody lays down priorities.
There is no strategy, no vision, no policy, no sense of direction’.
The Council issued a statement on 13 September, correcting some points in the press reports, emphasizing that the visiting party had indicated that it believed the Polytechnic had ‘the potential to rectify the grave situation in which it finds itself, and stressing that the visiting party had not suggested that courses as currently taught were below an acceptable standard.
If, after a further review, the Council decided that students should not be admitted to any courses leading to its awards, the position of existing students would be safeguarded.
The CNAA had clearly discovered an unhappy situation inside the Polytechnic, and between it and the local authority.
As The Sunday Times pointed out, there were staff who more than welcomed the CNAA's judgments on the long-standing problems of the Polytechnic.
One article by a member of staff, while critical of some aspects of CNAA's procedures, stated clearly that
many of the CNAA's diagnoses of Teesside Polytechnic's ills had already long been articulated by staff within the college, and to a great extent the CNAA report was welcomed by the teaching body.
Although people feared for their jobs in the wake of the CNAA threat to withdraw blanket validation from the Polytechnic in 1980, there was also a sense of relief that the problems had now been stated  in a form and in a language which our masters would find difficult to ignore.
The visiting party had concluded that the management problems were a threat to the academic standards of the institution, and most faculties were affected.
In one of them the visitors faced the problem of the relationship between the staff and a head of department being the subject of a libel action, and a refusal by the staff to meet the visitors in the presence of the head of the department (resolved by the visiting party member who chaired the meeting allowing the head of department to stay until he had to leave ‘for another meeting’).
On 12 September the Polytechnic's Academic Board called for the ‘immediate resignation, retirement or removal’ of the Director.
The governors in fact accepted the Director's offer to go on ‘indefinite leave’, a move which angered the staff, but one which gave rise to a four-man team of senior executives to manage the Polytechnic — in fact until a new Director was appointed.
The CNAA's procedures, its concern with the total academic environment in which its courses were offered, had led it — at a time when its relationships with the institutions were under intensive discussion — to a position in which it could directly influence the management and operation of an institution where it perceived weaknesses, as well as the institution's own relationships with governors and the local authority.
It was visibly true that the CNAA, as one education correspondent put it, was ‘busy about the job it was set up to do — to award degrees and to make sure that the standards of them are at least up to university level’.
The implications of Teesside were not, however, lost on the other polytechnic directors, who went into a flurry of activity in October.
At the beginning of October the Chairman of the CDP, wrote to the Secretary of State complaining essentially of two things.
Since CNAA reports were always likely to reach a wide readership they ‘must be based on conclusive evidence and should not identify individuals for serious criticism in a manner which cannot allow them to defend themselves in accordance with the established rule of law’.
In the Teesside case the evidence was ‘not reasoned and substantial in a manner to command confidence in the CNAA’.
Secondly, if the polytechnic in question had deteriorated in resource provision and management to the point suggested, this pointed to the lack of an early warning system through the Inspectorate, who had a responsibility for the monitoring of standards in non-university institutions.
The CDP also issued a statement expressing its increasing concern over recent years at the way the CNAA conducted quinquennial reviews.
It considered the Teesside report as ‘the culmination of this process and finds aspects of the report distasteful and unacceptable’.
The CDP also expressed its concern at the fact that no polytechnic director had been on the visiting party (in fact, when the visiting party was first put together, it did include i polytechnic director, who withdrew at the last moment).
One CDP paper suggested the Council visit to Teesside exemplified the aspects of CNAA activity which were giving rise to concern: ‘while not adducing any evidence which indicates an objective failure of student or employer satisfaction or of academic standards, the report makes serious criticisms of the management of the Polytechnic, based on a cursory inspection and conversations with members of staff’.
The CDP recorded its concern about CNAA quinquennial visits and reports, and while considering it proper for the CNAA to judge whether an institution was a ‘satisfactory environment for advanced work’ thought it was not competent to adopt a ‘judicial role’.
The CDP called for a moratorium on institutional reviews.
An exchange of letters with Sir Denis Rooke then followed, and in December the Council basically affirmed the importance of institutional visits as the means by which the CNAA built up a picture of institutions and enabled it to exercise its responsibilities, and asked the Working Party on Partnership in Validation to give consideration to the form such visits should take.
A return visit to Teesside was planned for 1979.
In October 1978 Cleveland County Council earmarked substantial additional funding for the Polytechnic, the post of Director was advertised but first time round was not filled when interviews took place in April 1979 (with Lord Boyle, Vice-Chancellor of Leeds University, and Professor Maurice Kogan of Brunel University among the advisers for the appointment).
A confident graduation ceremony at which the Chairman of Governors spoke optimistically took place in February 1979, and at its meeting in May 1979 the Council received a report of a preliminary visit by a small group of members and officers the previous month to the Polytechnic.
They reported on discussions with the Directorate, heads of departments and central services, the Academic Board, the governors and members of the local education authority: ‘the visiting party believed that the Polytechnic had made real and substantial progress and had felt that there was a different atmosphere from that encountered by the visiting party the previous year.
The Council agreed to postpone the next full visit from the summer of 1979 until later in the year, and to release a press statement that had been agreed by the visiting party with the Polytechnic and the Teesside Education Authority.
The local press announced a ‘Poly comeback’, and when the CNAA reapproved the Polytechnic's BSc in Mechanical Engineering later in the month it announced —‘Poly wins a tribute from CNAA’.
When the full institutional visit took place in December the Council found that the expectations of the preliminary visit were being fulfilled.
The Teesside events were crucially important at this stage of the development both of the CNAA and of its associated institutions, but the outcomes were ambiguous.
On the one hand they strengthened the polytechnics' resistance to the institutional review element in the CNAA's procedures, but on the other hand they confirmed for the CNAA the value of gaining intelligence about the overall health of the institutions.
Into the discussions of partnership  in validation, the ‘blue book’ and the possibility of new validation arrangements with ‘mature’institutions were fed the varied attempts to draw lessons from and conduct dialogue around the specific difficulties encountered over the Teesside visit.
By the time the CNAA published Developments in Partnership in Validation the CDP was voicing increasingly strong criticisms of CNAA practice.
It was talking of a ‘gulf’ between the two bodies, seeing the partnership discussions as revealing that the CNAA was not prepared to go very far towards new relationships, and criticizing validation visits in particular: they were ‘more often than not’unsatisfactory in meeting the assumed objectives.
The Developments publication was hardly likely in this situation to satisfy the strongest of the CNAA's critics.
Developments in fact was what it described as ‘an evolutionary development of the Council's present procedures, which will also allow experimentation with more radical variations’.
The six-part model it presented comprised:
(i)
Improvement of the procedures for the initial approval of courses.
(ii)
Introduction of indefinite periods of approval, subject to regular progress reviews.
(iii)
Replacement of the process of the renewal of approval of courses by progress review visits.
(iv)
Extension of the limits within which institutions can change approved courses.
(v)
Provision for institutions to propose variations from the normal validation methods.
(vi)
Improvement of the procedures for linking course validation and institutional reviews.
The Council was proposing, therefore, a variety of amendments to existing validation procedures, lengthening the reins in various ways, and — in item (v) of the model — offering institutions a way to go beyond what was proposed.
Its implementation proposals included the creation of the Committee for Institutions and an immediate start on considering ‘possible longer-term models’.
In spelling out its arguments for the proposed pattern, the Council was once again reinterpreting the balance that had been at the centre of its concerns from the beginning: there was nothing in the Charter and Statutes ‘which prevented greater recognition from being given to an institution's own internal procedures where these could be shown to be rigorous and effective.
Council was doubtful, however, if a system of internal validition could ever be a complete substitute for a system of external validation’.
It emphasized that many people considered that direct contact between boards and course teams was ‘one of the most valued aspects of  the Council's operation’, and the Council concurred with this view as long as boards worked within the policies laid down by the committees.
Some models of development had been proposed which would require changes in the Charter and Statutes, but since there was no evidence that the government wished to see any change in the basic role ‘of the Council or in the status of institutions in the maintained sector’, the Council had given priority in the shorter term to developments within the existing Charter and Statutes.
Such developments, however, ‘should not preclude further changes in the foreseeable future’.
In the letter accompanying the document to the Council's institutions the Chief Officer underlined that ‘the Council is already engaged in examining possible longer term models’ .4
There were problems, old and new.
The emphasis in Developments on boards being required to work within committee policies, and the changes of procedure envisaged in the first four items of the new model, did not mean automatic changes in the ‘inspectoral’ functions of the boards.
Amongst officers and boards there were some who could not, or would not, relinquish old attitudes: ‘never mind what the blue book said, this is what we are going to do’.
Some CNAA members were aware of opposition to the concept of partnership in validation among the Council's officers, particularly some whose main responsibility was to subject boards.
At a meeting of the Committee for Education in October 1979, ‘there was a feeling that the boards were beginning to develop ‘identities’ of their own, separate to that of the Committee'.
In 1980 the CDP was talking of CNAA ‘dogmatism’, and in suggesting the establishment of a liaison body with the CNAA it looked for the establishment of a ‘special relationship’.
In early 1980, however, there were differing views in the CDP and the polytechnics.
In the polytechnics themselves, as one CDP document on reactions to Developments indicated, ‘in general, the proposals are welcomed, although with some reservations’.
There were already favourable comments on changes in institutional and review visits.
One polytechnic had expressed its fears to the Council that not all boards would operate the new arrangements, and had received an assurance from the Chief Officer that ‘corrective action would be taken as soon as possible where any Board was seen not acting in the spirit of the new arrangements’.
There were, therefore, problems that Developments sought to solve, and in doing so had to contend with entrenched positions.
There were also new problems within the institutions, as some commentators were quick to point out.
Increased partnership of the kinds intended both made greater demands on the senior staff of institutions, and increased their authority within the overall procedure.
It also, as was pointed out from Scotland, affected the committee structure, its purpose and value, within institutions:
Working through committees may provide opportunities for a form of participation in decision-making in an institution (a cynical view would be that at least it may give the illusion of this), but by their  nature committees can be introspective and restricted in their outlook.
Generally they evolve as comfortable structures in the establishment being more effective in maintaining the ‘status quo’ than in encouraging change, and rarely do they encourage innovation.
It was suggested that the new arrangements would also weaken the roles of course teams in institutions, to the benefit of heads of departments and central administrations, and another commentator talked of the danger of increased internal conflict between management and ‘the grassroots’.
Alternatively, there continued to be ‘grassroots’ feelings that in spite of the hazards of peer review through external validation, the process was more palatable in some subject areas than the hazards within institutions.
Discussing the implementation of partnership in validation, the Sociological Studies Board, for example, heard concern about the ‘apparent lack of sympathy which may exist in institutions’ internal monitoring and validation procedures to academic developments in sociology, in that the views expressed may be harsher and more inhibiting than those expressed by the Board'.
It is important to emphasize that the policy statements of the CDP disguised serious conflicts of opinion at crucial moments amongst the polytechnic directors, but also were frequently at variance with the views of the principals of the colleges of higher education and other institutions, and with the sentiments of the academic boards or staff of the polytechnics.
The strengths and weaknesses of the CNAA's procedures, old and new, contained what the CDP considered to be ‘dogmatism’, but what other constituencies often regarded differently.
Within the CNAA what the partnership debates and their outcomes indicated was the crystallization of opinion around a modest but significant liberalization of the validation base of the CNAA's roles.
The move was far enough in suggest the future transfer of greater validation responsibility in institutions, but not far enough to suggest the degree of autonomy that many of the polytechnic directors had sought.
The difficulty in reaching agreement about this, or any greater measure of development, had lain partly in the fact that neither the CNAA nor any of its internal structures or external partners or constituencies was homogeneous, and the evolution of ‘partnership’ was therefore through a constant, complex and difficult process of negotiation.
The frustrations and criticisms arose from clear enough aspirations on the part of institutions for the maximum attainable independence — but far from agreed as a concept within institutions and organizations.
The difficulty lay also in what had been interpreted by the late 1970s, inside and outside the CNAA, as a valuable tradition.
Validation, wrote one active university participant in the CNAA's affairs in 1977, ‘has been hailed as the most important single educational innovation since 1945’.
The CNAA was by then ‘on the move not only to the greater degree of independence in validation implied by the debate on Partnership in  Validation but also towards different forms of validation, more in tune with the situation of higher education in the late seventies’.
The whole process was the ‘institutionalization of academic common sense’.
Another university member of a CNAA Committee commented that the CNAA ‘does a meticulous job as far as I can see and the overall standard of CNAA courses which gain approval is probably much higher than in most universities’.
The standards of CNAA courses were therefore so well established that major shifts in, or the removal of, the validation tradition through peer review might imperil what had been achieved.
The tendency in the Council therefore was to seek a sufficient measure of ‘self-validation’ to enable institutional progress to be made, but to marry it with the protection of the external validation system which appeared to be the best defence of hard-won standards.
The CNAA's concern for the defence of standards throughout this period was a concern for institutional and course considerations and student access and outcomes.
In registering those concerns it was paying some of the penalties of the pioneer, anxious to ensure adequate monitoring of both traditional and novel courses — single subject and multidisciplinary, full-time, part-time and mixed mode, organized by year or in modules.
Many of these structures were both challenging and, in British education, relatively new.
The CNAA gave its first approval to a modular course, for example, in 1972 — the logic of which was ultimately to bring the Council strongly into the field of credit accumulation and transfer.
From the early 1970s it was validating courses structured in macro-modules and micro-modules at colleges and polytechnics.
By 1976 officers were producing papers reviewing the design, aims, differences and validation problems of modular courses, and the modular structures being validated were — in validation and management terms — complicated.
In 1973 the City of London Polytechnic obtained CNAA approval for its modular degree, beginning with fifteen subjects and a first year in which students reappraised their objectives and had guidance and counselling available.
Oxford Polytechnic began its modular course in 1973 with seven fields of study, all in science.
In 1974–75 the CNAA approved arts and humanities fields at Oxford, the following year education, catering and food science, and in the following two years languages, law and a range of social science fields were added or assimilated.
By 1983 almost all the major areas of the Polytechnic were represented in the modular programme, and the number of students on the modular programme was by now greater than the total numbers of students in some colleges.
While the discussions of partnership in validation were taking place in the late 1970s, therefore, the CNAA had had some decade and a half of validation experience, but the rapid expansion of subject areas and such relatively recent developments as the DipHE and modular courses, and the uncertainties surrounding public sector higher education in a swiftly changing economic climate, all helped to strengthen the view that the Council should not move too rapidly into a higher gear of change.
At a  Leverhulme seminar on higher education in 1981, Gerry Fowler commented that the CNAA's ‘Partnership in validation’ might be held to point the way forward to a national system of awards whose standards were assured by the institutions offering the courses, and periodically scrutinized from outside.
Unfortunately, however, ‘no one, least of all the CNAA itself, seems certain of the precise meaning and intention of ‘Partnership in validation’.
Good intentions and uncertainty are a not infrequent outcome or compromise.
The ways forward for the CNAA in its relationships with the institutions were articulated in various forms in the 1970s, and a perspective on the complexities may be helped by taking two of them.
As Chairman of the CNAA and strongly committed to its activities, Sir Michael Clapham was a consistent advocate of increasing the responsibilities of the institutions it validated.
He resisted, however, the notion that the polytechnics were merely a new breed of university.
At an awards ceremony at the Polytechnic of the South Bank in 1974 he castigated those people ‘who would like to make polytechnics exactly like universities’, and who ignored the fact that the polytechnics had the distinctive feature of not only pursuing knowledge for its own sake, but also treating the acquisition of knowledge as ‘never far removed from its application’— and constructing courses of study accordingly.
The following year, at a CNAA awards ceremony, he emphasized that it was planning, for academic reasons, a ‘major shift in the work of validating courses from the Council to the Polytechnics and Colleges running them’.
Departments, with some external advice, could now be capable of evaluating their own courses.
The CNAA hoped ‘to move with reasonable speed to a situation in which first departments with established academic reputations, and later whole institutions, can undertake the scrutiny of new courses internally, looking to the Council for almost automatic approval’.
The outcome would be to ‘enhance the academic responsibility of the institutions of higher education’, as well as diminishing the administrative pressure on the CNAA.
In 1976 he went a stage further in his address to the CNAA's degree congregation, by discussing the position at both sides of the relationship with institutions.
The CNAA's own system, he concluded, was thorough, but also ‘cumbrous and laborious’:
It generates paper in sickening profusion; it makes unconscionable demands on the heroes of the piece, the thirteen or fourteen hundred volunteers drawn mainly from ‘that two-handed engine’ we pompously call the binary system of higher education…but with all its faults the system works.
At its best it works well, clarifying objectives, improving ideas, through dialogue between academic equals working to a common end.
At its worst the procedure leads to irritation, the dialogue to acerbity.
The Council was not content with the system, and was working to improving  the partnership — in a dialogue with partners that the Council needed to continue as its ‘most urgent agendum’.
But that was perhaps not enough, and he went on to explain to the congregation and to the Prince of Wales as the new President that there was a ‘more searching question’ to be asked about validation:
should this be done at all?
Should we advise Her Majesty under whose Charter we operate, that the time has come to devolve our responsibilities gradually to the institutions who are our partners?…
Would it be a proper recognition of the quality of their teaching and administrative staff to accept their judgment of academic standards absolutely and make them mature degree awarding bodies?
Or would it be a sign of still greater maturity for their staff to go on contributing to a national system, a system in which the collaboration of the entire academic community could raise standards higher and judge quality more surely?
Having asked the question, he offered no personal answer: ‘Like jesting Pilate, I stay not for an answer: though the question awaits our collective resolution’.
Sir Michael Clapham had what he later described as ‘wild hopes’ that the process of delegation would be achieved within two or three years of his vacating the chairmanship in 1977.
It was certainly his ‘personal aspiration’ that this would be the case, though he was aware that this was not a view that was universally shared.
When he retired from the chair Frank Hornby sent in a note about Clapham's contribution to the CNAA in the early years.
In 1971, as Chairman-to-be he found himself in ‘a maze of important policy items’, including ‘how best to give appropriate independence to colleges experienced in courses leading to CNAA degrees and/or the DipAD’.
Placing quality and independence in combination in such questioning, he reflected the problems and pressed for them to be treated with urgency to achieve a ‘collective resolution’.
Neither urgency nor unanimity were easy to achieve, and the ‘blue book’ of 1979 clearly went only one step, though a significant step, in the direction to which Sir Michael Clapham pointed.
While Developments was being finalized there were, as Edwin Kerr pointed out to the institutions, other longer-term models being discussed.
A second perspective on the partnership issue is offered by a contribution made to the seventh meeting of the Working Party on Developments in Partnership in Validation in May 1979.
The Working Party had been instructed by the Council to begin a consideration of longer-term developments, and possible models of development was an agenda item for this meeting.
Chairing the Working Party, Edwin Kerr called on David Bethel to present his views.
Bethel spoke as a member of the Working Party, not as Chairman of the CDP, though he underlined that Sir Denis Rooke had recently given an undertaking that  the CDP would be consulted.
Bethel indicated that all institutions conducting courses at degree level in all countries except the United Kingdom conferred their own awards.
Should the position of the polytechnics be maintained ‘in perpetuity’?
Could standards be preserved at the same time as giving institutions greater autonomy?
The power to make their own awards was in the interests not only of the polytechnics, but also of higher education as a whole.
His preferred model for accomplishing this was one of ‘accreditation’, and he described a process by which this could be accomplished:
Institutions could be granted charters or licences to confer their own awards but it would be in the interests of higher education if the C.N.A.A.
maintained a role in the validation of the courses leading to those awards.
Thus institutions thus granted these charters or licences would be required to ‘accredit’ their courses with the C.N.A.A.
every five years.
It might even be possible to extend this process more broadly across higher education so that there was a national system of accreditation.
In sum, the power to award their own degrees would be conferred only to those institutions which had been accredited by the C.N.A.A.
for this purpose.
The advantage of this approach would be that it would enable a mixed economy to be operated i.e. some institutions be validated in the present way;, others who were ‘chartered’ would not necessarily be accredited for all their courses in that their courses would be validated in the present ways.
The discussion that followed indicated difficulties but ‘found attractions to the proposal’.
Accreditation was not a concept that had gained currency in Britain at this time, and in developments over the next few years it was to receive a variety of interpretations in British further and higher education.
The version that Bethel was working towards in this statement was not precisely the road that the CNAA was to take in the mid-1980s but it was an outline model of development at the end of the 1970s which attempted to go beyond the decisions contained in the CNAA's 1979 document.
It looked afresh at the elements in the established balance between the CNAA and its institutions, retaining standards at the centre of debate, defining a continuing role for the CNAA, justifying and describing the process towards greater institutional autonomy, conceding the need to take account of different stages of development, and looking towards possible implications for the whole of higher education.
It was to take several years and unexpected pressures before general progress in this direction was achieved, but it is important to remember that there were views being canvassed in the CNAA and more widely that pointed towards a possible further ‘collective resolution’.