

ONE
The day was almost over before the young men made their move.
Karen King — because she was English, Jessica insisted — had given over even thinking about them, let alone imagining what they might do with their hard, lean bodies and their tired, rope-burned hands, had given over bothering to deny she'd had such fantasies.
When Jessica poked her in the ribs and swore they were coming for them, she hardly raised her head.
‘Get off,’ she mumbled.
‘Don't wake me up just yet.
Wait until you can see the whites of their eyes.’
‘God, but they're tanned,’ Jessica replied.
‘They weren't here yesterday, or the day before.
I wonder if they have a place at Fahan?’
Indeed, the men had first appeared from the Fahan Creek side, near the pier.
They had been noticed by Jessica at half past ten that morning, searing the peaceful waters of Lough Swilly with a little sporty powerboat, bright red and snarling.
They had waterskied, swooping round the northern end of Inch Island, making great arcs along the shore, as if looking for something.
Women, said Jessica, languidly at first, but later with more interest.
The day was hot — killingly hot, for Donegal — and the men did not wear wetsuits.
She had definitely liked the look of them.
Later, they had returned on sailboards, taking advantage of the breeze that had sprung up around lunchtime.
Jessica and Karen had by now brought a picnic from the cottage, and spread it on a blanket for a cloth.
Karen, afraid of burning, had put on a yellow sun dress over her bikini, but had taken it off again when swarms of insects  settled on her.
Coincidentally, the two young men had come creaming close into the shore, as if attracted like the small, black flies.
‘Rape,’ said Jessica, laconically.
She timed it well, and Karen raised her eyebrows.
‘The insects.
They think you're a field of rape, they've come to suck the goodness out of you.’
She raised her head, stretched her neck, grinned.
‘Honi soit qui mal y pense,’ she added, glancing at the sailboarders.
And she stood, stretching her shoulders back, flexing her body in her scarlet bathing suit, dark hair blown across her eyes.
‘You're completely shameless,’ Karen said.
‘Sit down and eat your cold pease porridge.’
It was, in fact, a classic picnic.
There were crisp fresh rolls, smoked fish and swimming olives, two kinds of pate and chilled Sancerre.
Part of Jessica's upbringing, SQ she claimed, had been the satisfying of every appetite, high and low.
Hence the blanket, she laughed — her own ‘refinement’ in case the men should make a landfall!
But that lime they did not.
The boards turned and swooped away, their gaudy sails flashing across the lough until they dwindled and merged with others by Buncrana.
Even Karen felt a tiny sense of loss, which amused her more than it upset her.
She thought of Tony, back in Manchester, big, blond Tony working on the buses to get some cash together, looking after the bedsit and the cat, writing her long letters.
She found herself looking down the length of her legs, squinting through the V-shape of her feet at the gaggle of sails across the water, to try and isolate ‘their’ two.
She giggled.
‘You're meant to be respectable, you are,’ she said.
‘You're in Ireland now, what would your ‘daddy’ say?
You're a disgrace!’
She tried to do the accent, but she could not even get the ‘daddy’ right.
It fascinated her, the way that Jessica called her father ‘daddy’, in the Irish fashion.
He was too big for it, by far.
‘Oh God!’ said Jessica, taking up the fun.
‘Don't mention him, if he could only see us now!
He thinks I'm sitting knitting, thinking of my one true love, as far as he's concerned I'm bloody well engaged!
What can I do though, Karen, it's not my fault that I love it, surely?
Oh I wish they'd come on shore, I wish they'd come.’
She paused.
She hooted.
‘I want some bloody dick!’
Suddenly, they were screaming with laughter, Karen coughing tiny specks of olive across her biscuit-coloured stomach, spilling cold wine onto her arm.
Jessica got to her knees, holding herself and snorting, then staggered to her feet and ran down to the water.
She held her glass aloft in her left hand, waved hugely with her right.
‘Come back, you bastards, come back!’ she yelled.
‘There's two young women here are dying for it!’
She put her glass down on a rock and walked into the waters of the lough, gasping as it rose up her thighs and touched her lower belly.
It was icy cold by contrast, straight in from the Atlantic on the rising tide.
God, she thought, those boys must be good on sailboards, or completely mental.
If they fell in this without a wetsuit they'd be dead.
‘They'd shrivel up like walnuts,’ she said to Karen, who had joined her to wash off the debris of the laughing fit.
‘I like them when they're like that, don't you?
Lovely little walnuts.
It makes me want to kiss them.’
Karen made a non-committal noise, and Jessica did not push her.
She often laughed at her for her staidness, for her virtue, for her faithfulness to stodgy Tony — who was very sweet, for all that — but they rubbed along on it OK.
They had been friends for two years, best friends Jessica might have said, with her formal, respectable private education in County Down, but some of their actions and their attitudes were miles apart, centuries, planets.
Karen had watched, wide-eyed, as this woman like a chainsaw had cut a swathe through the young men of their department at the university, apparently  unconcerned with looks, or wit, or age.
She had a knack of breaking hearts and being mystified by the effect.
She slept with boys (and men — some lecturers, too, fell by her wayside) as if it were the most natural thing in the world (‘indeed it is, it is!’), then dropped them just as casually in the morning with a smile of disbelief that they should expect anything more of her, or any other woman.
If they recovered and were friends she was delighted, and would flirt with them, and assume an easy physicality with them, and sleep with them again maybe, and break their hearts again if given half a chance.
And all the time, it seemed, back home in Northern Ireland, she had a different life.
Karen sat down in the soft, dark sand and let the ripples of cold Atlantic water wash round her thighs.
She still had her glass in hand, and sipped then passed it over.
Jessica drank, then squatted, then lay, half-covered.
Overhead a flock of seagulls passed, screaming.
‘This bloke Parr, though,’ said Karen, finally.
‘You wouldn't really marry him, would you?
I wish you'd tell me it's a joke, once and for all.
Why don't you come to my auntie's with me?
We could have a laugh.
You could meet a millionaire or two.’
‘Oh sure, and die of bloody boredom for my pain.
I've had some of that, you know.
The worst times I've ever endured were with a tax-dodger in Castletown.
The bastard tried to pay me for it, the only way he could get excited was by the thought of buying me.
That and sitting in casinos.
You can stick your Isle of Man for me.’
‘Port Erin's not like that,’ Karen said, rather lamely.
‘You can go for days without meeting a millionaire.
We could walk, and so on.
Do the beaches.
Aunt Jane's OK.’
Jessica crowed.
‘You're so transparent, Karen.
You'll be out of your head with the tedium.
Look — you've got your cross to bear, all right, I've got mine.
You go and be nice to aged  aunties, I'll play the vestal virgin for my daddy and ma.
In the meantime, let's go mad.
Where are those bloody fellers?
I've got something cool for them to slip into!’
Later, back up the shore beside their picnic blanket, beside Karen's sun dress that was now a mass of creeping black, the girls lay on their stomachs and talked again of Parr, desultorily.
The name had been dropped into Karen's consciousness only days before, at Jessica's home near Belfast, and she could not rid herself of curiosity.
Jessica had said, as they had dressed for dinner with her parents, that he would probably be mentioned, and Karen was not to corpse.
‘Why should I?
Parr, who's Parr?’
Karen had replied.
‘What, hasn't he got a Christian name, or anything?’
‘He's not a Christian, not by our standards.
He's one of your lot, a godless Englishman.
I'm meant to marry him one of these days, that's all.’
She had disappeared, strategically, into the folds of her little black dress, leaving Karen gasping in her underslip.
Jessica's face had emerged through the neckhole grinning.
‘I thought that would bring you up.
I bet you never saw me as the faithful little wife.
Now listen — you mentioned boys at dinner on Monday.
as if I even knew the meaning of the word!
In future, watch your lip in front of mother and my da.
Parr's the man for me!’
‘But why?
Jessica, what in heaven's name is going on?
You can't get married!’
‘Free, white, and over twenty-one.
Why not, then?
God, you're practically married to Tony, don't deny it.’
‘But I've never heard of Parr!
You've never mentioned him!
I mean…well, do you love him?’
‘Do you love Tony?
There, then.
Do my zip.’
Karen could never surely tell when Jessica was teasing her, and when Jessica found a good one she played it to the hilt.
As Karen's lust for certainty increased, she threw in tantalising little snippets, altering some of the details from time to time.
They had shopped round Belfast and  she had teased her with the idea that this Parr was very rich, they had gone by train to Dublin and she had claimed he was ‘hand in glove’ with government circles there.
Then driving to the house in Donegal in her pea-green Polo Fox (‘I didn't choose the colour, it was a present from my daddy’) she admitted, with amusement, she did not have a real idea what Parr did, and did not care a jot.
She said once she might love him, she said once she might not.
She said her parents liked him tremendously and surely that must count for something even in this day and age!
She said why not, in any case, as there was no one else engaging her emotions.
‘You're talking boys,’ she said, when Karen mentioned names in Manchester.
‘Don't you understand, I'm talking men.’
That afternoon, beside Lough Swilly, the game continued lazily, from time to time.
Karen King read mystery stories, and in the gaps between the chapters of the latest P.D.
James, asked subtle, Dalgleish-like questions that were fielded languorously.
At last, the Sancerre finished, Jessica grew weary of the topic.
‘Ach, I don't know,’ she said.
‘It's all a farce to some extent.
Will I step up to the cottage for another bottle, or will you, or shall we go without?
I don't know if I want to marry him, or if I will whenever it comes to the crunch.
But I'll be back from Manchester in a year or so, and it's the thing to do in one way, over here.
At least he's not a spotty adolescent or a man that smokes a pipe in bed or reads philosophy while you're making love.
He's very good at it, Karen, he's an expert.’
‘An expert?’
Karen responded, primly.
‘That sounds terrible.’
‘Does it?
You should borrow him one of these times.
Be my guest.’
They slept for a while, they got the other bottle, they swam, they talked and sighed, Jessica scanned the Fahan shore for a friendly sail, they slept again.
Karen had  moved from P.D.
James to a course book, and was nodding through the unhinged pastures of the higher criticism when Jessica brought her back to reality with the sharp bone of her eager knuckle.
‘I want the curly one,’ she said.
‘God, but aren't they lovely, both of them?
Look at the way he's lifting that great sailboard, like a toy.’
The young men turned to face them, panting slightly, their brown skin specked with goose pimples.
One, with curling chestnut hair, was five foot ten, and thin, and wore long-legged swimming shorts that clung to him like skin in jagged gold and emerald.
The other was shorter, big-chested, with black hair, black chin and deepset, glittering eyes.
His bathing suit was brief and white, the front of it enormous, set in wild bushes of escaping hair.
Before they set off up the beach, both bared white teeth in sudden, violent smiles.
‘Oh God,’ Karen King heard Jessica breathe.
‘Oh God, Karen, but they're Catholics…’
TWO
‘Hallo there, girls,’ drawled the taller one.
It was cod American.
‘We are travellers from a far distant shore, and we wondered if you could see your way to giving us a drink.
My name's Rory, and I've just sailed this darn thing from Tennessee.’
The girls, through some instinct that Karen resented in herself but could not isolate, had rolled onto their backs as the men had approached them up the beach.
They lifted their heads from the stones and squinted, as if they'd only been half aware of interlopers.
Jessica laughed.
‘The Atlantic doesn't go as far as Tennessee,’ she said.
‘You're a liar.’
Rory turned gravely to his companion.
‘The natives aren't friendly,’ he said.
‘That's the last time I let you plan an invasion.
Now we'll have to give them beads.
This is Mallachy,’ he added.
‘He's my navigator.
We just popped out to get a beer and a burger, down-state a ways.
That was twenty-seven years ago.’
Karen sat up.
She shook the sun dress convulsively, dislodging many of the tiny insects.
She bunched it up and placed it on her thighs.
The shorter man seemed to understand.
‘He's mad,’ he told her.
‘We'll just sit a minute, if you don't mind, and get our breath.
There's no bars on this side, is there?’
Jessica was staring.
‘Mallachy,’ she said.
‘That's a hell of a name for a Taig.
If I offered you a glass of Sancerre would you bring the wrath of God down on me?’
The way she said it, the tone, the edge, shocked Karen.
Mallachy coloured, but did not go red.
It was more a darkening.
His deep eyes regarded her for a moment, then he looked at Rory.
‘You're right about the friendliness,’ he said.
‘But it's not the natives, is it?’
To Jessica, he added: ‘Where are you from?
Holywood, is it?
Slumming, are we?
Popped across the border to patronise the underprivileged from the safety of daddy's cottage?’
Rory's face took on a regret that was almost comic.
Lost opportunities.
‘Hold on, hold on,’ he murmured.
Karen, too, was hollowed.
Jessica had turned an all-day fantasy into a full-scale row in seven seconds flat.
Was she insane?
She certainly was not chastened.
Her eyes held Mallachy's, full of bold contempt.
‘Cultra, to be precise,’ she said.
‘Holywood's a little common, don't you think?
And who are you trying to kid?
If you come from round here, I'll eat your sailboard.
Five more sentences and I could tell you which street you were born in.
Where are youse slumming?
The big hotel?’
‘The big hotel!’ said Rory, trying hard.
‘We can only afford a caravan, God's honour.
It's just a tiny fortyfooter, hardly room enough to swing a champagne bottle.
What with the speedboat and the boards, we had to park the BMW twenty feet away.
A terrible long walk.
We're just two humble lads.’
Everybody seemed to hold their breath.
Mallachy turned away from Jessica, Karen studied Rory's face.
It was hopeful, open, humorous.
She could almost see him searching for another string of quips if Jessica would not thaw to the first attempt.
But she did.
She made a noise with her mouth, of contrition maybe.
She rolled onto a knee, then pushed herself upright and reached for the bottle of Sancerre in one complete, if clumsy, movement.
‘OK,’ she said.
‘Have a drink, I'll go and get more glasses.
I'm Jessica, by the way.
This is my friend Karen, she's from England and is no doubt completely mystified by now.
I wouldn't try and explain, though, they've never understood yet, have they?
Do you want a jumper, Karen?’
The sun was due to leave them shortly.
The shadows were already long.
As Karen nodded, Rory failed to suppress a shiver.
‘I'm much too hard to want a woolly for myself,’ he said, ‘but I wouldn't say no to an overcoat or two!’
‘Mallachy?’
Jessica's tone was neutral.
‘I'll be all right,’ he said.
‘Thank you.’
When she returned, they rearranged themselves more decorously on rocks and set themselves to recover the mood that had been lost.
Rory talked fast and funnily, told them of the rat they'd found in the caravan when they'd come to it, recounted the horrors of a little restaurant in Buncrana where they'd eaten the night before, and laughed at the way he and Mallachy had sailed past the beach a thousand times before deciding to boldly ask them for a drink.
Jessica admitted freely that she was a cottage-dweller, one of the idle rich that cluttered up the streets and strands of Donegal from May to September, but at least she didn't drive a gas-guzzling BMW like some she could mention.
Mallachy talked more quietly to Karen, asked her about Manchester, and what the girls did normally, and how long she'd known Jessica and Ireland.
As the sun dipped behind the trees, and then below the western hill, the prospects of the night became a silent issue.
It was a dead one, though.
Jessica and Mallachy had moved beyond armed politeness, but not significantly, and there was a palpable edge to many of their exchanges that Karen assumed meant they fancied each other, but could not climb down enough to acknowledge it.
She did not fancy Rory, though, and she was glad.
Earlier, for  brief periods of the day, she had contemplated making up a foursome not unhappily, might have taken risks, might even have ended up in bed with someone, the classic holiday encounter.
But Rory was not it, and Mallachy confused her, his powerful body and powerful dislike of something or somebody blurring in her mind.
And there was Tony, her old man.
It would not be fair to Tony.
Finally, the boys went.
Rory made several suggestions, but no one seriously took them up.
As the light began to fade, Mallachy — still dressed only in white trunks gestured towards the sailboards.
‘Come on, Rory.
Time to cross before it gets too cold.
I need a shower.’
Rory, who had been sitting next to Jessica on a large warm stone, stood reluctantly.
‘Ah well,’ he said.
‘When you've got to go, et cetera.
How long are you here for?
We've got two days.
I thought maybe…’
‘Tomorrow morning,’ said Jessica, levelly at Karen's face.
‘So you've had us, I'm afraid.
You should have kept your biting friend on a shorter leash.’
They both watched Mallachy, who was at the sailboards.
The tide was receding, there was a fair way to shift them to the water.
‘Ach, he's all right.
It's just a minor chip he's got, not the whole damned plank.
It's a pity, though.
It could have been fun.’
‘Do you go with him all the time?’ asked Jessica.
‘I'd have said he was a liability.’
‘He's not my shadow,’ said Rory, after a brief pause.
‘Cultra, you said?
Collins is my name, Rory Collins.
What's your last name?’
She laughed.
‘Jessica will do.
Look, he's on his way.
Don't forget the jumper, now, it would be terrible feeble as an excuse for coming back.’
He grinned, and dragged it quickly over his shoulders and head.
He returned it with a little bow.
‘Well, goodnight Jessica.
So sorry we can't stay!’
He turned, including Karen.
‘Bye now, Karen.
Early to bed, mind!’
The expression on his face was comical.
The girls did go early, as things turned out.
They had a pleasant evening, but the vein of wildness that Jessica had lost on meeting Mallachy never returned.
They drove down to Letterkenny and had a meal, then they walked along the lough shore in the darkness, looking at the lights across the water.
They talked of nothing major, but they returned to some things several times.
It almost seemed that Karen had a need to know what made Jessica tick, what drove her moods from hilarity to gloom and why.
Jessica answered her questions, but not always with consistency.
‘Are we really going home tomorrow,’ said Karen.
‘Or was that part of the scheme to turn them off?’
‘Up to you.
If the weather's nice, let's stay.
Of course, we'll need an excuse if the boys show up again!’
‘They wouldn't, would they?
You made it pretty clear.
Poor Rory looked like a whipped dog.
Funny, wasn't it?
Such a big strong bloke, and such a softie.
Why were you so scratchy?
Were you after Mallachy?’
‘Mallachy?
You're raving.’
‘Oh, come on.
All that sniping, all those nasty cracks.
Methinks the lady doth protest, as old Bill put it.’
‘I thought Mallachy was a nasty little bletherer.
All that crap about the cottage and patronising the locals.
A Belfast bigmouth.
I'm just surprised he didn't claim to be one of the boyos.’
They were climbing slowly back towards the cottage from the water's edge.
The surface of the lough was black and still now, mirroring the lights at Fahan and  Buncrana and between.
There were boats on moorings, a rowing dinghy plashing quietly along.
‘I don't believe you,’ said Karen, at last.
‘You fancied him, why not admit it?’
‘Karen King, I worry about you.
I hated him — well, I was indifferent.
Now Mr Collins, say.
Now there, I'd stretch a point.
Maybe I was just annoyed that his friend tagged on and mucked it up.
I couldn't exactly see you two clicking.
He'll look me up, maybe.
That would be fun.’
‘But you wouldn't even give your name!’
‘Cultra's small enough.
If he's really got a BMW, maybe he has brains that he can apply.
Anyway, even a Taig's allowed to make enquiries, isn't he?
If he has a BMW.’
‘You're terrible, you really are.
This country's mad.’
‘You're catching on.
Look, I'm feeling better, I could get great again, I'm sorry if I wrecked the evening.
Should we have another drink?
There's lots of gin.
Maybe we should drive round to Fahan and track them down.’
They did not.
Jessica poured herself a gin, but only had two sips.
Karen did not want one.
Soon they were in bed.
Stars lit the room, the occasional glow of headlights from the Buncrana road, across the lough.
It was completely quiet.
‘Did you really fancy him?’ asked Karen, as they were drifting off.
‘Rory Collins?’
Maybe Jessica was asleep, she thought.
There was a long wait for an answer.
‘I did,’ Jessica finally replied.
‘I didn't think he was soft, I put him down as shy.’
‘A shy and sensitive type,’ said Karen.
‘That's just what you need, I don't think.
You'd murder him.’
There was another pause.
‘That's what I like, maybe,’ said Jessica.
THREE
Next morning, whether or not Jessica had meant to change the plan, the weather did it for them.
The girls awoke to the sound of rain rattling on the windows and the constant clattering of downspouts filling water-butts.
The wind was north-westerly off the Atlantic, driving thick massed clouds and raising short white horses on the lough.
It did not take them long to make their minds up: mobility, Jessica said, was the nicest thing she knew about being well-off.
They pulled on jeans and jumpers, had a hasty breakfast, tipped their clothes into their cases, then scuttled through the dripping trees to the pea-green Polo.
Lunch in Dublin, asked Jessica?
Why not, why not.
Rory and Mallachy awoke with raging hangovers.
They had tried a few in the Fahan Lodge Hotel after sailing back the night before, been seen off by two ugly English girls (Morally ugly, said Rory — they wouldn't screw) and had roared into Buncrana in the BMW and done the High Street bars.
After that they had decided to get across the other side and ‘maybe give the girls a fright’, an entirely mad idea that could only end in tears, and all the better for it.
By the time they reached Letterkenny they were thirsty, so had a drink, and by the time they reached the shore road between Ray and Drumhallagh could not have pinpointed the cottage in the wood with any certainty to save their lives.
They ended sitting high above the lough sipping from a bottle of John Powers, gazing at the lights of a house below them that could have been anybody's.
‘I tell you what,’ said Mallachy.
‘Why shouldn't we try a pot-shot at it?
That'd bring them from their beds.’
The thought sobered Rory slightly, but not enough to stop him going for the gun.
It was in a concealed metal box underneath the dashboard, that he'd had one of the fitters weld in one evening for him, thirty quid and not a word to anyone, least of all Tom Holdfast.
Only he and Mallachy knew about it, and sometimes he regretted that he'd told his friend.
Mallachy could be too damn serious for fun.
It was a three-eight Webley revolver, which Mallachy derided as an infamously inefficient piece, issued for God knows how long to British Army officers, and policemen, and other types who knew no better than to accept it as their side-arm.
It had, however, been the only one that Rory had been able to lay hold of, and at first he had been proud of it.
‘English popgun,’ said Mallachy, morosely.
He held his hand out for it, but Rory hesitated.
‘We could push it through the letter-hole and pull the trigger.
No one would get hurt.’
Rory sat beside him and checked the chambers, which were full.
The cold evening air washing in from off the water chilled his face, freshened him.
‘You're pissed,’ he said.
‘We're not firing it here, and well you bloody know it.
If the gardai got to us there'd be hell to pay.
Goodbye driving licence, that would be the start of it.’
Mallachy belched.
Raw Guinness fumes, and whisky.
‘Gardai'll be pissed themselves.
This is the civilised part of our country.
You couldn't hurt a fly with that thing.
Give.’
Rory handed it across.
Mallachy spun the chambers and squinted down the barrel at the cottage lights.
‘We could hold them up with it.
Your fanny or your life.
That hard-arsed Prod.’
‘Aye, you'd need a pistol in your hand.
She'd wither  you with a look.
You'd be better off with the English one.’
‘Anybody would.
Jessica, eh?
Nose in air and reeking of cash.
Never done a hand's turn in her life.
I'd bang some sense into her.
Some humility.
Nasty wee bitch.’
He lapsed into silence, coping with a rush of drink.
Rory, whose head was clearer now, thought of Jessica, mainly with regret.
A liability, she'd called Mallachy.
Point taken.
‘If money's what you're bitching about,’ he said, half-aggressively, ‘maybe I should let you walk to Fahan.
I don't want you to betray your principles in the BMW.
Listen, if you've finished waving it about, give me the pistol back.
I want it in its place.’
Mallachy's eyes were swimming.
He got ropily to his feet and raised the pistol in his right hand.
His thumb felt surely for the safety catch and pushed it off.
‘For Christ's sake, Mallachy!’
Mallachy levelled the Webley in the general direction of the lighted cottage.
The barrel wavered in his grip.
Rory side-stepped, getting well clear, his face clouded with anger.
‘Mallachy!’
The smile became a grin.
Mallachy moved the gun from horizontal to vertical, his hand directly above his elbow.
Then, as Rory relaxed, he pulled the trigger.
In the silence of the country evening, the report had a double impact, the crack and then a bang.
It seemed to leap off the glossy surface of the black lough, it seemed to echo off the Inishowen shore, it rang in Rory's ears.
It was only a pistol shot.
In the vast silence it was nothing.
‘Bastard!’ he spat.
‘Stupid bastard!’
Mallachy handed him the Webley.
‘Fucking toy.
It wouldn't wake a mouse.
God, Rory, sometimes you make me laugh.’
They drove back more carefully than they had come, Rory well aware of every aching mile, all thirty-five and more of them.
By the time they pulled down the steep road to the caravan on the loughside he had a headache and a mouth like death.
In the morning, later than the girls across the lough, they awoke to lashing rain, and misted windows, and a drip onto the carpet.
They did not breakfast, nor did they clear up.
They'd paid for three days, so the rest could buy a cleaner, couldn't it?
The hired boards and motorboat would surely be collected.
They drove home the Derry way, and as usual it set Mallachy off.
They were waved through Customs on the Irish side without a pause, but they had to stop, like everybody else, at the Army checkpoint a few hundred yards further on.
A soldier with a machine gun, bulky in his bullet-proof jacket, asked Rory for his licence, and where they'd been.
Mallachy, dark-faced and obvious, grumbled obscenely just below his breath.
‘Near Buncrana.
Little break,’ said Rory.
He looked rich, a cream silk shirt and tailored dark casual trousers, the charcoal BMW also opulent.
The soldier's eyes were piglike.
‘Nice,’ he said.
He had a southern English accent.
‘Yours, is it?’
‘Fuck off,’ muttered Mallachy.
Both Rory and the soldier decided not to hear.
‘I'm in a wee bit of a rush,’ said Rory coldly, satisfying honours evenly.
‘If you wouldn't mind?’
There was nothing to stop them for, and the brush-off had at least been done politely.
The soldier waved them through.
The barrel of his machine gun clacked against the glass as they pulled off.
An accident.
Eighty feet beyond the stopping point, still within the armoured barricades, wreaths were piled, straying flowers, heaps of roses on the roadside.
‘Bastards,’ said Mallachy, pulling himself upright in his seat to stare.
‘That's new.
That wasn't there before.
The bastards shot somebody.’
Rory took the low-slung car cautiously over the traffic humps.
‘They do,’ he said.
‘They'll shoot you one day, mate, the way you badmouth them.
They're trigger-happy.’
‘The way you crawl to them makes me sick,’ said Mallachy.
He mimicked: ‘I'm in a wee bit of a hurry, officer.
If you wouldn't mind.’
Anger stabbed up through the hangover, but the hangover won the fight.
The stab was painful, the anger unsustained.
‘I did not call him officer, you twat,’ he said.
‘Sometimes you push your luck, you do.
I've got a gun down there, remember.
If they decided on a search we'd be deep, deep in the shit.
Both of us.
They might get really trigger-happy.’
Mallachy was slumped again.
He made a noise, half atonement, half contempt.
‘English popgun,’ he muttered.
‘They'd know at least you were not serious.’
Rory drove.
Taking the bypass, at least they missed out the Bogside, ‘Free Derry’, the streets that invariably aroused Mallachy's Republican ire.
The bleak Shantallow estate was bad enough to pass through, with its tricolours and white-painted exhortations to ‘ask about’ the latest IRA martyrs to grace the concrete walls.
He had not the stomach, literally, to wax serious about such things today.
Mallachy, indeed, was inclined to push his luck with Rory.
They had been friends for long enough, they'd been to school together for a little while until geography had pushed them apart, then they'd met up again as older teenagers, both interested in bars and snooker, then in girls.
Rory, having money, attracted loads of young fellers who would be friends, but Mallachy was better at it than most, more accomplished in apparent sincerity, and with more to offer, finally.
Both his father and his uncle had been Stickies, while several younger relatives were  reputed to have broken with the official wing and gone over to the Provies.
Mallachy, when questioned, used the need for caution with great subtlety, with sliding eyes and tapping of the nose, and quickly became accepted by admirers as definitely in there somewhere, but too deep a man to make light comments on it.
He was bold enough in his public demonstrations of hatred for the RUC and Brit soldiers, prepared to sneer and insult openly, and had certainly been ‘beaten by the bastards’ more than once.
Quick wit and cleverness at school had shifted him quickly from his roots in the Belfast underclass, and his natural proclivities had led him to the theatre set, a wee bit of acting and extra-work from time to time, usually as a gunman or a thug and once, memorably, as a rather well-fed hungerstriker.
He did well with the theatre and the media lot because he treated them contemptuously, co-opting Rory Collins as a fellow scourge of sloppy liberals, a man who for all his cash and flash was the real thing, the sort of guy you'd go into the jungle with, the sort of guy who was his father's son.
Rory, sometimes against his better judgement, lapped it up.
His father, now dead, had had a reputation, and the assumption of his mantle undoubtedly improved his standing in the eyes of the smarter people.
And got him plenty sex.
Rory's true feelings about the matter were complex but red-blooded.
After Derry, as they climbed into the rain-drenched Sperrins, Mallachy went to sleep, snoring lightly in the rhythm of the windscreen wipers.
Rory was grateful not to get the lecture about the IRA men who had lived in foxholes in the soaking bog in the fifties, hunted out into the mountains by the B-men at the end of a long and terrible campaign, but he continued with the trains of thought.
His father had been killed two years before, and Mallachy had been known to refer to him, with his grim-eyed smile, as some sort of hero, a victim of the UFF or someone like them.
Rory, secretly, did not believe it, he held to his mother's bitter view that Michael  had been a feckless drunk, another feckless Irish drunk, who had died at the wheel of his car while returning from a bout of cross-border carousing in Dundalk.
Michael had had a farm across the border, a lonely ruin near a place called Hackballs Cross, where it was said that men with guns had been known to train, and where certainly only the barest minimum of farming ever happened, enough to get the EC grants and little more.
The implication always was, the feeling, that Michael not only knew about the men in balaclavas, but was a part of them somehow, but Rory and his mother — although never discussing it — believed otherwise.
Rory knew there was a woman in the question, a barmaid in Dundalk who was quite well off, considering, who had her own little place.
This was his father's mistress, and he often wondered if his mother knew as well.
Anyhow, he did not care much.
He had the farm now, which had its uses, as well as the agricultural machinery business.
If his father had been a hardnose Republican, he had been a very strange one, for the cash side of the firm, the accountancy, was run by a level-headed Protestant called Tom Holdfast, and a couple of the men were also Protestants.
In fact, Michael had never talked to his son about politics, labelling him good-naturedly as an idle playboy.
And Rory, throughout his teens, had thought about the struggle sometimes, and determined vaguely one day to be part of the broom that swept the Brits out of his country, and drank and screwed and spent and had terrific crack, and bought the three-eight Webley once, upon a whim.
He knew he was a Republican, underneath it all, and Mallachy flattered that.
His heart was solid, and if the time would ever come…
At least he was not a drunken lecher, like his poor old man.
They were not far out of Belfast when Mallachy woke up, and all he wanted from the rest of the day, he said, was his own wee bed and no one in it.
By evening, he would be recovered, and they could go out for a jar, maybe.
What of Rosie, he asked Rory.
Would there be something going on, or had she been superseded by the scrawny one from Holywood?
‘Cultra, to be precise,’ laughed Rory.
‘No, it'll be a night out I would guess, although I'm for home myself first, to get some shuteye.
She likes me fresh, does little Rosie.’
‘Well at least you'll be able to tell her hand on heart you kept the faith,’ said Mallachy.
‘It'll save you the trouble of telling lies, and blackening your soul, and paving the way for your long sojourn in hell.’
Rory pulled the BMW over to the kerb.
They were near the university, where the nice ones lived, the area which Mallachy had graduated to since embarking on the life theatrical.
Far from all the troubles.
‘Such a thing would never enter my head,’ he said.
‘Since Rosie came along I've been lily-white.
The idea!’
‘A whited sepulchre,’ Mallachy grunted.
‘Whatever one of them might be.’
He got out and jerked his bag out after him, from the back seat.
His eyes, deep in pouched skin bruised from alcohol, still glittered.
‘I'll await your call with barely contained impatience,’ he said.
‘As I recall it, it's your round.
And keep that lanky rich-bitch from your thoughts.
I can tell, you know.’
As he picked his way through the traffic, heading south, Rory wondered if it was as plain as that.
It couldn't be, could it?
Mallachy was firing in the dark.
But he had a vivid picture of her in his mind, lean and hungry in her scarlet bathing suit.
He damn nearly took a left, made a huge detour to the east.
Towards Holywood, in County Down.
Cultra, to be precise…
FOUR
In four days time, Karen King was due to go to her Aunt Jane's on the Isle of Man, still hoping to persuade Jessica to join her on the boat.
In two days, Rory Collins tracked them down.
The girls did not come back from Dublin after their lunch.
The weather was hateful, but Jessica had friends at Trinity, and they spent the afternoon chatting and drinking in people's flats.
Being Ireland, they ended up by eating three teas, then roared out to a singing pub in Howth, then went for a major curry before returning for a ‘little party’ in a student house.
Karen crawled into a sleeping bag at three o'clock, having last seen Jessica deep in conversation with a blonde-haired willowy type with beard and pipe who had pursued her earnestly for several hours.
On the journey back, she asked if they had slept together — in fact, jocularly, if Jessica had notched up another broken heart — but Jessica shook her head, without the usual laugh.
‘I have another on my mind,’ she said, apparently not joking.
‘There's no point if you don't think you'll enjoy it, is there?’
They reached the house in Cultra at four that afternoon, to find Jessica's mother alone and rather harassed.
She was a small, dumpy woman, nothing like her only child in either looks or personality.
Daddy, she said, had had to spring some people ori them for dinner, and she was out of some basics.
On the last leg of the journey, the girls had planned a little sleep, then a bath or shower and a night out in Belfast.
But Jessica put her arm around her mother and  gave her a great hug.
OK, she said, give us the list and we'll shop for you.
Is it formal, or can we attend in rags?
Karen, who had been warned before she came to Ireland that some things in the household were extremely pukka, nevertheless marvelled at the ease with which Jessica changed her plans, and marvelled at her attitude.
There was no hint of protest, no shadow of exasperation.
The girls got their showers, a long time later, but not their sleep.
And at seven thirty, Karen found herself sipping sherry in a borrowed frock and shaking fingers politely with a lawyer and his wife, whom she disliked quite intensely after fifty seconds.
The call of duty…
Samuel Roberts — Jessica's ‘daddy’— she found an impressive man.
He was tall and broad with sleek dark hair, and a definite air of suppressed power, even violence, about him.
He was in his fifties — the only child had been a late arrival — but he exuded physical wellbeing and self-confidence, reminding her somehow of a well-dressed bull.
He was, however, quietly spoken, and also very humorous.
Jessica adored him.
At dinner, he directed everything.
He did not make it obvious, but he led the conversation, changed topics when he thought it needed it, enquired robustly of the lawyer certain things, and more gently of the females, as if to bring out gems of information they had stored in their pretty little heads.
Karen, very tired and possibly a little drunk, realised slowly that she had seen him deploy this technique before, at an earlier dinner in the house, and that somehow it was probably quite offensive.
She was too confused to pin the thoughts down, though, and Mr Roberts — catching her in introspection — threw her a question, cocking his big, handsome head on one side with complete attention to receive the answer.
Which he did not want to hear, she realised; which meant nothing to him.
In the bedroom, afterwards, she tried to couch a question which would probe some of the doubts she  had, without alerting Jessica to the fact she had them.
A mug's game, because her mind was blurred and Jessica was far too intelligent, and caught her drift immediately.
Half out of her dress, she hooted with amusement.
‘He's killing, isn't he?’ she said.
‘He plays them like game fish.
The poor saps come round here and act like they're his equals, and he plays with them.
Otherwise, I suppose, we'd all go mad with boredom.’
But he plays us, too, thought Karen.
Then she thought: Maybe he doesn't, though?
Maybe it's just me, as another poor sap outside the family circle.
To her annoyance, she could not remember the evening with sufficient clarity to be sure.
She had been drinking far too long, too much.
Twenty-four hours on tonic water.
A vow.
One day soon…
‘You mustn't worry about him,’ Jessica was saying.
She was regarding her friend quizzically, her face concerned.
‘You don't think that's the real man, do you?
It's only a wee act, you know.
He's a politician.
He has to know these people, to socialise with them.
He has to bow them to his opinions, that's the way we live.’
‘A politician?
I thought he was a businessman?’
Jessica's laugh was more muted.
No more hoots.
‘It's the same thing over here, isn't it?
At a certain level?
I don't mean he's involved in politics, he's not after anybody's vote or anything like that, but the whole place runs on politics.
There's wild men out there, Karen, some of them more like wild animals, and not all of them are Catholics, believe you me.
People like daddy have to hold the ring, they're a sort of bedrock, to make sure there's always some civilisation to fall back on.
He has to keep an eye on his own kind as well as anybody else.
He has to keep his finger on the pulse.’
Karen wondered if Mr Roberts dealt directly with the ‘wild men’, but she did not like to ask.
Although they had not talked about the weird reality of Northern Ireland since her arrival, in Manchester Jessica occasionally had a  little rant.
The thing she found galling about the English was their idea that the place was violent, dangerous, like Chicago during Prohibition, or New York.
It was a quiet, pleasant, law-abiding land in fact, with the lowest general crime rate in the British Isles.
Only that a few madmen liked to kill each other, and the British Army and the RUC, and there was nothing anyone could do to stop it.
It was to convince Karen, partly, that she'd wanted her to come and have a holiday, to see it for herself.
‘I'll have an ally then,’ she said.
‘When all the bar-room experts bore my arse off with ‘The Trouble’.
It's only you lot that are obsessed with it, you and the Yanks.
In the South of Ireland, people go to sleep if it's so much as mentioned, and in Belfast even the playwrights are growing out of it.
We don't see it, we're not affected, it's the province of the great unwashed and unlamented, it's for the morons, it's a bore.
The wild men are like loony aunties you kept in the attic in the old days, a bloody nuisance but you learn to live with it.’
To Karen, that had sounded like a lot of Jessica's most harsh and brittle statements, the harshness and the brittleness barely concealing something darker underneath.
But in truth she'd found it difficult to sustain her patronising English mix of prurience and pity very long.
Belfast seemed handsome and untroubled, Cultra opulent, the people generous and unafraid.
The police stations were like forts, with enormous wire fences and armoured observation posts, but so what?
Even Downing Street had tank-proof gates these days, and not many people lost sleep over that.
Jessica was naked now, about to shuffle her long legs into a pair of light pyjama bottoms.
They had been given separate rooms, of course, but liked to gas late into the night, and dress together, and compare clothes and hair and notes.
Karen, perplexed, was still in her petticoat.
‘Your mother doesn't seem much like a politician,’ she volunteered.
‘I can see your father having his hard side, but your mum's too nice.
In fact, I can't see how she survives with you two.
It must be like living in a power station.’
‘She has her moments,’ said Jessica.
‘She's not as soft as you might think.
I'm not saying that she winds Daddy round her little finger, she does not.
But she has a sticking point, even with him: I've seen him back down, many times.’
She was into the pyjamas.
She slipped under her duvet, watching as Karen rather moodily undressed and got into her nightie.
‘You look knackered, love,’ she said.
‘I bet you never thought you'd end up as a social accessory whenever you agreed to come here for a holiday!
You'd better keep your mouth shut, by the way, after we've gone back to the department.
A few tales here and there could wreck my cred completely!’
‘Yes,’ said Karen.
‘The Irish fire-eater putting on a cocktail gown and tights to feed her mother's social aspirations.
I know twenty men who just would not believe it.’
‘Only twenty?
Your memory's failing, so it is!
That's the mother's steel I'm telling you about.
She may give me six inches in my height, but what she tells me, goes.’
Karen sat down on the bed.
‘Is it her that's telling you to marry Parr?’ she asked.
‘How did she get married, was that sort of arranged?
I don't know, maybe it's the custom over here?’
‘What, like polygamy?’ laughed Jessica.
‘That wouldn't be so bad, would it?
Look, Karen, we're a hundred and twenty miles from Manchester in this spot, for God's sake — don't let your fantasies run away with you.’
‘So why?
Are you sure nobody's trying to make you?’
Jessica put on a grave expression.
‘There are some traditions, I will admit.
If I did marry Parr, and had two little children and made a lovely home, I'd be allowed to run off the rails a bit, so long  I was discreet.
Once a woman's done the social bit, she's allowed to take a lover, as a right.
A Protestant woman, naturally, I don't speak for the other sort.’
‘You're teasing.
Not fair, I want to…’
‘To help?’
The tease had deepened.
Jessica was smiling wickedly.
Karen stood up, shrugging.
‘Suit yourself.
If you think I'm prying.
Right, I'm off to bed.
See you.’
Jessica touched her arm.
‘Don't sulk, you fool, I can't help mocking you.
Look, honestly, I don't think I'll make any utterly appalling mistakes.
You don't know Parr.
He's interesting.
I can see all sorts of things in it, advantages.
He hasn't asked me yet, not formally, he hasn't done the man-to-man bit with my father, I'm just expecting it to happen one day, maybe.’
‘But you're mad about men!’ said Karen, her voice alive with exasperation.
‘All men, not just him.
You're…’
‘Go on.
More compliments?’
‘Just something Tony said.
You know Tony.
My little old Victorian.’
Jessica seemed cast down.
She looked almost childlike in the big white bed, staring at the duvet.
‘Let me guess,’ she said.
‘A tart?
Dick happy?’
Karen went red.
‘I'm not, you know,’ said Jessica, seriously.
‘You really shouldn't let him say things like that, should you?
I've had a few blokes, a few more blokes than you.
But if I was a feller, would Tony think I was immoral, then?’
Karen felt bad.
‘Tony's got this thing; you know.
About independent women.
He's scared of promiscuity.’
‘Sure.
All men are, aren't they?
I think deep down it's some kind of fear, a fear of comparisons.
If a woman fucks a lot of men, each one fears he's up for a rating.’
She laughed.
‘They all think they're going to suffer by  it too, that's what amazes me.
They've not got a lot of confidence in the dick department, the ones I know.’
‘Tony's young, in any case,’ Karen said.
‘God!
What a feeble thing to say!
It has a lot to do with it, though.
I hope.
He's afraid you'll lead me away from him.’
Both women were older than the people that they mixed with, in Manchester.
Karen had dipped badly in her A-levels and had done two years in a commerce school before she'd been accepted for her degree course.
Jessica was a year older still, at twenty-four.
She had gone to Switzerland, then France.
She was doing an M.Phil., on the works of Helene Cixous.
‘That could be one of his attractions, I suppose.’
Jessica was musing.
‘Parr, I mean.
He's not jealous of my flings with other men because he doesn't have that fear.
You'll have to meet him one day, Karen, seriously.’
‘Seriously,’ said Karen, ‘you've already offered me his body, haven't you?
You said he was an expert.
I suppose he's so marvellous he's confident you'd come crawling back whatever happened?
That's appalling, Jessica!’
She was half laughing, half genuinely appalled.
Jessica grinned unrepentantly.
‘You twist my words, you do.
You twist my meanings, anyway.
I said he's not afraid of comparisons, that's all.
He's not a whining, namby-pamby little git like most men are.
Look, Karen, he's got something, OK?
He's not just good-looking, and rich, and competent, he's got something else, OK?
He's got…oh, I dunno, he's serious.
He's different, you know what I mean.’
Karen thought of Tony, and Jessica knew it from her face.
Karen flushed slightly.
They understood each other.
‘OK,’ she said, a shade defensively.
‘But is it enough to marry him for?
If you aren't in love?’
‘Who says I'm not?’ asked Jessica.
Her eyes were bold, but she flushed in her turn.
‘Well are you?’
‘Oh I don't know!
Don't ask, don't keep digging at me!
It'd be a good match, wouldn't it?
It would be excellent.
He lets me have my freedom and he's everything the other boys can't be.
And I'm smart, and hard, and self-contained, and capable of handling the social situations, and beautiful, and sexy, and modest too of course!
And you're right, it sounds appalling!
I won't do it!’
‘But will you!’
Karen yelled.
‘But no one 's asked me!’
Jessica shouted back.
The laughter had returned to her, it was her gift, her curse, to laugh things out of court.
She didn't know, did she, what might happen in the next few days?
The rest of her natural?
She didn't have a clue what she really might do.
She struggled to make her face straight, to present a thinking front to Karen.
She loved Karen, so demure in her neat white nightdress, she loved her dearly.
‘But I'm not a tart,’ she said.
‘I'm not just anybody's.’
‘I know,’ said Karen, carefully, guessing she was being set up.
Whatever, she could not help responding.
‘Look, Jessica —’
’ Mind you,’interrupted Jessica.
Her voice was cracking.
‘I might have to stretch a point for Rory Collins.’
She lost control.
‘But only if he asks me nicely!
Oh Karen, Karen!
Oh!’
In her own bed, Karen calmed down slowly.
It was a mixture of amusement and exasperation with her friend, with worry added.
There was a wind outside, rushing in across Belfast Lough, soughing in the great, mature trees that surrounded the modern mansion at Cultra, buffeting the windows.
She'd like to meet this Parr, to make her own assessment, although she mocked herself because of her presumption.
Like an agony auntie in a newspaper, she thought.
Jessica probably knew ten times more about these things than she did, she'd had a million times more experience, at any rate.
But she'd like to see him, to try and set her mind at rest.
Fat chance of that, or of persuading Jessica to go with  her to Aunt Jane's in Port Erin.
As much chance of Rory Collins tracking Jessica down, of even bothering.
When they left the house next morning, to a sunny, rain-washed world, the first thing they noticed as they stepped out of the drive was a charcoal BMW with two young men in it, parked twenty yards from the front gate.
‘Maybe there's something in this religion after all,’ said Jessica.
FIVE
Mallachy had taken some persuading, and as the two young women emerged, he gave a sour grunt.
But as they swung along the road towards the BMW, his interest quickened.
The rich-bitch hardly bothered him, he did not look at her, but the English one was better than he remembered.
She was slightly taller than her dark companion, and had fair, fluffy hair that blew across her face.
She was in a short, lightweight dress and her legs swung rather beautifully — there was a lot of them to swing.
He also liked the way her breasts bounced.
OK, he thought, I'll play the gentleman.
If she's prepared to plead, I won't resist!
The clinching argument had worked along similar lines.
He and Rory had had a drink the night before, and Rory confessed he'd driven up from Belleeks early to cruise around Cultra and reconnoitre.
It was a small community, very snooty, of large detached houses set in lawns and trees.
Of the infamous ‘security’ poor people might worry about, here was none, of course— no one bothered to go murdering the rich, they did not care enough about their beliefs.
His own car was perfect camouflage, what's more.
Another rich son come to sniff around the daughters of the ruling class and (ultimately) propagate the Protestant elite.
Rory had been able to leave his car when he thought he was getting warm, and walk up people's drives until he found the pea-green Polo Fox.
While Jessica and Karen had been helping with the salmon mousse, the dark-eyed alien had been lurking at the gate…
He had been tempted, so amusing did he find the situation, to ring the doorbell  and ask if he could borrow a jack to change a wheel, or something.
Having located the house, he had roared into Belfast and met Mallachy at the Wellington Park, where they'd had a pint of Guinness beneath the photos of the famous actors.
Rory, having ducked out of meeting Rosie the night before, had said they'd pick her up later for a meal, but his talk was all of Jessica.
Mallachy could tell he'd been ridiculous from his face, and Rory had confessed immediately.
He'd found her, he said, and next day he'd either lay siege to the place, or boldly batter on the door and ask for her hand in marriage — or at least her something else in something else!
‘You're bloody demented, so you are,’ responded Mallachy.
‘She'll set the dogs on you, or call the polis.
Even worse, she might say yes, then you'll be lumbered.
Count me out.’
‘You're bloody in,’ said Rory.
‘You dog me and Rosie like a shadow whenever we want some peace to do bad things to one another, and this scam's a team affair to start with.
What's wrong with the wee English?
If I hadn't found the girl of my frigging dreams, I'd have screwed her just as happily.
You're getting too much like a poofie actor, mate.’
‘You're getting too much like a playboy,’ said Mallachy.
‘Just like your da used to call you.
Forget it, Rory, for crying out loud forget it.
She's trouble, she's of the other sort.
Call it off.’
Rory banged his glass down.
‘Oh for God's sake,’ he said.
‘Not religion, Mallachy.
Spare me that old shite, for Jesus’ sake.
Spare me that.’
They called a pause.
They both sat breathing through their noses, on the verge of anger.
Mallachy had not liked the crack about actors, because it was a line that Rory had been peddling quite strongly recently, a rod he'd found at last with which to beat his friend.
Even the fact that  he, Mallachy, drank regularly in the Wellington Park was cause for comment.
‘Ach, Jesus,’ said Rory, after thirty seconds.
‘Get off the puritanical high-horse, man.
Look at it this way.
If you refuse to come and help me out with this, you might miss getting your end away.
Which of us can afford to forgo a chance like that in these troubled times?’
Mallachy capitulated.
He took a drink.
‘Powerful arguments, colonel,’ he said.
‘Powerful arguments.
At least screwing the Brits is politically correct, whichever way you do it!
They'll tell us to piss off, so what the hell?’
The girls put on a classy act.
It was heads in air, studied indifference.
It was meant to convey that they had no recognition of the young men in the car, and therefore no interest.
This was Cultra, where an introduction was de rigueur before so much as a cocktail could be taken.
But even Karen, rather to her amazement, swung her hips just that little extra.
‘Morning, girls!’ said Mallachy, whose window was nearest to the kerbside.
‘Are youse walking to the lough to take the air?’
His smile was all sunshine.
His mood had changed.
The square, severe face had softened, although the ill-shaved chin still looked like granite.
Once more to her surprise, Karen found she was attracted.
Taking her cue from Jessica, she raised her nose a little higher.
Rory, seeing them moving past, abruptly opened the driver's door and hauled himself out.
It was a fluid movement, elegant despite the low-slung seat.
He had shed his Raybans and his smile was mixed with supplication.
‘Don't just walk off!’ he said.
‘It's us!
You wouldn't recognise us with our clothes on, maybe?’
There was a woman walking past.
Jessica glanced into her face.
‘I've told you before,’ she said to Rory, frostily.
‘Once  is all you're getting for a five pound note.
Now away with you, before I call the law.’
Rory ducked his head below the roof to smother laughter.
The woman, with supreme indifference, plodded on.
Mallachy's grin at Jessica was genuine.
‘You're mad,’ he said.
‘Welcome to the club.’
For a while they chatted, gathered round the bonnet in the sun.
Rory hinted at a trip to Strangford, borrow a dinghy maybe, and wondered if they might be interested.
Jessica glanced up at the sky.
‘There's a lot of cloud,’ she said.
‘It could turn out a wet sail.
Besides which, there's things we've got to do.
Karen's going off soon, and we want to get some special linen up in town.’
Mallachy made a face.
‘Going where?
Just when I was about to sweep youse off your feet.’
‘The Isle of Man,’ Karen replied.
‘Pretty boring, but I like it.
My auntie lives there.’
A grin flitted across her face.
‘Jessica won't come with me because there's too many millionaires.
She says they're —’
‘Ach, you wee bitch!’ said Jessica, putting her hand across Karen's mouth.
‘That's the last time you hear my pillow talk!’
‘God,’ said Rory, ruefully.
‘If you don't like millionaires, what chance have I got?
I should've worn the jeans and jersey, like my posey mate.
But we can't all be famous ack-tors, can we?’
Mallachy took a clout at him, and they regrouped.
‘We could give you a lift, though?’ asked Rory.
‘Whenever you're ready to go up into town.
You'll not want to take the little green job, the traffic's awful in the middle.
We could go over to the Amsterdam and have a drink.’
‘You're very bold,’ said Jessica, ‘but you've got the wrong types, we're not a pair of easy pick-ups, you know.
Why would we be going for a drink with you?’
‘Because we're handsome beasts,’ said Mallachy.
‘And  because poor Karen's got to go and hide her bushel in the Isle of Man.
Christ,’ he added, to Karen, ‘that really is a downer, no mistake.
For God's sake have some fun before your sentence.
The crack's good in the Amsterdam, we can start off there, see what develops.’
‘What comes up,’ said Rory, and Jessica gave a dirty laugh.
‘I'm game,’ she said.
‘But not till later, we've got things to see to, truly.
Don't you ever work, then?
Mallachy'll be resting, that's understood.’
Rory tapped the side of his nose.
‘Flexi-hours.
I'm the boss, and I pay a keen man with a brain and conscience to do the grafting.’
A timed pause.
‘One of your sort, naturally.’
‘Naturally.
The boss, though, or the boss's son?
You're a little young to be the great tycoon.’
He bowed.
‘Inherited wealth,’ he said.
‘None of youse Holywood fly-by nights with your nouveaux riches.
I'm the real thing’.
Later in the day, after their shopping expedition, Jessica and Karen drove down to the docks.
The Amsterdam, lonely these days in a small street blocked by an enormous chained steel gate that had once guarded wharves teeming with commerce, had few cars parked outside, and no BMW.
It was early yet — not even six o'clock — and they were high on spending money and trying lovely outfits on, so did not give a toss.
They ordered gins, and sat on a wooden bench before a wooden table, while Karen admired the place.
It was a relic from the great days of the docks, and had kept the feel of a sailors' and a stevedores' drinking hole, right down to the bare brick walls and flagstones.
‘It's great in winter,’ Jessica told her.
‘They've great coal fires, and bands come in, and crowds and crowds  of solid drinkers, you could stand a spoon up in the fug.
See that fire over there, by the bar counter?
See the black iron gate affair?
It's to stop the punters getting thrust onto the coals and roasted.
Terence is the only drawback.
He comes in here a lot.’
Terence was Jessica's cousin, who had come sniffing at the Cultra house a couple of times early in Karen's visit.
He was thin and keen and not unhandsome, but had found it hard to take her lack of interest seriously.
Worse, he and Jessica did not like each other much.
Karen had suspected he might be an early member of the Broken Hearts Club, but Jessica had denied it.
She would not touch him with a bargepole, she said, and never would have done.
‘Oh come on, Jessica,’ Karen said, ‘he's not that much of a problem, we saw him off OK last time.
We can ignore him.’
‘We did and we can,’ Jessica agreed.
‘He's a boring shite, though, and I don't like boring shites.’
Her face brightened, she was looking at the door.
‘See who's here,’ she said.
‘Eccentric millionaire and sidekick.
Your round, Rory!
Two gins, ice and lemon!
And as you're late, make them big ones!’
The crack was good, as promised.
Friends of Mallachy's came in, all fragile actor smiles and personalities, then friends of Jessica's.
Various schemes were mooted for the night, various groups drifted in and out.
At about eight, eating became the question, then that got overwhelmed in crisps and salted peanuts.
Jessica announced she felt pissed and would have to go onto lemonade or leave the car outside the Amsterdam all night — which raised guffaws as to what she thought she'd find left of it the morrow — and Mallachy offered to drive it home for her for twenty quid plus his taxi back, although he didn't have a licence.
Terence turned up at ten to ten with two friends nobody knew, although the threesome set Karen off, reminding her, she giggled, of the tormentors  of Fantastic Mister Fox, one fat, one short, one lean.
Terence seemed thrown to find his cousin and her friend there, and approached with a cautious, questing smile.
Jessica, in no mood for talking sense, told him it was a private party, which caused roars of laughter that were not directed maliciously at him, then told him to fuck off off her back, which raised a cheer that very probably was.
Terence came close to being stroppy until Mallachy got to his feet and squared his iron jaw, but the incident was enveloped by a late surge to the bar.
By now, the Amsterdam was heaving much as it might have been when the quays were lined with ships, although probably it was not half so fetid.
The girls got out alive, and were in their beds not long after midnight, little Cinderellas.
Dancing had been suggested but it would have bust the spell, and moves by Mallachy and Rory to get them off alone were put down with spiteful glee, accepted with good humour.
But both were kissed beside the black car then the green, and Karen felt a stirring of regret that she'd be off to Aunt Jane's and the lonely wind-blown beaches.
The following night was agreed as a farewell binge, details to be arranged after they'd rendezvoused, but possibly with a meal and then some bopping afterwards.
It had been a terrific evening.
‘Did you see that slimy bastard of a cousin of mine?’ said Jessica, as they went through their undressing routine back at the house.
‘The gob on him whenever we left the Amsterdam!’
‘Did you sleep with him?’ said Karen, unexpectedly.
‘You did, didn't you?’
‘I was very young,’ said Jessica, picking up her hairbrush.
‘We all make mistakes, don't we?’
‘Yeah,’ said Karen.
‘I wouldn't have minded making one myself tonight, with Mallachy.’
‘You little slut!’ said Jessica.
The girls were late at breakfast, but Mrs Roberts did not mind.
They found her sitting at the table with the Telegraph, nibbling toast.
Her husband had already left, but not for his office in the centre.
Business in Coleraine, she said, he would be back in time for dinner.
There was an assumption in the way she said it that brought Jessica up.
For the moment she busied herself making a fresh pot of tea, while Karen cleared the dirty plates and made room for their toast and marmalade.
Mrs Roberts declined another cup.
‘This dinner, Ma?
You know we'll be out tonight, don't you?
I never forgot to mention it?’
Mrs Roberts raised clear grey eyes to her daughter's.
Jessica, of course, was lying.
‘I doubt if you forgot anything,’ she said.
‘But Daddy is expecting it to be a sort of little God-speed thing.
Karen's leaving, isn't she?
Oh, by the way, I forgot something: Martin rang last night.
I told him you were at the theatre.’
Jessica flushed.
‘Why did you tell him lies?’ she said.
‘Parr doesn't think I stay home knitting waiting for his calls!’
‘It was a joke,’ said Mrs Roberts, mildly.
‘Martin knows your attitude to culture.
He'll ring back later.’
‘We won't be in.’
‘He'll ring back till he finds you.
It's not important.
Except he's coming over very soon.
In the next few days.’
There was a tiny silence, a catch in time.
Karen King smiled cautiously.
So Parr did have a Christian name.
‘I'm really sorry about tonight,’ she said.
‘I hope it won't upset anybody.’
She said this with conscious boldness, a pre-emptive strike.
One could not argue with the honoured guest, could one?
Mrs Roberts gave in gracefully.
‘I expect I can make him understand,’ she replied.
‘I'll try to reach him in Coleraine.
Sam does still look on Jessica as his little girl sometimes.
I sometimes think he must walk around in blinkers.’
Jessica treated her to a tight, satirical smile.
She said: ‘Try and persuade him to come home for a special tea.
High tea.
We could open a wee bottle or two, sit out on the grass.
We're only meeting friends, they'll not expect us to be sober.’
‘I expect you to be sober, if you're driving.’
‘Ach, mother!
Stop pretending to be a dry old biscuit.
Anyway, we'll take a cab, it'll be a long night I expect.
We can't send Karen to the boring Isle of Man with anything less than a nineteen-carat hangover, can we?’
‘Well all right, I'll try.
Will you run into the shops for me, get some deli?
I've got some nice salami in the fridge.
Get a piece of Brie and some Vignottes, that'll put him in the forgiving mood.’
‘Good idea,’ said Jessica.
‘I'll get some Greek stuff, too.
Some retsina.
Daddy loves that, God knows why.
I wouldn't wash my smalls in it.’
‘Jessica, you're disgusting.’
At about ten thirty, while the girls were drying their hair after showers, the phone rang.
Jessica switched off the drier and lifted the receiver beside her bed, expecting Parr.
It was Terence.
‘Hi,’ she said, then: ‘Oh, you.
What brings you out from underneath your stone in daylight?’
She laughed across at Karen, hardly bothering to cover the mouthpiece: ‘It's the wee shite cousin Terence.’
‘Listen, Jessica,’ said Terence.
‘You're very funny but  I'm giving you a warning.
As a relative.
You're playing in the wrong league with those Taigs.’
Jessica's mouth actually dropped open slightly, she was quite astonished.
‘What?’ she gasped.
‘You heard.’
There was a note of malicious pleasure in the voice.
‘I'm telling you, you picked the wrong —’
Jessica drowned out the rest with a shout of pure anger.
‘You little shit!
You cheeky bastard!’
She banged the receiver down so hard the telephone skidded off the bedside table and clattered to the floor.
She bent down and picked the whole thing up and slammed it back.
‘God, Jesus, hell,’ she spluttered.
‘I'll kill the sod!
I'll tear his nasty sneaky eyes out, so I will!
The brass neck of the guy!’
Karen took the hair drier.
Drips were running down her neck.
‘What did he say?’
Jessica stood up and strode about.
‘He's warning me,’ she said.
‘I can't believe it!
I really can't believe it!’
‘Warning you about what?’
‘Being seen with Catholics, what do you think?
He was threatening.’
‘But you weren't with Catholics.
Not only Catholics.
How could he tell?
You can't really tell by looking, can you?
That's a joke?’
‘Wish it bloody was,’ said Jessica.
Her rage had run down.
She sat on the bed, ran fingers through her damply tangled hair.
‘Oh, you can sometimes tell.
You know, in any case.
I don't know.
He was damn right, wasn't he?’
‘Mm,’ went Karen.
She burnt her ear, and yelped.
‘Does it matter?’
‘Of course it doesn't matter,’ replied Jessica.
‘Terence  is a nasty little joke, a no-hoper, a paranoid little rat.
He's a bit like Mallachy.
All mouth and trousers.’
Karen switched off the hair drier.
Jessica was not looking at her, for which she was grateful.
She decided to go for it.
‘Hold on,’ she said.
‘What do you mean, a bit like Mallachy?’
For a second Jessica was lost, then her face cleared.
She flapped her hands dismissively.
‘Oh get that hurt look off your stupid face!
You're not in love with him, are you?
I mean Terence likes to play the hard man, too.
He blethers.
He and his stupid little friends pretend to have dark secrets, contacts with the paramilitaries.
He was almost done once, for having possession of an unlicensed gun.
The family got him off the hook, of course, but it didn't go down well.
He's a fink.’
‘Just like Mallachy.’
‘Piss off, Karen.
Mallachy's an ack-tor.
I like Mallachy, he's OK.
But he's a bull-shitter, you know he is.
Give us that drier over.’
Dressed, they went into Holywood to get the high tea specialities, then extended into Belfast because retsina was not in stock locally.
They met some girlfriends of Jessica's, and ended up having cakes and coffee and a laugh.
When they got back late for lunch Mrs Roberts had gone out, leaving a note.
Martin Parr had rung again, there was a number.
‘He's persistent,’ Karen said.
‘Why don't you get it over with?’
‘It's too much fag,’ Jessica replied.
‘If I did ring he'd have moved on, anyway, he's more elusive than my daddy.
He'll get me if he really wants me.’
‘What does he do?
Honestly, none of that ‘don't know’ bullshit.’
Jessica waved a hand.
‘Honestly, I don't.
He's something in the government, I guess.
Bringing commerce to  the Province is part of it, he spends half his time with continental businessmen, Krauts and Dutchmen and Italians.
He speaks more languages than a pentecostalist.’
She had opened a tin of beans, was flopping them into a saucepan at the stove.
‘Anyway, I've a horrible feeling I don't want to talk to him just at the moment.
There's something in the atmosphere that I don't like.
I've got a premonition.’
Karen, putting bread into the toaster, waited.
Until she got fed up.
‘Go on?
A premonition of what?
Oh…’
Jessica dropped the bean-tin into the flip-top bin.
She turned.
‘Yes: Oh,’ she said.
‘I think it could just be the formal one.
I said it had to come one day, didn't I?’
‘You amaze me, Jessica,’ said Karen.
‘You're so offhand about it, so bleeding calm.
You don't even know what he does for a living properly!’
‘Calm,’ said Jessica.
‘Hah!
Calm!’
She picked a saucepan off the cooker and raised it high, as if she might fling it across the kitchen like a hatchet.
Then she put it down.
‘Well, what do you expect me to do?’ she said.
‘Go bananas?
Cut my throat?
It's what I wanted, isn't it?
It's what I decided was the best idea all round.
And let's have none of your crap about arranged marriages, OK?
I probably love him, in my own sweet way.
It's what I bloody wanted.’
The toaster popped.
Noisy in the sudden silence.
Karen watched her friend's face and saw it closed, hurting.
She thought she understood.
‘So what about Rory?’
But Jessica had caught herself again.
She ran the tip of her tongue across her upper lip, red and pointed.
‘A little bit of healthy lust,’ she said.
‘What else d'you think?
If I end up in bed with Rory I'll have a lovely time and then I'll quit.
Or maybe I won't!
What's wrong with married women with a little on the side?
You ought to try it, sometime!’
That sounded like the end of it.
Jessica had slammed a drawer open, was sorting knives and forks out, brittle, self-absorbed.
Then, unexpectedly, she said: ‘You mustn't worry, Karen, it won't come to anything, all this crap.
I'm only edgy because there might be something being planned, but I'm probably completely wrong.
Parr's probably coming for a business deal with my daddy and feels the need to have a grip of me, the usual thing, that's all.
If they have got something cooking, and if I found I didn't like it when it came, I'd tell them to get stuffed.
It's simple really, isn't it?’
Karen buttered toast, and put more bread in the machine.
She had a mental picture of Samuel Roberts' fine, hard face.
Simple.
That evening, they met the men at eight o'clock, all parties quite well oiled from the off.
Jessica and Karen, under the eyes of Mrs Roberts, had booked a taxi, and had had to take a farewell brandy with Mr Roberts while it waited, in case he should have gone to work before they rose next morning.
Rory had been down home in the country all day long, working on some bad debt accounts with Tom Holdfast, so he and Mallachy had taken a couple in the Wellington Park to wash away the nasty taste of commerce.
Rory, crazed as ever, had his car.
They drank some spirits in the Amsterdam, then repaired to a French restaurant on the Malone Road, where seats were booked.
The evening was quite riotous, with Mallachy and Rory misbehaving badly enough (in Karen's English opinion) to be thrown out.
But Rory said his ‘insult credit with the Frogs’ was high, and so it appeared.
They shrugged at his noises and Mallachy's, and winced gallically at their jokes, some of them translated for their benefit.
Being Belfast, none of the other  customers appeared to mind the row at all.
Afterwards they went to a nightclub and danced and smooched in the smoky blackness, cleaning their throats from time to time with champagne.
In the car, on their way to Holywood at past two in the morning, Karen rested in the crook of Mallachy's arm and shoulder and tried to sort out what she felt.
Drunk certainly, thank God — too drunk to suffer anything but minor guilt pangs, extremely muted and infrequent.
Excited,— perhaps, but more contented, happy to let his hand range soft across her breasts or rest on the inside of her thigh, protected by the trousers she had deliberately worn.
She liked the taste of his mouth, the feel of his tongue caressing hers, but she did not feel threatened by the thought that she might be expected to ‘go all the way’ like some poor teenager on a heavy date.
She wouldn't have minded screwing him-she thought she would have liked to — but it would not be an issue.
She looked at the back of Jessica's head, tucked sideways onto Rory's shoulder as he drove, and she smiled.
It was rather like a mid-West movie, as pleasant as that.
She turned her mouth again to Mallachy's.
They stopped on the promenade at Cultra and looked out over the blackness of Belfast Lough, alive with twinkling lights.
A ship was moving slowly down the main channel, its engines throbbing in the stillness.
‘That'll be you tomorrow,’ said Mallachy.
‘Hey, that's a pity, isn't it?’
‘This morning, not tomorrow,’ said Jessica.
‘That's a bigger pity still.
Why don't you give it up, Karen?
Go sick!’
‘Why doesn't Mallachy go too?’ said Rory.
‘What would your auntie say if you brought a Thespian?’
‘I'm not a Thespian, you cheeky bitch!’ trilled Mallachy.
‘I wear trousers because they're comfortable!’
‘Karen wears trousers because they keep out ack-tors’ hands,’said Jessica.
‘Me, I wear a skirt.’
There was a car moving along the promenade towards them, on dipped headlights.
As it got closer, its lights went up to full beam.
‘Aye-aye,’ said Rory.
‘Holywood Moral Majority Patrol, is it?’
But his humour was uncertain.
They all fell silent as the harsh glare played on them.
At about a hundred yards, the car came to a halt.
They heard the engine being gunned, like a racer at the grid.
‘Shit,’ said Jessica.
‘What's going on?’
The engine noise changed abruptly as the car leapt forward.
It came at them like a bullet from a gun, faster, faster, the tortured motor on a rising scream.
Karen screamed as well, and dug her fingers into Mallachy's hard neck.
Their white faces glared more whitely, stricken, lurid, paralysed as they all moved sideways, pushed by the sound and light, crushed across the car.
Their world became a blinding wall of white, howling towards them, too fast for thought or action.
Jessica felt her eyes close but could see the light, two hot white searchlights, hot red spots.
It was over in an instant.
There was a metallic crescendo of machinery, a sgueal of rubber, a buffeting of wind that rocked the BMW on its springs.
Then anti-climax, as they watched its tail-lights in the pitchy dark, lights that seemed to throb and waver in their seared sight before they blazed redly when the brakes went on for the corner by the sailing club slipway.
‘Go on!’ said Mallachy.
His voice was slightly strangled.
‘What are you waiting for?’
There was a moment's pause.
‘No!’ said Karen.
Rory hissed, a sound denoting amusement, possibly.
Another tiny gap.
‘Come on,’ he said.
‘Let's not play silly games.
I can't see straight, I'm blinded.’
‘Toyota,’ said Mallachy.
‘I'd put my life on it.’
‘Your own life,’ said Jessica, dryly.
‘I grew out of joy-riding ten years ago.’
‘Christ,’ said Karen, shakily.
‘Is this considered normal, this sort of thing?’
Jessica turned in her seat and touched her on the arm.
‘Just lads out for a thrill,’ she said.
‘Off-duty soldiers from the barracks, maybe.’
A snort from Mallachy: those lousy fucking Brits, it meant.
‘No harm done,’ said Rory.
‘Jasus, but it's upset the ambience, however.
And no mistake.’
Shortly afterwards, he drove them back to the house, a half a mile away.
They kissed, briefly, and made a date for about eleven the same morning, to see Karen onto the ferry.
Exhausted, the young women did not talk much as they prepared for bed.
Karen felt herself in turmoil, felt the horrible excitement of the car attack would never let her sleep.
Within seconds, she was gone.
But Jessica, lying in the soft warm darkness, pondered on the car.
She had her suspicions, and she hated them.
She hated them.
SEVEN
Tearful farewells, after a night on the toot, were not really on the cards.
Karen and Jessica both had puffy eyes, and were well aware of it.
Jessica, more for the crack than anything, wore big dark glasses, like a thirties film star.
They were not feeling too bad, considering, although Karen, as soon as she had awoken, had been flooded with guilty thoughts — the pangs unmodified, this morning, by champagne or brandy.
She tried to clear them from her mind, but was broody over breakfast.
Jessica picked up on it, but did not tease.
Sometimes she felt sorry for her uptight, upright friend.
They hardly expected to see the BMW waiting for them at the dockside, but after they had parked the car and got the ticket, they began to look at their watches, and each other.
It was a fine, bright morning, so they wandered about the quay, watching the activity at Harlands and the dinghy sails farther down the lough.
The tannoy on the Isle of Man boat gave occasional coughs, and tinny, inaudible announcements, but they did not begin to panic for a while.
‘Well,’ said Karen, ‘it's a damn good job I didn't drink enough to go overboard with Mallachy, isn't it?
Is this the Irish way?
The famous unreliability?
Where are they?’
Jessica lifted her sunglasses and scratched her nose.
‘The Irish way is to go back to some shebeen and carry on with the whisky all night long,’ she replied.
‘If that's what happened, Rory can whistle for it, the backsliding little Taig.’
'They couldn't have had an accident, could they?’ asked Karen.
‘It's terrible the way Rory drinks and drives.’
Even behind the glasses she could see Jessica roll her eyes.
‘For God's sake, Karen!’
‘But they were so keen to be here.’
She was aware of how pathetic she was sounding, so she forced herself to stop.
But she was hurt.
She thought of Tony, wincing.
The taste in her mouth was slightly sour, despite toothpaste, despite hot coffee.
‘Look,’ said Jessica, sympathetically.
‘Look, it's not the end of the world, love.
They may have been delayed.
They may have been held up.
Rory's got a long drive in, and Mallachy hasn't got a car.
It doesn't mean anything.’
‘No,’ said Karen.
‘I know.’
‘You couldn't blame Mallachy, anyway.
Could you?
I mean — suppose he's fallen wildly in love with you?
Perhaps he just can't face the parting!’
The sympathy had not been long-lived.
Karen tried to laugh.
She did not know, now, if she regretted leaving Belfast, or was glad.
‘Oh Christ,’ said Jessica, her voice completely changed.
‘Look over there.’
A car had pulled up by the gate.
Three young men had got out and were looking at them.
One raised a languid hand.
The car was white.
‘The slug,’ said Jessica.
‘Looking for a juicy lettuce.’
‘Bunce, Boggis and Bean,’ said Karen, flatly.
‘One short, one fat, one lean.’
‘I wish you wouldn't say that,’ said Jessica.
‘I don't know what you're talking about.
This could be nasty, you know.
It was them, last night.
This morning.’
Terence Rigby and his two friends were sauntering towards them.
All three glanced about the dockside, as if looking for somebody else.
‘What?’ said Karen.
Then she knew.
‘What, in the car?
Oh.
Are you sure?’
Terence was tall, quite thin.
One of his friends was, indeed, heavy around the hips and bottom, almost bellshaped, the third was small and foxy.
Somehow, the comical aspect had gone.
They were smartly dressed, they did not look like thugs, but their faces were stamped with unpleasantness.
‘Look what the tide washed up,’ said Jessica, when they were ten feet away.
‘The cheap thrill brigade.
First they come to peep, then they play at racing cars.
How many red lights did you jump, going home?’
The men stopped.
‘I don't know what you're talking about,’ said Terence.
‘You're a liar.
You were ever poor at it.
Now go away, we've got a boat to catch.
We want to say goodbye without an audience of perverts.’
Water off a duck's back.
‘Suit yourself,’ said Terence.
‘Better we should see you off than those bastards you expected, isn't it?’
‘Now what?’ demanded Jessica, irritably.
‘The only bastards here are youse bastards.
Go home Terence, you're getting in my space.
I'll tell my mother off for this.’
Terence showed a glimmer of discomfiture.
‘Your mother's nothing to do with it.’
‘Away!’ said Jessica.
‘She'll have told you we were coming for the boat.
The rest you dreamed up for yourself, you obvious wee shite.
Now go to hell.’
The tannoy on the ferry crackled and buzzed.
The level of activity on the decks had increased.
Karen did not want to miss it, any more.
‘Come on,’ said Jessica, ‘you'd best go on.
Sorry about the third-rate cabaret.
Pity me.
I have to stay here.’
Terence said: ‘You're so fucking clever, Jessica.
You know fuck all, that's your trouble.
These lovely friends of yours, who've let you down.
They'll be off killing  someone, have you not caught on yet?
Do you not know the sort you're running with?’
Jessica removed her sunglasses, staring at him.
He held her stare.
‘You may not like it, but it's true,’ he said.
‘The wee one, Mallachy O'Rourke.
Pretends to be an actor, doesn't he?
He's known.
He's on the list.
We've come to see you as a friendly warning.
All the thanks we get.’
‘On what list?’ blurted Karen, but Jessica pulled her roughly by the arm, towards the knot of people gathered at the square steel entrance to the boat.
‘Come away!’ she snapped.
‘Terence, you disgust me.
Get out of here before I lose my rag.’
‘The fingers that mould the Semtex,’ said the fat one.
He was laughing, confident, everything had changed.
‘Supple little fingers, would you say?’
Jessica drove Karen before her like an angry shepherdess.
She was furious.
‘Is it true?’ asked Karen.
‘Do they mean terrorists?
Jessica?’
Jessica made a noise to silence her.
People in the crowd were watching, curiously.
At the barrier she was not allowed on board with Karen, the officer told her it was too late.
Flustered, they kissed each other and Karen blundered into the noisy stomach of the ship.
It took her some time to orientate.
She lugged her case up the wrong stairway, came out facing the open lough, had to find her way around the superstructure.
By the time she overlooked the quayside, the decks were vibrating and black diesel smoke was pouring from the funnel.
Below her, she picked out Jessica on the concrete, scanning the upper deck, shielding her eyes.
The three young men had moved back some twenty or thirty feet, but were still watching Jessica.
Karen waved until her arm ached, but Jessica did not see.
As they moved out onto the lough, the wind began to bite through her light  dress, but she still stood, still waved.
Soon Jessica was lost among the jumbled people on the quay.
Karen went below and found a table in the cafeteria.
She stared out through the thick, salt-streaked glass as roads and fields and houses moved slowly by.
Already Northern Ireland was becoming just a pretty landscape, a backdrop to the pain behind her eyes.
She looked at Carrickfergus, across to Holywood, back to Belfast, interested by the dullness of her reactions.
Truly, it was a dump, a land of weirdos.
Someone had once called it the biggest open mental institution in the world, one of the twin armpits of the British Isles, presumably with Glasgow as the other, Glasgow before the tartan yuppies got to it.
Indubitably it was full of madmen, and women too, much as she found them fun to be with.
What was Mallachy?
Some bloke she'd snogged with, pissed, and no harm done as long as Tony never got to hear of it.
In the cold light of the morning after, she did not think she even fancied him, could hardly bring what he looked like into focus, she had gone briefly crazy that was all, gone native.
Was he a terrorist?
It seemed highly unlikely.
Did she care?
Karen sighed.
It was a land of fantasists.
She did not imagine that they would ever meet again.
Ah well roll on Port Erin and Aunt Jane.
Back at Cultra, Jessica Roberts was also cast down.
She had watched the ferry until it was tiny in the water, upset at having failed to locate her friend.
Terence had tried to talk to her as she had gone to her car, then the fat one had cat-called like a teenage oaf.
At the gateway to the dock a black sports saloon had passed across a junction, unnerving her, but she doubted it had been Rory's.
Despite her bold words to Karen, she found his failure to turn up gnawing at her, nagging, worrying.
Unlike Karen, she could recall every feature  of the face she'd kissed, lingered over his eyebrows and his hands almost obsessively.
She remembered what the fat one had said about Mallachy's hands.
Semtex.
Her stomach chilled.
The trouble was, you never knew.
How could you?
Mrs Roberts was not home, and Jessica thought about going back to bed for an hour or two.
She kept looking at the telephone beside her bed, willing it to ring, dithering.
Although she had had a shower before going to the boat, she decided to take a long bath.
She filled it with sweet oils and bubbles, shrugged her clothes off, and got in.
Remembering the phone, she went to fetch it, leaving a soaking trail across her carpet.
As she touched it it rang, and she jumped a foot.
She snatched up the receiver and sat wetly on the bed.
Her heart, she noted wryly, was thumping.
‘Hallo, yes, it's…’
It was Parr.
‘Jessica?
You sound flustered.’
Jessica felt more than flustered, she felt devastated.
‘Oh.
Do I ?
I suppose I do.
I'm all wet.
I was in the bath.’
‘It's gone midday.
All right for some.’
Parr's voice was pleasant, humorous, controlled.
She could imagine him, sitting in an office somewhere, no doubt in a sharkskin suit and Gucci slip-ons.
She could see his smile in perfect detail, ironic, thin-lipped, in command.
She felt gloom descending on her shoulders.
‘I'm tired,’ she said.
‘Is that a crime?’
Parr, as usual, appeared to understand.
Oh God, that understanding!
How it irked her.
His voice softened perceptibly.
A saint.
‘Look, I've got you at a bad moment, sorry.
I've been trying for days, though, I'm coming over tomorrow.
I'll be at Aldergrove about four, do you want to pick me up?’
Jessica did not reply.
She was fighting hard not to be  unpleasant.
What had he done, for God's sake?
She could see his smile, his sympathy, but her perception of the picture had drastically changed.
She could see another smile, overlaid on his, a looser, browner smile.
‘Jessica?’
The voice was not impatient.
Parr knew her moods, her snappiness.
In a way he revelled in it, it amused him.
He waited.
‘I'm here.
I'm thinking.’
‘Look, I'll have to go.
If it's any trouble, I'll get a car.
I'll ring McCauslands.’
She laughed.
She could have predicted it.
‘Now what?’
‘Nothing.’
She had a sudden change of mood, a swoop of the old affection.
He was very sweet, really.
‘Don't get a hire car, I'll be there.’
She would– be.
She cleared her head of Rory, all that nonsense.
Good God, was she a teenager?
‘If I'm a wee bit late,’ she added, ‘you won't have to mind, will you?’
‘I'd be astonished if you weren't.
You'll be pleased to see me, then?
Just a little bit?
I'll be bringing my DJ.’
There was something in it, something that frightened her.
The mood swoop went the other way.
‘You always do,’ she said.
‘What is it this time?’
To her suspicious ears, Parr sounded furtive.
‘Nothing too terrible.
A little family do, it was Sam's idea.
Just the four of us.’
Jessica's voice was hard.
‘Tell me, Parr.
You know I don't like mysteries.’
‘No mystery, honestly.
Well, maybe a little one.
Look, I've got to go.
I promise you you'll be pleased, I promise you.
Four o'clock, right?
I love you, Jessica.’
He hung up, and she listened to the empty line.
There was panic in her, not far beneath the surface.
This was her lover, the man who made comparisons ridiculous.
But she was hollow, not with dislike for him but with indifference, a faint and empty sickness, something that had gone away.
It was not Rory, surely?
She was attracted, but so what?
She had not had as many men as Karen gave her credit for, there was an element of blarney in all that, but there'd been quite a number, hadn't there?
Rory was just another one, he'd not stand the comparison either, Parr was the real thing.
In any case, she thought, I'll not give him the opportunity to try.
I will not.
She put the phone down and it rang again, immediately.
Her stomach dropped.
It had to be.
It was.
‘You shit,’ she said.
‘You lousy bastard.’
‘Listen,’ said Rory Collins, cheerfully, ‘enough of that old crap.
I'm off to Galway City.
Business.
Urgent.
Now.
Will I bring you with me?’
Despite herself, she let out a yell of laughter.
‘What sort of business?
For the IRA?’
‘You what?
What kind of talk is that?’
‘Terence says you're a Provie gunman.
That's why you missed the boat.’
‘Whoever Terence is, Terence is a toe-rag.
Provie gunman, my arse!
I can sing God Save the Queen in several languages, including Irish!
I missed the boat because —’ He stopped, laughing in his turn.
‘Well, come to think of it, I was detained on urgent business with a Catholic.
A wee green patriot, indeed.
Are you coming?’
‘Tell me more.’
‘If you come.’
‘Is Mallachy —’
An explosion down the phone.
‘The hell he is!
The two of us!’
‘OK.
Where shall I come to meet you?’
‘The roundabout at Moira.
Do you know it?
You can leave the pea-green there.’
She did know it, everybody did.
They fixed a time.
When the phone was in its cradle, Jessica reached for the clothes she had discarded.
Then she changed her  mind, and went back to the brimming bath.
She was exhilarated.
Oh God, she told herself, as she sank into it.
I'm going to get myself shot for this.
EIGHT
They crossed the border at Blacklion, by which time they already felt like lovers.
Indeed, when Jessica had locked her car with all the others at the Moira roundabout — travel-sharing, she assumed, hardheaded Ulstermen saving on the petrol — Rory had walked up to her and kissed her lightly on the mouth as if they owned each other.
He was in black trousers and black shirt, dark glasses, handmade shoes, and was smiling easily.
Jessica had deliberately gone the other way — she wore old jeans and a denim shirt and scuffed brown flatties.
If it was a business trip in fact, she was not about to be mistaken for the personal assistant/mistress.
‘I like the outfit,’ said Rory.
‘They'll be hard put to it to think I'm sleeping with a scruff like that!’
She grinned, delighted at this mind-reading.
‘Yeah, yeah,’ she said, dismissively.
‘Although I must say you look every inch the boss yourself.
What is this trip?’
Rory opened the passenger door of his charcoal car for her, just like a gentleman.
There was a black briefcase on the rear seat, but nothing else.
The radio was tuned to the BBC, to her surprise, but Rory switched it off as he got in.
‘Bloody news,’ he said.
‘It's enough to make you cut your throat.
I thought a bit of lunch in Sligo on the way?
I know a place.
All right?’
He had put the car in gear and was waiting to pull out.
Jessica studied the angle of his chin, his ear.
She found him lovely.
‘Sligo?
Jesus, that's a funny way to get to Galway City.
What time is the business?’
Rory took the car round the roundabout and slipped left onto the M1.
He accelerated hard, the engine humming throatily.
‘Tomorrow morning,’ he said.
‘I thought I wouldn't mention that until we'd left the pea-green incorruptible behind.
We could spin round at the Lurgan turn-off if you're furious, I could take you back to Moira?’
He glanced across.
He put on a soppy-dog look that she'd seen before.
She shook her head.
‘You're a cheeky bastard, Mister.
First you stand me up, then you kidnap me.
If the business is tomorrow, and we're off to Sligo now, presumably I don't get home tonight?’
‘You could catch a train.
It would only take three days or so.
I know a good wee hotel in Galway.’
‘Don't tell me, you've booked us in.
Mr and Mrs Smith.’
His lips curved.
‘Oh God, I made a bad mistake there.
I forgot you were a Prod.
I called us Murphy.
There's more of them in Galway City than there's ever Smiths.
Are you wild?’
‘Religion means nothing to me, Mr Collins.
Smith, Murphy, it's all one.
I was a believer until about my fourteenth birthday, when I heard an Easter service on the radio.
The Reverend Canon Something-or-the-other was rounding it off.
I can quote the fool exactly.
‘In this service so far,’ he says, ‘we've concentrated on the ordinariness of the Resurrection.’
That was it for me.
Although I'd had me doubts before, I will admit.
Are you religious, Rory?’
A van passed them on the other carriageway.
It was white, emblazoned on the sides in red.
The Saviour's Army, it proclaimed.
Ulster Still Needs Jesus.
Rory pointed.
‘Everywhere you look,’ he said.
‘Do you know, something like eighty per cent of the mad bastards in this Province are members of a church?
Ulster needs a fucking  break, more like it.
Me, I'm meant to be a Catholic.
I meant about the booking of the room, though.’
She brought a window down by pressing on a button.
Wind whipped through her hair.
‘I sometimes think I might convert, you know,’ she said.
‘There seems a lot more fun with your lot.
God, how I used to envy the Catholic girls going to the schools in Belfast when I was waiting at the bus stop like a fresh dog's dinner to be carried off to Dothegirls Academy in me big grey interlocks with double gusset for the hockey stains.
The names they have!
Conceptua, and Carmel, and Dolors, can you imagine calling someone Dolors, it means misery, doesn't it?’
‘I've an Auntie Dolors.
She's a misery.
Still, she's married to me Uncle Dennis.’
‘Do you know,’ said Jessica, ‘I was standing at the bus stop once, and two little Catholic girls came along so sweet you would have thought that they were angels.
There was a wee wasp buzzing round behind the neck of one of them, and the other one was waggling her school bag at it, at arm's length.
Then she says to her, in this lovely, trilling little voice: ‘For fuck's sake, Immaculata, will you run!’
Oh, save us, I nearly died.
Immaculata!
For fuck's sake, Immaculata.
I wanted a name like that.
I cried myself to sleep for days.’
‘Your daddy shouldn't have left you at a bus stop in an area where a girl would hear language like that,’ Rory told her, sternly.
‘What was your daddy doing not giving you a lift to school?
Were you in Holywood, still?’
‘Cultra, to be precise,’ said Jessica.
‘No, we moved there later, when he got the riches.
At this time he only ran about half the companies in Belfast.
Small-time stuff.’
Rory jumped on it.
‘Now come on then,’ he said.
‘Why ‘Cultra, to be precise’?
You always say that.
Why?’
She had a friend, Jessica explained, who lived in England, on the south coast at Brighton, which he  knew, of course?
Only she lived in the posh part, called Hove, and whenever people said ‘You live in Brighton, don't you?’ it was normal to reply ‘Hove, actually’until it almost had become the name, Hove-Actually.
Cultra, to be precise, was her adaptation.
‘There,’ she said.
‘Aren't you glad I told you that?
Aren't you just bowled over with my brilliance?
Do you have a girlfriend, Rory?’
‘Well I suppose I do,’ he said, unthrown completely.
‘And you a feller?
Is he in England, at the university, or do you have one here, as well?
I shouldn't be surprised if you have both.
Lots.
You deserve it, with thighs like yours.’
They were coming to the end of the motorway — which went nowhere, after the fashion of the country, having been built to please a politician it was said — and both of them knew a bar.
They stopped for drinks and crisps, and sat out on a low stone wall, looking at the cattle and the traffic and green fields.
Rory told Jessica about his girlfriend Rosie, not a great deal but nothing too disloyal, while she for her part realised after some moments that she was not listening with more than half an ear, but wondering what she should tell him about Parr.
Rosie worked in a chemist's shop, she heard, and was a nice wee thing, if rather young, and it was not serious.
No hearts were going to be broken, he told her with the frankest face, if he were to run off with a Protestant and have a dozen kids.
It was not true, although he damnwell wished it were.
He had spent the morning in bed with Rosie, which was why he'd missed his date down at the docks, she had rung him at ten to eight.
A morning off, she took them occasionally when she felt put upon, but this time her ire and suspicion were aimed at him.
She had a little flat in the Falls, a house she shared with girlfriends, her family home being in a village outside Derry, and she told him in blunt terms that she hadn't seen enough of  him at it for too damn long, at it or anywhere else.
Rory had driven up and slipped into her bed like lightning, because he had already cooked up the plan to try and entice Jessica Roberts to go with him to Galway, and needed to sweeten Rosie for another evening's absence.
She had gone back to sleep when he'd agreed to come, and she'd woken warm and fuzzy, naked in her narrow bed.
She was only nineteen, and short and plump and cuddly, and they loved to fuck each other.
By the time he told her he must go, and was off to the Republic for a day or two, she was placated.
They moved on after that, with Jessica dropping in bits about Parr as they occurred to her — although not that she was due to meet him the next day.
He was an Englishman, she said, an associate of her father, who'd come across for years on whatever business it was he did.
She'd thought at one time that it might be serious, be love or something weird like that, she'd even thought they could get married.
‘Who knows,’ she added, eyes out of the open window, unable to look at Rory for a moment, ‘it could still come to that.’
‘No,’ said Rory Collins.
‘That would be a waste.
God, if you're not crazy about someone, if you're not completely mad for them, where's the point in marrying?
Jesus, you're a Protestant, and your daddy's loaded, you can suit yourself in everything.
Why chuck away your freedom?’
‘Are you saying if I was a Catholic I couldn't suit myself?
Next you'll be telling me this Rosie girl's a virgin!’
‘The hell she is.
She got rid of that nonsense somewhere down the way before she came to me.
I just meant the old wedding bit, the tradition, the custom and practice.
I've always thought we had it stronger on us than you other lot, forgive me if I'm wrong.’
‘So if she had her claws in you, you'd be hard pressed not to marry her?
Is that the truth of it?’
Rory did not answer that immediately.
The subject had not arisen, but he did have qualms about Rosie, occasionally.
She had said she loved him, once, and it had chilled him, so clearly that she'd never mentioned it again.
They'd been together for eighteen months or more, and she had no one else.
She suffered so much when he did casuals that he'd lied about it for a long time.
‘Ach, no,’ he said.
‘You've got a nasty way of expressing yourself, d'you know that?
There's no question of claws in anyone.
We're just…’
‘Good friends?
Heavens, Rory!’
He shook his head, exasperated, but did not respond.
They talked of other things as they approached Blacklion, parts of Ireland they both knew, the parts they liked the best.
In the Republic, slowed down by the roads, they took a detour, turned left at Manorhamilton, followed the Bonet river, peeped at the old great mansions in the trees, dreamed up a whole world of the madly rich lurking in this lovely countryside, their children educated at the Convent of the Little Daughters of the Wealthy which they placed on Inisfree, serenely sited on the gleaming waters of Lough Gill.
‘Nine bean rows shall I have there, and a hive for the honey bee,’ chanted Rory.
‘The honey is to keep the beans on the knife, of course.
Those old poets thought of everything.’
After lobster in Sligo, eaten late and washed down with Macon Villages, they took the southward route to Charlestown, on the landward side of Slieve Gamph, then on to Claremorris and Tuam, because Rory said he didn't trust himself to take the coastal roads, to get too near the sea.
They would linger, he insisted, he could never tear himself away, they'd miss the business in the morning, and the hotel.
‘Mark you,’ he said, ‘I did have a fantasy of doing it with you on some lonely western strand, in time to the  roaring of the Atlantic.
What would you have said if I'd suggested that?’
She mocked him.
‘You didn't, so you'll never know, will you?
I never even consented to the hotel, did I?
It could be money wasted, still.
Have you legislated for that contingency?’
‘Ah well,’ said Rory, slowing to avoid a pair of sheep that had come dribbling across the road.
‘Easy come, easy go.
I'll tell you what.
Next time we'll go the coast way.
Westport and Leenane and Letterfrack.
We used to take our holidays on Inishbofin, it's where I learned to sail.
I love it, all this area.
We'll go and stay in Roundstone, there's a wonderful pub there, you'd fall in love with me as soon as step inside.’
All too easy, thought Jessica, suddenly.
She shivered slightly.
A ghost across her grave.
Christ, where was she going?
She asked about his father, then his money.
She did not want him to think, she said, that she was really rich, that was only a kind of joke.
They had the cottage in Donegal — but who didn't, these days?— they lived in Cultra, but they were only ordinary, not millionaires or anything.
She reddened as she explained, but Rory understood.
He felt the embarrassment himself sometimes, as all his friends were stony broke, and his came from his father, also.
‘It's agricultural machinery, tractors and such stuff — John Deere, naturally, they're green!
He started up twenty years ago, he could not have picked a better time.
Mind you, I only got it because he died intestate and me mother doesn't care.
He never thought I was fit to run a shoe shop.
Damn right, too!
Bad thing to say for the old feller, but I was lucky.’
‘How did he die?
He couldn't have been that old, could he?’
Rory pondered.
He was tempted to come out with the stuff about Michael and the IRA.
The men in berets at the  house at Hackballs Cross, the possibility he might once have been a gunman in his wild and woolly youth.
He did not want to, but on the other hand…it might be taken for romantic, it might impress.
He did not want to talk about the woman in Dundalk, though, the double life, the scenes and drunken violence.
‘You're such a high-born lady,’ he said, ‘I don't know what to say.
There is a possibility he was murdered by the Proddie roaring boys, the UVA or UFF or somesuch, but I don't know.
Officially, he died in a car smash on the border.
He was coming from Dundalk, he spent a lot of time there.
You know Dundalk, they say the bars are stiff with wanted men.’
‘Oh,’ said Jessica.
She gave it all some thought.
She laughed.
‘If only my daddy would see me now!’
She paused.
‘But you're not…you know — connected, are you?’
He waggled his eyebrows.
‘God, would you fancy me if I said I was?
If I told you I'd a revolver hidden in my glove compartment?
No, of course I'm not.
I agree with Tom Holdfast, he's the man who runs the company.
He says all the trouble in this land is caused by two per cent of bastards who should have been drowned at birth.
When he's in a jolly mood he blames it on their potty training.
And he's one of your sort, too.
My employee.’
‘And Mallachy?’
‘He's all talk.
A spoofer.
The only one I know that's —’ He stopped, kicking himself.
The only one he knew that well was Rosie, who had cousins in it, brothers maybe, although she never talked of it except in the most general terms.
She had emigrated with half her family to England when a baby, but they had all come back the night an auntie's house in Derry had been seen on TV news, with the sofa flying from an upstairs window and loyalist thugs pouring petrol on the geraniums.
He and Mallachy, between themselves, called her the Wee  Green Patriot, but steered clear of all argument on the subject.
‘Go on?’
‘Just a thought,’ said Rory.
‘You haven't answered me.
If you would fancy me if I was one.’
–I fancy you already,’ Jessica replied.
‘Stop fishing.
‘The only one you know…‘?’
‘Who's Terence?
You said Terence said I was a Provie gunman.
That's an awful dangerous claim to make.
I could sue for slander.’
Jessica gave up on her question.
There would be another time.
‘He's my Mallachy equivalent,’ she said.
‘The skinny one in the Amsterdam with the rat-trap mouth.
He's my cousin.
He turned up with his pals at the Isle of Man boat this morning, looking for a spot of trouble.
That car on Cultra promenade, earlier.
That was them as well.’
‘Christ, is that a fact?’
He did not seem concerned.
‘How did they know we'd be there?’
‘Well, if I'm right,’ said Jessica.
‘No, I'm sure I'm right, it's just his style.
He worked it out, I guess.
Cruised down on the off-chance and struck gold.’
‘The dirty shite.
And he says I'm…?’
‘Mallachy, to be honest; he didn't mention you.
A known terrorist, or somesuch.
He's a bletherer.
He was lifted once.
He had a gun.
Even the madmen wouldn't have him in real life, I'd put money on it.
It's nasty, though.’
She slipped another probe in.
‘This business that kept you away this morning.
You said a Catholic.
You said a wee green patriot.
You said you'd tell me.’
Rory Collins pulled the car over to the left, putting two wheels up on the pale grass verge.
Into neutral, handbrake on.
He turned his head and looked into her face.
‘Look,’ he said.
‘That was a little joke.
I'm not involved in anything like that, anything at all.
I said it for the crack, to wind you up.
I had some business I couldn't  wriggle out of.
Even playboys have got to earn the crust, OK?’
‘OK,’ she said.
‘And you haven't got a gun?’
‘I haven't got a gun.’
‘Good,’ said Jessica.
She glanced at her watch, yawned suddenly.
‘How far is it to Galway City?
Is it far?’
‘An hour, maybe.
If you want a sleep, wind the seat back.’
‘No, I don't want to sleep, I only yawned.
Is it a good hotel?’
‘It is.
It's very good.
Why?’
She yawned again, and licked her lips.
‘I think I have to have you soon,’ she said.
NINE
How soon is soon?
Rory realised quickly that Jessica was playing with him, and enjoyed the game immensely.
When they had negotiated the outskirts of the city, she demanded to be driven instantly to the hotel.
But on a bridge across the Corrib, she saw an itinerant girl, barefoot, selling flowers, and said she needed some.
They parked nearby, and bought a huge selection.
The girl, thin-faced and undernourished, watched with complete indifference as Jessica then took them to the parapet and scattered them onto the turbulent black surface of the river, where they swirled beautifully, made changing patterns as they swept between the steep stone walls.
‘I was here last Christmas,’ Jessica told Rory.
‘There were itinerants on this same bridge then, I think the same girl, in a pale cotton dress.
She had a young boy with her, about thirteen, and he had no shoes on either.
Jeans and a tee-shirt.
It was raining, sleety rain, and so cold you could have frozen milk.
I did my shopping, had some lunch, and they were still here when we crossed over, going home.
They were selling Christmas trees.
It was dark by then.’
After she had scattered the last few blooms, she went and gave the girl a five pound note, Ulster Bank pounds, not punts.
The girl said thank you, possibly, it was something not quite audible, but her face did not change.
Rory mocked Jessica.
‘The ould habits do die hard,’ he almost sang.
–Whyever don't you take her home with you to be a lady's maid!’
‘Who'd want undressing by a maid,’ said Jessica, ‘if  they had you to do it for them?
Will you bring me to the hotel now, or are you frightened?’
But the smell of fresh ground coffee took her nostrils, and they went and had almond buns and Vintage Colombian, roasted on the premises.
It was her opinion, she told Rory, that there was something awful funny going on, that this western city in the poorest part of a poor country should have such places, and such shops as they could see all round them, and such terrific style.
‘It makes Belfast look like a dump,’ she added.
‘And look at all the people in their designer clothes, and all.
Someone's kidding someone, so they are.’
They drove down to the harbour and watched the cargo boat for the Aran Islands loading up, the crew of black-haired ruddy men chatting easily to them, amused — delighted — by their northern accents and their contrasting styles.
Jessica dropped in a reference to the Playboy of the Western World, her eye on Rory, but it passed as far over him as it did the seamen.
They moved on to see some fellows working on a lovely Galway hooker raised on sleepers at the waterside, then crossed to a quiet little bar and had some Beamishes.
It was getting early evening now, it was getting time to eat.
‘For a woman who's dying for it, you're holding up extremely well,’ said Rory.
‘Now I don't know if you know it, but there's one of the finest restaurants between Paris and New Orleans just down the road.
I've seen strong men crying at the salmon mayonnaise, and the wine cellar would turn a camel off the water.
Shall we try a bite, or are you still screaming out for intercourse?’
Jessica settled for the food, over which they lingered, rounding it all off with cognac, armagnac and calvados just for the hell of it.
Back at the hotel, instead of heading for the bedroom, she led him to the bar, where they took a couple of glasses of malt and fell to chatting with some locals who'd ‘just dropped by to have a nightcap’ despite the fact it was gone midnight and they all had work to  go to in the morning.
When the bedroom door finally closed behind them, Rory was fit to burst with laughter, and told her so.
‘My God, you're such a spoofer, Jessica.
You're such a bloody teaser!’
Jessica stood facing him, her face gone serious.
She undid her denim shirt, exposing her pale breasts.
She kicked off her slip-on shoes, unbuckled and unzipped her jeans, and pushed them and her pants rapidly to the floor, where she stepped out of them.
‘I fucking amn't,’ she said.
‘I'm serious.’
‘God,’ said Rory Collins, as if mesmerised.
‘You're so very…
God.’
Jessica, still in her shirt, moved to him and undid the buttons down his chest.
She pulled the black cloth back over his shoulders, then breathed deeply at the catch of sweat, mixed with deodorant, that rose from his armpit.
She put her mouth, wide open and wet, onto his chest, among the dark curly hair beneath his neck.
She took his belt, unbuckled it, undid the top stud and his zip, and pulled the dark trousers down.
His penis, thrusting from the displaced briefs, she licked in one fast movement, root to tip, tasting the tang of its confinement, the elasticity of the drop of fluid she had generated.
Then, as she pulled the briefs down, she enclosed its head in her warm mouth, just for an instant, then moved backwards away from him, on her knees, his clothes bunched at his feet.
‘Lift,’ she said.
He lifted one foot, then the other, stepped out of his leather casuals then the clothes and socks.
Jessica stood, jerked his black shirt further down his back and off his arms, stepped back again, looked at him.
His prick was throbbing, his hair was tousled, his face wonderfully bemused.
Until she had seen him without his clothes on — so she had told herself — Jessica had not been sure.
She had undressed many men, she had read somewhere that  nakedness was safest, because with the mystery gone humans were just humans, not that exciting, nothing special, and she believed it, for some times and for some human beings.
But here she stared at something she found heart-rending, and beautiful, and horrifyingly dear, already.
‘Oh Christ, Rory,’ she said.
‘Your dick is bent.’
He looked down, his rueful dog-look on his mug.
‘It is,’ he said.
‘I jammed it in a mangle as a child.
Does it matter?’
‘You never did!’
She raised a hand, as if to strike him.
‘You bastard!
Why is it bent?’
She moved forward, and took the length of it in her right hand.
Lying in her palm, strained, weeping with desire, it had a definite bias to one side, a kink almost.
It was trembling, and so was she.
‘Don't you like it, Jessica?’ he said.
‘It's the only one I have.’
She did like it.
She could not even say so.
‘At least the bias is to the left,’ he said.
‘It's politically correct.
Unless you're a — Holy Mary, you will be, I suppose!
Cultra, to be precise!
Unionists to a soul!’
‘But inside me, the bias will go right,’ she said.
‘Unless I'm on my face.
Oh Christ, you've got to get it in me, Rory.
Now.’
She let go his penis, wet and sleek now, and grabbed both his shoulders with her hands.
She walked two paces backwards to the bed, only in her shirt, and tried to pull him on her as she fell.
He resisted, kept them almost upright.
‘I'll be no good,’ he said.
‘I'm half coming already.
You've got to give me time.
I'm just not used to this.
You Proddie girls.’
‘You're wonderful,’ she said.
‘Your dick is wonderful.
It's everything I've ever dreamed of in a cock.
Just don't be too expert.
Come in me, come now.
I couldn't stand it if you go for expertise.’
She had begun to pant, and Rory Collins had begun to come.
She fell onto the bed, he fell on her, spilling hot gushing sperm onto her belly and thighs.
Jessica grabbed his bursting penis and almost pulled it into her, then threw her legs around him and her arms and crushed him until he gasped, still coming, and then she let out a mighty hoot, a hoot to wake hotel guests two corridors away, she had come as well, once, hard, like a violent convulsion.
In the aftermath, as they instantly relaxed, Rory slipped off the bed and out of her and banged his shin against a chair and shrieked in agony.
Jessica threw herself onto the floor on top of him, and put her tongue into his open mouth and kissed him till he smothered, rubbing her wet vagina hard onto his knee and thigh.
As he seized her ears to get some breath she came once more, panting like a dog, licking at his face.
They rolled slightly apart.
‘Fuck me,’ said Rory.
‘Who said drinking dulls the senses?
I'm sorry if I —’
Jessica smacked his face, quite hard.
‘I'll kill you if you say another word.
I'm sick to death of men who want to prove something.
I shouldn't say this, because you'll just get swollen headed.
That was the best fuck of my life.
Bar none.’
Rory lay down on his back, the carpet pricking him rather pleasantly, content not to reply, not believing her, not caring.
They lay entangled, breath slowing down, slippy limbs entwined.
In a minute, they climbed into the big bed, Jessica having discarded her blue shirt, and cuddled to each other.
They turned the light out.
There was something, somewhere, in both their heads, something they had to think about, something strange.
‘It was for me as well,’ said Rory.
‘I think.’
They were drugged with sex.
They slept.
In the morning, Jessica wanted toast and coffee, not more love-making.
They rang room service, then she had to push him off like a young puppy.
‘I want to do it properly,’ he yelled.
‘I want to take control, be masterful!’
‘Bollocks,’ she replied, and slipped out, brown and naked, and whipped into the shower.
The bathroom, she noted with relief, had a very noisy extractor fan, it damn near vibrated the outer wall off.
Which was good, because she needed the lavatory, and did not know him that well yet.
Which was crazy, she reflected as she sat there, after all the things they'd done to each other with their bodies, and the things yet to be done.
She got back in the bed wet through, and sat up brazenly as the young girl brought the tray in.
She crunched through toast and marmalade while Rory had a shower, then said they had to hurry down to breakfast, she'd need the bulk to make sure a hangover did not develop from the great variety of booze they'd sunk the night before.
In the breakfast room, wet ringletty hair dripping on the tablecloth, she read out headlines from the Galway papers that caught her fancy, and earned some dirty looks.
The locals thought she was a stuck-up bitch from Belfast, which she played up to the hilt, and the other guests — foreigners, mostly Dutch and Germans by their collar sizes — were taken by her vivacity, and the calm indulgence of the quiet, handsome man opposite her, who said little, smiled a lot, and ordered a second full fried breakfast in a way that had the waitress fit to melt into his arms.
As they walked to the hotel car park across the road, two young art student types, thin girls with long black hair and western eyes, stopped and asked him if he could help them work their camera, they were out on an assignment and it wouldn't go at all, and Rory fiddled something on the side and gave it back and said: ‘That should be it now, the poor ould thing should be in a museum’, and as they went away looked back at him, and back again.
‘They love you,’ said Jessica, with delight.
‘Rory, they adore you, you should stay here forever and pack me off back home!’
And they put their arms around each other, and they hugged.
For the moment, though, he had to pack her off alone, to do the business that he'd come for.
Galway City is quite small, but your man lived just outside, so he took the BMW.
He dropped Jessica off at the harbour, because it was so beautiful and there was that little bar if she should get fractious.
‘I'll only be an hour or so,’ he said.
‘I bet you thought I was lying about the work to do, and all?
I'm not entirely a playboy, and I'm better than Tom Holdfast at some of the things we have to do.
They wouldn't like him too well down here, he's too damn dry for them.’
‘From what you tell me of the EC grants, he's too damned honest,’ Jessica laughed.
‘I suppose it's more Catholic wheels and deals, more wee green patriot doings?’
‘Ach, you're a racist just like all your sort,’ Rory replied.
‘Just that you've got such lovely thighs and things!
It's impossible to do business in this land completely straight, that's one thing the Brit government and the IRA have achieved between them.
The criminal economy.
You ask your daddy, he'll be a part of it as well, he'll be in the Brotherhood.’
‘What Brotherhood?
What, with you Taig businessmen?’
Rory stared at her, to see if she was joking.
She was not.
‘No,’ he said.
‘No, we're not in the Brotherhood.’
There was silence for a moment.
A gulf had opened up between them.
Jessica said: ‘If you mean that old guff about the Orangemen.
If you still think there's some sort of secret…
Rory, that's all old boots, surely you don't think that?’
On the quay at Galway, with the warm wind breathing through the open windows, something cooled them.
They both wanted, suddenly, to make it go away.
Jessica, seat belt off, leaned across Rory's chest, drove her head into his neck and face, embraced him.
‘Bloody nonsense!’ she said.
‘It's bloody rubbish, all of it!
I love this country, all of it, and so do you!
You don't think it's dying of corruption, do you, you don't believe the ‘criminal economy’!’
Smelling her damp hair, her stomach laid across his loins, Rory closed his eyes and believed in her, the pair of them, the breeze off Galway Bay.
‘Have you seen the time?’ he said.
‘If I want to miss a pauper's grave I'll have to go.’
They went home via Connemara, because they wanted to, and despite the fact it would make her late to pick up Martin Parr at Aldergrove (perhaps because of that).
They stopped at a small bar where everybody spoke Irish, which made Jessica feel very odd, as if she had wandered to a very foreign country, then drove out along the switchback road laid on the bog, through soil so thin and bitter that the white stone bones of Ireland protruded everywhere, mocking the tiny ancient farmsteads where generations had failed even to subsist.
At Ballyconneely, with the Twelve Pins at their backs, they went down a track and faced the black Atlantic, left the low-slung car and scrambled out along the headland until they found, amazingly, a concrete pillbox, a relic of the war in which, surely, the Free State had been a neutral?
They were high on a tumbling cliff, not the lonely strand of Rory's dream, but they wanted to make love.
The trouble was, the clouds were piling in, the breeze was stronger, it was beginning to spatter down with rain.
‘Inside!’ said Jessica, grabbing him by the hand.
‘Now that would really be a first!’
‘It'll be full of shit and newspaper.
This is where the tourists go, whenever they're caught short.’
‘Surely it's too far out?
It's only lunatics like us would make it this far.’
Apparently, Jessica was right.
The earth floor was clear of everything, the place fresh from the constant winds.
‘Not even any writing on the wall,’ said Rory.
‘So this was not the ancient site of Paddy Belshazzar's famous feast!’
‘Have you got a felt-tip?’ said Jessica.
‘We ought to put something!’
‘You're a vandal!
This is the next coast to America!’
But Jessica, kicking round the floor, found a sharp piece of broken concrete.
With the point, she scratched MUFC into the wall, in six-inch letters.
‘You're cracked,’ said Rory.
‘Are you a fan?’
‘No.
You see it everywhere.
I've even seen it on a Finnish bus-shelter.
It's traditional.’
‘It's nuts like you that put it there.
Put it down, Jessica.
Come here, now.
Come here.’
They took each other 's clothes off more slowly this time, and examined each other 's bodies in more detail.
Jessica was besotted with his crooked organ, and Rory discovered two moles inside her fine, rich pubic hair he claimed for the Pope in Rome.
He apologised in advance if he should be too expert, but Jessica conceded graciously she had nothing against technique per se, it just got in the way of animal passion sometimes.
After starting in the pillbox, they moved out into the rain on the grounds that they were Irish, and came wonderfully just as a shaft of sun broke through and warmed them, too poetical, too symbolic, too fucking marvellous for words, crooned Jessica.
‘I knew you'd be great at it,’ she carried on, whispering despite the mighty desolation in which they lay.
‘I could tell by looking at you, I just knew.’
‘It's not me, it's the place,’ he said.
‘D'you know, Jessica, it's impossible to do it badly on the coast of Ireland.
Next time, we go south, OK?
We'll make a trip of it.
Better, we'll do the circuit, we'll fuck our way round the whole of it, we'll circumnavigate.’
‘Jesus.
How long do you think that would take?
We'd be in wheelchairs.
Walking frames.’
He got up on one elbow.
‘Walking frames.
Artificial limbs.
Next — the Cork Leg!
We'll do the south-east corner!’
‘Ach, you're a fool.
Ah Christ, Rory, we must do this again.’
The sun was back now with a vengeance.
Steam rose from the scant grass they lay on, from their bodies and from the concrete of the pillbox.
His face clouded, slightly.
‘Was that in any doubt?
Of course we're going to do it again.
What's to stop us?’
Jessica thought of Parr.
He had packed his dinner jacket.
The ghost was back across her grave, in boots.
‘You're never telling me it's because I'm a Tim?’ he said.
That made her laugh.
‘Don't be ridiculous!’
The laughter died.
‘You know.
You've got a girlfriend, too.’
Rory was shut up.
He flopped back onto the wet ground.
But the Wee Green Patriot could be sorted out.
Would have to be.
‘There's nothing else?’ he said.
‘No other reason?
It's just your secret service man, is it?’
‘My what?’
‘Your man across the water.
The one you might get married to, by default.
He sounds like an agent to me.
Joke, joke.’
She smiled, without great enthusiasm.
‘He'd be more exciting if he was, maybe.’
She sighed.
‘Do you want to go with me again?
Honestly?’
He sat up, scratched his naked chest.
‘Nah, not really.
Shut your mouth, Jessica, be serious!’
She put her arms around his neck, and rested her face on his shoulder, her eyes tight closed.
Be serious…
TEN
It was not far from Moira roundabout to Aldergrove, a half an hour or so, but by the time Rory dropped her at her car, Jessica Roberts had made up her mind.
She would have been some forty minutes late, and as she had no intention of ringing home to leave a message, Parr would be in a quandary.
She tried to picture him getting flustered, but conceded bitterly that it was not possible.
He would wait for an hour or so, reading a newspaper or catching up on paperwork, then he would go to the McCausland counter and hire a car.
They knew him at McCausland's, and would treat him reverentially.
He took their biggest manual model, and he tipped at both ends, the ideal customer.
If she was quick she could be at Holywood before him, to change and have a bath.
To wash the smell and feel of Rory off her.
As she buzzed along the M1 back into town, Jessica's resentment grew to flame heat.
She could picture him so clearly, sitting waiting at the airport, that she ground her teeth at one point, made spitting noises.
At other times baffled amusement gripped her, at this bizarre reaction.
What had she done, after all, that had changed things so very much?
She'd had a wondrous time with another man, a time that filled her with remembered textures and sensations, that would have left her smiling now if Parr had not become so damned intrusive.
It was not unique though, was it?
She was going on as if she loved the fucking man, not just the fucking!
And that was not so, surely, it wasn't feasible, it was ridiculous?
‘Jessica, Jessica,’ she told herself.
‘Come on now, pull yourself together.
It's just the novelty of the left-hand  thread.
It's just the doggy smile.
It's just…oh Jessica, what are you thinking of?’
If I did love him, she thought more soberly, he'd be the first one that I have, maybe.
She felt her mind draw back from that proposition.
But how were you meant to know?
Was there a formula?
She remembered Karen saying something once (But was it Karen?
About Tony?
It seemed unlikely): ‘When I'm with him, it's like a light goes on inside my head.
When he goes, it switches off.’
She thought of Rory's hand on her bare stomach, she thought of the two art students with their camera, she saw two brimming glasses of Beamish in the dockside bar, and the light came on.
Oh shit, she thought.
Then: Stupidity!
Utter and complete stupidity!
It was the aftermath of lust, mixed up with tiredness, and too much booze.
It's the hangover from twenty-four hours of daft behaviour.
The afterglow of good food and sex and fun.
He's a good-looking man, and he makes me laugh, and he screws like the angel of light.
Love's got nothing at all to do with it, love's a stupid joke, God, how he'd laugh at me.
Or run a bloody mile, more like.
No — how he'd laugh.
When she swung into the leafy driveway at Cultra, she was relieved to find no other vehicle there.
No alien car, no McCausland.
She closed her door quietly, regretting not leaving the Polo on the road, and tried to sneak through the back way to her room.
No chance.
Her mother called her from the kitchen, then appeared, wiping her hands upon her apron.
‘Jessica?
Where in heaven's name have you been?
I wish you'd ring in when you're staying out all night, you know you've said you will.’
‘Sorry, Ma.
It was the driving.
I had a few too many.’
‘Where were you?’
Jessica had not even thought.
She screwed her eyes up.
Her brain was tired.
‘You won't believe me, I've forgotten.
Just for the  moment.
Nowhere exciting.
A party, over near Newry.
Belleeks, that was it.’
She said it because Rory was in her mind, and he had told her he lived not many miles from Belleeks, at a little crossroads in the lower hills.
She regretted saying it, obscurely.
‘In Armagh?’ said her mother, as if she disapproved.
‘Oh well.
Martin's rung.
From the airport.
He said he'd got a car, not to pick him up.
Wasn't that a little rude of you?’
Jessica was tempted to be obscene, but fought it back.
‘He's a big boy now,’ she said.
‘I'm going for a shower.’
‘Jessica.’
Her mo'ther's voice was sharp.
‘Martin has come especially, you know.
Your daddy's giving up important business.
This is meant to be something special.’
Jessica bit her lip.
She knew now where the hot resentment came from.
She knew the trouble.
‘Sorry,’ she said.
‘Yes, I know.
But honestly — I'd better have that shower, hadn't I?’
‘You see,’ said Mrs Roberts.
Then let it go, on a fading smile.
‘Oh go on, then.
But darling — do buck up, eh?’
‘I'll be all right,’ said Jessica.
It was fear.
There were messages awaiting Rory Collins when he got home, and his mother gave them to him with little interest.
His mother was a strange, fey woman who had become odder since her husband's death.
She had always been touched with religion, but as Rory had grown out of boyhood into his teens, she had been content to let him follow down his father's road to politely concealed indifference.
Rory still went occasionally to Mass with her, and sometimes, as a kind of acknowledgement of how different he was from Michael, she would talk to  him about the Church, and its importance in their lives.
Her bitterness about her husband she kept well hidden, only letting the sharp edges show sometimes when Rory would be drunk and stupid.
She allowed no liquor in the house, of any sort, and genuinely hated it.
They were quietly fond of each other, and in the bungalow Rory went on often in a way his friends would have been surprised by, a TV and slippers man, or sharing the crossword with his Mam.
‘Rosie has rung twice,’ she said.
‘I told her you were across on business, but she seemed impatient.
Is it serious with that one, Rory?
She's a firebrand.’
‘Away with you!’ joked Rory.
‘Keep your meddling nose out of my sex life, mother!’
Mrs Collins smiled an uncertain smile.
Rory had decided early to make a story out of sex, to lift it from the dark and violent mystery that he suspected had lain between his parents.
He wondered if she confessed about the things he hinted at.
He would not, indeed!
‘She said to ring as soon as you got back.
I told her I would stand over you, but nothing guaranteed.’
‘Good.
I might toss her a crumb.
Mallachy?’
‘Of course.
He said he knew what you were up to and I would lock the door against you if I so much as guessed the half of it.
I said I wouldn't ask.’
Rory made a kissing gesture with his lips.
‘Very wise.
Now listen, I need an hour's kip and a bath, so I'll settle for the bath.
First I'd better speak to Tom.
I had some success in Galway City.
You'll have your mink stole yet.’
‘Rosie said it was very urgent.’
He was on his way out.
‘They're so impatient, these young girls.
If only they knew what hot lust leads to for a woman.’
‘Amen to that,’ said Mrs Collins.
Tom Holdfast was sitting in his office before a computer screen.
He had a stillness, as if he might be stone, or  stuffed, or dead.
Rory could see him through the open door as he crossed from the bungalow, through the yard of machinery and tractors, and into the business block.
Holdfast heard him enter, but did not move, or speak.
Rory felt his banter slip away.
He was a desiccated stick, Tom Holdfast.
‘Tom,’ he said.
‘I clinched it with your man.
He wanted five per cent, we settled it for three point seven five.
Don't tell me I did wrong?’
Tom Holdfast turned slowly in his chair, his finger still resting on the button which he seemed so loath to irrevocably press.
He had a very Irish face, although he was a Protestant, pale reddened skin, white hair, hooded watchful eyes of green-flecked hazel.
He did not smile.
‘I expected four.
Well done.
The exchange rate's going our way too, it makes a change these days.
If we order it in punts today and blast it through we'll save another point oh three.
Massey's were on from Canada about those gear chains.
They'll replace them free of charge, the lot.
I have a buyer, too, for some silage.
Is that a possibility?’
‘Oh God,’ said Rory.
‘I hadn't thought of that.’
Holdfast swung back to his computer and pressed the button.
The machine began to whirr.
‘You'll maybe have to pay a man to do it, then,’ he said.
‘Now wouldn't that be an expensive pity?’
‘It would,’ said Rory.
‘I'll try and make some time.
I'll try and get some mates to help out for the crack.’
He went into the yard, yawning.
The farm at Hackballs Cross had been neglected since the sun came out.
He'd been off having fun too much.
It would be great to take Jessica, to cut the grass with her, drink champagne in his little hidey-hole, make love.
He wondered if she could drive a tractor.
Rosie could.
He dismissed that thought, impatiently.
It would be great crack to teach her, on the Zetor.
He called out to Tom Holdfast: ‘I've got a few hundred  in it, Tom.
I'll do me sums.
If I cannot make the time myself it might still be worth paying Dessie Clancy and his lad.’
Holdfast did not bother to reply.
Thinking of Jessica, Rory walked back to the bungalow.
She had told him how Karen had gone half stupid over Mallachy, when it had been just a one-night stand, a one-night stand that did not, in the event, come off.
Well, he'd had his one-night stand with Jessica, and it had gutted him, he knew how Karen felt.
Jesus, maybe it was something in the water!
He looked at his watch.
Only about an hour since he'd left her.
Jesus, he began to get a hard-on at the thought!
They hadn't made an arrangement to meet, even, she had visitors coming for the night, official ones to see her father, she had to help him ‘entertain', she'd told him not to phone at all.
He thought of Rosie.
He'd better get it over with.
He tried to think of screwing her, but could not.
It must be something in the water…
The house repeater bell began to ring, a different tone from the repeater on the business block.
It stopped, his mother appearing in the window seconds later, gesturing to him.
It was Rosie.
‘Hi,’ he said.
‘I was just on my way to call you.
How's it going?’
Rosie had a plan.
The girls were going to a concert, so the house was hers that evening.
She would get some Dublin Bay prawns and tons of garlic, if he could bring some great wine or other?
Just the two of them, it would be wonderful.
Oh shit, thought Rory Collins.
‘Oh shit,’ he said.
‘I've just been on to Mallachy.
He rang while I was reaching for the phone.
I've arranged to pick him up.’
‘Well unarrange it.’
Her voice was steely.
‘I'll try.
He was on his way out.’
It sounded implausible, even to him.
He searched for inspiration.
‘We've got to  talk, he's…a…
Look, we'll probably have to see him later, for a drink, OK?’
‘Are youse trying to tell me something, Rory?’
‘I'll ring him up.
If I'm quick I'll catch him.
Shit, I'm sorry about this.
What concert are they going to?’
‘Piss off,’ said Rosie.
She put the phone down.
He dialled Mallachy immediately, in case she should pre-empt him.
Mallachy laughed like a drain.
‘So I was right,’ he said.
‘You've been off screwing the rich-bitch.
One word to the Wee Green P, old son, and you're dead meat.
What's it worth?’
The details fixed, Rory rang Rosie back.
He'd put off Mallachy until nine o'clock, he said.
They were set for the garlic and the prawns, if they made it quick.
He managed to sound quite hurt when she informed him coldly that she'd changed her mind.
‘Ach well,’ he said.
‘A burger'll be fine by me.
That way you get to save your cash.’
He was smiling as he sank into his bath.
Parr was smiling when at last he greeted Jessica, his usual rather wolfish smile.
She had showered and put on a tracksuit, having been called down to help in the kitchen before getting into something more elegant.
She had tried to curb it, but her tongue had been like acid.
She had nagged at her mother for insisting on cooking everything herself, although she always did it, however formal the occasion or long the guest list, she had gone on and on until Mrs Roberts had snapped back in her turn, furiously.
Given that the evening was meant to be so special, so significant, they could hardly have got off to a worse start, but Jessica refused to compromise.
The whole thing stank, she said, the so-called surprise element was patronising, she was being treated like a child.
Mrs Roberts advised her to mend her temper before her daddy came home, and asked what Parr would think  if he caught her like a toddler in a tantrum.
It was at this point that he turned into the drive.
‘There,’ hissed Mrs Roberts.
‘Oh Jessica, what's got into you!
For God's sake get that scowl off your face.’
She went to open the door herself, drying her hands on a tea-cloth.
Parr, in grey slacks and sports jacket, kissed her on the cheek and came into the kitchen.
The wolfish smile for Jessica.
‘Darling,’ he said.
‘You do look beautiful when you're angry.
Was it very difficult to let me down completely?’
He laughed, showing his white, sharp teeth, pleased with his joke.
Jessica would not respond.
Mrs Roberts said ruefully: ‘She's in a foul mood, Martin.
If I were you…’
‘Oh shut up, mother,’ said Jessica.
‘Parr, go and get a drink, or something.
I'm sorry I wasn't there.
I got detained.’
‘In fact, a bonus,’ he replied.
He was in supreme good humour.
‘I went down to the harbour airport without your beady eye on me.
Useful.’
‘The airport?
But you've just got off a plane.’
‘Something to pick up.
Air freight.
Not big, but quite significant.
It's in the boot.’
Jessica caught a secret smile flitting between them.
Inside her chest, she felt her heart grow heavier.
It was their complicity, the suffocating weight of their complicity.
There was a realisation swelling in her, that her ideas of easy extrication were insane.
No snap of the fingers was going to break this spell, her complacency and her inertia had locked her deep into the circle of assumptions.
Why had she thought she could just walk away?
A picture slipped into her mind, inconsequentially, a vanload of religious freaks.
Ulster Still Needs Jesus.
Ulster needs a fucking break, Rory had added.
Oh God, and so did she…
ELEVEN
After six o'clock, when the cheap rate had started, Karen King let herself out of the side door of Aunt Jane's bungalow and walked the quarter of a mile to the public call box.
There were two reasons not to use the phone at home — the cost to a generous woman living on a widow's pension, and the impossibility of talking in the open-plan downstairs without being overheard.
She'd done it the night before when she'd tried to get hold of Jessica, but Aunt Jane had turned the radio up so loudly (to make it nice and private for her niece) that she'd hardly been able to decipher Mrs Roberts' apology for her daughter's absence.
Tonight, Karen wanted to talk to Tony.
The brevity forced on her by a pay telephone might possibly be quite useful.
The evening had turned fine in the past hour or so, although there were still dark clouds massed in the west, over where Ireland lay, but Karen had spent a useful day revising, and felt virtuous.
As she fed coins into the machine, the irony of that struck her.
Throughout the revising, to her surprise and her annoyance, Mallachy had obtruded.
She had found herself, at one stage, lightly stroking the back of her hand across her breast, and had jumped with guilt.
She would forget him, she had forgotten him, what the hell was going on?
Tony's voice, when it came through without a crackle, brought a reassuring flood of gladness.
‘Phew,’ she said, quite unaffectedly, ‘it's nice to hear you, mate!
Whose stupid idea was this separation, anyway?’
Tony was a Mancunian, a large stodgy boy a cut below  her, in her mother's ‘humble opinion’.
He had thought she needed a holiday while he was working to get some scratch together, although he had studying to do as well.
He had suggested she take up Jessica's constant offer, considered she could do her revision on the beach or wherever, had smiled comfortably at her half-serious suggestion that Jessica might ‘lead her astray’, or at least have a good go at it.
His first question was about the time she was having, his first statement that the cat — and he — were doing fine.
Karen was all at once extremely pleased that she'd done nothing terrible with Mallachy.
Well, hardly anything…
‘Only another week,’ she said.
‘I miss you, Tony love.
It's pretty boring here and I've only been at Auntie Jane's just over a day.
Still, it makes a change after Jessica's.
She's as mad as ever.’
‘She would be.
What's the latest?’
Karen limned it in, surprised at how easily she added lurid details.
‘Balladic archetypes’ sprang to her mind a good phrase, she'd try to work it in somewhere when she got back to university.
Wild black-haired boys and women who should be untouchable.
To bring it down to earth, she ended with a pet joke phrase of theirs —‘tears before bedtime!’
‘Bloody ‘ell, it sounds like it,’ said Tony.
‘Romeo and Juliet, without the poetry.
Typical Jessica.’
Karen barked with laughter.
‘She'd murder you!’ she told him.
‘She hates the way everyone goes on in England.
I'll tell you, she'll marry anyone she wants to.
Not that her mum and dad would mind, they're lovely.
It's just not like we think it is, it's completely different.
Auntie Jane kept going on about the violence.
She kept examining me for bullet wounds, I think.
She expected my clothes to be bloodstained!’
Her money was starting to run out.
She regretted, now, that she'd brought so little.
‘I'll have to hurry, love,’ she said.
‘This thing eats cash.’
‘I wouldn't mind eating you,’ said Tony.
‘You were all right there, were you?
Honestly?’
‘I did ring twice.
I was only a hundred and twenty miles from Manchester.’
‘But that was in another country.’
‘And besides, the wench is dead!
I'm running out!
I'll ring you again!
I love you!’
‘I love you t —’
Outside the phone box, she shivered in the breeze.
The clouds out to the west were thickening.
That night, Jessica Roberts found the ritual element she had always accepted in her high home life hard to bear.
She dressed for dinner in a plain dark dress, then stared for ages in the full-length mirror in her bedroom, hating herself.
She was the last down to the dining room, where the first course, a cold soup, was already laid.
Her mother also favoured a small black number, while her father and Martin Parr were like twins, except for the differences in size and weight.
Once, she supposed, she must have been impressed by formal evening wear on good male bodies, but now it annoyed her.
Her father was a big man, broad-shouldered and stout with an important stomach, and Parr was strong and wiry, like a bundle of whips with an urbane face.
But in their dinner clothes, they were twins.
All three were sipping sherry, and her father handed one to her.
‘You look lovely, darling,’ he said.
‘Your mummy says you had a mood.
No more of that, eh?
We're going to have a wonderful evening.’
‘Of course,’ replied Jessica.
‘It was probably a drink I needed.
I am my father's daughter.’
Parr, as ever, was the heart of social nicety.
Ever since he had known her parents, he had had them in the palms of both his hands.
At first it had amused her, because his Englishness could have stood out like a sore thumb, could  have made them, indeed, appear inferior in some subtle way, less smooth, less cultured, provincial.
Now even this annoyed her, the way her father toned down some of the roughness of his idiom, her mother increased the Holywood Hampstead in her voice.
The thin, handsome face, grey-eyed and intelligent, no longer struck attractive as he made his small talk.
The sense of dread within her grew alarmingly.
At table, for the first course, the three of them worked on her as if consciously.
There was something up with her, something lacking in her mood, which needed patching, turning round.
In the kitchen, preparing to bring in the meat and vegetables, her mother almost sniped at her, but pulled up just in time.
‘Darling,’ she said.
‘You must try, for your daddy's sake.
I know you're nervous, but try not to be.
We all love you, here.’
Jessica, expecting a sharp dig as the tone had initially indicated, was put out, then relieved.
She had been known to storm off sometimes, to take violent umbrage and depart.
But she could not, really, let that happen tonight.
This was a Big Occasion.
After the main course but before the pudding, her parents had decided that they could not afford to wait forever for the sunshine to break through.
Things had improved — Jessica had been seen to laugh twice, and her hands around her knife and fork were less whiteknuckled — but there was no guarantee they would go on improving.
It was noticeable, among other things, that she was drinking faster than anybody else.
Samuel Roberts, judging the moment to be ripe, rapped on the table with a silver spoon.
‘Jessica,’ he said.
‘You're not stupid, and neither are we, although you might be doubting it at the moment.
You know something's going on, we have a little surprise set up for you, and I think the time has come to let the cat out of the bag.
Martin, I have to tell you, warned me  you might take it hardly, done this way, and Martin's always right, damn him!
But I know you'll forgive me, so it doesn't matter anyway!’
Martin smiled, Mrs Roberts chuckled, Samuel Roberts beamed.
Jessica's mouth went dry, her hand reached automatically for her glass.
‘Jessica,’ said her mother.
Jessica swallowed a big swallow, notwithstanding.
Martin Parr took over.
He leaned back in his chair.
He had a slight air of apology.
‘This is the craziest thing I've ever heard of,’ he said.
‘Jessica — before it's all too late — will you marry me?’
‘Oh fuck,’ said Jessica.
‘Jessica!’ her mother snapped.
‘Well,’ said Jessica.
Parr stood.
The tension in the room was palpable.
He wanted to defuse it.
‘I could go down on my knees,’ he said.
‘We've done it all wrong, but it's not irrevocable, is it?
It's the wrong time and the wrong mood, maybe — but not the wrong question?’
‘Surely not,’ said Mrs Roberts, sounding reassuring.
Trying to reassure herself.
‘It's our wish,’ said Mr Roberts, uncomfortable as hell.
‘Our dearest wish,’ echoed his wife.
Jessica breathed deeply, trying to get a grip.
She was exhausted, she was close to tears or laughter, she was probably getting drunk, topping up on last night's alcohol.
‘Give me two minutes.’
She shot upright, her chair sliding backwards noisily across the polished floorboards.
Her glass went over with a crystal Ting!
Jesus Christ, she thought, fleeing to the lavatory across the hall.
Even Parr can't still be smiling after that!
What a disaster!
After five minutes in the lavatory, however, she was ready to return.
She had sat on the seat cover, resting her head on the porcelain of the washbasin, licking dry lips  and bringing her breathing down.
She listened to footsteps in the hall, a muttered conversation.
Shortly, she needed a pee, and had one, feeling strangely comforted by the act.
The juddering in her ribcage was quieting, the panic dying down.
Finally, she rinsed her hands, then dabbed her face with a cold flannel.
Somehow, she did not conceive that the nightmare could continue.
Somehow, the whole strange incident would have sorted itself out.
They were silent as she walked through the door to the dining room, as if they had a secret.
They seemed to stare at her, examining her face minutely for her reaction.
Across an easy chair that had been pulled forward, was something off-white and ancient, a cascade of silk and lace.
A wedding dress.
Jessica's heart rose into her mouth.
‘What is it?’ she said at last.
as if she did not know.
‘Oh Jessica!’
Her mother almost fluted it, trying to sound pleased.
‘It was my mother's,’ Parr told her, gravely.
‘And hers before that.
She had it from another member of the family.
It's an heirloom, in a way.’
Samuel Roberts said gruffly: ‘It's a piece of tradition.
A fine tradition.’
Her mother said: ‘The trouble we had in keeping it from you, Jessica.
We smuggled it across in a little plane from Blackpool.’
‘But it's English!’ said Jessica, surprising everybody with the sharpness of her voice.
‘You'd never have me marry an Englishman, surely?’
They stared at her in silence.
Parr's thin, keen face had narrowed, strangely.
He was going bald at the front, she noticed.
Had she never noticed it before?
He was thirty, older than she was, but not old enough to go bald, surely?
‘What are you blethering about?’ said Samuel Roberts.
‘We don't have any of that nonsense in this house.’
‘Martin is a Protestant, dear,’ said Mrs Roberts.
‘Well, Church of England.’
‘Good,’ said Jessica.
She was panicking, she had lost control, she was almost babbling.
‘I'm glad you're not that way inclined, prejudiced, I mean, because I can't marry Parr just now, I'm sorry, Parr.
Just now I'm going with a Catholic, who lives down in Armagh.’
Her mother had gone white, instantly.
Her father began to turn a deep and dangerous red.
Jessica held a chairback, her throat constricted, fearing she would choke.
‘Joke,’ she croaked.
‘That was a joke.
Please, Parr-I can't marry you.’
She had rendered him, at last, bereft of speech.
She could not isolate his expression, though, because her eyes were swimming.
‘But,’ her mother said, ‘you have got to, Jessica.
Think of the sacrifices Daddy's made.
Everything we've always…the way we've…’
‘A Catholic?’
Her father's sudden boom swept her mother into silence.
His eyes were wide open, the pupils fearful black.
He refilled his enormous lungs.
Jessica shouted: ‘It was a joke, a joke, a joke!
You can't just come along one day and tell me who I'll marry!
Have you all gone insane?
Do you know what year it is, what century?
I don't want his mother's wedding dress!
I don't want to be part of tradition, least of all that bloody one!’
.‘You'll shut your mouth, Miss!’ roared her father.
‘You'll shut your bloody mouth!’
He stopped, fortunately, of his own volition.
Father and daughter faced each other, breathing jaggedly.
‘Jessica,’ said Mrs Roberts, in despair.
‘You just don't understand.
We're not forcing you.
We thought you wanted to.
We thought…the culmination…all our dreams…’
‘And now you're telling me,’ Samuel Roberts started.
But Martin Parr cut him off.
He raised his voice.
‘Sam!
Jessica's overwrought, I think.
Jessica, we'd better talk this over.’
There was a break.
Jessica was standing on the polished floor, beside the polished table, in the elegant and lovely room.
She was trembling, her face ash white, her eyes lost in dark caverns.
Soon she would collapse.
Then anger swept her.
Her colour heightened, instantaneously.
Her dull eyes flashed.
‘What a good idea!’ she snapped.
‘What a pity someone did not think of that before!
But before you get around to it, chew on this: I'll do what I like, when I like, and with whom I like.
Have you got that?
Daddy?
Mother?
I'll do anything I like!’
As she flew up to her room, she thought her father might have killed her for that speech.
But she had got out of the dining room too fast for it to happen.
She locked her bedroom door behind her.
TWELVE
Rory Collins — with all the tact at his disposal, as Mallachy admiringly put it — took Rosie to the Amsterdam for their drink.
To make his point, he had taken her for a burger, nothing more, and defied her to come on too strong about it.
Then they had done a short walk along the Lagan, the mood teetering precariously between rapprochement and a set-to.
He blamed it all on business, but could not resist taunting her for expecting him to be at h-er beck and call, while disapproving that he was rich.
‘You bloody socialists are all the same,’ he said.
‘You hate me because I have the cash, you hate me because I'm not tied to a counter in a shop or slaving down the mines for it.
You hate me when I turn up in the sexy German motor, you hate me when I can't turn up at all.
You're schizophrenic, so y'are.’
Rosie, although small, could pack a hefty punch.
They had some of their best times when they were close to fighting, they had both noticed it.
She went for him now, on the grassy river bank, surprising staider strolling couples.
Rory ducked and ran.
‘It's not because you're loaded that I worry after you,’ she shouted.
‘It's that I think you're gay!
Watch him, mister!
He'll feel your arse as he goes by, I know him!’
He ran the faster, and got behind a tree.
As she came towards him, he appraised her almost dispassionately, from her beautiful dark features to her nicely bouncing tits.
Almost dispassionately.
She had tangled brown hair, a small and lively face, a dress of dark red material that clung to her.
Her legs were brown and shapely.
Rory jumped out and grabbed her round the waist.
Soon they were kissing.
‘Ach, you're not bad,’ he said.
‘For a wee wild Republican.
When the revolution comes, will you string me to a lamp post with the rest?’
‘By your balls,’ she said.
‘But only after I've made good use of them!’
‘Tonight, Josephine, tonight!’
‘Hah!
You mean when you've tucked up Mallachy into his bed!’
The row was well over, however, and meeting Mallachy on the corner near his house caused no further friction.
Mallachy, remembering the story they'd concocted, gave Rory a piece of paper which contained (he said) a ‘list of the addresses’, and Rory thanked him for his trouble.
Rosie, by now, didn't give a stuff.
There'd be a singer in the back room at the Amsterdam tonight, and the crack would be excellent.
All she had needed from her man, she had decided, was an indication that he was still keen.
Rosie, who had four brothers and six male cousins, very close, distrusted her countrymen more than most women of her age.
And that, she reflected sometimes, was saying plenty…
They had poured out of the back room in an interval of the singing and were fighting for the bar with empty glasses, when Mallachy dug Rory sharply in the side.
‘Fuck sake,’ he murmured.
‘Is that not Jessica's pushy wee cousin over there?’
Rory looked round quickly, taking in Terence Rigby and his pals, then seeking Rosie.
Terence Rigby and his pals were eyeing him and Mallachy with clear intent, and Rosie's presence would have been a great embarrassment.
She had gone to join the queue inside the ladies.
‘If he blows his mouth off before the Wee GP,’ he said, ‘I'm for castration.
Are you ready for a spot of fisticuffs?’
‘Does Paisley piss pure orange?’
Mallachy was delighted.
He hadn't had a good old fight for ages.
He especially fancied Terence's thin good looks for rearranging.
‘Are youse ordering, or just blocking up the bar?’ said a smiling, thirsty man.
Rory and Mallachy slid aside to give him preference.
Terence and his pals — Nick Day, the short one, Stewart Ross, the fat — found a corridor opening in front of them, on the surge.
The bar was packed and noisy, bursting with good nature.
Also on the surge, they were quickly face to face with Mallachy and Rory.
‘Well well,’ said Mallachy.
‘The tide flows in and brings the shit.
What are you drinking, lads?’
The main room in the Amsterdam is long and narrow.
The surge that brought them forward had cut them off.
In front the enemy, to their right the crowds at the bar counter, to their left tables and the wall.
The door was thirty feet behind them, beyond a mass of people.
Stewart Ross's face registered a minor panic.
Mallachy had it, instantly.
‘Don't shit yourself, son,’ he bantered.
‘You're among the civilised in this place.
If youse keep your nose clean.’
Terence was of sterner stuff.
He spoke to Rory.
‘Why don't you put a cover on his cage?’ he said.
‘It's you I've come to talk to.’
Rory felt enormous pressure at his back.
Over his shoulder he saw the looming shape of Arthur Dooley, the main singer of the group they'd been listening to.
He was about six feet, went eighteen stone at least.
He was a quiet man, they said, with black greasy hair and beard, a voice like rough-crushed granite when he sang.
His enormous arm went over Rory's head, the empty pint pot hanging in the smoke above the counter.
Beneath his armpit, at the same moment, Rory glimpsed Rosie returning from the ladies.
‘Look,’ he said, to Terence.
‘I don't know what you think your argument with me is, but forget it.
If you want to talk it over anytime, we'll arrange to meet.’
The little fat man, courage apparently returning, leered.
‘Christ, Terence.
He'll be hitting you with his Filofax in a wee minute.’
‘I've left it in the BMW,’ said Rory, the humour directed at himself.
‘Should we go outside and talk this over?
That would be sensible.’
It was a last throw, and it worked in part, helped by the situation.
No one in his right mind would want to start a fight in such a place as this.
But Rosie was pushing through the roaring crowd, she was only feet away.
Terence, at that moment, decided on a bit of harmless menace.
‘Listen, Taig,’ he said.
‘I'm not here to fight, I'm here to save your fucking life.
Lay a finger on my cousin Jessica —’
‘Go!’ shouted Rory, and launched himself at Terence.
His pot was in his hand still, it preceded him like the torch of justice.
It occurred to him, in that split second, to let it fall.
He did not want blood, at any price.
But in the same split second something like an iron band clamped round his waist, squeezing the breath from him and bringing him to a dead stop.
Another band encircled him from the left, two massive arms had him from behind, his feet were lifted from the ground.
Terence's face went from being startled by his attack to astonishment, then might have cracked into a smile.
Mallachy, however, unfettered by the arms of Arthur Dooley, hurled his glass, which caught Terence in the face, just above the eye, and broke.
A piece winged off and sliced a gash in Nick Day's cheek, while Stewart Ross, diving sideways, pushed a man into the table that he sat at, dislodging drinks into his girlfriend's lap.
‘Bastards!’ screeched Terence Rigby, his hand across his eye.
Stewart Ross, pushed backwards by the man that he had knocked, rammed Terence into a gaggle  at the bar.
Nick Day, blinking blood, received a push that could have been for anybody, and went onto his knees.
Rory, still crushed, his face warmed by the flavoured breath of Arthur Dooley, was drawn backwards from the fray, inexorably.
The Southern lilt, all broken glass and deep concern for human nature, murmured sadly in his ear: ‘You're savages up here, you're just like savages.’
The gigantic man turned him slowly, against the tide of people pressing to the epicentre, and planted him squarely on his feet.
Behind him the noise was changing, rising, as the fight wound up to pressure.
Before him was the face of Rosie.
‘Jessica,’ she said, her eyes like diamonds.
‘So who's this Jessica?’
Rory, jammed sideways as Arthur Dooley walked back into the action like King Kong, managed to become separated for a while.
The fight was not a long or bloody one.
There was no space to get a swing, for starters, and the mood was all wrong, anyway.
Everyone had come for a good time, and they did not want it spoiling by some wildmen.
Arthur Dooley's presence deterred the opportunists, and Mallachy was content to watch Terence and his sidekicks receive the odd punch as they were passed and bundled backwards to the door.
Rather than following, he plunged into the passageway between the bars, seeking his mate.
He was well satisfied — he'd drawn blood and not received a blow.
‘Got the bastards!’ he said triumphantly.
‘What's with that skinny-gutted shitbag, anyway?
Has he got some claim on Jessica, or something?’
‘Tssch!’ went Rory, explosively.
Too late, Mallachy located Rosie, thin-lipped with anger, jammed against a wall.
She came at them like a canoeist, breasting white water.
‘Oh God,’ muttered Mallachy.
‘Rosie, where you going?’ said Rory, seizing her arm as she powered past.
She tried to shake it off.
‘To find out who is Jessica,’ she spat.
‘He'll tell me, even if you won't, shite.’
He gripped more tightly.
‘I'll tell you, there's no need for this, I'll bloody tell you.’
The big feller had struck up the opening chords of his set, the last one of the evening.
The noise in the Amsterdam was settling to a pleasant background roar.
‘You better bloody had,’ she said.
Mallachy said, hopefully: ‘Would youse want that other drink?
My shout.’
‘You're walking home,’ said Rosie.
‘We're off.’
‘Is that wise, just at the moment?’
He made a face at Rory.
‘Someone could be waiting outside the door.’
It was a thought, but Rosie was already on her way, freed by Rory.
The men followed at a small distance.
‘Next time we'll kill the twat,’ said Rory, quietly.
‘He was in that car down on the promenade.
He told Jessica you're in the IRA.’
‘You what!’
‘You heard.
If I survive the Wee Green Patriot, we'll go for him.’
Rosie, in the doorway, was surveying them sarcastically.
‘Should I go first, in case there's trouble?
Mallachy, you are not invited.’
The road outside was clear.
Rosie stamped ahead of Rory the two streets to where they'd left the car.
For an instant, he wondered why he bothered.
Maybe he should take the opportunity…but for the moment, that was not the issue.
The issue was escaping with his eyes intact, with his skin still on his face.
The central locking clunked, they both got in.
Rory, letting go his breath, murmured: ‘Rosie.’
She cut in on him.
‘Is she a Protestant?
Of course she's a fucking Protestant, a name like Jessica.
Who knows this?
How big a laughing stock am I?’
‘For Christ's sake,’ said Rory, angrily.
‘If I'd been unfaithful, what matter if it was a Protestant or not?
For Christ's sake, Rosie, let's have none of that!’
She went silent.
Rory started up the engine and got the vehicle moving.
He headed, automatically, towards her home.
The traffic was quite heavy.
They stopped at a red light.
‘We've got to have this out,’ she said.
Her voice was dull.
‘So you haven't been unfaithful, is that what you're saying?
We can't go back to mine, the girls could be back any time.
You've got to tell me, Rory.’
He set off jerkily.
He saw an opportunity and did a screeching U-turn.
Horns blasted, headlights blazed.
‘I'll go along the coast,’ he said.
‘I don't know why I'm bothering, you've had this mood on you for days.
Three lunatics come causing trouble, and you take their side.
I've never bloody heard of Jessica.
It was a misunderstanding.’
It was a lie so blatant, it brought out Rosie's anger.
She turned on him, screeching and pummelling, but circumscribed by the fact that he was driving.
Rory, using this, allowed the car to swing over the white line, invited all the hard lads and the death-wishers to flash and honk and snarl at him.
Keep moving, that was the strategy.
Keep moving till she burned it out.
In a few minutes they were on a smaller road, with the lough in view.
Rosie, having shouted long enough, fell silent.
After a while longer, Rory nosed the car onto a patch of spare land.
There were a few lorry trailers parked there, a high wire fence along one side, nothing more.
He killed the engine.
‘Rory,’ she said.
Her voice was low.
‘You'd not betray me, would you?
Who is this Jessica?
Tell the truth.’
‘I will,’ he replied, after a tiny pause.
‘But first I need a piss.’
Then he did tell her, but he told her lies.
He told her he and Mallachy had got involved ‘through Mallachy's big mouth’ in a late-club row up the Malone Road where some students had been blowing off their mouths over politics and religion, and it had almost come to blows.
This Jessica woman — he assumed it must be Jessica, he'd never heard her name for sure until tonight — had been in danger of getting her face poked down her throat, was all.
Mallachy had stepped into the breach, and —
‘Mallachy!’
Rosie interrupted.
‘Now I know you're fantasising!
Mallachy help a woman?’
‘So would I tell you if I'd made it up?’ he said.
He knew her mood was changing, he could win.
He expelled breath, ruefully.
‘I knew you'd never believe it,’ he went on, ‘but it's true.
Mallachy steps in, and takes a punch in the mouth.
The girl takes a punch as well, and I hit some bastard with a chair.
Mayhem.
We're barred.’
Rosie was thinking, turning it over in her mind.
He waited.
‘Where is this club?’ she said.
‘What club?’
‘I told you.
Malone Road.
The Parrokeet or somesuch, I can't remember.
I'll take you there!
Now!
If you don't believe me?’
He reached for the ignition key, but Rosie stayed his hand.
She was quiet.
‘Mallachy had another brush with him later, another day,’ he said.
He was impressed with the quality of his invention.
‘That thin-faced feller.
He's got this idee fixe that Mallachy's a Provie gunman.’
He had hoped for a snort at least for this, but Rosie did not react.
Rory pressed it home.
‘Wonderful, eh?
Mallachy the Mouth!
I think he may have planted the idea that I was after her, for badness’ sake.
You know Mallachy, he never knows when to  stop.
It's all above board, Rosie.
You can check it out.
A cock-up.
A misunderstanding.’
It was so complicated, he did not understand it himself.
Rosie said quietly: ‘You're all such liars.
All of you.’
He thought that called for a reaction.
‘Listen, I was up to here with him!’ he said, vehemently.
‘Why the hell else do you think I went for him?
It was getting out of hand, the stupid innuendoes.
I'm not lying, Rosie.’
Before she could reply, before she could sort out the details, even, he launched himself on her and stopped her mouth with his.
His left arm went round behind her neck, his right snaked up inside the clinging fabric of her dress.
She struggled momentarily but not, it seemed, with serious intent.
There was spite there, a desire to hurt, but it was not unmixed.
She bit the inside of his mouth, and grabbed a handful of his hair and jerked at it.
Rory slipped the fingers of his right hand sideways underneath elastic, tangled with her pubic hair.
With her free hand, Rosie dexterously rolled the seat knob and fell slowly backwards with Rory spreading over her, repositioning himself with his right leg.
She released his hair and put that hand down between them, feeling for his buckle.
As they scratched and bit and fought each other, Rory remembered Jessica, and worried about the marks his skin would bear, but he did not worry long.
He eased inside Rosie with her pants still on, they rolled around each other like grotesques.
By the time they had finished, they had slipped down off the seat, half in front of it, half underneath the dashboard.
They lay there gasping, murmuring, Rosie with a piece of his lip still trapped, more gently now, between her teeth.
‘Oh Christ, I love you, cunt,’ she said.
‘Yours too,’ said Rory.
THIRTEEN
Inevitably, perhaps, Parr and Jessica ended up in bed together at roughly the same time that evening.
Their love-making was far more civilised, in one way.
There was certainly no biting.
Downstairs, when Jessica had stormed out, her parents had found themselves remarkably constrained by the stranger in their midst.
Mrs Roberts, indeed, who felt completely disoriented, clung on absurdly to the reality of Martin Parr.
If he had not been there, none of it would have happened, but because he was there, she had to retain control.
Before, she had seen him comfortably as part of the family, so to speak.
Now he was an audience before whom a front must be maintained.
It kept her, very specifically, from breaking down.
‘Martin,’ she said, almost urbanely, ‘you must forgive us for our daughter.
That was the most appalling display she's offered up for years.
I will quite understand if you want nothing more to do with her.’
Her husband, suffering in his own quite different way, looked at her as if she had gone crazy.
It had not occurred to him that Jessica's behaviour might have put a suitor off, more that Parr would want to go and smack her cheeky face, as he would have done.
Parr, however, walked rather stiffly to the sideboard and lifted a decanter.
‘Oh, I don't think it will come to that, June,’ he said.
His voice was not noticeably strained, although he felt it must be.
‘I wouldn't want to marry her if she wasn't wayward, would I ?
Will you take a spot of brandy?
I think we all need something.’
Samuel Roberts did.
He joined Parr at the sideboard and held out a balloon.
‘But we haven't had the pudding,’ said Mrs Roberts.
Despite herself, there was a tremor in her voice.
‘What should we do, Martin?
Shall we wait for her to come back?
To come to her senses?’
Parr poured brandy, glad of the mundane reality of the task.
He was in a state of minor shock, as if someone had kicked the chocks away.
Roberts gave a brief bark of laughter.
‘We might wait a long time!’ he said.
‘I sometimes wonder if she's any senses to come to.’
He threw back the brandy and held out the glass for more.
‘God though, what a terror!
June, let's forget the rest.
We can live without your pudding, just for once.
Why don't you clear away while me and Martin have a chat?’
He was assuming that it was a hiccup, only.
That was the public stance.
Despite his mighty hollowness, Martin Parr added to the edifice.
‘June,’ he said, ‘he's right, let's call it off tonight.
I promise you it will all turn out fine.
I can tell you I've no intention of letting her slip away from me, and I'll bet my bottom dollar she's not going, either.
It was all my fault, I did it wrong, all the psychology.’
She shook her head at that, denying it with vigour.
The sense of him as alien was withdrawing.
‘No,’ she said.
‘She's too wild, too headstrong, rude.
I feel awfully ashamed.’
I feel sick, thought Martin Parr.
He saw the wedding dress, across the chair.
It had seemed such an easy, splendid gesture.
Was there another man?
‘You've nothing to be ashamed of,’ he said.
‘She wants her head, we'll let her have it.
It's not as if she didn't warn me, is it?
I should have taken notice.’
June Roberts went and touched the old silk fabric, tears filling her eyes.
‘She loved the dress, though, Martin,’ she said, hopefully.
‘What woman wouldn't?
I'll put it away.
There were a couple of little bits, small repairs I thought I'd tackle.
Perhaps I'll get Jessica to have a go at them, whenever she's calmed down.’
She stood there, looking helpless.
There was a question on her lips she could not articulate.
‘Martin?
You don't think…?’
She wanted to bring up the Catholic, he knew.
He did not want to help her.
He wanted to bring up the Catholic, as well, with Jessica.
In a few moments, Mrs Roberts gave up.
She sighed.
‘Go you into the drawing room,’ she said.
‘I'll clear the things away.’
Before Parr knocked on Jessica's bedroom door, he stood outside and listened for a while.
There was no noise, no radio, no light, but he could not imagine she would not be waiting for him.
He had spent some time alone after talking to her father, had changed his clothes and had a shower, trying to clear his mind of all the stuff of history, the political necessities that ruled their lives, the reasons he must lie.
He was coming as a supplicator, with an open pit inside him.
Tonight he had expected to become engaged, and everything had collapsed.
Most completely, all his certainties.
Staring at the elegant, panelled door, Parr was aware of the difficulties he was facing.
He saw himself as cold in many ways, a match for Jessica in terms of their relationship.
He knew that people thought them an ideal couple because they lived their mutual lives at arm's length, they complemented each other in self-containment.
Now, he feared that he would not be able to express his real feelings.
Jessica had exploded publicly, but in private he might not be able to summon up the words.
He knew he could not plead.
The talk with Roberts, when it had come to it, had been quite short, and quite constrained.
They had sat on opposite sides of the empty fireplace in the drawing room for some time without speaking, each wondering how the subject could be broached.
In their dinner jackets, glasses of brandy in their hands, they appeared not unlike an uncle and his nephew in their London club — not much to say to each other, but quite content.
Each was aware, in fact, that they had too much to say, rather than too little.
Too many things they shared, too many secrets.
In the end, it had been Roberts who had spoken.
He was smoking a cigarette — something he rarely did outside his office — and he looked at it almost with distaste.
—‘If there is a Taig,’ he said, ‘you realise we'll have to do something about it.’
The sentence seemed to hang in the still air with the thin grey smoke escaping from his lips.
It needed no elaboration.
‘Yes,’ said Martin Parr.
‘Of course.’
Inside, he still felt raw.
Even by her own weird standards, he thought that Jessica's behaviour had been extraordinary.
He still had no idea if the reference had been a joke, as she had almost desperately claimed.
If it had been — what a joke indeed, to throw into the waters of an engagement party.
‘On the other hand,’ said Samuel Roberts, watching him through narrowed eyes, ‘she said it was a cod.
Do you believe that?’
Martin Parr drank brandy, and thought about betrayal.
He realised that the religion of a rival would be the last consideration on Jessica's agenda.
Such irony.
‘It's possible.
Not so much a joke as a rebuke, perhaps.
For springing the surprise at all.
She told me that she didn't like surprises.’
He-stopped.
‘The upshot was, though, that she turned me down.
That's my first consideration, Sam.’
The leather armchair creaked as Roberts shifted his bulk.
He was reaching for the decanter.
He let his arm drop.
‘Of course,’ he said.
‘The wedding must take place.
That's most desirable.
If you still wish it, naturally…’
Parr curved his lips, a dry acknowledgement.
‘Next time I ask we'd better drop the wedding dress, I think,’ he said.
‘If we should get a second chance, that is.
The symbolism was a bit too much for her.
The sand-filled sock of history.’
It was a kind of joke, but when their eyes met neither of them smiled.
Roberts finished his cigarette, crushing it between broad thumb and finger.
He flicked the stub into the fireplace.
‘If it comes to it,’ he said, ‘a sand-filled sock would do as well as anything.
I sometimes think a blunt instrument would do some good for her.
To make her see what's going on around her.
To make her know which side she's on.’
Parr did not reply.
He thought of other weapons, and their deployment.
He hoped that he would have no need.
When he knocked, Jessica was lying on her bed.
She was calm, her breathing even, she had possibly dozed off at some time, a thought she found quite odd.
She got off the bed and went to unlock the door without any trepidation, or any other strong emotion.
She was tired, tired of the whole thing.
She no longer knew what she was sure of.
‘Hallo,’ said Parr.
‘Can I come in?’
‘OK,’ she replied, moving to one side.
‘Do you want a light on?’
She turned it on, blinking at the sudden harshness.
She had been meaning for an age to get a dimmer fitted.
‘Jessica.
First I must apologise.
I'm not blaming them, but your mother and father thought it was a good idea, and foolishly I went along with them.
I didn't  realise it would get up your nose so quickly and so far.
She sat on the bed.
She drew her legs up underneath her, sat cross-legged on the duvet.
‘You're lucky you didn't get a bottle smashed across your head,’ she said.
‘The whole damn trio of you.
Look, Parr, what is all this holy shit, this anti-Taig shit?
It was new to me, it was a shock.’
She had no shoes on.
She began to pick a broken nail on her left foot.
She picked up the foot in both her hands and nipped the jagged crescent with her teeth.
Parr looked at the exposure of her inner thigh with a dropping sensation.
She was talking Taig already.
She was not interested in the rest of it.
But his voice, his expression, remained detached.
‘I think we were all wound up,’ he said.
‘We were all aware we'd made a total cock-up.
There'd been assumptions, hadn't there, made very happily and very easily, and they smashed into the buffers.
Your father's not a bigot, you know he isn't, he was lashing out.’
She raised her eyes to his, for the first time.
They were bright with anger.
‘So what was all this ‘sacrifice’ stuff my mother mentioned?
‘You've got to marry him, Martin's a Protestant, Martin's Church of England’?
What was that crap?’
Parr did not reply, let her grow calm once more.
Jessica began to pick the other foot.
‘I'm telling you the truth,’ he said.
‘As far as I know it.
I imagine it was all part of the same reaction.
Somehow not unnaturally, I'd say — they got it into their heads that you'd be…well, I don't want to get my nose punched here, do I ?
You know what I mean.’
‘That I'd jump at the chance of marrying you.
That I'd be overjoyed.’
‘That sort of thing.
Not precisely that, but that sort of thing.
Not just them, me too.
Your reaction did come as a shock, you know.
Rather like putting up a mouth to get a  kiss and getting a blow instead.
A bucket of iced water in the face.
Your father just lost his cool a little, I suppose.’
He tried to leaven it with a minor joke.
‘To be fair, you were babbling yourself, at one point.’
‘But my daddy babbled out the truth.’
Her voice was still hard.
She glanced at him, expecting a reaction.
Parr did not react.
All right, you bastard, thought Jessica.
‘Is he in the Brotherhood?’ she asked.
The eyebrows moved, at least.
He dropped into a wicker chair too casually, among discarded clothes.
He did not reply.
‘Well?’
‘I don't know precisely what you mean.’
Jessica had dredged her memory since Galway City.
A part of thinking about Rory Collins.
Rory Collins.
Jesus, that was miles away, light years!
Where was Rory Collins now?
‘I think you know quite well.
I think it's the sort of thing you'd make damn sure you know, despite you're English.
You do business with my daddy, you're very close to him in that way.
Is he a member?’
If he admitted nothing, she was done.
She had vague memories, only, to build on.
She had been out with a young lawyer once, a bumptious and ambitious man, and a boring one.
He had told a self-regarding tale of secret arms stores, battle plans for if the Catholics should ever pervert the British government into some dreadful sell-out of the Protestants, a scheme of dirty tricks clandestinely organised by some of the highest in the land.
The Brotherhood, perhaps?
But she had hardly listened, dismissing it as tedious fantasy.
‘I've heard of them,’ said Parr, surprisingly.
‘I hear lots of things in my line, naturally, I talk to so many people.
They're meant to be a bunch so wedded to the mainland, so loyal to the English crown, that they'd even fight against the government if they thought it necessary.
It's a myth, it must be.
I've certainly never come across any evidence that it exists.’
‘What is your line?’ asked Jessica.
‘The truth, Parr.
You've never really told me, have you?
You've always been so very vague.’
You've never really asked, thought Martin Parr.
You've never really seemed to care.
‘At bottom I'm a conduit,’ he said.
‘My brief is to channel funds from Britain into the Province.
There have been plenty of them.
Millions.
Billions.
I prime pumps.
Help industry.
Oil cogs.’
For a moment it looked as if she'd ask him more, she raised her face to his.
So Parr pre-empted her.
‘Jessica, I've heard all this stuff before, it's nonsense, honestly, romantic bilge dreamed up by journalists, mainly.
If you're talking moonshine, why stop at the Brotherhood?
Why not mention the UCCC, the Committee?
Why not the inner force, the inner circle?
You could mention MI5, you could bring in Dublin elements.
Everything that's happened here, everything that's gone wrong, is meant to be a part of some coherent plan — the overthrow of O'Neill, the destruction of the power sharing, the jamming of the Anglo-Irish Agreement works, screwing poor old Peter Brooke.
It's not like that, you know it isn't.
There are destroyers behind the wings, maybe, but they don't play a jolly little team game, it doesn't work that way.
Ireland's complicated.’
Jessica was rocking herself, her arms folded in her lap.
She felt desolate.
‘Being Irish is complicated,’ she said.
‘That's true enough.
You lot have never understood.’
Self pity now, she thought.
He ought to pounce on that.
But Parr said carefully: ‘A cliche, but probably it's true.’
And she thought, Smug, you English are so fucking smug.
‘The problem is you think you have the right to try,’ she said.
She laughed, self pity over.
‘The problem is  that half of us think we're British anyway, so we can't complain I guess.’
She stopped, her mood sagged again.
‘Oh Parr, my daddy's not a terrorist, is he?’
‘What!’
She stared at him.
She could not read his face at all, that was the problem.
Was that shock real?
‘You know what I mean.
If Britain gives us all those billions, to keep us going in spite of all the trouble, might not the cash dry up if we had peace?
Might not some businessmen, for instance…oh, you know.
He's not in the back room somewhere, is he, feeding funds and silent approbation to the gunmen?
Somebody's behind them, Parr, the murderers and bombers.
Someone's behind them.’
‘Your cynicism's breathtaking,’ said Parr.
‘But that aside, I don't believe you're right.
It's a class-based thing, the terrorism, it's not a lot to do with people like us, but I think you're underestimating them.
Just because they're brutes doesn't mean they're not capable of doing it themselves, and very well.
They're not stupid, however mad they are.
They're tying down half the British Army, for God's sake.
They're brilliant.’
‘I think they have backing, still,’ she said.
‘I think…oh God, Parr, I don't know what I think.’
‘Is there a Catholic?
A man?’
The question was so sudden that she jumped.
‘Of course there's not!
Oh Parr, for God's sake!
That's not the problem!’
He sat back in the wicker chair, and their eyes joined.
A smile had formed on his lips, and it seemed to Jessica to be a rueful one.
She felt rueful too.
Oh God, the lies, the lies.
‘Does it matter?’ she asked him.
‘It does matter.
Jessica, believe me it matters very much.
You know I find these things hard to say, but…but I felt destroyed.
Just by the thought alone.
It was horrible.’
He came across and sat beside her.
He put his arm around her, awkwardly, because her legs were still crossed underneath her.
He tried to pull her to him.
‘You will marry me, won't you?’ he whispered.
‘If I ask you properly?
I'm sorry for all the nonsense, I'm appallingly ashamed.’
She was ashamed in her turn.
That dreadful scene at dinner.
It was only now she began to understand her cruelty.
To him, it must have seemed ice cold, indifferent.
She allowed her head to sink onto his shoulder, knowing that sex would follow, knowing she had no reason to say no.
I suppose I will marry him, she thought.
It was a question of sanity, or madness.
‘I'll think about it,’ she said.
‘But I make no promises.
Any more bullying, any more moral blackmail, Parr…’
‘Yes,’ he said.
He nuzzled her neck.
‘Jessica…’
He moved gently round her, untangled her crossed legs.
Jessica lay back, still hard, still seeking softness in her heart.
‘This is not to seal a bargain.
Any bargain.’
‘Of course not.’
She saw his penis as he pulled down his pants, then closed her eyes.
It was straight, as it always had been, no bias to the left, no bend at all.
Oh Christ, she thought.
‘I won't come, Parr,’ she said, not unkindly.
‘Just do it for yourself for once.’
Alone in her head, as he moved in and out of her, she brooded.
There would be nothing in the Rory Collins thing, she knew that, it was just a wild flirtation.
There was precious little concrete to it, and she had probably hurt her mother and her father quite enough.
She felt Parr coming, trying to be quiet about it as a mark of respect for her lack of interest, she guessed.
Ever the gentleman, he soon withdrew.
She held his head upon her breast, she patted it.
If we were married, she thought, all the lies could stop.
When he had gone, she turned the light off and lay back on the bed, still in her dress if not her knickers, staring at the ceiling.
She thought of Rory Collins.
Then Rory Collins came.
There was a spattering of noise at her window that could only be thrown gravel, although she'd never heard the sound before.
She sprang off the bed and reached the window in a swoop of wild excitement.
Looking down, she saw him beside a bush, only half concealed, laughing at her face.
She was gripped by joy and terror.
She was gripped by something else, a truly strange sensation.
Her body opened, she felt things pour from it.
All the confusion, all the fears and doubts, all the crushing tension.
She felt them pouring from her mind like dirty water down a drain.
She felt that she'd been emptied.
At last her madman, surely.
FOURTEEN
It was a scene of joy and terror, it was fraught with danger, it was wild with possibilities.
Neither of them, the trouble was, could take it seriously.
‘You're mad, you're crazy, you're insane,’ hissed Jessica.
‘Before God, Collins, if we're found out there's hell to pay.
Go!’
Rory, like a boy, drew back his hand and flipped another spray of gravel at her.
Jessica had opened the window.
Some rattled on the glass, some got her in the face, some spurted into the room.
She almost burst, suppressing fear and laughter.
‘I'm serious, I'm serious.
Rory, everybody's up, they're walking round the house, they'll come out for a breath of air if they don't hear you, even.
What do you want?’
‘What do you think I want, you fool?
Your cousin warned me off again, we had a little set-to in the pub, so I thought I'd better come and make me mark.’
‘Terence?
Oh Jesus.
What did he do?’
‘Nothing to write home about, forget it.
Ach, Jessica, it gave me the excuse!
Look, I'm coming up the wall, I'm rising on the lep!
The lady in her tower of cold ivory!’
He had assumed a stage-Southern accent.
He emerged from the shadow of the bush and scuttled to the wall.
He scratched the red brick with his fingernails.
‘No creepers!
What sort of house is this itself, the way you said your da was rich!’
‘Shut up, shut up!
Oh Rory, please shut up, they'll hear you!’
There was a note of real anxiety in her voice.
She  glanced behind her, as if her door might open.
She wished she'd locked it.
Rory, picking up the fear, stopped fooling quite so much.
‘We'll be all right,’ he said.
‘Can I come up, though, seriously?
There's not even a bloody drainpipe.’
His voice was quieter, but his schemes were just as mad.
Jessica, despite her panic, knew she'd have loved him to come up.
She remembered what she'd just been doing.
Oh God, she'd have to wash, though.
‘Of course you can't,’ she said.
‘I'm not joking, someone will hear us.
Please, love.’
Rory considered.
He'd have some explaining to do himself, if he took off his trousers.
He looked along the house wall, counted lighted rooms.
Two below, one above.
Lucky they did not have a dog, indeed, but still completely dangerous.
He'd had to come, though, after dropping Rosie off.
He'd tried to fight it, to stay on the straight and narrow to the M1, but had turned off eastwards like an automaton.
A higher power, he had told himself.
Lust.
‘I've got to talk to you,’ he said.
It wasn't lust, it must be more than that.
‘I suppose it would be stupid to get arrested in the process, but…
Can you come down, at all?’
Behind her, at the door, she heard a creak.
God, if they should come in now!
‘Jessica?’
‘Sssssh!’
It was no longer funny, no longer an adventure.
She tried to shush without making a sound.
Her head was half turned to the doorway.
‘Oh please,’ she whispered, in a second.
‘Go, Rory.’
Her mother's voice called softly: ‘Jessica?
Darling, are you awake?’
‘Jessica?’ he whispered, from below.
‘I've been lying to you, we have to talk.’
Jessica leaned half out of the window, waving at him frantically to be silent, her face contorted.
Rory, catching  a laugh, clapped a hand across his mouth.
He put a finger there, solemnly — trust me, schtumm.
She swayed her body back inside the room.
Her mother must have gone.
Like a wrung cloth, Jessica peered palely from the casement for the last time, she told herself.
She had to know the rest.
‘Lying?
What about?’
‘Only the important things.
Life, and sex, and rock'n'roll.
I want to do the Cork Leg soon, I want to have you here and now, I want to fuck you, Jessica.’
There was another creak outside her bedroom door, perhaps imagined.
Her heart was stopping up her throat.
‘Lying about what?’
‘About the Wee Green Patriot.
Among other things.
But never mind it now, we have to talk it all through.
Tomorrow, can you make?
You must.’
The wee green patriot.
So Terence must be right!
Jessica, somehow, was enthralled as well as horrified — and swept by desire.
There was something concrete between her and this man, and with the knowledge fear flared inside her, biting, complex fear.
‘In the morning,’ she said.
‘I might be watched though, sort of.
Where could we go?’
The face below was almost split in two by smiles.
‘I have a place.
It's safe.
I get lost myself sometimes, it's so hard to get to.’
‘Fool.
How will I find it?’
‘I'll ring you in the morning.
I've got some work to do, unfortunately, so it won't be till eleven.
Eleven fifteen on the dot, wait for it to pick the phone up.
I'll say I'm from the garage if someone else does, about the service.
I'll give you the directions, we'll get there separately.
OK?’
She swallowed.
There was silence in the passageways behind her.
She was tempted to go down.
She knew it was stupidity.
‘OK.’
They gazed at each other like a pair of fools.
‘You'd better go,’ she said, softly.
‘Rory — I'm glad you came.’
‘Aye,’ he said.
‘So am I, too.’
‘Goodnight, then.’
‘Aye.
Goodnight.
Jessica?’
‘Yes?’
‘Ach, to hell,’ he said.
‘I'll tell you in the morning.’
He bolted.
Jessica sat, yearning.
She heard a car start up.
I love you too, she told the scented air.
Martin Parr was not a hasty man, but before he went to sleep he made two phone calls.
Despite the hour, he got replies immediately, and was transferred up through systems without delay.
He acknowledged to himself that he was fishing, really.
Jessica's father, like most men in his position in the Province, was watched much of the time, kept an eye on, lightly guarded.
In the process, there was a spill-over, inevitably.
Jessica swam in and out of the local scene, and would be noticed, if not recorded.
Martin Parr had access.
He was using it.
The guest room that he had was large and airy, and overlooked a different part of the garden from Jessica's.
Parr kept his window open, and while he waited on the line, let the sounds from outside wash his consciousness.
Wind noise, mainly, the gentle breeze from off the lough hissing in the trees, the occasional moan of distant engines.
Between the calls, he went and hung out of the casement, in shirt and trousers, bare-footed, and breathed the sweet clean air.
He thought of Jessica, thought of the love they had just made, and felt his heart go cold.
The night had brought him shock and pain, so far.
He feared it might end up in deep humiliation.
Parr did not consider himself a jealous man, in any way.
When he had taken up with Jessica he had recognised her as a wild Ulster girl, and had respected her for it.
He had respected her lack of interest in what others might have called sexual morality, had respected the fact that she had slept with him and neither offered nor expected anything in return.
When it had happened four or five times, and he had, perhaps, begun to feel some stirrings of a more disturbing passion, she had brought him up with a catalogue of the men she had had, and made it clear that — if she wanted it that way — there would be more.
Parr, on the spot, had accepted that.
When love had come to him, it had been more difficult.
However, he had slowly modified his lack of jealousy into trust.
Jessica, after a time, had said she loved him too, and grew quite fascinated by his refusal to bring up the subject of fidelity.
Sometimes she hinted at young men, she teased him, but more and more, Parr became convinced that she was faithful — as he was to her — because she loved him.
Occasionally she let slip as much: that she went out with other men, enjoyed the crack, but that was all.
Odd, he reflected, that now she had been forced to make a straight denial, he had lost his confidence.
He drew in another breath of air, and it shuddered in his chest.
He closed the window.
The second phone call, like the first, drew him a blank.
Jessica had been observed on many occasions, he was told, and with many young men.
Of whatever religion, whatever political persuasion, she did not appear to differentiate.
But no, she had never been observed doing anything ‘noticeable’ in any way, she was just a woman going about her life, and apparently enjoying it.
Parr put the phone down, and sat on his bed, and thought some more about her.
He was relieved.
He half contemplated creeping back to her room, trying to communicate something, trying to make things better.
What things?
For whom?
He was not sure.
If there was a man, what would he do?
Again, he was not sure.
If it was a Catholic?
He thought of Samuel  Roberts, of what that would really mean to him.
Oh Jesus, there was so much at stake, such ramifications, such things as Jessica could never dream of.
Parr stripped his trousers off, then his pants, and sat contemplating his cock.
Small and shrivelled, still a little sticky.
Like a walnut, Jessica had once described it, lovingly.
He touched it.
Poor little walnut.
An idea came to him, and he went and got his Filofax from his briefcase.
He looked up a number.
Terence Rigby.
Just on the off-chance.
He looked at his watch.
Late.
He left the number by the telephone, and rolled himself into his bed.
That could wait until the morning.
When Rory Collins let himself into the bungalow, his mother was still up.
She met him in the hallway, in an old blue dressing gown.
She had a cup of something in her hand.
‘Egad, ould woman!
You've caught me out this time.
Is that Horlicks?
Can't you sleep or something?’
‘Hot milk.
I can smell the drink from here.
You should take a cup.’
Her face was lined and sour.
She should be asleep.
‘I've not had much,’ he lied.
‘With the driving and all that.
Seriously — why are you up so late?’
‘Tom Holdfast.
He was in the office.
I must have heard a car door slam, or something.’
Rory narrowed his eyes at her.
She could be very vague.
It was past one o'clock.
‘Tom Holdfast?
Are you sure?’
She moved past towards her bedroom door, forcing him aside.
‘One of his little meetings.
It won't be the last time.’
‘Mother?’
She stopped.
He sensed that she was angry, obscurely.
‘Ach, Rory,’ she said, impatiently.
‘The men.
You know.
If you don't know at your age, you should work it out.
Or ask.’
He was lost, entirely.
‘I am asking,’ he said.
‘What men?’
She pressed the handle down, pushed her door open.
‘Oh, don't ask me,’ she said.
She entered.
The door began to close.
‘Don't ask me.’
No point in calling out.
He knew his mother.
Rory bit his thumb.
FIFTEEN
He had business in the morning, accounting business, and Tom Holdfast was not the sort to let idle chitter-chatter get in the way of that.
Rory was late for their appointment, and when he arrived, Holdfast told him dourly to close the door and join him at the biggest table.
It was spread with computer paper and piles of accounts, with desktop calculators at both their places, both switched on.
He raised his green-flecked eyes to Rory's, assessed his liveliness, the state of his attention.
He grunted.
‘I hope you didn't overdo it too much last night,’ he said.
‘We've a lot to get our heads round, Rory.
None of it will wait.’
Rory said: ‘I'm all right.
But how about yourself, Tom?
My mother says she saw you here.
In the wee small hours.
You weren't alone.’
Holdfast, hand on his calculator, raised his eyes again.
Slowly, a smile came to his face.
‘I'll tell you later.
Now, business.
That pile on your left, there.
Aye, that one.
Peter Fogarty, of Killeavy.
We'll start with him.’
They worked solidly for nearly two hours, through the bad debts, the underpayments, the cash they themselves owed for plant and lubricants.
Holdfast worked quickly, despite he hardly moved, ranging over the spread papers like some sort of croupier.
At times he got impatient, if Rory failed to grasp a point, and on several occasions he glossed over figures that Rory raised a query on, assured him it was all in hand, there was nothing he need bother with.
Rory, who had been told to trust him by his father, never pressed him.
It was just beyond eleven when they finished, and Rory was well conscious of his need to use the telephone.
He was tempted for a moment to leave his questioning till later, till a better time, but Holdfast had his own ideas.
‘Well,’ he said.
He was wearing a ginger sports jacket, and he thrust a couple of ballpoints into the breast pocket.
‘So your mummy saw me with the boys, did she?
I shan't apologise for waking her, however.’
He was a polite man, invariably correct and pleasant with Mrs Collins, so this was done deliberately to elicit a response.
His expression reinforced the view.
‘Go on then.
Why?’ said Rory.
‘What were they here for, do you think?
Think carefully, now.
You don't imagine I was involved in anything that could be detrimental, do you?’
Rory thought.
‘If you had been, I guess, she would have told me.’
‘But for yourself?
What's your opinion, Rory?’
‘Me too.
I don't think you'd do…
I don't think you'd do any harm to us.
I trust you.’
‘So you'd be right and you'd be wrong.
I was paying money out, illicitly.
Your money.
Your mother's money.
Mine.
I was paying money to the paramilitaries.’
Rory experienced a stab of anger.
He leapt instantly to a conclusion.
‘Protection money?
The cheeky bastards!
And my old man a —’
‘Michael used to do the same,’ said Holdfast.
His voice was calm.
‘We used to fight about it, when I first knew.
You know my opinion of the gunmen, Rory.
On either side.’
Rory's expression softened for a moment.
‘The loonie two per cent,’ he said.
‘And Michael?’
‘It was his firm, was it not?
I wasn't even on the board till later.
Michael was romantic, Rory, you know that.
Even if he could have turned them down he wouldn't have, in my opinion.
He could never see the danger of  such things, he could never see the way they'd drive the country down into the stratum of the beasts.
When he was dead, it was far too late for me to opt out.
A Protestant, indeed.
There were some among them would have killed me for the hell of it.
The principle, they would have said.
We get on all right now.’
Rory digested that.
‘Jesus,’ he said.
‘Hell, Tom, you should have said something.
How much do we pay?
Is it a big amount?’
‘It's not a negligible amount.
I can keep it hidden from the Vatman and the revenue.
We can handle
£
They stood in the office, Holdfast resting on the tabletop, both lost in thought.
Rory did not know how to take the information.
He supposed it was all right, but then…
He supposed it was inevitable.
Tom Holdfast thought about the rest of it.
He had not told Rory everything, not by a long shot.
Michael Collins had been an active sympathiser who had, he suspected, been well aware of some odd uses that the farm at Hackballs Cross had been put to, and who had, maybe, done more than sympathise.
He had agreed to pay the money out, before Michael's death and after it, because they had had an understanding.
Which had not included Rory, the gadfly son.
But not even Michael had known about the other sum — smaller, but just as regular — that Holdfast had dourly diverted to the fighters on his own side of the great divide.
Two per cent insanity could go a long, long way.
‘Shit!’ said Rory.
‘It's eleven thirty-five!
I've got to leave you, Tom.
There's more to life than filthy commerce.’
He shot off for the bungalow and a private phone.
Tom Holdfast sighed, and sat, and called for coffee from Loretta on his intercom.
And two digestive biscuits, if she'd please…
‘Parr, throughout the morning, had been dipping into similarly murky pools, had heard, in fact, the name of Michael Collins mentioned.
His first source had been Terence, who had intensified his own investigations after the humiliation at the Amsterdam.
Indeed, he and his mates had driven to a house in East Belfast straight from the fracas, to try and tee some pals up for a quick retaliation.
It had not materialised, sterner counsels had prevailed, but people had been consulted, people with files and knowledge as well as hatred, and Terence had gone to bed happy in the supposition that he would get revenge, and soon.
When Martin Parr called him, at breakfast, he covered his surprise at being asked, and revealed that yes indeed, Jessica had got her own wee Taig — although he had to add, when pressed, that it was not known yet if it was more than an acquaintanceship or a flirtation.
He was in awe of Parr, and so was glad to be the bearer of bad news, although the cold voice — demanding detail that he did not have — revealed no hint of anything beyond mild contempt.
When asked for names, however, Terence had his triumph.
‘I do know his name, as it happens.
He goes around with another Taig, a bad wee feller who runs with terrorists, called Mallachy O'Rourke.
Jessica's interest is Rory Collins, we're working on him at the moment.
All I know for definite is he lives down in Armagh, not so far from Newry, in the hills.
We're working on it.’
Parr made no comment.
He neither liked nor trusted Terence, a young man full of braggadocio in his view, and there was a certain bitterness in receiving such information from such a source.
He doubted it would add up to much, though, just another of her lads, the orange or the green.
The terrorism link sounded similarly unlikely.
Terence said: ‘If there's any way I can help you out on this?’
Parr grunted.
‘I doubt it.
But thanks for the offer.
Bye, now.’
The name was useful, though — to himself he did not deny it — and as information came in from other places, more reliable, more official, Parr began to be disturbed.
By the time he left the Cultra house, a picture was emerging of a young man with definite allegiances.
His late father was an IRA supporter, believed to be a money source, believed to have strong cross-border links.
There was some doubt — there were many doubts — but circumstantially it was strong.
This young man…but Parr would not allow a final judgement yet.
Parr was not a hasty man, and he gave himself a lot of space to think in.
When he left the house — Jessica had still not come down — he drove in the McCausland car to the heart of Belfast, where he went to an office in a grey, featureless building and followed up the leads.
He used the telephone some more, he sat and concentrated.
If Rory Collins were an activist, or even if his links with terrorists were palpable, then things were bad indeed.
The daughter of Samuel Roberts, quite simply, could not be seen to be involved.
Something occurred to him, and he punched out Terence Rigby's number once again.
Terence would not mention his own name to anybody, he was confident of that, but he must be told to say nothing about the rest of it, to anyone.
Least of all his cousin Jessica.
He was too late.
When at last she snatched up her bedroom phone and found Rory on the end of it, Jessica had already endured a call from Terence.
Edgy as a cat on broken glass, she had gone at him like a power-saw, but had failed to silence him entirely.
Wee Rory, he had said — he had shocked her with his knowledge of the name — was connected to the terror men, he now had concrete evidence.
Tell me it, you lying little shite, she said repeatedly, and was partly reassured by the fact she had him floundering.
But although she slammed the phone down in fine style, she was shaken horribly.
And when she went down for a cup of tea, her mother  mentioned casually that Parr had gone to Belfast, not to England as expected, although she did not know why.
What was the matter, she then asked.
Why do you look so odd?
‘Jessica?’
The voice was tentative.
‘Can I talk?
I'm sorry to be late.
The business.’
Jessica drew in a great breath of cool air.
She had decided to send this man to hell.
His voice filled her with confusion and relief.
‘It's all right.
I've had a morning of it, too.
Rory?’
‘That's me.’
Let's call it off, she had been going to say — believing, maybe, she could manage it.
She let it hang.
She had been thrown by everything, today.
Why had Parr not gone back to England?
Where was he?
‘Nothing.
I'll tell you later.
Look, this place.
Give me directions quickly.
I need to see you, I need to talk.
Rory, this might not be on, we might have to —’
‘Stop!
Don't say another word.
You'll need a pen and paper.
How well do you know the land around Dundalk?’
‘Dundalk!
That's bloody miles!’
It was where the bars were stiff with wanted men.
He had told her that himself.
‘A far country.
We have the motorway, then take the A I at Hillsborough.
It's sixty miles or so, seventy at most.
How fast can you get up to in the green machine?
I'll tell you what, meet me at the border and I'll bring you the ways myself.
It's not an easy spot to locate, where we're going to.
It's near a place called Hackballs Cross, a nothing place, a couple of houses scattered on the map.
That's why I like it.’
‘Oh God,’ she said, distressed.
‘What sort of name is that?
What lovely little incident does that commemorate in our great history?’
He was taken aback.
‘Jessica?
What's up with you this morning?
Look, we need to hurry this along.
Will I collect you or do you want directions?
It's nearly twelve o'clock.’
She didn't know, she didn't know.
She didn't want to see this man again.
But why deny it, she was going to.
‘We'd need some lunch,’ she said.
A rearguard response, normality.
Rory was severe.
‘Jessica.
This is my fucking heart you're using as a football.
Be serious!’
Be serious.
She remembered that.
She remembered Connemara.
They would have to talk.
She would be serious.
‘I'll find you in Dundalk,’ she said.
‘Just in case.
Stop at the other side of town on the same road, the Dublin road, I think?’
‘It is.
The Nl.
Signs to Drogheda.’
‘I can hardly miss your flashy car, can I ?
Look in your mirror for me.
As near two thirty as I can make it.’
‘The pea-green incorruptible.
I'll be waiting.
I'll buy you lunch, you madwoman.’
‘Rory?’
‘Yes?’
It was Terence Rigby.
It was what he'd said.
‘Nothing.
It'll keep.’
‘Jessica?’
‘Yes?’
‘Just in case of what?’
Martin Parr spoke to Terence Rigby, then to some other men, then rang to speak to Jessica, twenty minutes after she had left.
He had thought he would invite her out for lunch, talk to her, try and work things out, assess things.
He had thought that that might still achieve something.
June Roberts said she'd gone out in the car, saying nothing except that she'd be back in time for cocktails  at the Clarkes' as she had promised, a business thing for Samuel.
Would Parr be interested?
Parr, voice neutral, in a raging calm, declined.
He sat back in the leather office chair and tapped his fingernails.
He had felt the knife blade turning in his gut as he had talked, and he acknowledged it.
He thought of Rory Collins.
Nothing crude or hasty could be done.
Crude or hasty.
Parr was not a jealous man, he told himself, but he was at least a human one.
Perhaps Jessica had not realised how much trust reposed in her, how confident he had been.
Perhaps he had not realised it himself.
But if she did not love him, if she was contemptuous of all the things they'd had…that was unbearable.
He sat in the drab office, aching.
For his self-esteem and her lost grace.
For infidelity.
If that was true, when that was proved, then everything was changed, irrevocably.
The hard things would be easy, the matrix would be smashed.
The measures to be taken could be pitiless indeed.
He hoped to God that, so far, it had not been physical.
SIXTEEN
At Hackballs Cross that day, it was not.
Jessica, when she arrived, was overwhelmed by too many things, lost in too many emotions, to even want to make love.
Rory did, but Rory was immensely happy to wait for her, to go along with any whim.
She had seen his crazy house, and she had loved it.
The drive from Dundalk was fast and furious, largely because Jessica was late.
She had got stuck getting out of Belfast, and got lost trying to take a short cut round the traffic jam.
On her way, out of shame that she would mess up the arrangements, she stopped at a small shop and got some fresh rolls and ham, some butter and some tins of Smithwicks bitter.
When she finally drew in behind the charcoal BMW on the road to Drogheda, she brandished the plastic bag and gestured — lead me on!
It took a little time, and without the guidance she would never have found it in a million years.
The country was green and flat and featureless as they got nearer Hackballs Cross, with high hedges and few signs of human habitation.
Rory made left and right turns in quick succession, seemed to go back on himself, seemed at times to be driving blind.
Jessica followed closely, watching the stop-lights and the curly hair she caught from time to time around the head restraint on his front seat.
The concentration calmed her, soothed the worries that had surfaced on the drive from Belfast to the border.
This was a crazy episode, but all was not lost.
This man was a Southerner, in his heart, a Southern boy whom she could give up if she had to, whom she could forget.
She was hungry, too, healthily starving.
Things could not be all that serious.
Finally, Rory turned off a minor road onto a rutted track between high, uncut hedges.
He slowed to almost nothing, but still the low-slung car needed guiding around each pothole and over every lump.
Jessica dropped back a short way — the Polo handling the terrain without a struggle — and thus was in a position to take the view full-frontally when she rounded the last corner.
Involuntarily she stopped the car, almost struck with awe.
The BMW, like a crippled beetle, bucked slowly onwards to stop outside the house.
It was extraordinary, this scene, to Jessica — a surreal mixture of opulence and decay.
The house was square, and Georgian and magnificent, in a setting of green grass, black gravel and great, mature trees.
Except that it was dead as well, long dead, and blind and rotting.
It was coloured in cement and grey, its slate roof dull with moss, great jagged lengths of cornice hanging down like broken fingers from its brow.
Above the cornices, behind the parapet, the guttering was ablaze with colour, long waving grasses, cornflowers, a trailing rose.
At some dark windows, filthy curtains moved in the breeze, lace ends dangled through the grey-crusted, broken panes.
And all in a huge square courtyard, gravel, grass and flags, surrounded by tall trees, wild hedges, walls.
Beyond it, and to both sides, were farm buildings, red rotting brick, lost in undergrowth.
Rory walked towards her, dressed in jeans and sneakers, a soft yellow shirt.
His eyes seemed alive with joy to her, simple joy at her reaction.
‘You love it, too,’ he said.
She nodded, dumbly.
‘My great inheritance.
My past and future.
One day, Miss Roberts, all this could be yours!’
Jessica switched off her engine.
Why bother to go farther?
She got out and stood beside him, gazing at the house.
It was enormous, ten bedrooms perhaps.
She  listened to the silence, beyond the shushing of the leaves and calls of beasts.
It was complete.
‘Rory, it's incredible.
Is it really yours?
What's its history?
How long has it been derelict?
Is it really from your past?’
‘More from yours, I guess.’
He made a face.
‘Ascendancy.
As far as my old man could find out, it was abandoned two generations ago, or more.
Maybe you weren't so far out with the name.
Hackballs Cross.’
‘Oh don't.
This fucking country, Rory.
Why are we so bad?
Oh Rory.
I love the fucking place!’
Rory leaned down, reaching through the window of the pea-green car.
He came out rustling.
‘Tins of beer and sandwiches.
Jesus, you're a princess.
I've only spirits in the house, and wine.
A Smithwicks'll do nicely.’
‘Wines and spirits?
Tonic, too?
And ice!
Ach, there's nothing like the primitive life, is there?’
‘The ice'll take a little longer.
Will I show you?
There's a little bed, an'all.
Well, quite a big one, actually.
Well nothing short of king-size, if it comes to that!
Let's go and try her out!’
A cloud passed over Jessica's face, which puzzled him.
He misinterpreted.
‘You're not jealous?
That it's been used before?’
‘No, stupid!
It's just that…’
He popped a can of beer and thrust it into her hand.
He tore a roll open, stuffed it with cut ham and gave her that.
‘Invitation withdrawn,’ he said.
‘Until later, anyway.
Come on, Miss, the grand tour.
Can you drive a tractor, by the way?
I've an awful lot of silage to attend to.’
Outside the courtyard and the kitchen garden, beyond the barns and outhouses, were fields of rolling grass, cut by hedges.
Jessica stared about in every direction, but she could see no other buildings, or sign of human life.
Like the house, the impression off the landscape  was schizophrenic, of richness and desolation equally.
The grass rolled in waves, glistening and gleaming as it undulated.
It was lonelier than the sea, somehow.
‘But it's so vast,’ she said.
‘Is it all yours?
What do you do with it?’
‘I cut it and I crush it down.
I screw it into the barns and I go mountain climbing with my Zetor.
Oh, that's a big wee bastard, you'll love my Zetor, it's cheap, reliable, a monster.
We used to sell a few of them.
Then,’ he added, ‘when I've turned it into silage, I sell it.
And get the grants.
Like a proper Irishman.’
A slice of ham fell from his roll onto the ground.
Rory picked it up, blew on it, put it in his mouth.
‘Come on,’ he said, and took her by the hand.
‘I'll show you where it happens.
We'll crack the Zetor up.
I don't believe you wouldn't want a little go.
There's some grass cut in the bottom barn already.
We'll go and frighten it.’
The afternoon was slipping away, the afternoon was racing by.
Sheltered from the wind, Jessica could feel her face begin to roast, the sun was like a hammer.
Rory tore off his shirt, tying the long sleeves round his waist.
Jessica had dickered about wearing jeans — doing a Karen, she had mocked herself — but had settled for a button-through with a longish skirt to it.
She could have undone the top, let the breezes lick her breasts, but she did not think so.
One lick led to another, in her experience, and that was not the idea this afternoon, there were serious things in train.
At least, she told herself, that's how I remember it.
Somehow, the details had got blurred.
Rory's Zetor was magnificent.
He unlocked a padlock into a smallish barn — the key was in the padlock waiting — and got her to help him push the wooden doors back.
The thing was gleaming red, bigger than a tractor ought to be in her opinion, with bigger front wheels than expected, and smaller back.
It looked more like an  animal than a tractor, a long low dangerous thing, crouched forwards with its shoulders hunched.
It was clean, even the wheels were clean, as if it were put out on a drive on Sundays and given the old once-over like the family car.
Rory patted the bluff bonnet, the Zetor badge, with pride.
‘All it needs is two seats and we could go for a jaunt in it.
You stand clear, I'll start the bastard up.’
He clambered up behind the long bonnet, onto the padded bucket seat.
He bent and pulled a knob or two, turned the key.
He gave the thumbs-up like an old-time aviator, grinning.
‘Contact!’
After three turns, the engine fired.
Black smoke poured out, quickly turned to blue.
The smell of diesel, burnt and unburnt, filled the air.
Jessica covered her mouth, but Rory breathed it in, as if at Scarborough on the poster.
‘Smell the ozone!’ he whooped.
‘Come up here, me darlin'!’
Infected, mad herself, Jessica ran forward.
The metal of the gear-casing vibrated before her eyes, rattling the spanners in an open toolbox.
She reached her hand across the big back tyre and gripped Rory's.
She put a foot on the machine, where the gear-case joined the engine casing, and her free hand on the steering wheel.
As he jerked she launched herself, and stood beside him, his arm around her, his face in her stomach and her breasts.
‘Grip on, my lovely woman!
Leave go ‘the steering wheel!
Away we go!’
The engine barked, a harsh hacking sound, and they rolled out into the sunshine.
The metal body jumped and bucketed beneath her on the ruts.
Jessica swung, clinging hard to Rory, as they made for another barn.
While he jumped down and opened the doors, she gripped the steering wheel, which shook her arms with its fast, rhythmical vibration.
‘Hold on tight now!’
He was back in the seat, having kissed her glancingly on the mouth as he swung down into it.
‘If you fall, you'll lose a leg or something.
But it's worth it!’
He moved a lever on the gearbox top, then gunned the engine in a lower range.
The tractor surged forward, into the dimness.
There was an overwhelming smell, dust and grass and malty-sour fermentation.
Ahead of them, as her eyes adjusted, Jessica saw a mountain of cut grass, in a high-sided pen affair, a concrete floor-space walled in with wooden planks, thick as railway sleepers.
They careered towards it, speeding up the while.
Jessica, no idea what was happening, screamed in delighted terror.
As they hit the grass, Rory pressed the accelerator hard down, wrestled with the wide black wheel.
The front tyres jerked and bounced as the Zetor bored into the pile and began to climb and crush it.
As they reared backwards and ground further up the slope, a wild, sweet smell arose, sweet and rotten, mingling with the blasting smoke from the exhaust.
They reared to an alarming angle, the tractor pointing to the roof, the wheels slipping in the juice cascading from the broken stalks.
Then they reached the top, the tractor could go no higher, the wheels began to sink.
Rory dipped the clutch, banged into reverse, accelerated as he let the pedal jump.
As the machine leapt backwards, skittering off the wet green mass, Jessica was nearly thrown into it, over the bonnet, except she grabbed him, screeching, dug in her fingers.
When he jammed the brakes on she was better balanced.
As he surged ahead once more she was braced, her arm around his neck, their faces close, their shouts a merging roar.
‘Hup!’ they shouted, and the Zetor hupped, climbing roofwards, six feet off the ground and more, crushing grass beneath its belly, slipping, gripping, shuddering.
After five charges, she was riding like a bronco-hand, willing them yet further up the pile, covered, like Rory, in a sheen of sweat and sap.
And exhausted.
‘No,’ she said, as he backed into the sunlight.
‘No, I don't want a go.
You're crazy, so you are.
You can teach me next time, maybe, whenever I come again.
I want a gin and tonic now, or were you spoofing?
I want to see inside your lovely house.’
They left the tractor in the sun and wandered to the crumbling mansion.
The back kitchen door was unlocked — no one could find the place without a map, said Rory, and so what if they did?— and inside it was cool and deathly quiet, save only for the buzzing of a fly or two.
After the rich aroma of fermenting grass and diesel, the smell struck oddly on the nostrils, unknown and yet familiar, the breathing of a house long empty — damp and dryness, and decomposing wallpaper, and dust.
The room was furnished, but only by the neglect of the last inhabitants to take the stuff away.
A wooden kitchen table with some crocks on it, a car battery split long ago, three chairs and a broken clothes horse, a pile of something in a corner that could have been a tramp's bed, or, indeed, a long-dead tramp.
There were two pictures on the wall, pale washed watercolours, country scenes, and a broken mirror on a bit of string.
‘It's sad,’ said Jessica.
‘It could be such a nice room to have breakfast.’
They had to pick their way around the rest of it, because the floors were mainly gone, although some big holes still had carpet laid across them.
The main staircase was just passable, but the upstairs rooms were too dangerous to enter, Rory said.
He showed her one, from the doorway, where the great plaster-covered beam had cracked right along the front wall of the house, pressed down by the roof, and sagged in a filthy, green-stained vee almost to the floor.
Under it, where the rainwater ran down and gathered, the planking was a swamp of rot and funguses.
‘Me father dreamed of putting it to rights,’ said Rory.
‘Can you imagine that?
It would take a million.’
‘You'd better make a million, then,’ said Jessica.
' Surely it would be worth it, Rory?’
‘That's the hardnosed Proddie talking, isn't it?
The authentic voice.
My father was the other sort, a romantic dreamer.
God, what did he not dream of doing!’
‘I just couldn't bear to leave it go,’ she said.
‘Can't you get grants, or something?
If it was done up, it'd be worth two million.’
He shook his head.
‘This is the South.
We're across the border.
No house is worth that down here.
Anyway, where is it?
What is there for anyone to do?
It's Somerville and Ross territory, but with time moved on.
If you put on the pink and rode to hounds like English gentlefolk these days, some wee feller with an Armalite would blow your head off.
Quite right too, in my opinion.
On this one I'd be on their side, I'd have to be!’
‘I hope you're joking,’ said Jessica.
Despite herself, she felt the clouds roll back.
It must have showed.
‘Ach, sure I am.’
He took her arm, guiding her across the broad landing towards another door.
‘I wouldn't even kill the fox, and that's the point.
A house like this has had its day, we're talking social wilderness, as well as the natural sort.
Me father drove here once and found a dozen men in balaclavas in the yard, it's said.
So the Armalite joke might not be far off, when all's said and done.’
Jessica stopped.
Her face was clearly stricken.
‘Is that true?
Were they practising, or something?
Training?’
He tried to joke it off.
‘We'll never know.
Me father wasn't quite crazy.
He did a U-turn and buggered off to Dundalk.
Better cirrhosis of the liver than.a bullet in the head.
Listen, that's enough ould morbid talk.
I'm going to turn the key on Aladdin's cave.
Shut your eyes.’
She didn't, but she cleared her mind of bad thoughts  quite successfully.
She watched curiously as Rory rolled back a piece of carpet six feet away and pulled out an iron key.
He winked at her.
‘The secret spot.
No secret to you from now on.
Whenever you get here first you can go in and warm the bed up, can't you?’
He put in the key and turned.
‘Voilà!’
The room was small, and like an oven.
Jessica felt sweat break out fresh on her skin as they walked in.
It was dark, heavily curtained in black velveteen, with a mustiness in the air.
Rory did not switch on a light, but strode to the window and jerked back the drapes.
It was a sash window, and he threw up the lower half.
Fresh air followed the flood of light.
There was no electricity, she realised.
Of course.
‘Good eh?
The bed, the cupboard full of booze, the fridge.
What do you fancy, Jessica?’
It was a nice room, a small surprise.
She had expected opulence, baroque furniture maybe, rich drapes.
But it was simple and plain, an ordinary junk-shop bed — although quite large, by no means king-size — two armchairs, a table with a Tilley lamp.
Over in one corner was a washstand, with a big old jug, and beneath it, large and unwieldy, decorated in lurid purple flowers, an antique piss-pot.
‘All mod cons,’ teased Jessica.
‘And I suppose the fridge is mythical, as well?
Or does it run on steam?’
He twitched another curtain, a lightweight floral one.
Inside an alcove was a fridge, and beside it a two-ring gas stove.
‘Calor,’ he said.
‘Oh ye of little faith!
That cupboard there has tins of food, underneath the pots and pans.
On the other side, the wine cellar, the bottles specially selected by my importers, otherwise known as the local off-licence.
Local at home, that is.
Nothing's local here.’
‘The bed squeaks!’ said Jessica, sitting on it.
‘But then, I suppose it doesn't matter here.’
‘Open house,’ said Rory.
‘Anything can squeak, and  welcome.
Jessica…to say outside your window, don't you?’
Jessica felt panic rising.
She knew, she thought she knew, but she could not bear to hear it.
She knew because she felt the same herself, the whole damn lot of it, down to the last small detail.
— And that was bad enough, the appalling jumble of emotions, the appalling realisation that she was no longer free, but what was worse was all the rest of it, the things she'd learned, or guessed.
It was Terence and his poison, it was Parr, it was her father, no longer just a patriotic businessman, a stranger in whom she'd glimpsed bedrock, the heart of so-called loyalism.
She was afraid of everything, even, obscurely, for Rory's safety.
How could she say all this?
‘I'd like that gin and tonic,’ she said.
‘If you were serious.’
Then, as he moved away, she added: ‘You told me you were lying.
About the wee green patriot thing.
You said you'd tell me.’
‘The Wee Green Patriot ‘thing’?
That's no way to talk about a lady!’
‘A lady?
What?’
He stood there, and she sat.
Her eyes were lifted to him, dark and unhappy, she was lost.
‘Would you like a slice of lemon in your drink?’ he said.
On the road, not far away, the Wee Green Patriot herself was driving.
She too had had a call this day, and finally had told Mr Blaney in the shop that she was going, that she was unwell, could not go on.
In one way, the plain, unvarnished truth.
She had gone home to her room, she had debated fiercely with herself, she had rung up Rory's mother.
Rory was not around, it was not known where he'd gone, but Rosie thought she knew.
She would have put her life on it.
It was a long way to Hackballs Cross, and she hated herself for going, spat hatred at herself as she threw the Metro southwards.
She had no idea what she would do if she should find him there.
With her.
But surely he would not be, she told herself, waiting at the border to be cleared by the men in body armour.
Surely he would not take another woman there, not to their place?
She could see the big old bed, that squeaked.
She did not even notice when the soldiers waved her on.