

That afternoon Aurelio Zen went boating.
After the shock of Valesio's murder and his almost sleepless night, lunch with Luciano Bartocci had really been the last straw.
One thing he could have done without was an ambitious young investigating magistrate with a strong political bias, a prefabricated conspiracy theory and an itch to get his name in the news.
At Zen's expense, needless to say, should anything go wrong.
Once upon a time magistrates had been dull, stolid figures, worthy but uninspiring, above all remote and anonymous.
But the combination of television and terrorism had changed all that.
A new breed of men had emerged from the vague grey ranks of the judiciary to stamp themselves on the nation's consciousness: the glamorous investigating magistrates and Public Prosecutors who were to be seen on the news every evening leading the fight against political violence and organized crime.
Now all their colleagues craved stardom too, and almost overnight the once faceless bureaucrats had blossomed out in trendy clothes and bushy beards, and an anonymous letter was enough to get them as excited as any schoolboy.
Since Bartocci had been at pains to emphasize that his comments were ‘off the record’, Zen could of course simply ignore them.
But that would be rash.
There were an infinite number of ways in which the investigating magistrate could compromise or embarrass a police officer, whereas having the judiciary on your side was an invaluable asset.
No, he had to try and keep Bartocci happy.
On the other hand, the inquiries he had been asked to make, although apparently innocuous, were also fraught with risk.
A great family such as the Milettis is like a sleeping bear: it may look massively  apathetic and unimpressionable but each hair of its pelt is wired straight into the creature's brain, and if you twitch it the wrong way the thing will flex its tendons and turn on you, unzipping its claws.
What was he to do?
How was he to react?
What was a safe course to take?
His immediate solution was to go boating.
Not for long, of course .
With all these new developments pressing in on him the last thing he could afford was an afternoon off work.
But neither was there any point in trying to take action with his head in this condition.
So having made his way back to the hotel he closed the shutters, took off his shoes, jacket and tie, lay down on the bed and cast off.
The image of the long shallow craft gliding forward through the reeds in regular surges, propelled by the oarsman's graceful double-handed sweeps, was a powerful agent of calm.
Just ten or fifteen minutes of it now would see him right, a short trip out through the islets and mudbanks where you could let the boat drift, lean over the stern and watch the inner life of the dirty green water, the shreds of seaweed and small branches and other shapes that sometimes proved to be alive, or focus on the surface, a depthless sheet of scum on which the pearly light shimmered in continual shifting patterns, or even look up to see a huge modern building, several storeys high, going for a stroll along a neighbouring island, the superstructure of a freighter putting out to sea along the deep-water channel…
He got up and put the light on, shivering.
Something was wrong.
How could the room feel stuffy and cold at the same time?
And it was totally silent, no distant murmur of traffic, no footsteps, no voices.
Catching sight of the transistor radio, he clicked it on and fiddled with the tuning, encountering only heavy bands of static interspersed with the twittering gibberish of machines.
He felt like the last person left alive.
…very much and you get a fabulous Radio Subasio T-shirt so keep those calls coming out there this one is for Adriana in Gubbio it's Celentano's latest coming to you at fifteen before four this Thursday morning courtesy of your friend Tullio who says…
Zen silenced the radio, walked to the window and opened the shutters.
The deserted piazza glistened under the streetlights.
He had slept right through the night.
Catching sight of his reflection in the window he felt a surge of  self-pity and suddenly realized that he missed Ellen very badly, and that it was only at moments like this, when he surprised himself, that he could admit how much he needed her.
Why couldn't he tell her?
That was what she wanted, after all, and he knew that she was right to want it.
For a moment he thought of phoning her, then and there, and telling her how he felt.
But it would be ridiculous, of course.
He imagined the phone ringing and ringing until it prodded her unwillingly out of sleep, and her uncomprehending response.
‘For Christ's sake, Aurelio, couldn't this have waited?
Do you know what time it is?
I've got a sale to go to at nine, and you know how difficult it is for me to get back to sleep once I've been woken.’
Instead he read a paper he'd bought in Trieste and forgotten to throw away, immersing himself in a debate over the council's delay in resurfacing the streets in an outlying zone of the city until it was time to go to work.
A crowd of people of various races, clutching passports and sheaves of official documents, were clustered around an office in the foyer of the Questura.
A sheet of paper attached to the glass partition with sticky tape read ‘Foreigners’ in crude lettering.
Behind the glass an official from the Political Branch scowled at a worried-looking black.
‘And I suppose it's my fault you haven't got it?’ he demanded.
As Zen approached his office, the inspector who had been trying to trace Ubaldo Valesio's movements poked his head around the door of the next room.
‘Just a moment, chief!’
Lucaroni was short and rather sleazy-looking, with narrow-set eyes and a broad jaw blue with stubble.
His movements were quick and furtive and he spoke in a speedy whisper, as though every word were classified information.
‘You've got a visitor,’ he muttered.
‘The widow.
Rolled in about five minutes ago demanding to see you.
We weren't sure what to do with her.’
He looked doubtfully at Zen, who nodded.
‘Turn up anything yesterday?’
Lucaroni shook his head.
‘He phoned his office at nine to cancel all appointments.
It  was obviously unexpected.
There were two clients waiting who had to be sent away.’
Zen looked into the inspectors' room.
Chiodini was poring over a sports paper.
Geraci was staring fixedly back at Zen, as though he was trying to remember whether he'd turned the gas off before leaving home.
‘How about you two?’
Zen asked.
Geraci's eyebrows wiggled briefly.
‘Just a lot of stuff about his house and taxes and kids.’
‘And those marks in the diary,’ Chiodini put in without looking up from his paper.’
They're nothing,’ Geraci commented dismissively.
‘What marks?’ asked Zen.
He was really just buying time before having to deal with Patrizia Valesio.
Chiodini took the diary from the pile of documents on his desk and showed him that the lawyer had marked several pages during the previous three months with a red asterisk, the last being two days earlier.
Zen walked over to the door opening directly into his of office, taking the diary with him.
‘What do you want us to do now, chief?’
Geraci asked.
He sounded slightly panicky.
‘Nothing, for now.’
He should never have asked for three assistants, he realized.
Now he would always have them hanging about, making him feel guilty, getting in his way.
Moreover one of them was bound to be reporting back to the Questore, and since there was no way of finding out which he would have to keep them all busy if he was to do what Bartocci had asked.
The spare chair in his office was occupied by a woman of about thirty dressed in an elegant black outfit.
Her face was large and round and slightly concave, with a long sharp nose.
‘You're the man they sent up from Rome?’ she asked.
‘I am Patrizia Valesio.’
‘I'm very sorry…’
She waved dismissively.
‘Please, don't let's waste time.’
Zen took out a notepad and pencil and laid them on the desk.
‘Very well.
What can I do for you?’
‘I've come to make an accusation.
You may find it bizarre, even unbelievable.
I simply ask you to listen, and not to judge what I say until I have finished.’
She took a deep breath.
‘My husband did not usually discuss the negotiations for Ruggiero Miletti's release with me, but on one occasion about a month ago, while we were having dinner….’
She paused.
The strain of what she was saying showed on her face.
Then she finished quickly.
‘He suddenly blurted out, ‘Someone is going behind my back’.’
The phone started to ring.
‘Excuse me,’ Zen said, and lifted the receiver.
‘Good morning, Commissioner.
This is Antonio Crepi.
I'm just phoning to make it quite clear that our discussion the other night is no longer relevant.
Pietro has flown in from London and he's assured me that as soon as the gang make contact the matter will be resolved without further delay.
I don't need to tell you to keep what I said to yourself, of course.’
‘Of course.’
‘Incidentally, I hear you had lunch with young Bartocci yesterday.’
Zen watched Patrizia Valesio removing an invisible hair from her coat.
‘I don't want to interfere, dottore, but remember what I told you about him.
Luciano's a good lad at heart, but he's got a bee in his bonnet when it comes to the Milettis.
You know how these lefties are, they read Marx and stop seeing reality.
Now that's a dangerous attitude for an investigating magistrate, in my opinion.
Still more so for a policeman.
See what I mean?
Just a friendly word of advice, from one who knows.’
Zen put the phone down.
‘…from one who knows.’
Where had he heard that phrase before?
Patrizia Valesio was staring at him with the expression of one who is not to be put off by interruptions.
Her face reminded Zen of an old-fashioned candlestick: a shallow dish with a spike in the middle.
‘I'm sorry,’ he murmured.
‘You were saying that…’
‘Ubaldo told me that someone was going behind his back,’ she repeated.
‘He said that every time he returned to the kidnappers to present an offer worked out after lengthy discussions with the family, claiming that this was the absolute maximum the Milettis could afford to pay, the gang accused him of lying.
‘Have you forgotten the villa at Punta Ala?
And what about the olive grove at Spello?
Why haven't you sold the shares in such and such a company?’
And when Ubaldo asked the Milettis, lo and behold there was such a villa, such an olive grove, such shares!
It was a negotiator's nightmare!’
Zen shred hard at the pad.
He had been doodling obsessive box-like designs, a nest of interlocking right-angled lines locking out all possibility of error or surprise.
‘What about Ruggiero himself?’ he suggested.
‘He knows more than anyone about the family assets, and he's totally in the gang's power.
It wouldn't be difficult for them to make him talk.’
‘That's what Ubaldo thought at first.
But the gang knew about financial developments which had taken place since the kidnapping, things Ruggiero couldn't have known about.
Eventually Ubaldo became convinced that someone in the family circle was supplying the gang with information on a day-to-day basis.
Which means that my husband was the innocent victim of some hideous double-dealing within the Miletti family!
That's why I have come.
I want his murderers punished.
Not just the ones who pulled the trigger but also the ones who stood behind them, in the shadows!
’ She broke off, taking quick shallow breaths.
‘This is all very interesting, signora…’
‘I haven't finished!’ she snapped.
‘There's something else, a vital clue.
The gang always used the same procedure when they wanted to make contact.
The telephone would ring at one o'clock, just as we were sitting down to lunch.
Only two words were spoken.
The caller gave the name of a football team and Ubaldo had to reply with the name of the team they were playing the following Sunday.
He kept the fixtures list by the phone.
Then he hung up immediately, phoned his office and cancelled his afternoon appointments.
That was the procedure, and it never varied.
But on Tuesday…’
She broke off again, fighting for control.
‘On Tuesday the call came not at lunchtime but early in the morning, about seven forty-five.
I heard Ubaldo give the password and then say ‘Now?’ in great surprise.’
She held Zen's eyes with hers.
‘When did you arrive here in Perugia, Commissioner?’
‘On Tuesday.’
‘At what time?’
‘About half past one.’
‘And who knew you were coming?’
He frowned slightly.
‘Various people in the Ministry and here at the Questura.’
‘No one else?’
‘Not as far as I know.
Why?’
Was that a sound from the next room, from behind the dosed door?
‘Then how do you explain the fact that the kidnappers phoned urgently, demanding to see Ubaldo in person, at a time when you were still in Rome and no one supposedly knew you were coming except the authorities?’
Her voice was triumphant, as though this clinched the matter.
Zen deliberately allowed his frown to deepen.
‘I don't see there's anything to explain.
What connection is there between the two events?’
She snorted indignantly.
‘The connection?
The connection is obvious to anyone who can put two and two together.
Do you really believe that the first contact after weeks of silence just happened by sheer coincidence to fall on the same day as your arrival here?
I'm sorry, but that would be just a little too convenient.
But how could the kidnappers have known about your arrival in Perugia five hours before it happened?
Obviously their contact in the family tipped them off!’
‘But how did the Milettis know, for that matter?’
‘Because it was they who had you sent here, of course!
You don't, for heaven's sake, think that things like that happen without someone pulling strings, do you?’
Zen looked away.
He had just remembered where he'd heard the phrase with which Crepi had rung off.
It had been the signature of the anonymous letter Bartocci had received suggesting that the kidnapping of Ruggiero Miletti was a  put-up job.
He found himself writing CREPI??? in block capitals on the pad in front of him.
He hastily crossed it out, then covered the whole area with tight scribbles until all trace of the name had been obliterated.
‘I don't quite understand, signora,’ he said.
‘First you claim that the family is collaborating with the kidnappers, then you say they must have used their influence to have me sent here.
Isn't there some contradiction in your ideas?’
With a convulsive movement Patrizia Valesio got to her feet.
‘Don't you speak to me of contradictions!
That whole family is a living contradiction, consuming anything and anyone that comes within its reach, one of them smiling in your face while another stabs you in the back.
My poor husband, who wanted only to help, ended up as their victim.
Be careful you don't share his fate!’
Zen also rose.
‘Anyway, since this case is under investigation by the judiciary, the proper person to inform is the magistrate in charge, Luciano Bartocci.’
His visitor picked up her gloves and handbag.
‘Oh, I shall inform him, don't worry!
And I shall inform him that I've informed you.
And then I shall inform the Public Prosecutor's department that I've informed both of you.
Do you know why I'm going to inform so many people, Commissioner?
Because I am expecting there to be a conspiracy of silence on this matter and I intend to make it as difficult as possible for the Milettis and their friends.
If there is to be a conspiracy, at least everyone will see that it exists and will know who is involved.
That will be some poor consolation, at least.’
At the last moment Zen remembered the diary.
He showed it to Patrizia Valesio and asked if she knew anything about the asterisks which Chiodini had pointed out.
The sight of her husband's writing was clearly a great shock, but she held herself together.
‘Those are the days on which Ubaldo had a meeting with the kidnappers,’ she replied in a dull voice.
‘He marked the diary as soon as they phoned.
He thought it might be useful later.’
Well, perhaps it might, Zen thought when she had gone.
But he couldn't see how.
He opened the door to the other room.
Lucaroni was standing almost immediately inside, studying a notice concerning action to be taken in the event of fire breaking out in the building.
Geraci was sitting at his desk, a paperback edition of the Penal Code open in front of him.
Chiodini had slumped forward on his newspaper and seemed to be asleep.
‘Well, I've got some work for you, lads,’ Zen exclaimed breezily.
‘From what Valesio's widow has told me, it's dear that her husband's contacts with the gang began with a telephone call that was simply a signal for him to go to some prearranged meeting-place.
The chances are that it was a bar, somewhere not too far away.
I want you to find it.
Draw up a list and visit each in turn.
Take a photograph of Valesio along.
It shouldn't be too difficult.
A smart young lawyer driving a BMW will have been noticed.’
When they had gone Zen went back to his office and dialled an internal number.
‘Records.’
‘I want a check run on any firearms licences issued to the following persons.
Family name Miletti, first names Ruggiero, Pietro, Silvio and…’
Again that sound next door.
Zen put the phone down, got up quietly and went over to the door into the corridor.
He looked out.
The corridor was empty, but the door to the inspector's room was slightly ajar.
Zen walked along the corridor and pushed it wide open.
Geraci was standing by his desk.
He whirled round as the door hit the rubbish bin with a loud clang.
‘Forgot my notebook,’ he explained.
Zen nodded.
‘Listen, Geraci, I want you to keep an eye on the other two for me.’
The inspector stared uncertainly at Zen.
‘Keep an eye on them?’
‘That's it.
Just in case.’
He winked and tapped the side of his nose.
‘Better safe than sorry.
Know what I mean?’
Geraci clearly didn't have the slightest idea what Zen was talking about.
‘I should get going,’ he muttered nervously.
‘Good thinking.
Don't want to make them suspicious.’
He watched Geraci walk all the way down the corridor before going back to his office, leaving the connecting door open so that if anyone came in he could see them reflected on Pertini's portrait.
Then he picked up the receiver again.
‘Hello?’
‘So far I've got Miletti Ruggiero, Pietro and Silvio.’
‘Right.
Also Miletti Daniele, Santucci Gianluigi and Cinzia nee Miletti.’
‘Who's speaking?’
Zen seemed to see again that glare of hostility and hear the Questore murmur, ‘Until today he was handling the Miletti case for us.’
‘Fabrizio Priorelli.’
‘I'll call you straight back, dottore.’
‘Eh, no, my friend!
Sorry, but you'll do it now, if you please.
I'll hold.’
‘Of course, dottore!
Right away.’
There was a clunk as the receiver went down, followed by receding footsteps.
While he waited Zen looked round his of office.
Something about it was slightly different today, but he couldn't decide what it was.
The footsteps returned.
‘There are three cards, dottore.
A Luger 9mm pistol in the name of Miletti Ruggiero, issued 27 04 53.
Then Santucci Gianluigi registered a rifle on 19 10 75.
Finally Miletti Cinzia, a Beretta pistol, 4.5mm, dated 110181.’
Zen noted these details in the margin of his earlier doodles.
‘Shall I send a written copy up to your of office, dottore?’
‘No!
Definitely not.
I've got what I wanted.
Much obliged.’
He hung up, studying the information.
Ruggiero's Luger would be war loot, belatedly registered once the menace of an armed Communist insurrection had faded.
That might possibly have done the damage to Valesio's head, at close range.
So might Gianluigi's hunting rifle, for that matter.
But he didn't really believe any of it, not for a moment.
Geraci clearly didn't have the slightest idea what Zen was talking about
‘I should get going,’ he muttered nervously
‘Good thinking.
Don't want to make them suspicious.’
He watched Geraci walk all the way down the corridor before going back to his office, leaving the connecting door open so that if anyone came in he could see them reflected in Pertinis portrait.
The he picked up the receiver again
‘Hello?’
‘So far I've got Milletti Ruggerio, Pietro and Silvio.’
‘Right.
Also Milletti Daniele, Santucci Gianluigi and Cinzia ne/3e Milletti.’
‘Who's speaking?’
Zen seemed to see again that glare of hostility and see the Questore murmur.
‘Until today he was handling the Miletti case for us.’
‘Fabrizio Priorelli.’
‘I'll call you straight back Dottore.’
‘Eh, no, my friend, but you'll do it now if you please I'll hold.’
‘Of course dottore!
Right away.’
There was a clunk as the receiver went down, followed by receding footstep.
While he waited Zen looked around his office.
Something about it was slightly different today, but he could not decide what it was
The footsteps returned
‘There are three cards dottore.
A Luger 9mm pistol in the name of Milletti Ruggerio, issued 27 04 53.
Then Santucci Gianluigi registered a rifle on 19 10 75.
Finally Miletti Cinzia a Beretta pistol 4.5mm, dated 11 01 81.’
Zen noted these details in the margin of his earlier doodles.
‘Shall I send a written copy up to your office dottore?’
‘No definitely not.
I've got what I wanted.
Much obliged.’
He hung up studying the information.
Ruggerio's Luger would be war loot, belatedly registered once the menace of an armed Communist insurrection had faded.
That might possibly have done the damage to Valesios head, at close range.
So might Gianluigis hunting rifle for that matter.
But he did not really believe any of it, not for a moment.
He got an outside line dialled the law courts and asked to speak to Luciano Bartocci.While he waited he looked round his office with a deepening frown, trying to track down the detail which had been altered.
What was it?
The filing cabinet, the coat stand, the rubbish bin, that big ugly crucifix, the photograph of Pertini, the calendar.
Of course, the calendar!
Someone had thoughtfully turned the page to March and now the glossy colour photograph showed the Riot Squad drawn up in full battle gear in front of their armoured personnel carriers.
‘Yes?’
‘Dottore Bartocci?
It's Zen at the Questura.’
‘Finally, I've been trying to get hold of you since yesterday afternoon!
Where have you been?’
‘Well I was…’
‘Listen there's been developments.
Come and see me at once.’
‘Patrizia Valesio has been here she claims that…’
‘I've already seen her.
This is something else.
Be here in twenty minutes.’
Outside the weather was hazy and dull.
In the car park between the Questura and the prison Palottino had taken a break from polishing the Alfetta to chat to a pair of patrolmen.
He looked hopefully at Zen who waggled his finger and walked off up the street.
It was market day and the wide curving flight of steps leading up to the centre was lined with flimsy tables covered in kitchenware and watches and clothing and tools and toys Music blared out from a stall selling bootleg cassette tapes.
The traders called like barnyard cocks to the women moving from one pitch to the next uncertain who to mate with.
‘…at prices you simply won't believe…’
'…never before in Perugia…’
‘…thanks to the miracle of American technology…’
‘…ever wears out I will pay you twice the…’
' SOCKS!!!
SOCKS!!!
SOCKS!!!’
‘…one for thirty thousand, two for fifty…’
A man sitting at a three-legged stool emptied a dustpan full of rubbish over his suit and then removed it with a battery powered mini vacuum cleaner.
On the wall behind him the name UBALDO VALESIO appeared over and over  again in large black capitals.
It was a notice board devoted exclusively to funeral announcements, and the lawyer's death was well represented.
There were posters signed by his partners, by the local lawyers' association, the Miletti family, various relatives, and of course his wife and children.
The wording changed slightly, depending on the degree of intimacy involved, but certain formulas recurred like the tolling of a bell.
'…an innocent victim of barbarous cruelty…’
'…tragically plucked from the bosom of his loved ones by a callous hand…’
'…a virtuous and well-respected life extinguished by the criminal violence of evil men…’
The morning session at the law courts was in full swing, and the halls and corridors were crowded.
Luciano Bartocci's office was tall and narrow, with shelves of books that seemed to lean inwards like the sides of a chimney as they rose towards the distant ceiling.
Two lawyers were facing the magistrate across a desk that occupied most of the floor space.
One was dearly asking some favour on behalf of a client: bail or a visitor's pass or access to official files.
Meanwhile the other lawyer was growing impatient with Bartocci for allowing himself to be imposed upon in this way by his pushy and unscrupulous colleague instead of attending to his utterly reasonable request for bail or a visitor's pass or access to official files.
In the end Bartocci solved the problem by shooing both of them out of the office and leading Zen downstairs.
‘There's something I want you to hear.’
He took him to a long narrow room in the cellars of the law courts, where phone-taps were carried out.
A bank of reel-to-reel tape recorders lined the wall.
A man was monitoring one of them over a pair of headphones.
He jumped slightly as Bartocci touched his shoulder.
‘Morning, Aldo.
Can you play us that recording I was listening to earlier?’
‘Right away.’
He selected a tape from the rack and threaded it on to a spare machine.
‘This was intercepted late yesterday afternoon on the  Milettis’ home phone,’the magistrate explained to Zen.
‘That's why I've been trying to get hold of you.’
The technician handed Zen a pair of headphones and started the tape.
There was a fragment of ringing tone and then a voice.
‘Yes?’
‘Signor Miletti?’
‘Who is this?’
‘Go to the rubbish skip at the bottom of the hill, on the corner of the main road.
Taped to the inside there is a letter for you.
Get down there quickly, before the cops beat you to it.’
The caller had a thick, raw Calabrian accent.
‘The time for games is over.
You have three days to do what we say, otherwise we'll do to your father what we did to Valesio.
Only more slowly.’
Zen removed the headphones, looking for clues to Bartocci's reaction.
The message had sounded genuine enough to him.
‘What was in the letter?’
‘That's what we're about to find out.
Thank you, Aldo!’
As they walked back upstairs Bartocci went on, ‘Pietro Miletti has agreed to see me.
I'm expecting him shortly and I'd like you to be present.
We've just time for a coffee.’
They went to a tiny bar in Piazza Matteotti.
The only other person there was a woman eating a large cream-filled pastry as though her life depended on it.
‘I had a phone call from Antonio Crepi,’ Zen remarked casually.
‘Really?’
Bartocci's voice, too, was carefully expressionless.
‘He knows we had lunch.’
‘I'm sure he does.
In fifteen minutes he'll know we've had coffee, too.’
‘What did you make of Patrizia Valesio's story?’
Zen asked.
The magistrate shrugged.
‘It doesn't get us anywhere.
A hostile Public Prosecutor would make mincemeat of her.
The distraught widow trying to assuage her grief for her husband's death by carrying out a vendetta against the Miletti family, that kind of thing.
But this letter is another matter.’
It took Zen a moment to see what Bartocci was getting at.
‘If they try and fake a letter from the kidnappers, you mean?’
Bartocci nodded between sips of coffee.
‘They can't fake it well enough to fool a forensic laboratory.
I'm surprised they haven't realized that.
So this meeting with Pietro Miletti may well prove to be decisive.
That's why I want you to be there.’
The eldest of the Miletti children seemed about as unlike the others as was possible.
Short and plump, with receding hair and a peeved expression, Pietro looked at first sight like an English tourist who had come to complain about his belongings being stolen from his hotel room, full of righteous indignation about Italy being a den of thieves and demanding to know when the authorities proposed to do something about it.
From his tweed jacket to his patterned brogues he looked the part perfectly: not the usual designer mix from expensive shops in Milan or Rome, but the real thing, as plain and heavy as Zen imagined the English climate, character and cuisine to be.
Bartocci introduced Zen as ‘one of the country's top experts on kidnapping, sent here specially by the Ministry to oversee the case’.
Pietro Miletti was politely dismayed.
‘I understood this was to be a private meeting.’
‘Nothing which is said in this room will go any further,’
Bartocci assured him.
‘We are simply here to discuss what measures to take in the light of recent developments.
Please be seated.’
After a moment's hesitation Pietro leaned his rolled umbrella and leather briefcase against the desk and sat down.
Bartocci took his place on the other side of the desk.
There was no other chair, so Zen remained standing.
‘Now then,’ the magistrate continued smoothly, ‘I understand that in the course of a telephone call yesterday afternoon the kidnappers informed you of the whereabouts of a letter from them, and that this letter was subsequently recovered.
You've brought it with you, I take it.’
‘Not the original, no.’
Pietro Miletti spoke as though the matter was of no consequence, but Bartocci glanced at Zen before replying.
‘A copy of the letter is of very little use to our scientific experts.’
‘I haven't brought a copy.’
Bartocci gestured impatiently.
‘Excuse me, dottore.
You haven't brought the original letter, you haven't brought a copy.
Would you mind very much telling me what you have brought?’
Pietro Miletti opened his briefcase and took out a sheet of paper which he offered to the magistrate.
‘I've brought a memorandum prepared from the original letter, itemizing every relevant piece of information it contained.’
Bartocci made no attempt to take the paper.
‘Dottore, I strongly resent the assumption that anybody is in a position to dictate to me what is or is not relevant to a case I am investigating.
If you are not prepared to let me see the original letter then this pretence of cooperation becomes a farce and I see no point in continuing it.’
Pietro Miletti gave a short laugh that sounded unpleasantly arrogant and mocking, although it might equally well have been nervous in origin.
‘I'm afraid that's impossible.’
‘Impossible?
Allow me to remind you that you are head of the family in your father's absence.
Nothing is impossible if you want it.’
‘No, no, I mean it's literally impossible.
The letter no longer exists.’
Bartocci shot Zen a triumphant glance.
So the Milettis had realized the threat to their schemes which the fake letter would pose and had no intention of letting them see it!
Pietro balanced the sheet of paper on his knees.
‘I should explain that although part of the letter was dictated by the kidnappers, most of it was written by my father.
It was a personal letter addressed to his family, and like any personal letter it was not intended to be read by outsiders.
It was, besides, a very long, rambling and really rather distressing document.
Distressing, I mean, for the evidence it provided of my father's state of mind.
The strain and anguish of his long ordeal has dearly had a terrible effect on him.
Naturally no reasonable person would wish to hold  him accountable for what he wrote, but certain passages nevertheless made very disturbing reading.’
Zen gazed up at the shelves loaded with rows of books as uniform as bricks.
‘He accused you of having abandoned him,’ he said.
‘He recalled the innumerable sacrifices he has made on your behalf and reproached you for not being prepared to help him in his hour of need.
He even compared your behaviour unfavourably with that of his kidnappers.’
Pietro Miletti looked round in amazement.
‘How do you know that?
It isn't possible!
Unless…’
An idea flared up in his eyes for a moment and then went out.
‘Such letters resemble one another,’ Zen explained.
‘Like love letters.’
‘Ah, I see.’
Pietro had lost interest again.
Bartocci was staring angrily at Zen, who realized that he had made the mistake of speaking as though the letter really existed, as if the kidnapping was genuine.
The magistrate rapped on his desk.
‘What became of the letter?’ he demanded.
‘We burned it.’
‘You did what?’
‘My father specifically forbade us to communicate any of the information it contained to the authorities, or to cooperate with them in any way whatsoever.
That position received the strongest support from various members of the family, and it was only by strenuous and prolonged efforts that I have been able to persuade them to let me bring you this memorandum, which contains, as I've said, all the relevant items in the letter.’
Zen suddenly understood that Bartocci had some move in mind, something which he was keeping up his sleeve for the moment.
‘And what are these ‘relevant items’ you mention?’the magistrate asked, deliberately postponing this initiative.
Pietro Miletti picked up the paper again and began to read in a calm, confident voice, a voice that was accustomed to being obeyed, that never needed to make a fuss.
The full ten  thousand million lire, in well-worn notes, not consecutively numbered, was to be made ready for delivery immediately.
An untapped telephone number was to be communicated to the gang, who would use it to pass on further details, identifying themselves by the same method they had used with Valesio.
The police were not to be informed of any of these arrangements or to be involved in the payoff in any way.
Failure to comply with these instructions would result in the immediate death of the victim.
‘And what do you intend to do?’
Bartocci asked when Pietro had finished.
‘We shall obey, of course.
What else can we do?’
‘What you've been doing for the past four months!
Stalling for time, crying poor, haggling over every lira.’
Pietro Miletti replaced the sheet of paper carefully in his briefcase.
‘That'll do, Bartocci.
We already know what our enemies say about us.’
An effortless hardening had taken place in his tone.
He got to his feet and looked at both of them in tem.
‘Do you know why kidnapping flourishes here in Italy?
Perhaps you think it's because we're saddled with a corrupt and inefficient police force directed by politically biased career judges lacking any practical training whatsoever.
That is certainly a contributing factor, but similar conditions obtain in other countries where kidnapping is almost unknown.
No, the real reason is that in our hearts we admire kidnappers.
We don't like successful people.
We like to see them brought low, made to suffer, made to pay.
They used to call Russia an autocracy moderated by assassination.
Well, Italy is a plutocracy moderated by kidnapping.’
‘How do you propose to raise the money when for the past months you've been claiming that it just wasn't possible?’
But Pietro Miletti had no further interest in the exchange.
‘That's our affair.’
‘There's always SIMP, of course,’ Bartocci insinuated.
‘Yes, there's still SIMP left to bankrupt.
No doubt some people would be very glad to see that happen.
But if our company ever does go under, those are the very people who are going to moan loudest.’
‘What about this untapped telephone number the gang have asked for?
How are you going to communicate it to them?’
‘If I told you that, I doubt whether the number would remain untapped for very long.
We're paying an extremely high price to get my father back.
We have no intention of putting the success of that operation at risk because of the usual bungling by the authorities.’
‘I take it you've asked for guarantees,’ Zen put in quietly.
Pietro Miletti turned at the door.
‘What guarantees?’
‘How do you know your father is still alive?’
‘We just got a letter from him!’
‘How do you know when he wrote it?
You should make it a condition of payment that the gang supplies a Polaroid photograph of your father holding the mornings paper on the day the drop is made.
That will incidentally also establish that the people you're dealing with have still got possession.’
‘Possession of what?’
His tone was reasonable and polite, a senior manager seeking specialized information from a consultant.
‘The negotiations for your father's release have been very long drawn out,’ Zen explained.
‘It may well be that the original kidnappers couldn't afford to wait so long.
It would depend on their financial situation, how the other jobs they're involved in are going.
If they need some quick cash they may have sold your father to another group as a long-term investment.’
Pietro Miletti repeated his short laugh.
‘My God, are we talking about a business in second-hand victims?’
Luciano Bartocci had been shuffling papers about noisily on his desk in an attempt to disrupt this exchange from which he was excluded.
‘There is just one other thing….’ he began.
Pietro Miletti cut him off.
‘But what does it matter, after all?
We don't mind who we pay as long as we get my father back.’
‘But you wouldn't want to pay one gang and then find that they'd sold your father to another, would you?’
‘There is just one other thing,’ the magistrate repeated.
‘When the pay-off is made, one of the people present will be Commissioner Zen.’
Bartocci might previously have had some difficulty in making himself heard, but now he instantly had the total attention of both men.
It was so still in the room that it seemed the three had suspended their dealings by mutual consent in order to catch the barely audible undulations of a distant ambulance siren.
‘You must be crazy,’ Pietro Miletti said at last.
The young magistrate did actually look slightly mad.
His eyes were bright with determination, his face flushed with a sense of the risks he was taking, and the still born smile twitched away at the comer of his mouth as though he was trying to eat his beard.
‘Should you refuse to cooperate,’ he went on, ‘I must warn you that as from this evening each member of your family and household staff will be under surveillance twenty-four hours a day by a team of Commissioner Zen's men from Rome.’
He gave Zen a long, level look, daring him to deny it.
‘Naturally this flurry of police activity will get into the newspapers.
The kidnappers will quite possibly call off the whole operation.’
‘How dare you, Bartocci?’
Pietro Miletti's voice was quiet and curious.
Despite its rhetorical form, the question seemed to have real meaning.
‘How dare you make my father a pawn in your games?’
The investigating magistrate steepled his fingertips judiciously.
‘Dottore, we are all here in our official capacities.
You represent your family.
Commissioner Zen and I represent the State.
As such our duties are clearly laid down in the Criminal Code.
They are to investigate crimes, prevent them from being carried out, discover the guilty parties and take any further steps necessary to uphold the law.
In our official capacities that is all that we need do.
But we are not simply judges or police officials, we are also human beings, and as human beings we sympathize deeply and sincerely with the terrible situation in which the Miletti family find themselves, and wish to do everything possible to bring it to a swift and satisfactory conclusion.
At the same time, we cannot ignore our duty.
And so, after long and careful deliberation, we have arrived at a compromise between our official responsibilities and our natural wish to avoid hindering your father's release in any way.
It is this compromise which I have just outlined to you.
I believe that you would be well advised to accept it.’
Pietro Miletti shook his head slowly.
‘How can you even consider putting my father's safety at risk?’
‘There is no risk,’ Bartocci assured him.
‘No risk whatsoever.
Isn't that so, Commissioner?’
Zen's mouth opened and closed soundlessly.
You bastard, he was thinking.
You shifty little bastard.
But Pietro Miletti was not interested in Zen's opinion.
‘The kidnappers have just given us quite explicit instructions not to involve the police in any way, yet you claim that we can send a senior officer along on the pay-off itself without there being any risk!’
Bartocci waved the objection aside.
‘They won't know that he's a police official.’
Pietro Miletti stood staring intently at the magistrate.
‘Why, Bartocci?
You're going to alienate half the city, put my father's life at risk, all for what?
What's in it for you?
Why are you prepared to play such a desperate game, to put your whole future in jeopardy like this?’
‘How dare you threaten me?’
Bartocci shot back.
After a moment Pietro shrugged and turned away.
‘I shall have to discuss the whole matter with the rest of the family.’
‘Since when has the Miletti family been run as a cooperative?’
Bartocci jeered.
‘I shall contact you tomorrow morning.’
‘You'll contact me by three o'clock this afternoon,’ the magistrate insisted.
‘Otherwise I shall have no alternative but to allow Commissioner Zen to put his men in position.’
Bartocci made Zen sound like a mad dog he was managing to restrain only with the greatest difficulty.
Pietro Miletti turned in the doorway.
‘Needless to say, if we do agree, the responsibility for the consequences of that decision will be on your heads.
You might like to think about that before committing yourselves to this course of action.’
‘I tell you there isn't the slightest risk!’
‘That's what they told Valesio.’
As the door closed, Zen let out a breath he realized he had been holding for a long time.
And to think he'd been agonizing about what line to take on Bartocci's conspiracy theory!
No need for that now.
Henceforth, as far as the Milettis were concerned, Zen was Bartocci's accomplice, the henchman whose men were to be used to enforce their enemy's will.
‘You're prepared to go, I suppose?’ the magistrate asked him with a studied casualness Zen found rather insulting.
‘It's my job.
But I would have preferred to know you were going to do it.’
Bartocci laughed boyishly.
‘I didn't know I was going to do it myself until it happened!’
He walked over to one of the shelves in the end wall and took down a large box-file.
Zen thought he was going to be shown some decisive new piece of evidence, but Bartocci simply reached through the space left vacant on the shelf and with a grunt of effort manipulated a lever.
There was a loud metallic click and the whole section of wall swung outwards.
‘It was this business about the letter that decided me,’ the magistrate continued, as a widening slice of the outside world appeared in the gap.
‘Clearly the reason they claim to have burnt it is simply that they realize it would be too risky to let us examine it.’
The view expanded as he pushed the twin doors fully open.
There was a small balcony just outside the hidden window, now inaccessible and covered in pigeon droppings.
‘So according to the Milettis, what have we got?’
Bartocci asked rhetorically, counting off the points on his outspread fingers.
‘One telephone call which could easily have been faked from any phone box, a letter which no one outside the family has seen, and a pay-off which will supposedly take place once arrangements have been made over a telephone  number they refuse to disclose.
If I hadn't insisted on you going along on the drop we would have absolutely no proof that it had ever taken place!
It's a conjuring trick!
The money which has suddenly and mysteriously become available simply vanishes into thin air as Ruggiero Miletti magically reappears.
And from that moment on there would be absolutely no way of ever proving that the whole thing had been faked.
No, this pay-off is our last chance, and one that I wasn't prepared to let slip.’
They stood gazing out at the few early swallows looping around the hazy, fragrant air.
‘It's all coming together!’
Bartocci muttered excitedly, as though to himself.
‘So many separate bits of evidence all pointing in the same direction.
Yes, it's coming together!’
Despite his lingering feeling of resentment, Zen watched the young magistrate with an almost fatherly tenderness.
He knew that he was feeling what Zen himself had felt often enough in the past, on one fateful occasion in particular: this time the bastards are not going to get away with it.
5
Smiling!
Everyone was smiling and applauding!
The chubby, balding presenter was smiling, the blonde starlet was smiling, the famous politician was smiling, the best-selling journalist was smiling, while the clean, well-drilled young people dancing around them were smiling hardest of all.
Even the balloons they released as they gambolled about seemed to have a sleek, benevolent look as they rose, passing a shower of confetti as dense and continuous as the applause on its way down.
‘Make me a coffee, will you?’
The barman dragged himself away from the knot of men deep in conversation about the price fetched by a piece of land across the road.
‘And not even big enough to have a decent crap on!’ he hurled over his shoulder before turning to jab a finger at Zen.
‘Coffee?’ he demanded accusingly.
Zen popped two motion-sickness pills out of their plastic nests and put them in his mouth.
One to two, the box said.
Better safe than sorry.
On the way back to his conversation the barman punched a button on the television and suddenly they were in Texas, where folk lived and loved fit to bust and discussed it all in idiomatic but poorly synchronized Italian.
When the call finally came, it took Zen several moments to realize that the phone wasn't ringing in Sue Ellen's en suite boudoir but in the dingy pool-room at the end of the bar, where a pack of the local rogue males were playing throwing-billiards.
He just managed to beat one of them to the receiver.
‘Avellino.’
He had the list of the First Division fixtures ready.
Avellino were at home to the champions.
‘Juventus.’
There was a loud clack behind him as one of the players hurled the white down the table, scattering the colours.
‘Take the Cesena road.
Stop at the sign ‘Sansepolcro one kilometre’.
At the base of the pole.’
The line went dead and a moment later he heard the characteristic click as the interception machinery disengaged.
Outside it was pitch-dark and spitting with rain.
The large Fiat saloon parked in the piazza looked ridiculous with a yellow child's cot strapped to the roof, but this had seemingly been stipulated by the gang to make it easier for them to identify the car.
Zen climbed into the nearside front seat.
‘Take the Cesena road.’
The faint light from the dashboard caught a gold filigree ear-ring spelling ‘Ivy’ in flowing script.
The ear-ring was typical of its wearer's taste, he thought.
It was presumably real gold, yet it somehow contrived to look brash and cheap, like junk jewellery trying to make up in flash what it lacked in value.
When the Fiat had emerged from the gateway of the Miletti villa at five o'clock that afternoon, Zen had been astonished to find that his driver for the ransom drop was to be Silvio's secretary, Ivy Cook.
He had been waiting there since hearing from Bartocci, less than an hour earlier, that the kidnappers had been in touch and that the car would be leaving as soon as it got dark.
Pietro had finally agreed to Zen's presence, on condition that there was no contact until the pay-off actually began, so during the intervening forty-eight hours he had had nothing to do with the case beyond having the ransom money photographed to record the serial numbers and finalizing the arrangements for collecting Ruggiero when he was released.
The family's passive resistance continued right up to the last moment: Zen was not permitted to set foot on Miletti soil but had to wait for the Fiat in the street, beyond the imposing wrought-iron gates.
He'd had plenty of time to speculate about who else would be in the car.
He thought he had covered every possibility, but in the event the Milettis had amazed him.
But if the Milettis had scored a point with their choice of driver, Zen felt that he got one back when Ivy named their destination: the bar, identified by Lucaroni, where Ubaldo Valesio had gone to receive the phone calls from the gang, situated in a village about ten kilometres from Perugia.
Calculating that the kidnappers might use the same initial rendezvous, Zen had informed Bartocci, who had authorized a phone-tap.
The resulting tapes would be voice-printed and compared with existing samples.
The headlights of the Fiat swept from one side of the narrow winding road to the other, picking out an area of ploughed field, a thicket of scrub oaks with last year's brown leaves still clinging to the branches, an ancient wooden cart fitted with modern lorry tyres, an abandoned barn covered with posters for a dance band called ‘The Lads of the Adriatic’, a dirt track leading off into the hills.
Ivy drove steadily but not too fast, and thanks to the pills he had taken Zen was not worried about the prospect of nausea.
He even felt a rather pleasant sense of detachment from what was going on, almost as though everything around him were happening on television and the barman might switch to another channel at any moment.
Perhaps it was just due to the way he'd been sleeping lately, a restless, shallow sleep full of dreams which never seemed to work themselves out properly, leaving him half-enmeshed in their elaborate complexities even after waking.
In the morning his head felt as if the cast of a soap opera had moved in uninvited during the night, and the effort of following their interminable dreary intrigues left him mentally soiled and worn, less refreshed than when he'd gone to bed.
Or was it simply fear?
For he was acutely aware that Ubaldo Valesio had waited in that bar, used that phone, and then walked out of that door, got into his car and never come back.
Bartocci might be convinced of his conspiracy theory, but Zen just couldn't take it seriously, much as he would have liked to.
He had never taken part in a ransom drop personally before, but he knew what an extremely delicate moment it was.
In a way it mirrored the original kidnapping itself, and carried almost equal risks for everyone concerned.
It was a time when nerves were tense and misunderstandings costly or even fatal, a time when anything and everything might go wrong.
He turned slightly so that he could see Ivy out of the comer of his eye.
She didn't look frightened, but neither did she look as though she was faking anything.
There was tension in the lines at the comers of her mouth, but also determination and a sense of great inner strength.
Ivy Cook wouldn't crack easily, that was one thing.
‘Is it far now?’ he asked.
‘About ten minutes.’
Her strange deep voice pronounced the words like a parody of someone from the Trento area, where the warm and cold currents of Italian and German meet and mingle.
‘What are we supposed to do when we reach the Cesena road?’ she went on.
It seemed to take him an age to remember.
‘We have to find a sign beside the road reading ‘Sansepolcro one kilometre’.
I suppose they've left another message there.’
‘It's like a treasure hunt.’
When he had met Ivy at Crepi's dinner party her appearance had struck him as so wilfully bizarre that he had written it off as a freak effect, as though all her luggage had been lost and she'd had to raid the oddments put aside for collection by the missionary brothers.
But evidently her appearance that first evening had constituted a rule rather than an exception.
Tonight's colour scheme was more sombre but just as tasteless: chocolate-brown slacks, a violet pullover and a green suede jacket.
: ‘You're English, then?’
The association of thought was clear only to him, luckily!
‘My family is.
I was born in South Africa.
And you're from Venice, I believe?’
‘That's right.
A district called Cannaregio, near the station.’
A fine rain blurred the view.
‘Have you lived in Italy for long?’
Ivy turned on the wipers.
‘Years!’
‘How did that happen?’
‘I was on a tour of Europe.
People take a couple of years off, buy a camper and explore the world.
Then they go back  home, get steady jobs and never leave South Africa again.
I just didn't go home.’
A patch of lights off to the right revealed the presence of a town which slowly orbited them and disappeared into the darkness.
Slip-roads came and went, labelled with the names of famous cities: Arezzo, Gubbio, Urbino, Sansepolcro.
Then the road stretched away before them again, bare and gleaming and straight and dark, like a tunnel…
‘What?’
Ivy was looking at him with a peculiar expression.
He realized that he had just murmured something under his breath.
‘Nothing.’
Jesus, what was in those capsules?
He hadn't even needed a prescription to buy them.
Surely they were just like aspirin?
The government should step in, warn people, ban the things.
He had said, ‘Daddy?’
Then reality started to move so fast that by the time he caught up it was all over and they were parked on the hard shoulder.
Replaying the sequence he realized that Ivy had braked hard, the car swerving slightly on the greasy surface, then backed up.
Now she was looking at him expectantly.
‘Yes?’ he said.
She pointed out of the window.
‘Isn't that it?’
He looked out and saw the sign.
Outside it was cold and blustery, speckled with droplets of water gusting against his face.
The base of the circular grey pole was concealed in a clump of long brown grass.
A large spider's web strung between the base of the sign and the pole bellied back and forth in the wind, the spider itself clinging fast to it.
Beneath the strands of dead grass his fingers touched something hard.
He pulled out an empty pasta box sealed at one end with industrial adhesive tape.
The damp cardboard showed a picture of a smiling mother serving a huge bowl of spaghetti to her smiling husband and two smiling children.
‘Get this fabulous apron absolutely free!’ exhorted a slash across the comer of the packet.
‘Is everything all right?’
Ivy had the door open and was leaning out, looking impatient.
‘I'm just coming.’
He tried to strip off the tape, but it was too tough and his fingers were numb and he couldn't find where it began.
When he got back to the car Ivy took it away from him and opened the other end.
Why hadn't that occurred to him?
She took out a cassette tape and pushed it into the car's tape-deck.
After a short hissy silence there was the usual voice.
‘Play this tape once only, then put it back where you found it.
At the Sansepolcro turn-off take the road to Rimini.
When you reach the crossroads beyond Novafeltria stop and wait.’
There was the sound of a car behind them and it suddenly became very light.
Then a figure appeared on Ivy's side and rapped on the window.
She opened it.
‘See your papers?’
The Carabinieri patrolman had the raw look of a recruit freshly dug up from one of the no-hope regions of the deep South and put through the human equivalent of a potato-peeling machine.
The uniform he was wearing seemed to have been assembled from outfits designed to fit several very different people: the sleeves were too long and the neck too wide, while the cap was so small it had left a pink welt around his forehead.
He scrutinized the documents as if they were a puzzle picture in which he had to spot the deliberate mistakes.
Then he looked suspiciously around the car.
‘Having problems?’
‘Just stopped for a look at the map,’ Ivy told him.
‘It's illegal to park on the hard shoulder except in case of emergency.’
‘I'm sorry.
We were just leaving.’
The patrolman grunted and walked back to his vehicle.
Ivy started the engine.
‘The tape,’ Zen reminded her.
‘We've got to put it back.’
They sat and waited.
Fifteen seconds.
Thirty seconds.
The headlights behind showed no sign of moving.
Zen palmed the cassette and got out.
He walked to the verge and made a show of urinating.
After a few minutes the  Carabinieri vehicle revved up and screeched off down the road.
Zen slipped the tape back in its nest of grass at the foot of the pole and hurried back.
It was only when they reached the turning to Sansepolcro that he felt something hard underneath his foot.
‘Damn!
I forgot to put the box back.’
‘Does it matter?’
There was no telling, that was the problem.
The responsibility for the consequences will be on your heads, Pietro Miletti had said.
All along Zen had been haunted by the idea that he might make some blunder which would hang over him for the rest of his life, yet here he was behaving like a dope addict.
He felt an overwhelming desire for a cigarette, but Ivy was a non-smoker and he had agreed not to smoke in the car.
The road to Rimini by-passed the town and in a few moments they were out in the wilds again, labouring up a steep, tortuous medieval track on which modern civilization had done no more than slap a layer of asphalt and a road number.
The ascent was arduous and prolonged, twisting and turning upwards for more than twelve kilometres to the pass, almost a thousand metres high.
The starkness of the landscape revealed by the headlights penetrated the car like a draught.
Zen sat there unhappily taking it all in.
He didn't much care for nature in the raw: it was messy and wasteful and there was too much of it.
This was a fertile source of incomprehension between him and Ellen.
The wilder and more extensive the view, the better she liked it.
‘Look at that!’ she would exclaim, indicating some appalling mass of barren rock.
‘Isn't it magnificent?’
Zen had long given up trying to understand.
It all came of her being American, he supposed.
Americans had more nature than anything else except money, and they got pretty excited about that too.
To take his mind off the scene outside he looked at his companion instead.
Part of the oddness of her appearance, he realized, came from the fact that she didn't look like a woman so much as a rather inept female impersonator.
Not that there was anything butch about her.
On the contrary, it was precisely the excessive femininity, laid on with a trowel as it were, that created the effect of someone pretending to be a woman, someone in fact rather desperately hoping to be taken for one.
But this desperation was perhaps understandable.
Certainly her role in the Miletti household appeared to be anything but feminine.
She was evidently their dogsbody, used for tasks which no one else was prepared to take on.
Typically, it had been Ivy, he'd learned, who had been sent to collect the letter from Ruggiero which the gang had left in the rubbish skip.
‘Are you married, Commissioner?’ she asked suddenly.
It was the first remark she had volunteered all evening.
‘Separated.
And you?’
‘What do you think?’
Zen had no idea what he was supposed to think.
Eventually Ivy herself seemed to sense the need for an explanation.
‘My association with Silvio rather precludes marriage.’
They rounded yet another bend, the headlights sweeping over a bald expanse of stricken scanty grass.
It had started to rain more heavily, unless they were now actually up inside the clouds.
‘If you really want a cigarette very badly I think on the whole I should prefer you to have one,’ Ivy told him.
He gave an embarrassed laugh.:
‘Is it that obvious?’
‘Well, you keep fiddling with the ashtray and pushing the cigarette lighter in and out.
Just open the window a crack.’
‘What about the rest of the Milettis?’
Zen asked as he lit up.
The wind burbled at his ear like frantic drumming.
‘What about them?’
‘How do you get on with them?’
She took a moment to think.
‘They find me useful, on occasion.’
‘I still remember how Cinzia Miletti treated you that evening at Crepi's.’
‘Poor Cinzia!’ murmured Ivy.
‘She's terribly unhappy.’
‘Isn't it a bit of a strain, though, living in the same house with them?’
‘Oh, I don't.
They would never stand for it.
Ruggiero would have a fit!’
She laughed gaily, as though Ruggiero Miletti's attitude was frightfully amusing.
‘No, I have a little flat of my own, although I have been spending more time than usual at the villa since the kidnapping.
But I'll be very glad when it's all over and things return to normal.’
‘But you and Ruggiero don't get on?’
That gave her pause.
‘Well, he doesn't have a very high opinion of either foreigners or women,’ she said at last.
‘That places me at something of a disadvantage.’
Zen didn't reply at once.
He was at the honeymoon stage with his cigarette, listening to the nicotine marching through his blood.
‘And yet you're looking forward to his getting back?
I don't understand.’
‘It's a question of the lesser of two evils.
At least we all know where we are when he's around.
For the last few months everything has rather fallen apart.
Ruggiero kept all the reins in his own hands, you see.
So in a sense I'll be glad when he is back, despite his attitude to me.’
He decided to risk a shot in the dark.
‘Is it your relationship with Silvio that Ruggiero objects to?’
‘Why do you say that?’ she snapped.
Clearly this was a sensitive topic.
Then she laughed, as if to cover her outburst.
‘Anyway, you're quite right.
Silvio is a very complex and tormented personality, someone who has great difficulty in coming to terms with the demands of life.
I help to ease that burden for him.
Ruggiero doesn't accept that, perhaps because it would mean accepting responsibility for the way his son's turned out.’
‘In what way is he responsible?’
The cigarette had suddenly turned bad on him.
‘Oh, in all sorts of ways.
He was responsible for Loredana's death, for one thing.
Silvio has never really recovered from that.’
‘What happened?’
‘Ruggiero was driving her back from Rome late one night, and somehow the car left the road and ended up against a tree.
Loredana was killed instantly.
Ruggiero's legs and  collar-bone were broken and he was trapped in the wreckage for almost seven hours, pinned beside her corpse.
He was discovered the next morning by a boy on his way to school.
People say he has never been the same since.
Loredana moderated the violence of his personality, or at least sheltered the children from it.
After her death they certainly took the full brunt, Silvio in particular.
He was only thirteen and he'd been particularly close to his mother.
Her death was a great blow to him, and I imagine Ruggiero handled it in exactly the wrong way, telling him to snap out of it, stop snivelling, that sort of thing.
He's a man who has crushed all softness in himself, so why should his son be indulged, be allowed to cry and display his grief, be stroked and cuddled and consoled when he never was?
Of course, Cinzia suffered terribly too.
The others rather less, I think.
Pietro was old enough to cope better, Daniele too young to understand.’
Zen wound down the window and let his half-smoked cigarette be sucked out into the airstream.
The conversation no longer kept the landscape at bay but intensified it, showing its desolation to be a reality not merely natural but also human.
Eventually the car slowed to a halt.
The rain was now pelting down, covering the windows with a coat of water as thick and opaque as glycerine.
The headlights created a luminous swathe ahead of the car, but nothing was visible except a variety of shapes which obstinately refused to become more than that.
Ivy turned the engine off.
Nothing moved outside, and the only sound was the steady metallic drumming on the roof of the car.
‘Why did you ask if I was married?’
Zen asked.
She glanced at him briefly.
‘I don't know.
To break the silence, I suppose.
Why does one ask anything?’
He leaned closer to the window, but saw even less as his breath fogged the glass.
‘Well, in my case it's usually to get information out of people,’ he said.
‘Then after a while it becomes a habit, like those teachers who speak to everyone as though they're five years old.’
‘I suppose I was trying to make you seem more human.
I'm  frightened of the police, you see, like most people.
Almost as frightened as I am of this gang.’
The minutes slipped away, their passage recorded with unnecessary precision by the digital clock on the instrument panel.
‘They don't ever attack people, do they?’
It sounded as though the reality of what they were doing had come home to her for the first time.
‘Who, the police?’ he joked.
Her expression showed that she no longer had any time for jokes.
‘No, it's completely unheard of,’ he assured her.
‘All they want from us is the money that's in the boot.
We won't even see them, probably.’
The rain ceased abruptly, as if it had been turned off.
‘I think I'll just stretch my legs a bit,’ Zen announced.
The whole night was in motion, its gusts glancing blows from currents active on the fringes of the turbulence centred somewhere in the clouds swirling about overhead.
The visibility had improved slightly.
What he had taken to be a gate turned out to be a wall, the hump on the ground near by a heap of gravel and the massive bulk on the other side of the road a barn whose gable end still bore the faded icon of a helmeted Mussolini and the slogan ‘It is important to win, but still more important to fight.’
At first the sound might have been thunder, or an animal.
Next a light appeared, and a moment later a shape swept out of the night, big as a centaur, its blinding eye striking him along with something solid.
Then it was gone, leaving a weighted envelope Iying on the wet black asphalt at his feet.
Back in the car he showed Ivy the black-and-white Polaroid photograph it contained.
'That's Ruggiero,’ she confirmed.
The picture showed a stocky man with a shock of white hair and the typical Umbrian moon-face, wearing a chequered shirt open at the neck and holding up a newspaper.
He looked resentful and slightly embarrassed, like an elderly relative who had grudgingly agreed to pose in order to keep the peace at a Christmas party.
The photo might have been modelled on those sent by the Red Brigades during the Moro  kidnapping, but where those middle-class intellectuals had used the centre-left Repubblica to mark the date, Ruggiero Miletti was holding the Nazione, just the kind of paper which a bunch of good Catholic boys like the kidnappers would choose.
Ivy took the envelope from him, widened the opening and extracted a small coil of blue plastic strip about a centimetre wide.
A message had been punched out in capital letters with a labelling machine.
‘PUT PHOTO AND MESSAGE BACK IN ENVELOPE LEAVE HERE FOLLOW BIKE.’
Zen slipped the photo and tape back into the envelope, opened the door and let them drop out.
‘Right, well, let's get on with it.’
For the next three hours the motorbike led them a nightmare chase over more than a hundred kilometres of mountain roads that were often little more than channels covered by scree and loose gravel, furrowed by rain-water and ridged by surfacing strata of rock.
All they ever saw of their guide was a faint distant tail-light, and then only rarely, at irregular moments after long periods of doubt when it seemed that they had lost the scent, made the wrong decision at some unmarked junction up in the stormy darkness.
The driving demanded constant attention.
Only a narrow range of speeds was viable.
Below that the car risked bogging down in the mud or grounding on an obstacle, above it the tyres might lose adhesion on the continual twists and turns or cliff-like descents, or one of the vicious pot-holes or rock outcrops rupture the suspension or pierce the sump.
They hardly exchanged a word.
Ivy had her hands full with the driving, and although Zen soon gave up trying to follow their route on the maps he had brought with him, which proved to bear only a partial and rather disturbing resemblance to the landscape, like a mild hallucination, he kept up a show of poring over them to try and assuage his guilt at being a mere passenger, unable to share her burden.
And still the faint red light up ahead came and went by fits and starts, leading them on across gale-swept open moorland, through massively still pine forests, up exposed dirt tracks and over passes whose names had vanished with the inhabitants of the farms where until a few decades earlier generation after generation of  human beings had eked out lives of almost unimaginable deprivation.
It was after midnight when a set of headlights appeared behind them, flooding the interior of the car with light.
Ivy squinted, trying to shut out the glare that made her task still more difficult.
‘What's going on?’ she asked edgily.
‘They must be gating us in.’
Then everything happened at once.
The motorbike slowed so that for the first time they could see the outlines of the rider, a derelict farmhouse appeared in its headlight beam and the car behind them started flashing its lights.
Figures appeared in the road ahead, waving them into the yard of the farmhouse.
Their faces were black and completely featureless except for two oval eye-slits, the head hooded, the body shrouded in shiny waterproof capes.
There were piercing whistles, then a thump as they opened the boot, where the money was packed in cardboard boxes wrapped in plastic rubbish bags.
With a series of dull thuds and strangely intimate bumps the unloading began, punctuated by more of the raucous, inhuman whistles which finally blew away the remaining shreds of doubt in Zen's mind about the reality of the kidnapping.
That eerie keening, like the cry of a great predator, was used by shepherds to communicate across the vast wind-swept spaces in which they lived and worked.
No outsider, no amateur, could ever fake that sound.
The rain, which had been coming and going, began to pour down again, spattering in big gobs all over the glass around them.
In the still warmth of the car, bathed in the calm green glow of the instrument panel, it was impossible to imagine what conditions were like out there.
Inside and outside seemed so absolutely separate that once again Zen, drifting off into pleasantly dopey inattention, had the sensation of being a mere spectator of screen images, some television documentary about hardy men who did dangerous work for big money.
‘What's happening?’
Ivy whispered fearfully.
The activity at the back of the car had ceased and it had fallen silent.
‘They're probably checking the money.’
He could make out nothing in the darkness around the car.
The headlights revealed only the worn flagstones of the farmyard, the archway into the byre on the ground floor of the house, the crumbling steps that had once given access to the living quarters above.
The door was staved in and torn half off its hinges in what looked like an act of senseless violence.
At one of the gaping window frames a bit of ragged cloth twitched and flapped spasmodically in the wind.
‘Perhaps they've gone,’ Ivy whispered.
He didn't answer.
‘Can't we go?’
‘Not yet.’
Even before he finished speaking a caped and hooded figure appeared at Ivy's shoulder, the door was wrenched open and a powerful torch shone into their faces.
‘Out!
Out!
Out!’
The next instant the door behind him opened too, transforming the interior of the car into a wind tunnel.
A huge hand grabbed Zen's shoulder and dragged him outside, shoving him up against the side of the car.
Light hit his face as hard as the stinging raindrops.
Then it abruptly disappeared, and all he could see were entrancing coloured patterns chasing each other about the glowing darkness like tropical fish.
The pain was so unexpected, so absolute, that he had no name for it and fell over without a sound, like a baby, too shocked to make any fuss.
‘Fuckarse cocksucker of a cop!’
He could just make out the outline of the figure in front of him, sweeping its heavy cape to one side, then something smashed into the side of his head.
They've shot me, he thought.
They've shot me like they did Valesio.
They're proving they exist, punishing us for not believing in them, like gods.
With a strange detachment he noted the final sequence of events: the roar of a car engine near by, the boot drawn back, the hiss of a tyre skidding past, the oddly painless blast which ended it.
Like Trotsky and the ice-man, he thought.
Of course!
The  solution was so obvious, so satisfying, that there was no need to try and understand it.
That explained the cold, too.
Obviously if it weren't cold the ice would melt.
In fact some of it already had.
The hard, smooth surface pressed to his face was covered in water.
As for the purposeful darkness tugging at his clothing, this must be the wind in the tunnel.
The only question, in fact, was where his father had gone, why he had left him alone.
No doubt there was an answer to that, too, but he couldn't think what it was.
Once again he called weakly, but as before there was no reply.
He lay back, stretched out on the cold wet tracks, waiting for the express to Russia to come and chop off his head.
The telephone call could hardly have been vaguer.
‘One of your men is by the farm up above Santa Sofia there, above the river, up there on the way to the church.’
The voice was male, adult, uneducated, with a strong Calabrian accent.
It was one forty-three in the morning and the duty sergeant wasn't quite sure whether he was dealing with a wrong number, a hoax, or an emergency.
But the next words made sense all right.
‘You'd better go get him before he dies.’
The Carabinieri station was at Bagno di Romagna, a small town high up in the Apennines on the borders of Tuscany and Emilia-Romagna.
The locals were a staid lot; the sergeant, who was Sicilian, privately thought them dull.
They were not given to silly pranks at any time, let alone a quarter to two on Sunday morning.
So what the hell was going on?
He phoned his provincial headquarters at Cesena, who called regional headquarters at Bologna, who checked with their opposite numbers in Florence before confirming that no member of the force had been reported missing on either side of the Apennines.
Better get out there and have a look just the same, Cesena told him with a hint of malice.
Even down there in the coastal flatlands it was a wild night.
They could imagine what conditions must be like up in the  mountains, having done their stint in the sticks at one time or another.
Out where, though?
Apart from the undisputed fact that the farm in question was ‘up’, the sergeant knew only that it was near a village called Santa Sofia, above a river and on the way to a church.
He pored over his 1:100000 maps and finally selected four possibilities.
If none of them proved correct they would have to wait until dawn and call out a helicopter, by which time it would probably be too late.
The wind howled about the building, driving rain against the shutters.
They had been at it for over two and a half hours before the searchlight finally picked out the slumped body in the yard of an abandoned farm at over a thousand metres on the slopes of Mount Guffone.
The young private at the wheel let out a gasp of surprise.
‘You see?’ the sergeant exclaimed triumphantly.
His relief at not having been made a fool of was matched by his curiosity to find out who the devil he was, this man Iying chest down on the wet flagstones, face turned to one side as though asleep.
There were some quite nasty-looking cuts on his head, and the sergeant was a bit apprehensive about turning him over.
He would never forget that time when a corporal had been machine-gunned in an ambush on a country road near Palermo.
He'd been found Iying face down too, and the only sign of what had happened was a slight discoloration on the back of his jacket, as though some of the red dye from the trimming had leached on to the body of the black fabric.
But when they turned him over there was a sound like a fart and all his insides had sicked out, bits that weren't meant to be seen and which God accordingly hadn't bothered to finish off like the rest.
Amazingly, nothing had seemed to take any notice!
The sky was still blue, the sun still shone, somewhere near by a lark gibbered away.
Only he had watched, fascinated, as the pool of blood collecting around the spilt innards suddenly burst its confines and set off down the road, finding its way slowly and with difficulty, its bright fresh surface soon matted with dust and drowning insects.
‘What we going to do?’ asked the young private, a little concerned at the way his superior was acting.
‘Do?
Well, we've got to find out who he is, haven't we?’
In the end it was all right.
There were no serious injuries at all, in fact.
The man even mumbled something, and his eyelids flickered for a moment without opening.
‘No wonder no one knew about him!’ the sergeant exclaimed as he studied the identity card he had found in the man's wallet.
‘He's not one of ours at all.
Stupid bastard didn't know the difference.’
Or more likely didn't care, he thought.
The glorious traditions of the Service meant nothing to scum like that.
The man Iying at their feet mumbled something again.
‘Did you hear what he said?’ the sergeant asked.
The private made a face.
‘I'm not sure.
It sounded like he said ‘Daddy’.’
Yellowed light, stale warmth, a pervasive scent of chemicals: the contrast with his earlier dips into consciousness was total.
Zen was sitting on a stool under a bright light in a small white-curtained cubicle, thinking about Trotsky and the ice-man.
With his open-necked shirt, his air of dejected exhaustion and the newspaper spread open on his knee, he might almost have been a kidnap victim waiting to have his existence confirmed by means of a Polaroid photograph.
But in fact he was waiting for a different kind of photograph, a different kind of confirmation.
Trotsky and the ice-man had been his attempt to solve the problem of why he was still alive despite having been shot in the head.
Leon Trotsky protested with his dying breath that he had been shot, not stabbed, even though Stalin's killer had been caught with the ice-pick still in his hand.
Zen's mistake was less excusable, since all he'd suffered were a few hard kicks.
Then the wind and the darkness and the sense of utter abandonment had unlocked a memory which had already put in a passing appearance earlier that night.
It was a memory he hadn't known he had, and even now he knew very little about it beyond the fact that it involved him and his father and a railway tunnel.
He didn't know where or  when it had happened.
There they were, the two of them, walking into the tunnel.
It must have been on a main line, because there were two sets of tracks, and the mouth of the tunnel had seemed to him — he might have been five, six?— bigger than anything he had ever seen, bigger than anything he had known could exist.
They had gone a very long way into the tunnel.
He hadn't wanted to, but since his father was holding his hand it was all right.
When he looked round he found that the tunnel mouth had changed polarity and become a little patch of brightness, quite faint and very far away.
The silence echoed with large drips falling from the invisible curved mass above.
The air smelt dank and trapped despite the wind that poured past them, forcing them deeper into the solid darkness ahead.
Meanwhile his father, his voice reverberating in a way that hinted at the extent of the invisible spaces about them, told him about the tunnel, when it was opened and how long it was and how deep below the surface.
He pointed out the sloping white stripes on the walls, whose incline indicated the nearest of the niches providing protection for plate-layers who otherwise might end up under the wheels of one of the expresses which thundered over these rails, bound for famous foreign cities.
Then, without warning or explanation, the warm grip on his hand disappeared and the soothing voice fell silent.
It was only for a moment, no doubt, as adults measure time.
It must have been a joke, a little trick of the kind fathers like to play on their children, toying idly with their power, whimsical tyrants.
He knew that it had been a joke, because when it was over his father laughed so much that the laughter was still echoing around them as they started back towards the light.
It had sounded almost as though the tunnel itself were enjoying some deeper, darker joke whose significance not even his father had fully understood.
An unshaven young man in a white coat slouched into the cubicle and handed Zen three dark rectangular sheets of plastic.
‘No fractures.’
Zen held the X-rays up to the light.
They looked as  dubious as the photographs which are claimed to prove the existence of a spirit world: swirls and patches of white suspended in a grey mix.
‘You're sure?’
It certainly hurt badly enough.
But perhaps pain was no guide.
Oddly enough the worst was his shoulder, where the man had seized it to pull him out of the car.
‘It's only bruised,’ the orderly insisted.
‘But next time take it easy, eh?
I might be in the other car.’
Zen had told them he'd been involved in a traffic accident, which had got a good laugh all round when it emerged that he was from Venice.
For want of practice, Venetian drivers are proverbially supposed to be the worst in Italy.
He left the hospital and began to walk slowly along the boulevard leading back to the centre of Perugia.
The morning was quiet and warm.
The storm had blown itself out, leaving the sky pearly.
There was a mild southerly breeze.
A few people were about, returning from church or walking home with a newspaper or a neatly wrapped pastry.
He was glad that he had dismissed Palottino, although the Neapolitan had made it dear that he strongly disapproved of this mania for walking.
He had driven up to collect his superior from the Carabinieri post where he and his rescuers had returned as soon as Zen had recovered enough to assure the sergeant that he didn't need to call an ambulance.
As soon as they reached Bagno di Romagna Zen had phoned Geraci, who he'd left holding the fort, and inquired about Ivy Cook.
His greatest worry was that somehow his presence had compromised her, that he might have another corpse on his hands, another death on his conscience.
But Geraci was able to reassure him: Ivy had arrived home three hours earlier, badly shocked but unharmed.
The money had been taken but there had been no communication from the kidnappers.
While Zen waited for his driver to arrive, his hosts tried politely to find out who he was and what he'd been doing, but he remained deliberately vague.
Even with Palottino he had been discreet, not mentioning what the kidnapper had said to him.
And when the Neapolitan asked, ‘You don't think they knew?’
Zen had pretended not to understand.
‘Knew what?’
‘That you were from the police.’
‘How could they?’
Palottino had no answer to that, any more than Zen himself, though the question had tormented him for the whole drive back to Perugia.
How could they have known?
But they had, that was certain.
‘Fuckarse cocksucker of a cop,’ the man had said.
So they knew that their orders had been deliberately disobeyed.
This gang had already killed one man for less.
The thought of what they might even now be doing to Ruggiero Miletti took the sparkle and warmth out of the morning and made Zen realize how exhausted he was.
As he passed through a small piazza there was a shout and a boy appeared at a window holding a bulging plastic shopping bag which he let drop to a friend in the street who stood, arms raised to catch it.
But it was immediately obvious that the bag was too heavy and was falling much too fast.
At the last moment the boy below ran back.
The bag struck the paving, bounced, and now the boy caught it and peeled away the bag to reveal a football which he struck in a high, curling shot which ricocheted off the wall slightly to the left of a priest who had emerged from the large church which dosed off one end of the piazza.
Through the open door Zen could just make out the huge ornate crucifix above the high altar.
‘How could they?’ he murmured to himself again.
6
Twenty four hours later he was sitting out on the Corso.
It was brilliantly sunny and the atmosphere was charged with vitality and optimism.
One bar had even gone so far as to put a few tables outside, and on impulse Zen settled down to enjoy the sunlight and watch the show on the Corso.
This broad flat street was the city's living room.
The one place where you didn't need a reason for being.
Being there was reason enough, strolling back and forth greeting your friends and acquaintances, window shopping, showing off your new clothes or your new lover, occasionally dropping into one of the bars for a coffee or an ice-cream.
For about fifteen minutes he did nothing but sit there contentedly, sipping his coffee and watching their restless, flickering scene around him through half-open eyes: the tall, bearded man with a cigar and a fatuous grin who walked up and down at an unvarying even pace like a clockwork soldier, never looking at anybody; the plump ageing layabout in a Gestapo officers leather coat and dark glasses holding court outside the door of the cafe, trading secrets and scandal with his men friends, assessing the passers-by as thought they were for sale, calling after women and making hour-glass gestures with his hairy gold-ringed hands; a frail old man bent like an S, with a crazy harmless expression and a transistor radio pressed to his ear walking with the exaggerated urgency of those who have nowhere to go; slim Africans with leatherwork belts and bangles laid out on a piece of cloth; a Gypsy child sitting n the cold stone playing the same four note again and again on a cheap concertina; two foreigners with guitars an a small crowd around them; a beggar with his shirt pulled down over one shoulder to reveal the stump of an amputated arm; a  pudgy shapeless women with an open suitcase full of cigarette lighters and bootleg cassettes; the two Nordic girls at the next table, basking half-naked in the weak March sun as though this might be the last time it appeared this year.
At length Zen lazily drew out of his pocket the three items of mail he had collected from the Questura.
One was a letter stamped with the initials of the police trade union and addressed to Commissioner Italo Pompeo Baldoni.
He replaced this in his pocket and picked up a heavy cream-coloured envelope with his own name printed on it, and a postcard showing the Forum at sunset in gaudy and unrealistic colour with a message reading.
Are you still alive?
Give me a ring-if you have time.
Ellen.’
Putting this aside he tore open the cream-coloured envelope.
It contained four sheets of paper closely covered in unfamiliar handwriting, and it was a measure of how relaxed he was that it took him the best part of a minute to realise that he was holding a copy of the letter written by Ruggerio Miletti to his family three days previously.
My Children
If I address you collectively, it is because I no longer know who to address individually.
I no longer know who my friends are within the family.
I no longer know even if I have any friends.
Can you imagine how bitter it is for me to have to write that sentence?
I remember one day, long ago, when I was out hunting with my father.
He showed me a farmhouse, a solid four-square Umbrian tenant farm, surrounded by a grove of trees to break the wind.
Look, he said, that is what a family is.
Have many children, he told me, for children are and old man's only defence against the blows of fate I obeyed him.
In those days children obeyed their fathers.
But what has it availed me?
For you, my children, my only defence, my protection against the cruel winds of fate, what do you do?
Instead of sheltering me you turn to squabbling amongst yourselves, haggling over the cost of your own father freedom as though I were an ox brought to market.
It is not you but my kidnappers who care for me  now, who feed me and clothe me and shelter me while you sit safe and secure at home trying to find new ways to avoid paying for my release!
No doubt this tone surprises you.
It is incautious, ill-advised, is it not?
I should not permit myself such liberties!
After all, my life is in your hands.
If you treat me like an ox to be bargained for, I should be the more careful not to annoy you.
Swallow your pride and your anger, old man!
Father, plead, ingratiate and abase yourself before your all-powerful children!
Yes, that is what I should do, if I wished to match you in devious cunning.
But I don't.
You have refused to pay what has been asked for my return, but if you knew what I have become, a fearless old man with nothing left to lose, you would pay twice as much to have me kept away!
Whatever happens now, my children, we can never be again as we were.
Do you imagine that I could forgive and forget, knowing what I know now, or that any of you could meet my eye, knowing what you do?
No!
Though the ox escape the axe, it has smelt the blood and heard the bellows from the killing-floor, and it will never be fooled again.
I know you now!
And that knowledge is lodged in my heart like a splinter.
Nothing remains to me of the pleasures and possessions of my old life, which you now enjoy at my expense.
I have been forced to give them up.
But in recompense I have received a gift worth more than all the rest put together.
It is called freedom.
You laugh?
Not for long, I assure you!
For I shall prove to you how free I am.
Not free to indulge myself, to be sure.
Not free to come and go, to buy and sell, to control my destiny.
You have taken those freedoms from me.
Losing them was bitter, and my only reward is that now I can afford the one thing which with all my wealth and power I've never been able to permit myself until this moment.
I can afford to tell the truth.
I have paid dearly for it, God knows!
More than a hundred and forty days and nights of anguish to soul and body alike!
My leg, which never mended properly after the accident, has not liked being cooped and cramped and bound, and like a mistreated animal it has turned against its master, making itself all pain.
Yes, I have paid dearly.
So let me show you what I mean by freedom.
Let me tell you what I know, what I have learnt.
Let me tell each of you the truth, one by one.
I shall start with you, Daniele, my youngest, the spoilt darling of the family.
What a beautiful child you were!
How everyone doted on you!
Whatever happened to that little boy, all cuddles and kisses and cheeky sayings that set everyone in a roar?
Back in the sixties, when the kids seemed to think of nothing but politics and sex, I used to pray God almighty that my Daniele would never turn out like that.
It never occurred to me that he might turn out even worse, a vain, spineless, ignorant lout with no interest in anything but clothes and television and pop music, who would be rotting in gaol at this very minute if his family hadn't come to his rescue.
But when his own father needs to be rescued little Daniele is too busy to lift a finger, like the rest of you.
Cinzia I pass over in silence.
Women cannot betray me, for I have never made the mistake of trusting them.
The worst she could do was to bring that Tuscan adventurer into the family, since when none of us has had a moment's peace.
I can't claim to have had my eyes opened to your true character, Gianluigi, for they were wide open from the first.
Ask my daughter what I said to her on the subject!
However, she preferred to disobey me.
You think you're so clever, Gianluigi, and that's your problem, for your cleverness gleams like a wolf's fangs.
I at least was never fooled.
Take this business of the Japanese offer, for example.
Certainly the scheme you've worked out is very cunning.
I really admire the way the structure of the holding company leaves you in effective control of SIMP through an apparently insignificant position in the marketing subsidiary.
I suppose you thought that old Papa Miletti would be too stupid to spot that, wrapped up in a lot of technical detail about non-voting share blocks and nominal investment consortia?
Of course the kidnapping has given you an extra edge.
All you had to do was to hold up the negotiations until I got desperate and then bully me into authorizing the Japanese deal on the pretext of raising money to pay for my release!
In fact the kidnapping was  very well timed from your point of view, wasn't it?
It wouldn't even surprise me to learn that you set it up!
Beware of in-laws, my father used to say, and when he's Tuscan into the bargain I think we can expect just about anything.
But none of this really bothered me, it was all piss in the wind as long as my eldest boy was true.
Silvio I had already written off, of course.
I realized long ago that the only thing he has in common with other men is the prick between his legs.
God knows why — I made him the same way I made the rest of you — but there it is.
There's nothing manly to be expected from Silvio, unless that English witch knows something the rest of us don't.
Let him spit in her mouth and breed toads.
He'll never breed anything else, that's for sure.
But Pietro made up for all that and for everything else, or so I thought.
The rest of you, choke on this last gobbet of my scorn!
If he had been loyal I should never even have mentioned these playroom plots and tantrums of yours.
But what I didn't realize, and what has proved the gravest shock to me, is that Pietro is the worst of you all.
What a superb role he has invented for himself, the English gentleman who stands disdainfully aside from the vulgar squabbles of this Latin rabble to whom he has the misfortune to be related!
I've got to hand it to you, son, you're the only one who really managed to deceive me, the only one who could break your father's heart.
And you have, you have.
The others I could afford to lose, but you were too precious.
I loved you, I needed you, and blinded by my love and need I never looked at you closely enough.
But now I have, and I see what I should have seen a long time ago, the selfish, arrogant, unscrupulous fixer who has been quietly feathering his nest in London for the past ten years at our expense after turning his back on us as though we weren't good enough for him, who couldn't even be bothered to come home during this ordeal but just flew over on a weekend return when the mood took him, when he had nothing better to do, like the tourist he is!
Gianluigi likes to think he's clever, but you really are, Pietro.
You've inherited my brains and Loredana's morals, God rest her.
You don't instigate plots, because you know that plots get found out.
Instead you manipulate the plots of the others to your own ends, playing one off against the others, letting them waste their energies in fruitless rivalries while you look on from a safe distance, waiting patiently for the moment to make your move, the day when I drop dead and you can come home and claim your own.
Well, there we are, I've had my say.
How do you like yourselves, my children?
When you lie down tonight in your soft warm beds, think over what I have said.
Get up and look at yourselves in the mirror.
Look hard and long, and then think of your father Iying here tormented with cold and pain and fear and despair.
What follows has been dictated by my kidnappers.
For some reason they seem to believe that you will obey them this time.
First, then, the full ransom of ten million lire is to be paid immediately, in well-worn consecutively numbered notes…
There, at the foot of a page, the photocopy broke off.
Zen inspected the envelope.
It was of distinctive hand-laid paper with a griffin watermark and had been posted in Perugia the previous Thursday.
‘A personal and private family letter,’ Pietro Miletti had said.
‘A rather distressing document, not intended to be read by outsiders.
Certain passages made very disturbing reading.’
Yes, it was easy to see why the family who, as Antonio Crepi had put it, couldn't agree which sauce to have with their pasta, had found no difficulty in agreeing to burn Ruggiero's letter on the spot.
But this made it so obvious who had sent this copy that he was astonished that it had been sent at all.
When Pietro Miletti thought Zen must have seen the letter, he'd burst out, ‘But that's impossible!’
Then an idea occurred to him, and he added, ‘Unless…’
Now Zen knew what he had been thinking.
If the letter had been burnt in the presence of all the members of the family immediately after being read, then the copy could only have been sent to him before they received it, by the person who went to pick it up from the rubbish skip.
But that could wait.
This was urgent news and he must inform Bartocci at once.
Besides, he had not yet had a chance to speak to the investigating magistrate about the pay-off.
He tucked a two-thousand lire note under one of the saucers on the tray and went inside the cafe to phone.
Luciano Bartocci wasted no time on small talk.
‘Jesus Christ almighty, Zen, what the hell do you think you've been up to?’
He was too taken aback to reply.
‘The family are absolutely incensed, and quite naturally so.
How could you do such a thing?
I thought you were an experienced professional or I'd never have let you go in the first place!
Don't you realize the position this puts me in?’
‘What are you talking about?’
‘I'm talking about what happened at the pay-off, when you were beaten up.
The woman who drove you told us all about it.
It's no use trying to cover up now.’
‘I'm not trying to…’
Another voice broke in.
‘Maurizio?
Maurizio, is that you?’
‘It's in use!’
‘What?
Who is this?’
‘This line is in use, please put your phone down.’
There was a grunt and a click.
‘Hello?
Hello?’
‘I'm still here.’
‘The man who assaulted you called you a dirty cop, or words to that effect.
So evidently they knew who you were.
You must have given yourself away somehow.
It's absolutely unforgivable.’
‘They didn't find out from me!’
‘Then how did they find out?
Eh?’
Zen decided to give him the only answer he had been able to come up with.
‘Perhaps one of the family told them.’
‘That's nonsense!
Why should they do that?’
Zen put a hand out against the wall to steady himself.
‘How should I know?
The last I heard you thought they were behind the whole thing!’
‘Now, listen, that's enough!
I don't want to hear any more  talk of that kind.
This is a very serious situation you've got us into.
There's no telling what the gang may do now.’
Zen lowered the receiver and stared at it, as though its expression might help him understand the words it was uttering.
‘Hello?
Hello?’
Bartocci's voice emerged in a comically diminished squawk, like a character in a cartoon film.
The white-jacketed waiter scurried into the cafe carrying a tray on which a pyramid of empty cups and glasses was balanced.
‘Four coffees two beers one mineral water!’ he called to the barman.
With a sigh Zen raised the receiver again.
‘Look, dottore, they knew I was there before I got out of the car, before they'd even had a glimpse of me.’
‘I'd like to believe you, Zen.
But it's just not credible.
If the gang knew you were coming why did they allow the pay-off to continue?
Why didn't they just cancel the whole thing?’
‘I don't know.
All I know is that my presence was no surprise to them, but they decided to go ahead with the drop anyway.
And afterwards they went to the trouble of calling out the Carabinieri to make sure I didn't die of exposure.
So there's no reason to suppose that they're going to do anything stupid now.’
‘You and the kidnappers seem to have a perfect understanding, Zen.
They know what you're doing, you know what they're thinking.
I just hope you ‘re right.
For all our sakes.’
The line went dead.
A young man with a bad case of acne approached and pointed at the phone.
‘You finished?’
Yes, he had finished.
There was no point now in telling Bartocci about the letter he had received.
The young magistrate had embraced orthodoxy with the fervour of a recent convert.
He was no longer interested in sensational revelations by anonymous informants.
As Zen turned away he glanced at the calendar hanging beside the phone, and suddenly realized what day it was.
After all these years it had finally happened!
Come hell or high water, he'd always managed to get his mother a present  and to send her some flowers and a card.
But this time he had forgotten, and tomorrow was her birthday.
Then he remembered Palottino.
Since arriving in Perugia the Neapolitan's days had been spent slumped in the Alfetta in the car park beneath Zen's office window, reading comics and listening to the radio.
Yet poor Luigi was not happy.
He longed for action, yearned to be trusted with high responsibilities, to undertake prodigious feats requiring a cool head, a stout heart and nerves of steel.
Delivering a gift to Zen's mother didn't quite come into that category, but it was better than nothing.
Besides, he could pick up some Nazionali from Zen's tame tobacconist as well.
So it only remained to find a suitable present.
Forty minutes later he was still empty-handed and beginning to panic.
It was a feeling which often came over him in shops, a paralysis of the decision-making faculty.
Nevertheless he had to get something, and quickly, before the shops closed for lunch.
It was at this point that he found himself face to face with Cinzia Miletti.
‘Show me where they hit you!’ she cried.
‘Oh, is that all?
Surely it should be worse.
But you must tell me all about it, I can't wait to hear.
Come and have coffee, I'm just on my way home, you can help carry this.
Gianluigi's away and if that woman thinks I'm going to wait one second longer…’
Zen murmured something about needing to find his mother a present, and Cinzia immediately took charge.
‘Well now, let's see, it should be something traditional, characteristic, typical of the region.
Embroidery, for example, or does she collect ceramics?
I know, chocolates!
We'll get her a nice presentation pack, that one over there, local pottery.’
Even once Cinzia had bullied one of the assistants into offering Zen a discount, the item she had selected came to about three times what he had reckoned to spend, but he paid up.
A few minutes later the Deruta vase containing about half a kilo of assorted chocolates had been placed on the rear seat of the Volvo and he was sitting in the front watching Cinzia tear up the parking ticket which had been tucked under the windscreen wiper.
Cinzia Miletti drove as she talked, in a prolonged spasm characterized by unpredictable leaps and frenetic darts and  swerves, serenely unimpressed by the existence of other traffic.
The drive to her house just outside Perugia was littered with miraculously unachieved collisions.
Cinzia naturally also talked as she drove.
If anything she seemed even more voluble than usual, which Zen put down to embarrassment.
With her father's fate still undecided, he had caught her cruising the shops as though she hadn't a care in the world.
She was therefore at some pains to explain that the only reason she had come into Perugia at all was because of an appointment with Ivy Cook, of all people, who had telephoned her earlier that morning.
‘I must see you urgently, she tells me, shall I come out there or could you meet me in town?
So out of the kindness of my heart I agreed to come in.’
The kindness of Cinzia Miletti's heart was a quality Zen had considerable difficulty in imagining where Ivy Cook was concerned, but he found it easy enough to believe that in her husband's absence Cinzia had been feeling bored and had welcomed any excuse for going into Perugia.
‘Did she say what it was about?’
‘She didn't want to discuss it on the phone, that's all I know.
First of all I had the most awful trouble starting this thing.
We should never have got rid of the little Fiat we used to have which started first time every time and if anything did go wrong you could fix it with an elastic band or a bit of string, Gianluigi used to say, although personally I'm hopeless with machinery.
Anyway, when I got to the cafe where we were supposed to meet there's no sign of her!
Well, you can't get near her flat, they've closed the street, they're turning the whole city centre into a museum, next thing they'll be charging admission and closing in the afternoon.
I had to walk all the way round there in these shoes, they look good but believe me they're not meant for walking, and in the end she's not even home.
Have you ever heard anything like it?
I mean, it's really just the most infuriating thing conceivable, maddening, really.’
They were driving through the suburbs in the valley far below the ancient hill settlement forming the historic core of the city.
In the midst of concrete towers and slabs, the office blocks and apartment buildings of the new Perugia, stood an  old stone farmhouse, squat and sturdy, with its attendant chicken coops and vegetable garden, the walls dyed green by years of sulphur sprayed on the vines running up to form a pergola.
Was this the one Franco Miletti had pointed out to his son Ruggiero as an image of the family?
If so, the protective trees had gone, and the brutal buildings which had replaced them would channel the wind more fiercely, not screen it.
They crossed the strip of wasteland underneath the motorway link that came tunnelling and bridging its way through the hilly landscape, and entered a zone of fenced-off lots containing warehouses and sales-rooms, light industrial units and the offices of small businesses.
The whole area was no more than ten or fifteen years old, straggling along either side of what had once been a country road and ending messily with the shell of an unfinished building of some indeterminate nature.
Shortly afterwards Cinzia turned off along an unpaved minor road.
High boundary if fences marked the position of villas hiding coyly behind rows of evergreens.
Guard dogs hurled themselves against the wire and then chased the car the length of the property, barking frantically, while Cinzia told Zen how she had persuaded Gianluigi to buy a place in the country although he couldn't see the point, but to her nature was not a luxury but something fundamental, a source of sanity and order, did he understand what she meant?
They drew up in front of a pair of steel gates topped with spikes.
While Cinzia searched the glove compartment for the remote control unit, Zen noted the heavy-duty fencing with angled strands of barbed wire at the top and electronic sensors at the bottom, and the video camera mounted on a pole just inside the gates, all of it brand-new.
The local security equipment retailers had clearly done well out of Ruggiero Miletti's kidnapping.
Bartocci should have noticed details like that, thought Zen.
People don't go out and spend millions turning their homes into prison camps unless there is real fear in the air.
They were barely inside the front door when the elderly housekeeper appeared and told Cinzia that Signorina Cook had been looking for her.
‘What?’ shrieked Cinzia.
‘Here?
But she must be mad!’
‘She said you were supposed to meet her here.
She waited about ten minutes and then left.’.’
‘What nonsense!
Would I have bothered to go all the way into town if we had arranged to meet here?’
The housekeeper held up her hands in a conciliatory gesture and started saying something about a mistake.
But Cinzia was not to be mollified.
‘Oh no, she did it deliberately!
Well, I'll teach her to play tricks on me!’
She strode to the telephone and dialled.
After a moment or two she passed the receiver to Zen with an exclamation of disgust.
‘Just listen to this!’
‘…at the moment,’ Ivy's recorded voice said.
‘If you wish to leave a message please speak after the tone.’
‘I'll leave her a message all right, when I see her,’ Cinzia exclaimed, slamming the receiver down.
She turned to Zen, her anger apparently gone.
‘I'm going to change.
Look around, make yourself at home.
Margherita, make us some coffee.’
Zen stood there in the elegant and spacious sitting room, listening to the insistent voices of the glass and steel coffee table supporting a spray of glossy magazines, the pouchy leather furniture over which a huge lamp on a curved stainless-steel pole craned like a vulture, the silver plates and the crystal bowls, the discreetly modern canvases, the shelves lined with works of literature, the expensive antiques, the handwoven rugs on the gleaming parquet floor, the baby grand piano with a Mozart sonata Iying open on the stand, the fireplace piled high with logs.
The view from the picture window showed a carefully landscaped garden, a swimming pool, a tennis court, and a field where a wiry old gardener in baggy peasant clothing and a felt hat was tending his master's vines and olives.
Even nature was made to chatter.
‘Ah, so you've found our little secret, with your policeman's flair!’
The room had as many entrances and exits as a stage set Cinzia had appeared almost at his elbow.
She picked up a small statuette which he hadn't been aware of before.
‘But we didn't buy it from some grave-robber, you know.
I mean, that's totally wrong, taking the national heritage for your own selfish private use.
But you see, Gianluigi's cousin works in the museum and they've got so much stuff there they literally don't know what to do with it all, it just sits and rots in boxes in the cellar, no one ever sees it.
At least here it's cared for, admired, which is what they would have wanted.
Wonderful people, very sexual and full of life.
I'm sure I have Etruscan blood in me.’
She was wearing a short skirt with a big broad belt, a soft woollen pullover with a deep V-neck and a double string of pearls.
She had removed her shoes and stockings.
‘This wood is magic,’ she exclaimed.
‘In winter it's warm and in summer it's cool, can you explain that?
I can't, not that I want to.
I hate explanations, they ruin everything.
But you mustn't peek at my feet like that, poor horrible ugly deformed things.’
She moved restlessly about the room, lifting and rearranging things without any evident purpose.
‘Kant,’ she remarked, taking a book down from the shelf.
‘Have you read Kant?
I keep meaning to, but somehow I never get around to it.’
She curled up in the leather sofa that looked as comfortable as a bed and waved Zen into a matching armchair opposite.
‘So your husband's away?’ he queried.
‘In Milan, lucky pig!
Very urgent business which he'd been putting off.
But there's no point in him being here anyway, as far as I can see.
I mean there's nothing we can do, any of us.
It's just a question of waiting.’
Despite her alleged impatience to hear about his experiences during the pay-off, she made no attempt to refer to it again, launching instead into a blow-by-blow account of a film she had seen the previous evening, going on to explain that she loved films, really loved them, that the only place to see them properly was the cinema, that her favourite was a wonderful old place in the centre of town called the Minerva, and what a shame it was that no one went to the cinema any more.
The housekeeper brought in the coffee in an ornate silver tray which she deposited on one level of the Scandinavian  wall-system.
I've been in the family for generations, said the tray, so you can see that they're not just a bunch of jumped-up farmers like so many around these days.
Quite so commented the wall-system, but despite their solid roots these are modern progressive people with a truly cosmopolitan outlook.
Oh, shut up, Zen thought.
Just shut up.
‘Is your husband's trip to Milan connected with this Japanese deal I've been hearing about?’ he asked.
Cinzia's air of boredom deepened significantly.
‘He never discusses business with me.’
And you would do well to follow his example, her eyes added, because while I'm not very good at business there are other things that I am good at, very good indeed.
A lanky girl with a moody look walked in, strolled self-consciously over to the table and took a tangerine from a bowl.
‘Fetch me my cigarettes, will you, Loredana darling?’
Cinzia asked her.
‘Fetch them yourself.
You could use the exercise.’
Cinzia shot Zen a dazzling smile.
‘Do forgive her manners.
It's a difficult age, of course.
She'll start menstruating soon.’
The girl threw the cigarettes at her mother.
‘Much better talk openly about it!’
Cinzia continued calmly.
‘There's no need for us women to be ashamed of our bodies any more.’
‘It's not your fucking body,’ the girl shouted as she ran upstairs.
‘She's a crazy mixed-up kid,’ exclaimed Cinzia, as though this was one of her daughter's main virtues.
‘At the moment she keeps threatening to become a nun, if you please.
My other one's about somewhere too, little Sergio.
He's a darling!
Too much so, in fact.
I'm reading him the Greek myths at bedtime and I just hope when we get to Oedipus the penny will drop.
It's perfectly normal at that age, of course.
At least I haven't taught him how to masturbate, like some mothers.
Cigarette?’
As she leaned forward to offer them her pullover bellied out and he caught a glimpse of her breasts, almost adolescent in size, but with large and prominent nipples.
‘I've always tried to be an understanding parent,’ she continued.
‘I treat my kids as friends and equals.’
‘Is that how your parents treated you?’
‘My mother's dead!’ she replied vaguely.
‘What about your father?
Did he treat you as an equal?’
Cinzia laughed almost hysterically.
‘Well, it depends what you mean.
I suppose he does his best.
But take the business of Daniele's arrest, for instance.
That was typical.
For years father had been nagging away at him to take some interest and prove he had the Miletti flair, yet as soon as he tried to show a bit of initiative everyone got on their high horse about it, father especially, calling him a worthless junkie and I don't what else besides.
It was so unfair, I thought.
I mean, I suppose what the others were doing was illegal, but it's not as if they were forcing anyone to take the stuff.
If they hadn't sold it someone else would have.
And as far as Daniele was concerned it was just a business arrangement, nothing else.
He never actually took the stuff or got his hands dirty in any way.’
She rearranged herself in another pose, her legs curled under her like cat.
She was quite calm again now.
‘As it was, the poor kid ended up losing everything.
Not just the money he'd invested but his allowance from father as well.
Lulu's been helping him out, but it's still been very hard on him.
Now I don't call that being very understanding, do you?
You'd think people would be more tolerant with their own family.’
Zen gulped down the rest of his coffee and announced that he had to be going.
‘Already?’
Cinzia queried with a pout.
‘Why not stay to lunch?
Margherita's a wonderful cook.’
Her disappointment appeared genuine, but he forced himself to phone Palottino.
‘The family are absolutely incensed’, Bartocci had told him.
If Zen had survived more or less intact all this time it was thanks to the instinct that was telling him to leave now.
‘You still haven't told me about your adventure,’ Cinzia reminded him as they waited for Palottino to arrive.
‘It must have been terrifying.
I think you're very brave.
To sit in a car with that Cook woman for however many hours it was, I  simply couldn't do it!
Did you talk a lot?
Did she talk about me?
She must have done.
What did she say?’
‘We didn't talk that much.’
‘Oh come on, I don't believe that!
I know the woman.
What did she say?
Whatever it was I've heard worse.
Tell me.
What did she say about me?’
He looked away, out of the window, then back at Cinzia.
‘She said you were terribly unhappy,’ he replied.
Her features abruptly slackened all over, making her look years older.
‘Unhappy?’
It was a shriek.
‘She's crazy!
I've suspected it for a long time, but now it's absolutely dear!
Absolutely and totally clear, plain and evident for everyone to see.’
She gripped Zen's arm tightly.
‘I ask you, do I look unhappy?
Do I seem unhappy?
Have I got the slightest reason in the world to be unhappy?
Look at this house!
Look at my husband and my children, look at my whole life.
Then look at her!
What has she got?
Unhappy?
What a joke!’
She walked away a little distance, then came back to him.
‘The truth is that she envies me,’ she went on more calmly.
‘She envies all of us, she's riddled with envy!
That's the real problem.
It's not me who's unhappy, it's her!
She's projecting her problems on to me.
I've read about it, it's a well-known thing that mad people do.’
She shook her head and tried to smile.
‘I'm a little tense at the moment, with Gianluigi away and still no word about father.’
‘I'm sure he'll be released very soon now,’ Zen said as reassuringly as he knew how.
But an oddly vacant look had come over Cinzia's features.
Deafened by thoughts he couldn't begin to guess at, she hadn't even heard him.
Back at the Questura Zen tried to put Cinzia Miletti out of his mind.
He felt that a winning hand had been dealt him and  he had played it badly, perhaps even from a professional point of view.
In any case it was too late now.
He stuck his head round the door to the inspectors room.
‘Anyone know an officer called Baldoni?
Geraci looked up.
He's in Drugs.’
‘Three five one,’ Chiodini chimed in without raising his eyes from his newspaper
‘Don't be stupid,’ Lucaroni told him.
‘This is three five one.’
Chiodini stuck one fat finger thoughtfully up his right nostril.
‘Used to be three five one,’ he pronounced at last.
Lucaroni consulted the directory.
‘He's in four two five,’ he said.
‘Do you want me to…?’
‘That's all right,’ Zen replied.
‘I'll do it myself’
Baldoni was a pudgy, balding man wearing a blue blazer with five silver buttons, a canary-yellow pullover and a red tie.
He was picking his teeth with a match while someone on the phone talked his ear off.
When he hung up Zen handed him the letter
‘Fucking union,’ he frowned.
‘All they ever do is ask for money.
The reason I joined was I thought they were going to get more money for me, not take it away.’
‘I'm on the Miletti kidnapping,’ Zen began.
Baldoni looked at him more warily
‘Rather you than me.’
'I understand that Daniele Miletti got himself into some trouble with your section some time ago.’
‘Baldoni laughed briefly.
’ Got himself into it and got himself out of it.’
He tried to sit casually on the edge of his desk, farted loudly and stood up again.
‘You know the University for Foreigners?’ he demanded.
His tone was suspicious and aggressive as though the institution in question was missing and Zen was suspected of having stolen it.
‘I ‘ve heard of it,’
‘Forget what you've heard.
I know what you've heard.
You've heard about this symbol of the brotherhood of man  set in welcoming Perugia with its ancient traditions of hospitality, where every year bright-eyed, bushy-tailed youngsters come from the four corners of the world to study Italian culture and promote peace and international understanding.’
He looked intently at Zen.
‘You're not from round here, are you?’
Zen shook his head.
‘In that case I can tell you that in my humble opinion this place is the meanest, tightest little arsehole in the entire fucking country.
International understanding my bum!
Christ, the people in this dump are so small-minded they treat the folk from the village down the hill as a bunch of aliens.
So why do they put up with the real foreigners?
For one very simple reason, my friend.
It's spelt m, o, n, e, y.’
‘And Daniele?’
Zen prompted.
‘Don't worry, I'm getting there.
Now you also have to realize that the foreigners aren't like the ones you've heard about either.
They used to come down from the North-German, Swiss, English, American.
Girls, mostly.
They came to read Dante, drink wine, sit in the sun and get laid.
But those days are long gone.
Now the Arabs have moved in, because you-know-who in Rome has done a deal for oil rights, including a fat kickback for you-know-who, naturally.
Meanwhile you and I get paid worse than his housekeeper and the fucking union writes to ask me to send them money!
‘So, anyway, all these Arabs start rolling up to learn engineering and dentistry and Christ knows what.
Unfortunately the professors object to giving lessons in Arabic, so suddenly we've got hundreds of thousands of students who need to learn Italian.
And where do they go?
To the University for Foreigners, of course, right here in lovely medieval Perugia.
Only these foreigners are a bit different from what we've been used to.
Masculine like they don't make them any more, don't give a fuck about Dante, don't touch alcohol, find it cold here after their own country and are more interested in praying and politics than getting laid.
Bright eyes and bushy tails are at a distinct premium among this bunch, and as for the brotherhood of man, their  idea of that is that if someone disagrees with you, you kill him.
Remember Ali Agca, the man who shot the Pope?
He was here.
Remember the Palestinian commando that murdered half the Israeli athletes at the Munich games?
They trained at a farmhouse in the hills just outside Perugia.
The Jihad Islamica suicide squads, the pro-Khomeni mob, the anti-Khomeni mob, KGB spies, Bulgarian hit-men, you name it its been here.
The political branch have installed a hot line direct to the Ministry's central computer in Rome and even so they cant keep up.
At one time there were two and a half thousand Iranians in town.
There consul in Rome came up on an official visit and there was nearly a diplomatic incident when he got thrown out of the new university canteen he come to expect.
Turned out the last time the staff had seen him he was a student here and he'd made such an arsehole of himself they'd sworn they'd never let him back in!
All right, so that's the new Perugia, crossroads of international terrorism.
A big headache for the Politico's upstairs but what's it got to do with yours truly, you're no doubt wondering or with Daniele Miletti for that matter?
Well, terrorists need cash.
The official ones get it from the government back home, the rest have to earn it.
And there's no quicker way to make money than drugs, particularly if you happen to come from a country where the stuff is sold like artichokes.
So we start to take an interest, and among other things we're passed the names of a couple of Iranians who make frequent trips back home by train.
That's one hell of a way to travel to Iran, unless of course you want to avoid the screening procedures at the airports.
The next time through we have them picked up and lo and behold they've got a suitcase full of heroin.
So we get to work on them and forty eight hours later we have the whole ring, including one Gerhard Mayer, twenty nine, from West Berlin, their linkman into the local drug community.
Which is where everything starts to fuck up, because the moment we turn our attention to Herr Mayer he tells us that the money he used to pay the Iranians was put up by the son of a well-known local citizen.’
‘Daniele Miletti 
‘You know the feeling?
One minute I had a nice clean case bust wide open, stiff sentences all round and bonus promotion points for yours truly.
The moment that fucking kraut mentioned Miletti I knew I could kiss that sweet dream goodbye.
We went through the motions and pulled him in, of course, but by the time the magistrate spoke to him Mayer had changed his mind.
He'd never met Daniele Miletti, never seen him, never heard of him.
The kid was back home in time for lunch.’
‘And Mayer's statement?’
Zen queried.
‘Extorted under duress.
Duress my bum!
Mayer couldn't fucking wait to shop his rich young pal.’
‘What happened to Mayer?’
‘He hopped on the first plane back to Germany.’
Zen gazed at him, frowning.
‘They let him out?
With a drug trafficking charge hanging over him?’
Baldoni nodded.
‘Like I say, where the Milettis are concerned, rather you than me, my friend.
Rather you than me.’
By the evening Zen was beginning to feel like a hostage himself.
He had spent the entire afternoon in his office, pacing from the desk to the window, from the widow to door and back to the desk again.
It was now over forty hours since the money had been handed over, but there had been no word of Ruggiero Miletti's release.
Despite the fact that he was powerless to influence events in any way, Zen felt bound to remain on watch, like the captain of a ship.
But in the end he could stand it no longer and went out for a walk.
The evening was warm and calm, but the side-streets through which he wandered at random were almost deserted.
Very occasionally his path crossed that of a couple walking home or a group of a young friends going up to the centre, and then the brief appraising glances they gave him left Zen feeling obscurely ill at ease, underlining as they did his lack of purpose or direction.
Thoughts flitted to and fro in his brain like swallows: phrases from Ruggiero Miletti's letter, an insinuation of Antonio Crepi's, something Ivy had  said in the car, what Valesio's widow had told him, Luciano Bartocci's brisk new manner, Italo Baldoni's story, Cinzia Miletti's breasts…
He felt simultaneously starved and stuffed, deafened and denied.
It was the nature of the place, he thought, perched up there on its remote peak, its back turned to the world, all the more obsessed with its petty intrigues and scandals because it knew them to be of no interest whatever to anyone else.
Nothing he had been told from the very first moment he had arrived in Perugia amounted to any more than salacious gossip, casual slanders, ill-informed rumours of no real value which elsewhere would never have reached his ears.
But folk here were eager to let you into their neighbour's secrets, particularly if they thought it might distract your attention from their own.
‘Mayer couldn't fucking wait to shop his rich young pal.’
Yes, that was the style of the place.
It was all a fuss about nothing, another example of the national genius for weaving intricate variations around the simplest event.
Zen had always derived much amusement from Ellen's simple-minded approach to current affairs.
Despite her intelligence, she could be quite amazingly naive and literal in her judgements.
She seemed to believe that the truth was great and would prevail, so why waste time spinning a lot of fancy theories?
Whereas Zen knew that the truth prevailed, if at all, only after so much time had passed that it had become meaningless, like a senile prisoner who can safely be released, his significance forgotten, his friends dead, a babbling idiot.
But in the present case it was time to take a stand, to declare once and for all that on this occasion at least the truth was as obvious and evident as it appeared to be.
The crimes which had been committed were manifestly the work of hardened professionals who had no more to do with the incestuous dramas of this city than Zen himself.
Any suggestion to the contrary was simply an excuse for the locals to feel self-important and settle a few scores with their neighbours.
Inevitably, his steps led him in the end to the Corso, where the evening promenade was in progress.
People paraded up and down, displaying their furs and finery, hailing their  friends, seeing and being seen, streaming back and forth continually like swimmers in a pool.
The stars of either sex clustered in twos or threes, massing their power, or strode out alone, shining soloists, while the less attractive gathered for protection in groups outside the offices of some religious or political organization.
Part of the street was thronged with teenagers, and more were arriving every instant on their mopeds.
The males dominated, bold gangling youths in brightly coloured designer anoraks and jeans turned up to reveal their American-style chunky leather boots.
They threw their weight about with boisterous nonchalance while the girls, in frilly lace collars like doilies, tartan skirts and coloured tights, looked on admiringly.
One of the most prominent of them was a tall youth with the extravagant gestures and loud voice of an actor who knows he's going down well.
Only at the last moment, when he'd been recognized in turn, did Zen realize that it was Daniele Miletti.
It was almost predictable.
The young trendies of the soft right, like their Fascist counterparts of half a century earlier, bragged about not giving a damn.
Nothing would do more to boost Daniele's status than to be seen showing off on the Corso while his father's life still hung in the balance.
‘A very good evening to you, dottore!’ the boy called out in a bad parody of a Venetian accent.
‘So sorry to hear about your accident.
Do try and take more care in future!’
He turned to explain the joke to his companions, who all laughed loudly.
‘Don't you dare beat me up, you nasty nasty man, I'm a policeman!’ one of them shrieked in a mocking falsetto.
Zen pushed on, understanding how Italo Baldoni must have felt when the young Miletti slipped through his fingers.
Increasingly it seemed to him that there were people who needed to spend a few hours locked in a room with the likes of Chiodini.
The trouble with the system was that they were the ones who never did.
But he would never admit to such a thought, and in fact felt guilty for even thinking it.
Then he felt resentful for being made to feel guilty, so that by the time he got back to the Questura all the benefits of his walk had been cancelled out.
He'd had an irrational feeling that something must have happened in his absence, simply because he hadn't been there, but he was wrong.
He was back where he'd started, staring at the wall with nothing to do but wait.
As his eyes fell on the crucifix he realized that he'd always loathed it, and in a small gesture of defiance he lifted it off its hook and set it down on top of the filing cabinet.
Then he remembered the copy of Ruggiero's letter, and realized that there was something he could do after all.
‘Seven double eight one eight.’
‘Good evening.
This is Aurelio Zen.
Am I disturbing you?’
‘No, no.
Not at all.
Well, not really…’
Ivy sounded ill at ease.
Had she already guessed why he was calling?
‘I wanted to contact you this morning, but…’
‘I was out.
I'd arranged to meet someone.’
‘Yes, I know.
I met Cinzia Miletti in town.
She'd been waiting for you.’
‘Well, I'd been waiting for her, too!
We'd arranged to meet at her house.’
‘She told me that you phoned her and asked for a meeting in town.’
‘I really can't imagine why she should have said that, Commissioner.
It's exactly the opposite of what happened.
She phoned me and asked me to come straight over.
She didn't say why, but obviously in my position…’
It occurred to Zen that while they were talking any incoming call announcing Ruggiero's release would be blocked.
‘Never mind about that,’ he said briskly.
‘There's something I want to discuss with you.
It's about a letter I've received.’
‘A letter?
What sort of letter?’
‘I'd rather not discuss it on the phone.
Do you think you could drop into my office?
It won't take long.’
‘Well, it's a bit difficult.
It's a question of the family, you see.
I'm not sure they ‘d approve, just at present.’
They'd approve still less if they knew what it was about, thought Zen.
‘Perhaps later on, once this is all over.’
‘Very well.
I'll contact you later then.’
He hung up, his hand hovering hopefully above the receiver.
But the phone remained sullenly silent.
His suspicions were confirmed.
The uncharacteristic fuss and fluster in Ivy's manner was surely a proof that she knew only too well which letter he was talking about and was in mortal dread of the family finding out.
He took out the letter and scanned the final lines again.
That mistake was curious: ‘…well-worn consecutively numbered notes…’
For a moment it had made him inclined to doubt the authenticity of the whole thing.
But it was only a detail, and it didn't alter the fact that no one but Ivy could have done it.
She must have taken the letter straight to a photocopy shop after collecting it from the skip and then posted the copy to Zen before returning to the house, calculating that if the copy came to light each of the Milettis would equally be under suspicion.
But that calculation had gone up in smoke with the original letter, and since then she must have bitterly regretted her rashness.
Why had she taken such a risk?
Was it because she knew the Miletti family only too well, and was determined that this time at least everything should not be conveniently hushed up?
Had sending Zen the letter been her humble way of serving the great principle upon which Luciano Bartocci had now apparently turned his back, of not letting the bastards get away with it?
At all events, she had committed no crime, so there was no reason for him to pursue the matter any further.
He sat there until his eyelids began to droop, then phoned the switchboard and told them that he would be at his hotel.
There was no point in continuing his lonely vigil.
But why couldn't he rid himself of the eerie sensation that it had already happened, that everyone knew except him, that he was being deliberately kept in the dark?
7
He was in bed, in the room in Venice where he had spent his childhood, and he was still that child.
A figure moved slowly through the uncertain light towards him, as faceless and monumental as Death in an old engraving.
But he wasn't frightened, because he knew that it was all just a joke, a little comedy of the kind fathers like to play with their sons.
He'd always known his father would come back.
Not that he'd ever admitted it before, even to himself.
But nothing and no one could ever really convince him that a world where fathers just disappeared one day and never returned could be anything other than a pitiful sham, a transparent hoax.
He had never been taken in, not really, not inside, but he'd known moments of doubt, so his delight and relief were unbounded now he found that his instincts had been right all along!
For here his father was, sitting down beside him, hugging and kissing him, taking his hand again and laughing at the silly terrors his little game had aroused in his son.
The phone beside his bed started to ring.
It was the duty officer on the intercept desk at the law courts.
‘We've just picked up a message on the Miletti family line, dottore.
It was from the kidnappers.
They've released Signor Miletti.’
Thank God, Zen thought with obscure fervour.
Thank God.
‘Have you informed Dottor Bartocci?’
‘Yes.
The pick-up arrangements are to be put into effect immediately.’
‘Where has Signor Miletti been released?’
‘If you've got a pen I'll read the directions as they gave them to the family.’
Zen scribbled the instructions on the back of an envelope.
They were to take the road to Foligno, turn right towards Cannara just beyond Santa Maria degli Angeli and drive until they saw a telegraph pole with a yellow mark.
Here they were to turn left, then take the second right and go about a kilometre to a building site where Ruggiero Miletti was waiting, unable to move because of his bad leg.
It had been this problem which had led to the complex arrangements for picking up Ruggiero on his release.
Normally kidnap victims are simply turned loose in the middle of nowhere and left to find their own way to the nearest house or main road.
But since Miletti was immobilized it had been agreed that he would be fetched by a group consisting of Pietro Miletti escorted by Zen and Palottino in the Alfetta, with an ambulance in attendance in case Ruggiero required immediate attention.
After the events of Saturday night and Bartocci's angry phone call the previous day, Zen half expected to be rebuffed when he rang the Milettis.
But Pietro, although cool, made no attempt to change the arrangements.
Now the family's fears had been proved groundless, the bungled pay-off could be dismissed as just another example of clumsy incompetence on the part of the police, the latest in a long list of blunders.
Twenty minutes later the convoy set out.
It was brilliantly sunny, as though summer had leapt forward a few months.
People were moving more slowly and nonchalantly, without the pretext of a destination or purpose.
They glanced curiously at the line of official vehicles which drove along the boulevard running along the lower ridges of the city, through a gateway and down in a series of long, lazy curves, dropping over two hundred metres to the valley floor.
Shortly after passing the enormous domed basilica of Santa Maria degli Angeli Palottino swerved across a patch of loose gravel into a minor road.
The land was dead flat, divided into large ploughed fields almost devoid of trees.
Modern brick and concrete duplexes squatted here and there along the road, each with a few rows of vines trained along wires suspended from concrete posts behind them.
This would all have been uninhabited malarial marshland until the post-war boom made it worth draining.
The road ran straight ahead, the telegraph poles passing at regular intervals to the right..
The yellow splash of paint showed up hundreds of metres away in the bright sunshine.
A farm track led off to the left opposite, flanked by deep drainage ditches.
Speeds dropped now and the vehicles closed up.
The fields appeared to have been abandoned, the broken stalks of the crop left to rot in a vast expanse of furrowed mud which the recent rains had reduced to a sticky mess.
Could there really be a building site in the middle of this swamp rapidly reverting to nature after a brief and unsuccessful flirtation with civilization, Zen wondered?
There had always been a possibility that the telephone call had been a hoax and this seemed to be getting more likely all the time.
The bleak landscape made Zen think back to his dream, to his own father's fate.
When the Germans invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, Mussolini thought the war would be over in a matter of weeks, and so that he could claim a share of the spoils for Italy he offered to send troops to the Russian front.
The Germans had no illusions about the military effectiveness of their principal ally, and at first they agreed to accept only a few divisions of the Alpini, the specialist mountain troops who could hold their own with any in Europe.
But that was not enough to give Mussolini the bargaining leverage he wanted.
He insisted on sending more, and so two hundred and thirty thousand Italians were packed into trains and sent off to Russia, Zen's father among them.
But the war was not over in a matter of weeks, and the Italian conscripts had neither the training nor the equipment to fight a winter campaign in Russia.
They suffered ninety thousand casualties.
Sixty-six thousand more made the weary trek home again.
As for the remaining seventy-five thousand, nothing more was ever heard of them.
They simply disappeared without trace.
The Soviet authorities had no reason to take any interest in the fate of a handful of foreign invaders when over twenty million of their own people had been killed, while as for the Italians, it had suddenly become clear that they had in fact been anti-Fascists to a man all along and could hardly be expected to sympathize with the relatives of those few fanatics who had been rash enough to fight for the despised Duce.
In any case, the whole country was in ruins and there were more urgent matters to attend to.
‘There it is!’
Palottino burst out.
From a distance it resembled some piece of modern sculpture: disjointed planes, random angles, a lot of holes.
It was only as they drew nearer that he began to make out that it was the concrete skeleton of an unfinished three-storey duplex, its half-built walls, pillars and floors rising out of a sea of mud.
On each side a wide staircase led up in six zigzag sections, breaking off abruptly on an open landing about twenty metres above the ground.
They parked a short distance away.
Zen got out, jumped over the ditch running alongside the track and began to work his way along the edge of the field towards the back of the concrete structure, his shoes rapidly clogging up with mud.
The building site was surrounded by a token fence consisting of two slack strands of barbed wire.
Pietro Miletti was slowly making his way after him.
On the south side of the structure the concrete was cleaner than to the north, where it was discoloured with moss.
Here the stains were reddish-brown, from the twisted-off ends of the rusty reinforcing wire.
It felt warm and sheltered.
Plants had already seeded in crevices around the foundations, preparing to take over the instant man's will failed.
A yellow butterfly loped by with its strange broken flight, like an early film.
Zen looked round at the floor of unfinished concrete littered with cement bags, lengths of wire, nails and lumps of wood, a lone glove.
The upper storeys had not yet been floored and through the concrete joists and beams above the sky was visible.
There was no sign that anyone had been there for months.
‘Papa!’
Pietro Miletti appeared, his elegant shoes and trousers bespattered with mud.
Zen scraped some of the mud off his shoes on the bottom step of the staircase.
‘I'm afraid it was a hoax.’
‘But why should they do that?
What have they got to gain?’
Pietro sounded indignant, as though the kidnappers had broken the rules of a game and ought to be penalized.
‘Perhaps it wasn't really the gang who phoned you.’
‘It was them, all right.
Do you think I don't know his damned voice by now?
Besides, who else would it be?’
‘How should I know?’
Zen snapped back, his tension finding an issue.
‘Someone who hates your guts.
There must be plenty of them around.’
He turned away towards the outside of the building, veering to the right to complete his circuit of the structure.
In the distance someone sounded a horn several times.
The view ahead was obscured by a section of partially completed walling at the east end, but when he reached the comer Zen fount that the only unpredictable feature of the landscape was a river which cut across the track about a hundred metres further on.
Once, no doubt, there would have been a bridge, since swept away by floods or war.
Or perhaps it had never existed.
It was hard to say whether the track continued on the other site or not.
It was only when he turned to the more immediate problem of finding a way through the waste of mud that Zen noticed the figure lying slumped against the wall.
He just hat time to turn, plant one hand on Pietro Miletti's chest and push him back, indignantly protesting.
The floor was made up of dark red hexagonal tiles touching at their points, separated by triangles of a deep chestnut colour.
Another way of looking at it was that the basic form was a large lozenge consisting of a red hexagonal core surrounded by six brown triangular tips, or again, diagonal strips of ret hexagons kept in place by pairs of triangular brown wedges.
The strips ran in both directions, creating a number of crosses.
It should have been possible, theoretically, to work out how many there were.
But it would have taken more than just time and ingenuity.
You would have needed something else, some understanding of the principles involved, access to formulae ant equations, a head for figures.
Something he hadn't got, at any rate.
As it was, an irrelevant image kept popping up in the comer of his eye, dragging his attention away: the image of an old man Iying slumped in the mud against a wall of concrete blocks, turned away, as though death were an act as shameful as intercourse  or defecation, which he had sought to conceal as far as possible, even in the bleakly exposed place where it had come to him.
Zen forced his attention back to the floor.
But now a new pattern emerged as the red and brown shapes blocked together to form overlapping triangles all pointing across the room at the double doors opposite.
These doors were now firmly closed, but they had opened several times since Zen's arrival, admitting a succession of visitors who had forced their way through the mass of bodies and expectant faces in the corridor outside, sweltering under television lights and waving microphones in front of anyone who appeared.
It was six o'clock in the evening, four hours since the Deputy Public Prosecutor had summoned Zen to his office in the law courts.
When he arrived he had been told to wait, and he had been waiting ever since.
He was being put in his place, softened up for what was to come.
And what was that?
‘When they found a policeman at the pay-off they must have panicked,’ Major Volpi had remarked to Di Leonardo when they arrived together at the scene in a Carabinieri helicopter.
Yes, the death of Ruggiero Miletti was Zen's fault.
He was completely innocent, but it was his fault.
Even the tiles concurred, for now the arrows had all flipped over and were pointing at him, pointing out the guilty party, the incompetent official, the unworthy son.
The pain that tugged at the muscles of his stomach and chest was so intimately hurtful that he knew it was nothing but useless unspent emotion.
What he needed was to break down and howl like a child, and it was the effort not to do so that was tearing at him.
It was all his fault, his fault, his fault.
He had never known the man, but it was his fault.
He was condemned by an image which had haunted him for over thirty years: a poor defenceless body Iying curled up in a vast flat dismal landscape, a father abandoned to his lonely fate.
He must be guilty.
There could be no excuse for such a death.
It was almost a relief when the door opposite suddenly opened and Ettore Di Leonardo appeared, immaculate as ever in a dark suit and sober tie.
‘This way!’
The Public Prosecutor called him like a dog as he strode  towards the door behind which a continuous threatening murmur could be heard.
Zen obediently rose and followed, wondering as a dog perhaps does at his stupidity in not understanding why they were going that way, where their enemies lay in wait.
The gentlemen of the press had had a fairly lean time of it so far.
Di Leonardo's personal secretary had issued a statement shortly after midday, a masterpiece of prolixity that took about five minutes to say that Ruggiero Miletti had been found dead and that another statement would be issued in due course.
Since then anyone who had been unwise enough to venture along the corridor had been pounced upon and picked clean.
Magistrates, lawyers, various clerks, a court reporter, a telephone repair man, and even a number of ordinary human beings untouched by the grace of public office had been accosted, to no avail.
So when the Deputy Public Prosecutor himself suddenly appeared in person the assembled newshounds reacted like a gaggle of novices witnessing an apparition of the Virgin Mary.
Appropriately enough Di Leonardo's first gesture, a hand raised to still the clamour, looked not unlike a blessing.
When complete silence had fallen he then produced a sheet of paper from his pocket, folded it back on itself to remove the crease, smoothed it out a number of times and then read a statement to the effect that inquiries were proceeding, steps being taken, fruitful avenues opening up and concrete results expected within a short space of time.
Having done so he folded the sheet of paper again, replaced it in his pocket and made to leave.
The reporters protested vociferously and blocked his path.
Di Leonardo looked flabbergasted, as though never before in his experience had the media failed to be satisfied by the reading of a prepared statement.
But questions continued to be hurled at him from every side, and eventually, as an extraordinary mark of favour, he consented to answer one or two of them.
The first came from a man in the front row, a crumpled, resilient-looking individual with the look of someone who has been dropped on his head from a great height at some stage in his life.
‘Is it true that the magistrate investigating the Miletti case is to be replaced?’
Di Leonardo glared back in frigid indignation.
‘Certainly not!
Dottor Bartocci is and will remain in charge of the investigation into the kidnapping of Ruggiero Miletti.’
‘And into his murder?’ called a younger reporter on the fringes of the group.
‘That is another and quite separate development, whose importance and urgency I need hardly stress.
In addition to the kidnapping case, Dottor Bartocci is already handling the murder of Advocat Valesio.
My wish, the wish of all of us, is simply that we may as quickly as possible get to the bottom of the shocking and cold-blooded crime which has stunned and appalled the entire country, and arrest and punish those responsible.
In order to avoid placing an impossible burden on the shoulders of my young colleague, it has been decided that the investigation of the events whose tragic outcome was discovered this morning with be directed by Dottor Rosella Foria.’
‘But the murder of Signor Miletti is evidently linked to the other two cases,’ pointed out a well-known interviewer with a television news crew.
‘Why is the same magistrate not investigating all three crimes?’
Di Leonardo smiled wearily and shook his head.
‘You reporters may spin whatever theories you choose.
Our task is to weigh the evidence objectively and impartially.
At the present juncture there is no evidence to suggest that this crime is necessarily linked to those you have mentioned, or indeed to any others.’
There was a flurry of protest, which Di Leonardo once again stilled with a gesture of benediction.
‘But it is too soon to pronounce on these matters with any certainty,’ he went on smoothly.
‘Should any such evidence come to light in the future we will of course be prepared to review the situation.’
‘You mean Bartocci may lose the other two cases as well?’ asked the crumpled man.
There was a ripple of laughter.
A tall woman with the chic, efficient look that spells Milan held up her notebook, and Di Leonardo immediately nodded encouragingly at her.
It's a fix, thought Zen, and he edged  back against the wall.
Mesmerized by the Public Prosecutor's performance, no one had yet noticed him, but he had a nasty feeling that this was about to change.
‘The Miletti family have made a statement in which they lay the blame for the murder squarely on the shoulders of the police,’ the woman began.
‘They have named a Commissioner Zen, whom they claim demanded to be present when the ransom money was paid, threatening to wreck the pay-off by a show of force if they did not comply.
They further assert that in the course of the pay-off Commissioner Zen's identity was revealed and that the gang were so incensed that they assaulted him.
They conclude that the death of their father was a direct result of the kidnappers’ instructions having been disobeyed, and demand that this official be subjected to the appropriate disciplinary procedures.
Have you any comment to make?’
Di Leonardo smiled again.
It was a beautiful smile, brimful of wisdom, understanding and compassion.
‘I don't think I need remind anyone of the tragic blow which the Miletti family, and indeed the whole of Perugia, has suffered today.
Far be it from me to criticize comments made in the heat of the moment, which should be understood for what they are, cries of unendurable suffering, a passionate outburst of all-too-comprehensible anguish.
I am sure I speak for all of us here when I say that our thoughts are with the Miletti family in this ordeal.’
Di Leonardo paused for a moment, seemingly overcome by emotion.
Then he looked up, brisk and businesslike again.
‘Nevertheless the fact remains that disciplinary action against officials who may have exceeded their duties or wilfully abused the position of responsibility with which they have been entrusted is a purely internal matter which will be carried out, should the situation warrant it, by the appropriate authorities at the appropriate time.
The views and wishes of private individuals, however comprehensible, cannot be permitted to influence whatever decision may eventually be arrived at.’
‘Do you accept the family's account of the events surrounding the pay-off?’ another reporter demanded.
‘I have no further comment to make.’
‘But this Zen is still in charge of the case?’
Di Leonardo shook his finger as though admonishing a backward pupil.
‘As I have already explained, Dottor Foria is directing the investigation.’
The crumpled reporter who had started the questioning now sighed theatrically and rubbed his forehead.
‘Let's see, have I got this right?
As far as the police are concerned it's all one case and the same officer remains in charge, but when it comes to the judiciary it's a completely unrelated development and a new magistrate has been appointed.’
‘If you study the answers I have given I think you will find that they are very clear,’ Di Leonardo returned.
‘Should you have any further questions, I suggest you put them to Commissioner Zen himself.’
The Public Prosecutor pointed Zen out with one finger, and as everyone turned to look he slipped through the suddenly passive ranks to the safety of his office, closing the door firmly behind him.
Immediately all hell broke loose.
‘What's your reaction, dottore?’
‘How did it feel finding Miletti's body?’
‘Do you accept responsibility for his death?’
‘A spokesman for the family has described your handling of the case as a quote disgraceful and disastrous example of official interventionism unquote.
Would you care to comment?’
‘Isn't it true that during the Moro affair you were transferred from the active list of the Rome Questura to a desk job in the Ministry following a disciplinary inquiry?
Would you describe today's events as a further setback to your career?’
As the lights glared, the cameras whirred and the microphones thrust and jabbed, Zen finally understood why he had been summoned to the law courts.
‘If you study the answers the Deputy Public Prosecutor has given, I think you will find that they are very clear,’ he told them.
‘I have nothing further to add.’
The reporters didn't give up so easily, of course.
But stolid stonewalling makes for poor copy and dull viewing, and eventually they let him go, although even then a few of the  younger and hungrier among them followed him down the wide staircase and out into Piazza Matteotti, hoping for a belated indiscretion.
It was dusk, and the evening was as still and airless as the previous one when, impatient for news, Zen had gone out for a stroll.
It was strange now, walking through the same streets, to know that by then it had already happened.
But even on a cursory examination the doctor had been in no doubt.
‘Rigor mortis is complete but there's no sign of it passing off.
Body temperature almost down to the ambient level.
He's been dead at least eighteen hours, more likely twenty-four.’
Zen had hardly heard him at the time, shocked by the sight of the man he had been summoned to Perugia to save Iying naked on a plastic sheet with a thermometer sticking out of his anus.
Ruggiero Miletti had been killed the day before, on Monday morning, and yet the gang had waited until this morning to alert the family with a cruel message of hope!
In all his experience Zen could remember nothing like it.
Kidnappers could be violent, but in the easy, unashamed manner of men to whom violence was natural and legitimate.
If they had killed their victim to teach the Milettis a lesson they would have said so, even bragged about it.
But this crime, and above all the manner in which it was mockingly announced, had a twisted sophistication, a kink in the logic which Zen would have said was quite alien to a gang of Calabrian shepherds.
But he impatiently dismissed this line of thought.
Little enough was left him now, but at least his dignity remained, though no one but himself could see it.
If he were to start clutching at straws, hoping against hope for a way out, then even that would be lost.
Back in his office he reached for the phone and dialled his home number.
As usual, Maria Grazia answered and then yelled to his mother to pick up the extension phone by her chair, in the deep underwater gloom of the living room.
The connection was especially good, almost as if they were face to face, and Zen found himself resentful that he should be deprived of the usual screen of interference on an occasion when he could find nothing to say.
‘Happy birthday, mamma.
Did you like the present?’
‘Is this going to take long?
Crissie's having her baby and I don't want to miss that.
Wayne will be livid when he hears.
And that half-brother of hers, do you know what he's done?
Sold the property over their heads!
That couldn't happen to us, could it?’
‘No, mamma.’
‘Why not?’
Was she having a sly laugh at his expense, talking nonsense and then cornering him with a sudden question?
‘Is it because you're in the police?’
‘Yes, that's it, mamma.
They wouldn't dare do anything like that.
You see, there are some advantages after all.’
‘What?’
‘To being in the police!
You're always telling me that I should have got a job on the railways.
Anyway, if you're still watching when the news comes on you might see me.
I'm…’
‘Oh, I haven't time to watch the news.
There's the dolphins on Six right afterwards.
They've kidnapped them, the bastards.’
‘Who, the dolphins?’
‘Anyway, if you were on the railways we'd get free tickets wherever we wanted to go.’
‘I already get free travel, mamma.’
‘I don't!’
‘But you never even leave the apartment any more!’
‘That's what I'm saying.
If you had a nice job on the railways maybe I could get out and about a bit.’
There was a knock, the door opened and Luciano Bartocci appeared.
‘May I?’
After a moment's hesitation Zen waved him forward.
‘Look, I've got to go,’ he said into the phone.
‘Happy birthday.
See you soon.’
He hung up.
‘Sorry if I disturbed you,’ Bartocci went on.
‘I was just passing, and I thought I'd….’
He took off the heavy overcoat he was wearing and laid it across the top of the filing cabinet.
‘I won't stay long.’
The smile trembling to be born at the corner of his mouth was even more active than usual.
‘The thing is, you see, I realize that I've been rather stupid and rather selfish, and I'd like to apologize.’
Zen stood staring at the younger man in considerable embarrassment.
He had no idea how to deal with the situation.
A judge apologizing to a policeman!
What were we coming to?
‘I asked you to collaborate unofficially,’ Bartocci went on.
‘That was irresponsible.
You could have refused, of course, but it was a choice I shouldn't have forced you to make.’
Zen watched the younger man circling the office, inspecting the fixtures and fittings as though they were evidence at the scene of a crime.
He's not apologizing to me, Zen realized.
He's apologizing to himself, for letting himself down.
‘My entire strategy was incorrect from the start,’ the magistrate continued.
‘It's mere bourgeois adventurism to think that the conspiracies of powerful vested interests can be defeated by individual efforts.
I should have known better.
The ratking is self-regulating, as I told you before.
The strength of each rat is the strength of all.
Any individual initiative against them is doomed from the start.
The system can only be destroyed politically, by collective action, a stronger system.’
The distant smile was in place on Zen's lips.
By a bigger and better ratking, he thought.
‘Did you actually hear the recording of the message the Milettis received this morning?’
For a moment Bartocci appeared slightly confused.
‘Hear it?
Why?’
‘Is anyone sure it was really the kidnappers who phoned?’
There was silence while Bartocci thought through the implications of this remark.
Then he smiled and shook his head.
‘I see what you're getting at,’ he said.
‘But I'm afraid it's not on.
You've been away from active duty for a while, haven't you?’
Evidently the rumours about Zen's past were beginning to catch up with him.
‘All interceptions are now subjected to voiceprint analysis as a matter of routine,’ the magistrate explained.
‘If the one  this morning hadn't matched the pattern I'd have been informed.
No, I'm afraid we must accept that Miletti was murdered by his kidnappers.’
‘All right, perhaps they pulled the trigger.
But there's still the question of how they knew I would be there at the pay-off.
Ubaldo Valesio reckoned that someone in the family was passing on information.
Isn't it possible that the informant deliberately told the kidnappers I would be there, knowing what the consequences were likely to be?’
‘You mean that one of the family got the gang to do their murder for them?
I doubt very much whether you'll be able to interest Rosella Foria in such a theory.’
‘Why?
Is she…’
He paused, significantly.
Bartocci shook his head.’
No, no, Rosella's straight enough.
But she does everything strictly by the book.
She has to.
There still aren't many women in the judiciary, so everything they do tends to get scrutinized by their male colleagues, and not only those on the Right, I'm afraid to say.
If a woman makes the slightest mistake it's pounced on as evidence of her general incompetence.
The result is a natural tendency towards caution.
And after what's happened to me Rosella's going to be treading very carefully indeed.’
For a moment Zen wondered whether he should tell Bartocci about the photocopy of Ruggiero's letter.
Since the death of the writer the insults and threats he had dealt out to each member of his family took on a new significance.
But in the end he decided against it.
That letter was a card up his sleeve, the last one he had.
‘What has happened to you?’ he asked instead.
‘I'll have to look for a new posting.’
‘You're being transferred?’
‘Nothing as simple as that.
The judiciary only resort to disciplinary action in the most blatant cases, where the alternative would make us look even worse.
All I've done is offend one or two of the wrong people, it's not the end of the world.
No, nothing has changed.
I'm quite free to stay in Perugia for the rest of my life, as an investigating magistrate.
But if I want to move up the ladder I'll have to go elsewhere.’
‘I still don't understand why the Milettis didn't try and  stop-you handling the investigation in the first place if they feel so strongly about you.’
‘They did try!
But they went about it the wrong way.
It was Pietro's fault.
He's been away too long, lost his touch, forgotten how things are done.
When I was assigned to investigate Ruggiero's kidnapping, Pietro made a statement to the press drawing attention to my lack of experience and my political views and demanding that I be replaced immediately.
After that I couldn't be touched, of course.
This time they went about it correctly, which is to say incorrectly.
A few discreet phone calls and suddenly I find myself shunted into a siding while the investigation into Ruggiero's murder passes me by.’
As Bartocci took his coat, the crucifix which Zen had laid on top of the filing cabinet the previous evening fell to the floor.
‘Where you're concerned the Milettis got it wrong again,’ the magistrate remarked to Zen as they stood at the door.
‘The Ministry would have been only too happy to hand you over stuffed and pickled if they'd been asked in the proper way.
But once Pietro started sounding off to the press they had to stand by you to avoid charges of bowing to pressure.’
‘I expect it'll come to the same thing in the end,’ Zen told him as they shook hands.
The crucifix had been broken by its fall.
Zen wandered over to the window, trying to push it back together again.
One effect of the years of terrorism had been to abolish night in the vicinity of prisons, and the scene outside was bleakly bright.
Every detail was picked out by the floodlights mounted high up on the walls behind protective grilles.
Remote-control video cameras scanned back and forth, while up on the roof a nervous-looking teenager in grey overalls went his rounds, hugging a machine-gun for comfort.
That was another slight anomaly about Ruggiero Miletti's death, Zen reflected.
Like Valesio, he had been shot through the mouth, but this time the only sign of damage was a single discreet exit wound in the back of the neck.
The bullets fired into the victim's cranium were still lodged there.
When the projectile that had escaped turned up in the mud all was explained: it was a 4.5mm, low-power ammunition for a  small pistol.
This choice of weapons seemed rather bizarre.
The negotiating cell of the gang had brutally dismantled Ubaldo Valesio's skull with a sub machine gun while the hard men who had executed Ruggerio had done so with a small hand-gun, a bedside toy for nervous householders.
As Zen stood there fiddling with the crucifix, the end of the upright suddenly came away cleanly in his hand and he saw that it was hollow and that the lower part of the shaft contained a heavy rectangular pack about two centimetres long connected to a wire running back into the shaft and disappearing through a small hole into the figure of Christ.
This figure was painted in the same syrupy pastel shades as the rest of the crucifix, but when Zen tapped it the head resounded not with the dull thud of plaster but with a light metallic ring
He's been away too long Bartocci had said of Pietro Miletti.
He's lost his touch forgotten how things are done.
He wasn't the only one.
Zen clearly remembered the occasion when he'd felt that some detail in his office had altered.
He'd thought that it was just the calendar which had been turned to the correct month, but something else had been changed too.
The original crucifix had been much smaller, too small in fact to contain whatever it was that he was cradling in his hand.
And to think he hadn't noticed!
At this rate he couldn't even count on keeping his housekeeping job much longer.
People would be auctioning off whole police stations under his nose
The broken fragments of the crucifix looked like some bizarre act of desecration.
He laid them out on the desk, got a plastic bag out of the bottom drawer of the filing cabinet and swept all the bits and pieces into it.
Then he put on his overcoat and pushed the package deep into the pocket.
It was almost eight o'clock and the streets were dead apart from a little through traffic.
While he was still undecided as to what to do a bus appeared round the corner and slowed to a halt near by.
The doors opened and the driver stared at him expectantly, and Zen got in.
The bus wound its way through the ring of nineteenth-century villas on the upper slopes and the post-war apartments below them, down to the modern blocks and towers on the flat land around the station, where it pulled up.
The engine died and everyone got out.
Zen went over to the row of luggage lockers, laid the plastic  package in one, dropped in three-hundred-lire coins, locked the door and pocketed the key.
On the wall opposite there was an illuminated display listing the tourist attractions of the city.
The word ‘Cinemas’ caught his eye, and one of the names seemed familiar.
He gave it to the driver of the taxi he found outside, who whisked him back up the hill again, back through time to a medieval alley smelling of woodsmoke and urine.
A more unlikely situation for a cinema was hard to imagine, but the driver pointed to a set of steps burrowing up between two houses and explained that it was as near as he could get in a car.
The small piazza into which Zen eventually emerged had an eerie, underwater look, due to a uniform coating of lurid green light from a neon sign mounted on a building otherwise no different from the others.
‘CINEMA MINERVA’, it read.
Zen made no attempt to find out what was showing.
He paid, walked down a dark corridor and pushed through a curtain into a deep pool of sound and flickering light.
The auditorium was almost empty.
He walked without hesitation to the very front row, sat down and lay back, gazing up at the screen.
Enormous blurred masses swarmed into view and out again.
An ear the size of a flying saucer appeared for a moment and then was whisked away and replaced by a no less monstrous nose and half an eye.
Giant voices boomed at each other.
He snuggled down in his seat with a blissful smile, battered by images, swamped by noise, letting the film wash over him.
It was the perfect mental massage, and when it was over he rose feeling slightly numb, but tingling and refreshed.
In the foyer he paused to look at the posters, and learned that he had just seen a comedy called Pull The Other One!
Featuring a fat balding middle-aged clerk, the slim glamorous starlet madly in love with him, the clerk's wily roguish ne'er-do-well cousin and the cousin's battleaxe of a wife.
As he stood there he felt a hand on his shoulder.
He would never have recognized Cinzia Miletti if she hadn't approached him, for she was virtually in disguise: a silk scarf entirely covering her hair, dark glasses and a long tweed coat buttoned right up to the chin.
She lowered the glasses for an instant so that he could see her eyes, then raised them again.
‘Did you enjoy it?
We did, didn't we, Stefania?’
They were the classic female twosome, mouse and minx.
Stefania played her role to perfection, managing to give the impression of existing only provisionally, to a limited extent, and being quite prepared at the drop of a hat either to become completely real or to vanish without trace, whichever was more convenient.
Zen was so astounded at finding Cinzia there on that particular evening that he could think of nothing whatever to say.
‘I think he's just fantastic, don't you?’ she went on unperturbed.
‘I've seen all his films except Do Me A Favour! which funnily enough I've never managed to catch although it's on TV all the time.
He's working in America this year, you know.’
By now the foyer was completely empty.
On every side images of love and violence erupted from glass-fronted posters advertising coming attractions.
In her booth the cashier sat knitting behind a tank in which a solitary goldfish swam in desultory circles.
Cinzia looked at her companion.
‘I must go,’ breathed Stefania, and was gone.
‘Would you walk me home?’
Cinzia asked Zen.
‘I'm staying here in town, it's only five minutes’ walk, not worth calling a taxi, but I don't like to go alone.
There are so many Arabs about now.
Of course I'm not racist, but let's face it they've got a different culture, just like the South.’
Still he couldn't reply, his head too full of questions to which he didn't particularly want to know the answers.
But he managed to nod agreement.
‘Of course you think I'm shameless,’ Cinzia remarked as they set off, the windless muffled night hardly disturbed by their footsteps.
‘Do you believe in a life after death?
I don't know what to think.
But if there isn't one then nothing makes any difference, does it, and if there is I'm sure it'll all be far too spiritual for anyone to get in a huff over the way the rest of us carry on.’
The part of the city through which they were walking reminded Zen of Venice, but a Venice brutally fractured, as though each canal were a geological fault and the houses to  either side had taken a plunge or been wrenched up all askew and left to tumble back on themselves, throwing out buttresses and retaining walls for support as best they could.
‘I mean, do you really think the dead sit around counting who goes to the funeral and how many wreaths there are and how much they cost?’ his companion carried on.
‘I just hate cemeteries, anyway.
They remind me of death.’
Her tone was even more strident than usual.
Zen wondered if she wasn't slightly high on drink or drugs.
‘Going home to stick it up her, eh?
Filthy old bumfucker!
Squeeze it tight and you might just manage to get a hard-on, you miserable little rat!’
The voice was just overhead, but when they looked up there was no one there.
‘Good evening, Evelina,’ Cinzia replied calmly.
‘Don't you good evening me, you shameless cunt!
You blow-job artist!
I bet you beg for it on bended knees!
I bet you let him shove it where he wants!
Whore!
Masturbator!’
They turned a corner and the malignant ravings became blurred and indistinct.
‘Poor Evelina used to be one of the most fashionable women in Perugia,’ Cinzia explained.
‘Nobody seems to know what happened, but one day during a concert she suddenly stood up, took off her knickers and showed everyone her bottom.
After that she was put away until they closed the asylums, since when she's lived in that place.
It's one of her family's properties, they own half the city.
Sometimes you hear her singing, in the summertime.
But mostly she just sits up there like a spider, sticking her head out of the window to insult the passers-by.
It's nothing personal, she says the same to everyone.’
For some time now Zen had been wondering where they were going.
When Cinzia said she was staying ‘in town’, he'd assumed that she meant the Miletti villa.
But although the structure of the city still defeated him in detail, he had got his bearings well enough to know that this could not be their destination.
Eventually Cinzia turned up a set of steps rising steeply from the street and unlocked a door at the top.
‘You'll come in for a moment, won't you?’
Without waiting for an answer she disappeared, leaving the door open.
Zen slowly mounted the steps, and then paused on the threshold.
Ruggiero Miletti was dead and the family blamed him.
What better revenge than to disgrace him by rigging a scandal involving the dead man's daughter, a married woman?
But he told himself not to be crazy.
How could they have known he was going to that cinema when he hadn't known himself until he saw the name at the station?
A narrow stairway of glossy marble led straight into a sitting room arranged around a huge open fireplace.
There was no sign of Cinzia.
The room had roughly plastered walls and a low ceiling supported on enormous joists trimmed out of whole trees.
Everything was spick and span, more like a hotel than a home.
Zen was instinctively drawn towards the one area of disorder, a desk piled with leaflets, envelopes, magazines, newspapers, letters and bills.
He picked up one of the envelopes and held it up to the light: the watermark showed the heraldic hybrid with which he was becoming familiar, with the wings of an eagle and the body of a lion.
Next to it lay a note from Cinzia to her husband about collecting their daughter from school.
‘This is really Gianluigi's place,’ Cinzia explained as she breezed in.
She had changed into a striped shirt and a pair of faded jeans that were slightly too large for her.
‘I only use it when he's away, there's no telling who I might find here otherwise.
What do you want to drink?’
‘Anything at all.’
Her bare feet padded across the polished terracotta tiles to the bottles lined along a shelf in the corner.
Zen sat down on the large sofa which occupied most of one wall, thinking about that last card which he'd fondly thought he had up his sleeve.
Thank God he hadn't tried to play it!
The trap had been beautifully set, and he'd only avoided it because thanks to Bartocci's machinations he'd already fallen into another one.
Cinzia brought them both large measures of whisky and sat down astride the wicker chair in front of the writing desk, facing him over the ridged wooden back.
‘I don't normally drink with strangers,’ she remarked.
‘It's quite a thrill.
We do all our drinking in private, you see, in the family.
Like everything else, for that matter!’
Cinzia was beginning to remind Zen more than a little of his wife.
Luisella had also been the child of a successful businessman, owner of one of the most important chemist's shops in Treviso, and she too had had brothers who had dominated her childhood, driving her to defend herself in unorthodox ways.
Life was a game like tennis, set up by men for men to win with powerful serves she would never be able to return.
She countered by deliberately breaking the rules, exhausting her opponents and winning by default.
‘That's a clue by the way,’ she continued.
‘You're never going to get anywhere if you don't understand the people involved.’
‘I thought the people involved were Calabrian shepherds.’
‘Oh, well, I don't know anything about them.
You should have asked Stefania.
Her brother's best friend is Calabrian, a medical student.
But his family is extremely rich and I don't expect he knows any shepherds.’
She got up abruptly.
‘Shall we have some music?
Let's see, I can never remember how to work this thing.’
She pressed a button and one of the hit songs of the season emerged at full volume, the tough, shallow lyrics gloatingly declaimed by a star of the mid-sixties who had traded in her artless looks and girlish lispings for a street-wise manner and a voice laden with designer cynicism.
‘I'd rather just talk,’ Zen shouted.
With a flick of her finger she restored the silence.
‘I thought you were bored.
Well, what shall we talk about?
How about sex?
Let's see how you rate in that area.
What do you think we go in for, here in Perugia?
Wife-swapping?
Open marriage?
Group gropes?
Singles bars?’
‘None of those, I should have thought,’ Zen replied with a slight smile.
‘And quite right too.
Bravo, you're improving.
There's some of that around, of course, but it's not traditional.
So  what do you think is the speciality of the house?
I'm talking about something typically Perugian, home-made from the very finest local ingredients only.’
She finished her drink in one gulp.
‘No idea?
I don't think you're a very good detective, I've given you loads of clues.
It's incest, of course.’
She banged her empty glass down on the desk, as though she had expected to find the surface several centimetres lower than it actually was.
‘Don't look so surprised, it makes perfect sense.
From our point of view marriage has one big drawback, you see.
It lets an outsider into the family.
Much safer to stick to one's close relations.
There's no trusting cousins and the like, of course.
No, we're talking mother and son, father and daughter.
See what I mean?
If you don't know these things how can you hope to get anything right?
For example, you disapprove of my going to the cinema this evening, but what do you think I should be doing?
Cleaving to the bosom of my grieving family?
What do you think they're doing?
Daniele will be locked in his bedroom watching the latest batch of video nasties.
Silvio?
He'll be stripping for action with Helmut or whatever his name is this week.
And Pietro will have gone to bed with a nice English murder story.
Not much in the way of company, you see.’
‘And your husband?’
Zen was still irrationally worried that Gianluigi might walk in at any moment, hunting rifle in hand.
Or would he use the other gun, the little 4.5mm pistol registered in Cinzia's name?
Where was that kept?
‘He's still in Milan,’ Cinzia replied carelessly.
‘He couldn't get a flight back because of all the journalists wanting to get down here, or so he claims.
Anyway, he has nothing to do with it, he's not family.
Of course, he didn't realize that when he married me.
But you don't break into the Miletti family as simply as that!
So he's been reduced to other expedients.’
‘And why did you marry him?’
Cinzia looked around vaguely, as if trying to remember.
‘Well, he's very handsome.
I know men don't think so, but he is.
That might almost have been enough.’
‘But it wasn't.’
‘No.
I married him to spite my father.’
Zen gave her a look of appraisal.
‘You're not being very typically Perugian yourself, are you, telling me all this?’
Cinzia's eyes suddenly flashed and she smiled, displaying an excessive number of rather dirty teeth.
‘It's strange, isn't it?
I knew his death would be a release, but I thought it would be terrible, that I would suffer.
I thought he would always make me suffer, whatever happened.
But it's not like that at all.
All this time, all these years, I've been lugging this weight around with me, for so long now that I've forgotten what it's like to be free of it.
I'd even begun to mistake it for part of my own body, an incurable growth that I've got to learn to live with.
But it's not, it's not!
That disease, that horror, that swelling, it was all his!
I'm whole and healthy and light, I find.
Sorry for his death?
I feel like dancing on his coffin!’
But there were tears in her eyes.
For a moment it looked as though she was going to break down.
‘There used to be this old-fashioned clothes shop on the Corso,’ she went on more quietly.
‘It's gone now, they've turned it into a boutique.
It was full of wooden drawers and cupboards and enormous heavy mirrors on stands and boxes of buttons and threads and trimming.
All the clothes were wrapped in tissue paper.
I can still remember the sound it made, a lovely special sound, as light and thin as the clothes were thick and heavy.
Everything smelt of mothballs and lavender and cedar.
That shop was like a dream world to me, full of secrets and wonders.
My mother took me there occasionally, and we used to pass the window every Sunday after mass.
They always had beautiful things in the window.
There was one I craved in particular, a pink nightdress with a lace hem and a frilly neck and a family of rabbits embroidered on the chest.
I always stopped to look at it, although I knew it was much too expensive.
But when my eighth birthday came I found it among my presents, with a little card from my father.’
He saw that she was weeping, not for her father but for herself, for the child she had been.
‘Well, I expect you can guess the rest!
That evening he came to my room, to see how I looked in my new nightdress.
Told me to sit on his knee.
That was normal, I didn't think twice about it.
But what happened next wasn't normal.
I knew it must be wrong, because afterwards he made me promise not to tell anyone about it, not even Mamma.
What had happened was our secret, he said.
That was the agreement we'd made.
He'd kept his part by buying me the nightdress, now it was up to me to keep mine.
I didn't remember making any agreement, but what could I do?
Fathers know best, don't they?
So although I didn't like him touching me the way he had, I decided not to tell anybody.
I didn't realize that by keeping quiet I was walking into a trap.’
She sniffed loudly and picked up her cigarettes.
‘After that he came to visit me almost every evening.
After he had gone I found that my nightie was covered in a horrible sticky mess with a strange sour smell.
I went to the bathroom and scrubbed myself until I was raw.
But I still didn't tell anyone.
In the end he stopped bothering to make any pretence of cuddles, it became fucking pure and simple.
And his filth was no longer just on my skin, it was inside me.’
.
Zen tried to think of something to say, but it was useless.
Faced with this ordinary everyday atrocity, he felt ashamed be a man, ashamed to be human.
‘Finally I threatened to tell Mamma.
I was older now and more daring.
It was then that he finally sprang his trap.
If you do that, he told me, we shall go to prison, both of us.
Because it's really all your fault.
You encouraged me, you led me on.
You must have enjoyed it, otherwise you would have told someone before now!
You're as bad as me, my girl, or even worse.’
She lit her cigarette and smiled at Zen, inviting him to appreciate her father's cleverness.
‘The worst thing about his lies was that they were partly true.
Because although I hated it worse than anything, I did enjoy it too, once I got used to it.
Of course it felt nice, what did you expect?
And don't you think it was flattering, in a way, to be preferred to my mother?
What a position to be in!
On the one hand I could send us both to prison, shame my mother, beggar my brothers, scandalize the city and blacken the Miletti name for evermore.
On the other hand, I could do, I did, exactly the opposite, keeping my father satisfied and happy and my mother ignorant, helping to shore up their marriage, holding the family together and preserving my unsuspecting brothers, who thought they were so superior to me, from disgrace.
Half the time I felt like a vicious little whore and the other half like the heroine of a nineteenth-century novel.
But mostly I just felt my power!
My father used the carrot as well as the stick, of course, and that meant I got everything I wanted, clothes, jewellery, perfume.
And when his friends and business associates came round, I would put on my finery and try out my power on them too.
And it worked!
Antonio Crepi, for example, used to give me looks that would have melted a candle.
I was twelve at the time.’
‘Did your mother never suspect what was going on?’
After a long time Cinzia looked up.
‘That's a terrible question,’ she said.
‘At the time I was sure she didn't know.
How could she have known, I thought, and not done anything about it?
Now I'm not so sure.
She would have had every reason to look the other way.
Besides….’
She stopped.
‘What?’
‘Sometimes I think she deliberately ignored what was happening, in order to punish me.
Perhaps it was her way of taking revenge.
Perhaps she too thought that it was my fault, that I enjoyed it, that I was as bad as he was, or even worse.’
She straightened up, her voice bright and brisk again.
‘Anyway, none of that matters now.
There was a car crash, she died, he was in hospital for a long time and when he came out everything had changed.
He may have seen her death as a judgement.
I don't know, we never talked about it of course.
But he never came near me again, and I was left high and dry with all that power lying idle inside me.
It didn't lie idle long, needless to say.’
She gave him a wry smile.
‘So now you know everything there is to know about me!
Not even my husband knows what I've just told you.
A rare  privilege, and one you didn't deserve, to be perfectly honest.
But I needed to tell someone, after all these years, and it had be a stranger of course.
You were just in the right place at the right time.’
Zen finished his whisky.
‘'There's still one thing I don't know.’
‘What?’
‘Why you sent me that copy of your father's letter.’
She barked out a little laugh.
‘I thought at first it must have been Ivy Cook,’ Zen went on.
‘But that doesn't really make sense.
Take the envelope, for example.
Did she take it with her when she went to the rubbish skip or dash to a stationer's and buy it?
And not just any old envelope, but a special luxury brand with a griffin watermark.
Like the ones on your desk.’
She gave him a bored look.
‘It's not my desk, it's Gianluigi's.
I expect he sent you the letter.
You've no idea how resourceful he is.
He just about owns poor Daniele ever since that business with the drugs, not to mention those photographs he has of Silvio…’
‘No, it wasn't your husband,’ Zen interrupted.
‘It was you.
You rewrote the letter after the original had been burned, had your version photocopied and then sent me the copy.
The handwriting is the same as that note on the desk asking your husband to collect Loredana from school.’
‘Well, supposing I did?
It's not a criminal offence, is it, sending information to the police?
You should be grateful!
I may have changed a word here or there, but apart from that it's all exact.
I wrote it while the text was still fresh in my mind.
It wasn't the kind of letter that is easy to forget!
When Pietro told us that you were going on the pay-off I felt that you should know what you were getting yourself into.’
Zen smiled sceptically.
‘I thought it might have something to do with the fact that when it emerged that I'd received the letter, Ivy Cook would become persona non grata in the Miletti family.’
Cinzia giggled.
‘Well, why shouldn't I get something out of it too?
That bitch has been a thorn in our flesh for too long.
Help yourself to another drink, I'll be back in a moment.’
She lurched off across the room, reaching for the wall to steady herself, and disappeared upstairs.
Some time later there was the sound of a lavatory flushing, but Cinzia did not reappear.
Zen sat there, thinking over what she had told him.
He felt heavy, saturated, crammed with more or less repulsive odds and ends he neither wanted nor needed to know.
Someone had said that nowadays doctors had to double as priests, offering general consolation and advice to their patients.
But there are things you would be ashamed to tell even your doctor, things so vile they can only be confessed to the lowest, most contemptible functionaries of all.
There were days when Zen felt like the Bocca de Leone in the Doges' Palace: a stiff stone grimace clogged with vapid denunciations and false confessions, scribbles riddled with hatred or guilt, the anonymous rubbish of an entire city.
There was still no sign of Cinzia.
Zen got up, walked to the foot of the stairs and called out.
There was no reply.
He put his foot on the first step and paused, listening.’
Signora?’
The high marble steps curved upwards, paralleling the flight leading up from the front door.
Zen started to climb them.
There were three doors in the passageway at the top.
Feeling like a character in a fairy tale, he chose the one to the right and opened it carefully.
‘Signora?’
The room inside was startlingly bare, reminding him of his mother's flat in Venice.
Two empty cardboard boxes sat on the floor, one at each end of the room, ignoring each other.
Between them a small window showed a blank stretch of wall on the other side of the alley.
The second door he tried was the bathroom.
A quick search failed to reveal any suspiciously empty bottles of barbiturates, but of course she might have taken them with her.
That left just one door, and he hesitated for a moment before opening it.
But the scene which met his eyes was perfectly normal.
A large high old-fashioned bed almost filled the room.
Cinzia Miletti was lying across it on her back, bent slightly to one side, fully clothed, her eyes closed.
Her breathing seemed steady.
Zen felt he should cover her up.
Her body proved unexpectedly awkward and resistant.
One arm kept getting entangled in the sheets, until he began to think that she was playing a trick on him.
Paradoxically, it wasn't till her eyes opened that he knew he was wrong.
Their unfocused glance passed over him without the slightest flicker of movement or response.
Then they closed and she turned over and began to snore lightly.
His last image before switching off the light was of Cinzia's head lying on the pillow in the centre of a mass of long blonde hair, her mouth placidly sucking her thumb.
Outside the night had turned clear and bitterly cold, and the stars were massed in all their intolerable profusion.
The light cast by one of the infrequent street lamps glistened on a freshly pasted poster extolling the virtues of Commendatore Ruggiero Franco Miletti, whose funeral would be held the following afternoon.
8
By morning everything had changed: the sky was still clear, but the sun shone on a new landscape.
The straggling hinder-parts of the town, the scree of recent building on the lower slopes, the patchy developments strung out beside road and railway in the valley, all this had vanished.
Immediately beyond the two churches visible from Zen's window the world abruptly ended, to begin again fifteen or twenty kilometres away, where the upper slopes of the yeasty mountain survived as a small island rising from a frozen ocean.
A few other islets were visible on the other side of the valley, but apart from these patches of high ground and the stranded city itself, a glistening white mass of fog covered everything.
The Questura was barely fifty metres down the hill, but it was below the surface, and as Zen walked there from his hotel he felt the invisible moisture beading his newly shaved skin.
When he looked up the light was pearly and the sky a blue so tender he could hardly take his eyes off it, with the result that on several occasions he collided with people coming the other way.
But everybody was in a good mood that morning, and his apologies were returned with a smile.
He remembered a Chinese fable Ellen had once told him about a man who falls off a cliff, saves himself by clutching at a plant, and then notices that two mice are gnawing away the branch on which his life depends.
There is a fruit growing on the branch, which the man plucks and eats.
The fruit tastes wonderful.
‘How did the mice come to be halfway down a cliff in the first place?’ he had asked her.
‘And why didn't they eat the fruit themselves?’
He couldn't see the point of the story at all, but Ellen refused to explain.
‘You must experience it,’ was all she would say.
‘One day it'll suddenly hit you.’
He had been sceptical at the time, but she'd been quite right, for he had suddenly understood the story.
‘It'll come to the same thing in the end,’ he'd told Luciano Bartocci.
His days in Perugia were clearly numbered, and he would spend them like the young magistrate, on a siding running parallel to the main line but going nowhere and ending abruptly.
The process had begun the day before, at the scene of the crime.
It was Major Volpi who had been given responsibility for putting up road-blocks and carrying out house-to-house searches.
The police had made one mistake too many in this case and would be given no further opportunities to demonstrate their incompetence.
As for Zen, any day now he would receive a telegram from the Ministry summoning him back to Rome, and that would be that.
But in the meantime, how sweet the fruit tasted!
And although the bureaucratic mice were invisibly at work, he still went through the motions of shifting hands and improving his grip on the branch.
Thus his first action on returning to the Questura the day before had been to send his inspectors out to question the people living in the houses along the road to Cannara and talk to the local farmers, just in case anyone had seen anything.
When he arrived at work that morning the result of their labours was waiting for him in a blue folder.
Five minutes after entering his office Zen reappeared in the inspectors' room, where Geraci was watching Chiodini fill in a coupon for a competition promising the winner a lifetime supply of tomato concentrate.
‘What is this?’ he demanded.
Geraci looked warily at the folder Zen was holding up, his eyebrows working away like two caterpillars doing a mating dance.
‘It's our report.’
‘I've never seen a report like this.
What's all this stuff down the side?’
‘Those are computer codes.’
‘Since when have we had a computer?’
‘We haven't, it's at the law courts.
All packed up in boxes, down in the basement.
But we'll be getting terminals here, once it's working.
You see, this report isn't meant to be read, it's meant to be put into the computer.’
Zen regarded him stonily.
‘But there is no computer.’
‘Not yet, no.
But they want to be ready, you see.
It's going to be wonderful!
All the files from us, the Carabinieri, the Finance people, everything, is going to go straight into the computer.
Anything you want to know, it'll be there at your fingertips.
Say you've got a report about a small red car, and you want to compare it with all the other small red cars that have been reported in the area.
With the old method it would take you hours looking through files, but with the computer you just push a button and it tells you right away.
And the same for all the large red cars, or the red foreign cars of any size, or the small sports cars of any colour…’
Zen passed one hand across his forehead.
There were clearly various possibilities which the Chinese hadn't thought of.
For example, the mice stop gnawing, scamper down your arm, cock their legs and piss in your face.
‘Listen, you don't mean to tell me that everyone around here gets their reports in this form.
I simply don't believe it.’
‘Of course they do!
Isn't it the same in Rome?’
Zen looked away.
Of course it was the same in Rome.
It would be the same everywhere, that was how the system worked.
What Geraci still didn't know was that Zen had no recent operational experience in Rome or anywhere else.
‘Mind you, some of the older officers get us to do a back-up report in the old way,’ Chiodini told him.
‘But it's strictly unofficial,’ Geraci added hurriedly.
‘Can't be logged or filed.’
Zen was leafing through the folder.
He seemed not to have heard.
‘Did you speak to this witness?’
The inspector took the file and glanced at the entry pointed out by Zen's broad flat finger.
‘No, that was Lucaroni.’
‘But it's marked G.’
‘That's right.
G stands for Lucaroni.’
‘Really?
I suppose you're L?’
Geraci frowned.
‘L?
No, L is already in use by the system.
For example here in the same entry it says L23, right?
That means an unidentified foreign car.’
‘Where is Lucaroni?’
Geraci seemed to hesitate for a moment.
‘Upstairs,’ said Chiodini.
That meant either the senior command structure or the Political Branch, whose rooms are situated on the top floor of every Questura.
The fact that the same word is used for either reflects the general feeling that the distinction between them is fairly hazy.
‘Tell him I want to see him as soon as he gets back.’
He dosed the door behind him.
So they were getting a computer, were they?
Soon the intolerable mysteries of Mediterranean life would be swept away by the electronic wonders of real time and random access for all.
And just to make sure that everything was fair and above-board, the computer, like the facilities for tapping phones, would be located at the law courts, safely out of the hands of the police.
‘They're doing to small-time corruption what the multinational corporations are doing to small-time business,’ a cynical Sardinian friend had once remarked apropos of the latest initiative to dean up the police.
‘It's not going to stop the abuse of power, it's just going to restrict it to the highest level.
Anyone can afford to buy you or me, Aurelio, but only the big boys can manipulate judges.’
Zen glanced at the wall, where the calendar now looked oddly unbalanced.
Yes, it might be time to phone Gilberto.
He couldn't leave the crucifix in the luggage locker for ever.
Lucaroni appeared about ten minutes later, all apologies for the delay.
‘I was just having a word with Personnel,’ he explained.
‘My sister's getting married next week and I wanted to know whether there'd be any chance of a spot of leave.’
Zen passed him a page of the report.
‘Tell me about this woman who claims to have seen a large blue car near the scene of the crime.’
‘Well, there's just what it says here,’ the inspector replied, scanning the page.
‘It was a large blue foreign saloon, she said, driven by someone with fair hair, going along the…’
‘Tell me about the woman.’
‘The driver?
But we don't…’
‘No, the woman you spoke to.’
Lucaroni made a conspicuous effort to remember.
‘Well, she was oldish.
Lives with her in-laws in one of those new houses along the road.’
‘How did she see the car?’
‘She was out gathering salad leaves for the evening meal.
There's very little traffic on that road and she knows most of the people, so when she saw this strange car she noticed it.’
‘She called it a ‘strange’ car?’
‘Yes.’
‘So how did the idea that it was foreign come up?’
‘I asked her about the make and she said she didn't know.
I asked if it was foreign and she said that it was.’
Zen nodded.
The old woman wouldn't have known a Rolls-Royce from a Renault.
‘Foreign’ just meant that the car was a large luxury saloon of a kind she'd never seen before.
‘And there was only one person in it?’
‘So she said.
A woman with blonde hair.’
Zen took the report back again.
‘It says ‘fair hair/’ here.’
‘Well, you can't put blonde, can you?’
Lucaroni pointed out.
‘The computer won't accept it.
Hair is either fair or yellow.
’ Zen nodded.
‘Oh, there's one other thing.’
He pointed to the wall.
‘You remember the crucifix that used to be there?
You don't happen to know where it came from, do you?’
Lucaroni's tongue emerged to dampen his lips.
He shook his head.
‘I had a visitor in here the other day, you see.
There was an accident and the thing ended up in pieces.
Most unfortunate.’
‘In pieces?’
Lucaroni whispered.
Zen nodded.
‘Luckily my visitor was a Communist, so he's not superstitious about these things.
I'd be happy to pay for a new one, but I have no idea where to go.
Do you think you could get me one?
I'd really appreciate it.’
There was a long silence.’
Well…’
Lucaroni began.
Zen tapped his chest with one finger.’
But I want one that is the same.
You understand?
Exactly identical in every respect.’
Their glances met and held.
‘Identical,’ breathed the inspector.
‘Absolutely.
I was very fond of that crucifix.
It had a certain something about it, know what I mean?’
Lucaroni's mouth was now completely out of control.
His tongue shot out continually, dumping saliva on his lips, which barely had time to spread it around their shiny surfaces before the next load arrived.
Zen hastened to dismiss him before he self-destructed.
A glance at the map revealed that there was a short cut down to the Miletti villa, so instead of summoning Palottino he decided to walk.
What he was thinking of doing was risky enough as it was.
The less official he could make it the better.
The short cut turned out to be a lane which started abruptly at the bottom of a flight of steps opposite the Questura and ran straight down the hillside like a ruled line.
It must have been one of the old medieval roads into the city, now dosed to traffic by the concrete retaining wall of the ring boulevard.
To either side old farmhouses and new villas stood in uneasy proximity.
Beyond them, a narrow fold in the hillside was being filled with rubbish to provide space for a car park.
Down below, lost in the mist, he could just make out the holm-oaks and cypresses surrounding the Miletti property, a lugubrious baroque monstrosity built on a shoulder of land jutting out from the steep hillside.
Zen walked past it for another hundred and fifty metres to the separate entrance marked ‘Societa Industriale Miletti di Perugia’.
At this depth the mist was still unwarmed by the sun, clinging glaucously to every surface.
This was the site of Franco's original workshops, built just below the house.
In those days captains of industry were not ashamed to live close to the source of their wealth.
Since production had been moved out to Ponte San Giovanni the buildings had been gutted and transformed into the administrative headquarters of SIMP.
He'd been expecting tight security at the entrance, but in the event the gates were open and unmanned, and a  passing employee directed him along a concrete road leading to the garage where a man in blue overalls was washing one of the Fiat saloons.
Behind him a dozen or so more of the cars were lined up, their paintwork gleaming.
Zen flashed his identification with contemptuous brevity and then allowed a little time for the mechanic's fear to be fruitful and multiply.
Everyone has some reason to be afraid of the police, and fear, like money, can be spent on something quite unrelated to what has created it.
When Zen judged that he had enough for his purposes he pointed to the Fiats.
‘Are you responsible for these cars?’
The man nodded.
Zen gave a satisfied smile, as though he had obtained a damning admission.
‘Then what have you done with my cigarette lighter?’
‘Cigarette lighter?’ the mechanic stammered.
‘What sort of cigarette lighter?’
Zen's smile vanished.
‘Why, how many have you found?’
‘None!
I haven't found anything.’
‘Then why did you ask what sort, eh?
Think you can keep anything you find, eh?
Supplement your lousy wages with a little private enterprise, is that it?’
The man flung his sponge down angrily.
‘I've found nothing!
I've just cleaned them all ready for this afternoon.
There was no cigarette lighter in any of them.’
‘They're going to use the company cars for the funeral?’
Zen queried in a tone of deep disgust.
‘Talk about cheap!’
‘It's what Signor Ruggiero would have wanted.’
‘Don't try and change the subject!
You claim not to have found any lighter, is that it?’
‘I don't claim anything!
I didn't find any lighter and that's all there is to it.
Have a look for yourself if you want, I've got nothing to hide!’
‘Oh, I'm going to!
Don't you worry about that, I'm going to.’
The mechanic watched him out of the comer of his eye as he went from car to car, making an elaborate pretence of examining the interiors.
The mud surrounding the building site where Ruggiero Miletti had been murdered had proved a rich source of  impressions.
A preliminary investigation, completed while Zen was still present, had yielded five different footprints and two distinct sets of tyre marks.
One of the two sets consistently overlaid the other, and it was distinctive, in that one of the tyres did not match the other three.
Zen had imagined that this would be a rarity, but in fact four of the cars in the garage had one odd tyre.
Only one configuration, however, matched that found at the murder scene.
‘What the fuck do you think you're doing, Zen?’
It was Gianluigi Santucci.
The Tuscan turned on the mechanic.
‘What has he been asking you, Massimo?
If you've told him as much as the time, you're out!’
‘Nothing!’ protested the mechanic energetically.
‘I've said nothing!’
‘That's true,’ Zen confirmed.
‘He's been most unhelpful.’
‘I haven't found any lighter, I don't know anything about any lighter,’ Massimo went on.
‘I told him so, but he wanted to look for himself.
But he didn't touch anything, Signor Gianluigi.
I kept my eye on him the whole time.’
Gianluigi Santucci glared at Zen.
‘Cigarette lighter my bollocks!
What are you up to?
Come on!’
‘I've lost my lighter and I thought I might have left it in the car the other day.
I didn't want to disturb the family at a moment like this so I came to check in person.
But I don't understand what you're getting so excited about.
I mean, is this garage a secret research area or something?’
Too late, Gianluigi realized his error.
In an attempt to compensate he forced a smile.
‘You haven't understood, have you?’ he sneered.
‘You think you're still in the game, but you couldn't be more wrong.
You're a foreigner here.
No one wants you, no one likes you, no one needs you.
If you haven't got your marching orders yet it just means no one can be bothered to tell you what's happening any more!
Now kindly fuck off out of here and don't come back.’
When Zen reached the gate the security guard was back in his place, but he was so intent on the spluttering exclamations of his walkie-talkie, cradling it to his face and murmuring to it  like a mother trying to calm a baby, that Zen's departure went as unremarked as his arrival.
He walked on down the hill until the lane joined the main road.
At the comer stood a green plastic rubbish skip, presumably the one where Ruggiero's letter had been left.
Opposite there was a bakery, an office furniture showroom, a driving school and a tobacconist displaying the familiar public telephone symbol of a blue receiver in a yellow circle.
Zen went in, got two thousand lire's worth of tokens and dialled a number in Rome.
‘Gilberto?’
‘Who's this?’
‘Aurelio.’
‘Aurelio!
How's it going?’
‘Can you do me a favour?’
‘Such as?’
‘It means coming up here.’
‘Where's here?’
‘Perugia.
I've got problems.’
‘What kind of problems?’
‘Can you come up this afternoon?’
‘This afternoon!
Jesus.’
Even at this depth the sunlight had finally started to filter down through the mist.
There was a grove of olive trees opposite the shop, on the other side of the main road.
Above the rush and scurry of the traffic they stood in monumental stillness, each leaf precisely outlined against the deep blue sky.
‘What do you want done?’
‘Can we talk on this line?’
‘Listen, I'm in industrial espionage, you know.
How long do you think I'd stay in business if I didn't keep my lines clean?
You worry about your own end.’
Zen told his friend briefly about the murder and the large blue car that matched both the witness's description and the tyre marks found at the scene.
Then he told him what he wanted him to do and Gilberto said he would, although it might mean losing a contract to proof a leading Rome estate agent against electronic surveillance.
They arranged to meet at half past four at a village a kilometre or so beyond the cemetery.
That left lots of time to kill, so Zen rode a bus back up to the  centre and wandered along the Corso.
The steps of the cathedral were being used as a grandstand by some of the local young people and a few early tourists.
A German youth whose exaggerated features looked as though they had been moulded from foam rubber explained loudly to his companion how he needed the sun, the sun for him was a physical necessity.
The two Nordic girls he had seen two days before were now basking like seals outside another cafe.
One of them had even contrived to get sunburned.
Her friend was delicately pulling little wafers of flaking skin off her chest, watched hungrily by a group of young men in leather jackets, narrow ties and mirror sun-glasses.
All at once Zen saw a vigorous bulky figure in a dark grey overcoat with a black arm-band walking towards him across the piazza.
It was Antonio Crepi.
He prepared a greeting, but the Perugian passed by without a word or gesture, leaving Zen with his hand still uncertainly raised in salutation.
It was the first time that someone had cut him dead, and it was a shock.
He had always thought of it as a superficial and outmoded gesture found only in old novels.
But what had just happened had nothing to do with etiquette: Antonio Crepi had made it clear that for him, and by extension for the whole of the Perugia that mattered, Zen had ceased to exist.
That's why ghosts wail, he thought, condemned to haunt a world which has no further need of them.
He walked away quickly, trying to shake off the unnerving effect of the encounter.
The air was carved into blocks by the buildings, soft and warm where the sun reached, chill and unyielding in the shadows.
The continual passage from one to the other was initially as refreshing as a succession of hot and cold showers, and ultimately as enervating.
Zen stopped in a small grocery and ordered a roll filled with anchovies sprinkled with vinegar and a little crushed chilli, which he ate with a glass of white wine.
There was a newspaper open at the local pages on top of the freezer, and as he munched the roll Zen read an article describing the life and times of the late head of the Miletti family in such exorbitantly fulsome terms that Zen wondered in his dour Venetian way whether such a paragon would find Paradise quite good enough for him.
He  also wondered whether Ruggiero's daughter had seen the article, and if so what she thought of it.
Cinzia had told him what kind of drinkers the Perugians were, and what kind of lovers.
What he needed to know now was what kind of murderers they were.
By four o'clock the last of the mist had disappeared, even down in the valley below the cemetery.
The warm air was scented with the heady reek of diesel oil from the bus which had brought him there and was now parked in the terminus circle near by.
The driver was sitting on the step, smoking and reading a newspaper.
Zen stood in the fading sunlight watching the courtship of two pigeons on the tiled roof of a shed below.
The gurgling male, alternately bowing down and rearing up, chased the female from one row of tiles to the next.
Eventually he appeared to lose interest, disheartened by her lack of appreciation, and turned away.
Instantly the female stopped too, so that both birds came to a halt like toys whose batteries have run down.
It seemed the end.
Relationships were just too difficult, the sexes would never see eye to eye, it was all too much bother.
Something essential had broken down and next year there wouldn't be any pigeons.
Then, just as suddenly as he had stopped, the male was off again, perking up his feathers and hopping after his mate with a meaningful glint in his beady eyes.
Zen had watched this cycle a dozen times or more when he felt a touch on his shoulder and turned to find Gilberto grinning up at him.
Gilberto Nieddu was so small that it wasn't clear how he had ever managed to get into the police force.
There were the inevitable rumours of bribery and favouritism, but since Gilberto's father was only a small-time locksmith from Nuoro this seemed unlikely.
Zen preferred to think that some alert recruiting officer somewhere, realizing the appalling threat a disgruntled Gilberto would pose outside the law, had bent the rules to let him in.
For four years they had worked together in Rome.
The Sardinian had resigned a week after Zen's transfer, and he was the only one of his former colleagues whom Zen still saw regularly.
‘Any problems?’
Zen asked him.
‘Only getting back here after I dumped it.
You had to choose a place in the middle of nowhere.’
‘Close to the scene.
Local colour.’
Gilberto was as compact as a squash ball, sallow, ugly and muscular, yet amazingly deft in his movements.
For a bet, he had once broken into the flat where a certain Vice-Questore was entertaining a lady friend and removed the couple's clothes so stealthily that the Vice-Questore thought something supernatural must have occurred and came over all religious for a while.
No, Gilberto wouldn't have had any problems stealing an unguarded car from outside a cemetery.
‘Is this all really worth it?’ the Sardinian asked Zen, who merely shrugged.
‘How much do I owe you?’
Gilberto Nieddu spat thoughtfully at the pigeons on the roof below.
‘Take me out to lunch when you get back.
At the Pergola.’
‘The Pergola!
Wouldn't it work out cheaper just to pay your normal rates?’
‘Now, don't try and wriggle out of it or I'll send Vittorio round to see you.
He's my new enforcer.
A great success.
You may think you have problems now, but Vittorio can make them seem like fond memories.’
Zen handed him a key with a number stamped on the shaft.
‘This opens a luggage locker at the station.
There's something inside, wrapped up in a plastic bag.
I'd like to know what it is.’
The Sardinian looked at him long and hard, shaking his head slowly.
‘You know something, Aurelio?
You aren't really cut out to be a cop.’
‘Imagine living in a country where the cops are all people who're cut out for the job.’
‘I'll phone you tomorrow morning.’
Zen shook his head.
‘I'll phone you.’
The Sardinian spat once more.
‘Christ, you have got problems.’
The bus driver started his engine again.
Zen just had time  to cross to the phone booth, dial the police emergency number and give the message he had prepared before boarding the bus as the doors were closing.
A few moments later they passed Gilberto walking back up the hill to the place where he had left his own car, just below the massive wall of the columbarium in the cemetery where Ruggiero Miletti had been interred two hours previously.
The switchboard on the ground floor of the Questura was manned by a chubby youth who was holding a large roll, turning it from one side to the other and studying it closely like a wrestler looking for a hold.
As Zen came through the door he suddenly saw an opening and lunged forward, so that for the next thirty seconds or so he was unable to reply to his visitor's question.
‘He wouldn't give his name,’ he said finally.
‘Probably a hoax.’
‘What exactly did he say?’
‘Just said he wanted to report a blue Fiat abandoned on the road to Cannara, near the scene of the murder.’
He kept glancing warily at his roll out of the comer of his eye, as though it might attack him.
Zen leant forward on the top of the switchboard.
‘Listen, this could be very important.
I want that car brought in, turned over to the laboratory and given the works.’
‘They'll need confirmation in writing.’
‘They'll get it.’
The telephonist nodded.
He was too eager to get back to his roll to ask how Zen had found out about the anonymous phone call.
Upstairs on the third floor Zen stepped into the inspectors' room, but there was no one there.
He was about to leave when he froze in an awkward position midway across the room.
Then he heard it again, a slight but unmistakable sound from next door.
Someone was in his office.
He moved as quietly as he could towards the connecting door, grasped the handle and with a single movement flung the door open.
‘About time too!
I was beginning to think I'd have to spend the night here.’
He leant back against the door, his body slowly untensing.
‘Ellen.’
‘Ah, so you remember my name!’
‘It's wonderful to see you.’
‘Really?
I certainly wouldn't have guessed it from the way you've been behaving.
Why haven't you telephoned me?’
‘I did!’ he lied automatically.
‘You were never there!’
‘I was!’
‘Not when I phoned.’
‘I've been home almost every evening.
When did you phone?’
‘Well, anyway, let's not quarrel.
The important thing is that you're here.
How long can you stay?’
‘I'll have to see.
It depends.’
He tried to kiss her, but she evaded him in a half-angry, half-flirtatious way, so they were in the middle of a clumsy clinch when Lucaroni walked in.
‘Oh fuck!’ he said, on his way out again.
Zen turned on him.
‘Didn't anyone ever teach you to knock?
You're not home on the farm now, you know!’
‘Sorry, chief.
Really sorry.
I didn't think anybody was here.
I was going to put it up for you.’
‘Put what up?’
Lucaroni unwrapped the package he was carrying to reveal a brand-new crucifix, the wounds daubed with bright red paint.
‘Just what you wanted, right?’ the inspector prompted eagerly.
‘Just like the other one.’
Zen glanced at Ellen, who was staring at him in horrified disbelief.
‘I'll explain later,’ he said wearily.
‘Don't worry.
I'll explain everything later.’
A small white plastic bag containing various packets of waxed paper marked ‘For Foodstuffs’ lay propped against the gear-lever of the little Fiat.
The draught coming in through the ventilation ducts made it tremble continuously.
They should never have come, thought Zen.
What a crazy idea, picnicking up a mountain at this time of year.
A crazy foreign idea.
It had all started the night before, when Ellen asked, ‘Is that Assisi over there?’
They were standing looking out of his hotel window.
In the distance a mess of lights were spread out across the face of the night like a shovelful of glowing cinders, flickering and scintillating in the currents of air rising from the villages in the plain between.
Let's go there tomorrow, she'd suggested, and then talked about her previous visits, enthusing about the place so much that he grew quite determined to dislike it.
But it wasn't until Ellen came to pick him up that he discovered that she had already bought everything for a picnic lunch.
One o'clock in Piazza dei Partigiani after a stressful morning at work was very different from eleven o'clock the night before after making love, but Ellen was bubbling with such enthusiasm that he hadn't the heart to voice his reservations.
But he still thought it was crazy, and he'd been right.
Here they were, parked a thousand metres up the dough-shaped mountain, huddled in Ellen's Fiat 500 because despite the sun the wind outside was wicked.
Even the view was all but invisible through a windscreen coated with Roman grime.
Foreign craziness!
Ellen started to unwrap the food: a mound of ricotta, slices of cooked ham, olives in oil, half a loaf of bread.
On a warm sunny day in the open air it might have been idyllic.
Eaten off sheets of wrapping paper balanced precariously on their shivering knees the cheese looked a disgusting white excrescence, the ham pale and sickly and the olives slimy.
Even the wine, a heavy red, was a failure.
Cold and shaken from the journey, thick with sediment and drunk from a plastic beaker, it tasted like medicine.
But like medicine it did him good, and the food tasted better than it looked, and after a while the silence grew less tense and they began to chat about the contrast between bloody-minded, earnest Perugia, just visible on its wind-swept ridge as a distant smudge of grey, and Assisi, symbol of everything nice and pretty and kind, whose pink stone made even its fortifications look as innocent as an illustration in a book of fairy tales.
But as Zen pointed out, at least in Perugia you were spared the relentless commercialization of the pilgrim city, the three-dimensional postcards of a glamorous St Francis preaching to an audience of stuffed animals, the bottles of ‘Monk's Delight’ liqueur, the ceramic prayer texts suitable for mounting over the toilet, the little figurines of lovable monks with round bellies and mischievous smiles.
‘Yes, but despite all that there really is something special about the place, isn't there?’
Ellen insisted.
It was the sort of comment, at once vague and gushing, that always irritated him.
Sometimes he wondered whether that was why she kept making them.
‘To me it's just another pretty Umbrian hill town,’ he retorted.
‘It's a shame it's been ruined.’
He was going too far, pushing too hard, saying things he didn't really believe.
It was quite deliberate.
Something had gone wrong between them, and he intended to find out what it was.
Normally he handed over responsibility for the routine maintenance of their relationship to Ellen, but she was letting him down, so he was going to try the only technique he knew: drop some explosive overboard and see what floated to the surface.
‘How can you say that?’ she demanded indignantly.
‘What about all the churches?
They wouldn't exist if it hadn't been for him.
The basilica is one of the greatest buildings in the world.
Or would you dispute that?’
‘On the contrary, I think it's so great that it should be put to better use.
I remember when I was at university in Padua we went to see the basilica there.
It's magnificent, one of my friends said, after the revolution we'll turn it into a sports centre.
The place here would make a good Turkish baths.’
‘You're showing your age, Aurelio.
That sort of knee-jerk anticlericalism has been out of date for years.’
‘Or best of all, they could use it as an exhibition centre.
They could start with a display about the concentration camp at Jasenovac.’
‘Was that in Poland?’ she repeated as she cleared away the food.
‘Yugoslavia.
No one 's heard of it, it wasn't in the Auschwitz or Belsen class.
They only killed forty thousand people there.’
‘And what's that got to do with Assisi?’
‘The commandant of Jasenovac concentration camp was a Franciscan monk.’
He opened the window a crack, but the wind made such a noise that he immediately closed it again.
‘When the Germans turned Croatia into a puppet dictatorship the Catholics there immediately got to work settling old scores with the Serbs, packing them into their churches and burning them alive, that kind of thing.
The Church knew what was going on and they could easily have stopped it.
But the Pope kept quiet and the atrocities went on, many of them supervised by the followers of St Francis.
At the end of the war Eva Peron, the wife of the Argentinian dictator, sent us a boat-load of brown cloth.
Guess why.’
She shook her head.
‘To dress the Croatian thugs up as Franciscan monks so that they could escape to Italy out of the clutches of Tito's partisans.
They were fed and sheltered here in Assisi and in other monasteries and church buildings until they could get away to South America.
They were good Catholic boys, after all.’
‘I don't suppose Tito's men were angels either.’
‘I don't suppose they were.
But at least they didn't go around with beatific smiles mumbling about peace and goodwill.’
‘Well, I'm relieved to see that you haven't changed after all,’ Ellen remarked as they lit their cigarettes.
‘I got a bit worried when I found you'd been sending your subordinates out to buy crucifixes.’
Zen smiled too, but privately he heard Gilberto Nieddu's voice again, the Sardinian accent strong and clear-cut even over the bad line from Rome.
‘Oh yes, Aurelio, I've identified it.
No problem.
For me, that is.
But you've got problems all right.
Your crucifix contains a transistorized short-wave transmitter with a cadmium-cell feed.
Korean job, cheap and easy to obtain, four to five months continuous operation, use once and throw away.
The mike concealed in the head of the figure is only medium-quality, technically speaking, but it would pick up a flea farting in a smallish room.
The transmitter would then beam that out about  two hundred metres.
Somewhere within that radius there'll be a receiver, probably rigged up to a voice-activated tape recorder.
Once every so often someone comes along, swaps the cassette and takes away the highlights of your day at work.’
There was a long silence, during which the noise on the line seemed to become a third party in their conversation.
‘What do you want me to do with it?’
‘You'd better send it back.’
‘Do you have any idea who it belongs to?’
The silence lasted even longer this time.
‘Upstairs, maybe.’
Gilberto's next words had shaken Zen more than anything that had happened so far.
‘Watch yourself, Aurelio.
Remember Carella.’
Avoiding Ellen's eyes, Zen wrapped his coat more closely about him.
‘Anyway, let's look on the bright side.
The way things are going I should be back in Rome soon.’
‘I still don't understand what all the fuss is about,’ Ellen replied in a slightly peevish tone.
‘Miletti's death was nothing to do with you, surely?’
‘That remains to be proved.’
‘Oh, I see.
It's the old story.
You're guilty until proven innocent.’
‘Not necessarily.
Sometimes you're guilty anyway.’
They sat there listening to the gush and scurry of the wind buffeting the car.
‘You didn't tell me the whole truth that evening at Ottavio's, did you?’
Ellen asked at last.
He didn't reply.
‘I want to know, Aurelio.
I need to know.’
He turned his pale, grave face towards her.
‘When you were a child, did you have someone who used to tell you stories?’
She looked at him in surprise.
‘My father used to read to me.’
‘No, I don't mean that.
If it comes out of a book you know it's not real.
I mean someone who would just sit down and tell you things, as if they had just happened on the way home.
I had an uncle who did that.
For example once he went  to Rome on business and when he got back he told me about a building which was like the sky at night, so big that even when you stood in front of it you couldn't believe you were actually seeing it.
Yet it was completely useless, he said.
It had no roof and no floor, just hundreds of brick arches piled one on top of another like a team of acrobats.
He was describing the Colosseum.’
He opened the window and pushed his cigarette out.
‘Once he was late arriving at our house.
He told me that when the vaporetto arrived he had noticed something strange about it.
The boat was lying far too low in the water, almost level with the surface, the decks awash.
It made no sound, and even seemed to absorb the sounds around it, like a sponge soaking up water.
The people who were waiting all boarded this strange boat, all except my under.
I asked him why he hadn't got on with the other passengers.
Because that was the ferry of death, he said.
He explained that the people who had got on to that ferry would get off in another world, and would never be seen in this one again.
There is another city all around us, he told me.
We can't see it, but there are ways into it, although there is no way back.
Anyone who boards a certain ferry or walks down a certain street or enters a certain building or goes through a certain door disappears for ever into that other city.’
Ellen was looking at him with an expression he had never seen before.
For a moment he wondered if he was doing the right thing.
But in some odd way the decision no longer seemed to be in his hands.
‘My uncle's stories sounded unlikely, but they always turned out to be true.
That parallel world really exists, and what happened to me in 1978 was that I unwittingly blundered into it.’
The wind surged around the little car, streaking past across the expanse of long brown grass still flattened from the snow that had lain on it over the winter.
‘I was in the kidnapping section of the Criminal Investigation Branch at the time.
I was considered to be doing well.
Rome Central is one of the three top postings in the country, along with Milan and Naples, and I'd worked  my way there through a succession of jobs in various provincial headquarters.
Promotion to Vice-Questore seemed certain and the general feeling was that if I played my cards right I would make Questore in the end.
When the Red Brigade kidnapped Moro we were all thrown into the investigation, under the direction of the Political Branch.
The first thing we discovered was that there seemed to be almost no information to go on.
Despite all the money the Politicals had been siphoning off for years, a very sore point with the rest of us, they claimed to have no material on the terrorists beyond a few isolated descriptions and photographs.
It was almost unbelievable.
Here was Aldo Moro, an ex-Prime Minister, the leader of the Christian Democrat Party and one of the most powerful and influential men in Italy, at the mercy of the best-known organization of political extremists, and the people responsible for combating political extremism told us there was nothing we could do except organize random house-to-house searches.
So that's what we did, along with chasing after various red herrings which somebody provided to keep us busy.
Then one day one of my inspectors, a man called Dario Carella, phoned in claiming to have seen one of the suspected terrorists.
Carella had followed the man to a chemist's shop in Piazzale della Radio and then to a bus stop.
But the suspect must have noticed him, because he suddenly waved down a passing taxi and drove off.
Carella had taken the number of the taxi and we discovered that it had dropped the suspect outside the San Gallicano hospital in Trastevere.
Meanwhile Carella went back to the chemist's to find out what the man had bought.
The result was very interesting.
The prescription had been forged, and the medicines listed were all among those regularly used by Aldo Moro.
Besides suffering from Addison's disease, Moro was a bit of a hypochondriac and he used a lot of drugs.
He had a supply with him when he was captured, but this would have run out by then.
It looked as though one of his captors had been sent to get more.
The Political Branch were informed and the hospital duly sealed off and searched, but there was no trace of the man.
Next we did a door-to-door of the whole area.
You probably remember that.’
‘I certainly do.
They almost wrecked my flat.’
‘That wasn't any more successful.
But Carella had an idea.
The bus stop where the suspect had waited in Piazzale della Radio is served by three lines, the 97, 97C and 128.
And just around the comer from the San Gallicano hospital, in Piazza Sonnino, is the terminus of the 97 and 97C.
Suppose the suspect had taken the taxi to get rid of Carella, got out at the hospital to confuse matters further, walked around the comer to the terminus and then continued by bus to his original destination?
In that case, this wouldn't be Trastevere but one of the districts to the south where those two lines go, Portuense or EUR.
Carella explained his idea to me, and I thought it was worth following up.
It wasn't as though we had a wealth of other leads.
So I went upstairs and proposed that we should do a house-to-house on those two areas.
There was nothing very original in this.
It was just routine procedure, playing percentages, and I was very surprised when I heard that the proposal had been rejected.
When I queried the decision I was told that it had been taken at the very highest level, as a result of information not available to me.’
He tried to remove a smudge from the windscreen with the tip of his finger, but it was on the other side of the glass.
‘Well, all right, so I thought the decision was surprising, but I'd long since realized that if I allowed that sort of thing to keep me awake at night I was going to be a chronic insomniac.
But Carella was not so phlegmatic.
He was a Southerner and a devout Catholic, like Moro himself, and I think he felt guilty for not having made more of the best chance anyone had so far had to rescue his hero.
In short, he got a bit obsessed with the whole thing and he couldn't accept the decision not to pursue it further.
At least, that's what I assume.
We didn't discuss it, and when he didn't appear at work the next day I thought he was just sulking.
But that night one of my other inspectors phoned and told me that Carella was in hospital after being struck by a car in the Portuense district.
It was the San Gallicano hospital, as it happened.
By the time I got there he was dead.’
He looked up through the clear patch of windscreen at the clouds moving slowly and peacefully across the upper  reaches of the sky.
The wind up there must be a different quantity from the restless gusts at work where they were.
‘This is where it gets difficult to explain.
Because instead of just letting it go I allowed myself to get involved.
I don't know why.
I've been asking myself ever since.
Dario Carella wasn't a relative or even a friend.
I didn't actually like him very much.
And yet I risked everything I had worked towards, all the hope of what I might do in a position of real power, for something that was obviously doomed to failure from the start.
That bothers me, it really does.
I've always thought of myself as a sensible person, yet I allowed myself to do that.
I can't understand why.’
Ellen laughed, a short, mirthless noise.
‘Oh Christ, Aurelio, I don't believe it!’
‘You don't believe what?’
Her expression became opaque.
‘Nothing.
Go on.’
Apparently he'd got it wrong yet again.
‘The next day I went to question the bus drivers.
As I suspected, Carella had been there before me.
One of the men I spoke to said that a colleague of his had identified the terrorist suspect from a photograph Carella had shown him.
I got the colleague's address and went to have a word with him.
As I was walking up to his house two young bearded men in jeans and sweaters got out of a car and ran towards me.
For a moment I thought they were terrorists, but I was wrong, they were Political Branch operatives.
They drove me back to the Ministry, where I was questioned by an officer I'd never seen before, a colonel.
It was a small, stuffy room, and yet I distinctly felt a chill in the air, like a draught, and I knew that it must be coming from that other world my uncle had told me about, and that the threshold to it was somewhere very close at hand.
The colonel wanted to know what I had been doing and who I had talked to.
It wasn't an easy hand to play.
On the one hand I needed to stress the bus driver's evidence in order to bolster my case, which was that Carella had somehow stumbled on a clue to Moro's whereabouts.
On the other hand I was afraid that if I made the driver sound too important he might end up under the wheel of a bus instead of behind one.
In the end I was told to go  home and to stay there.
The next day I received a telegram informing me that my request to be transferred to clerical duties at the Ministry of the Interior had been granted.
I hadn't submitted any such request, of course.’
There was a long silence, broken only by the perpetual nudging of the wind, which seemed to be getting stronger all the time.
‘Shall we go?’
Ellen asked.
She started the engine without waiting for an answer and began to drive along the track winding down the mountain.
‘The Red Brigade were holding Moro in Portuense, weren't they?’ she commented suddenly.
‘In a ground-floor flat in Via Montalcini.
About four blocks from where Dario Carella was run over.’
It wasn't until they reached the walls of Assisi that she spoke again.
‘It's no good, I don't understand.
I'll never understand.
Why should they let him be killed?
It doesn't make any sense!
After all, he was one of them.’
‘Perhaps he was no longer really one of them.
Perhaps they didn't know that until he was kidnapped.
Perhaps once he'd gone they realized that they were better off without him.
The ratking is self-regulating, it responds automatically and effectively to every situation.’
She took her eyes off the road for an instant to glance at him.
‘What have rats got to do with it?’
‘Oh, nothing.
I was just trying to explain how Miletti came to be killed.’
‘Miletti?’
‘I mean Moro.’
‘How much have you had to drink?’
‘Enough to need a coffee.’
They stopped in a village strung out in ribbon development along the flat straight road from Assisi to Perugia.
The air was still and it was pleasantly warm.
The cafe was a brash new building full of old men playing cards.
‘I'm going back this afternoon,’ Ellen said as they stood at the bar, watched by every eye in the place.
Her visit had not been a success.
The basic material of their  relationship, the DNA itself, seemed to have gone wrong.
As long as that condition lasted, the time they spent together, instead of adding to their store of shared experiences, depleted the existing one, leaving them more apart than when they were separated.
‘I'll be back soon myself,’ he told her, ‘and then we'll forget all this and have a really good time again.’
When they reached Perugia she dropped him opposite the Questura.
As he stooped to kiss her Zen noticed that her cheeks were wet.
‘Why are you crying?’
She shook her head.
‘I'm afraid.’
‘Afraid of what?’
‘Of everything.’
‘There's no need to be afraid.
It'll be all right.’
But he stood there watching until the little car had disappeared, as though Ellen were setting off on a long and dangerous journey from which she might never return.