

1
A sociology of the global system
We are always being told that the world is shrinking and that the new technology is bringing the inhabitants of planet earth ever closer together, whether they like it or not.
With few exceptions, however, social scientists have not yet come to regard the whole world as a legitimate object of knowledge.
There are very good reasons for this.
The study of even a single society is considered to be extraordinarily difficult because of the complexity of social relations and the obvious problems of trying to generalize about people, their groupings and the structures within which they act.
Comparative sociology is supposed to be the attempt to generate universal propositions on the basis of systematic comparisons of a variety of different societies, and so it might have been expected to stimulate thinking about the global system.
In fact the opposite happened.
Due to the obsession of most comparative sociologists with problems of measurement, all sight of a global system was lost in the mists of dubious generalization about a host of discrete variables from societies all over the world.
Their only conceptual connection was that someone (often a foreign observer) had produced numbers about one phenomenon that could be correlated with numbers from other societies purporting to be about the same phenomenon.
This drew attention away from the whole and focused it on the part, as all empiricist research tends to do.
So the social sciences groan under the weight of occupational, educational, demographic, gender, ethnic and many more categories  of data collected cross-culturally, but offering little if any insight into the global system as a whole.
Does the global system really exist?
Like all ideas it exists in the minds of people who think it, but it is further from the world of everyday immediate experience than other ideas such as power or friendship.
Some ideas are found, or intended, to have no scientific validity at all.
The point of this book is to demonstrate that the concept of the global system does have genuine scientific validity and, indeed, that it is increasingly necessary for the analysis of a growing number of rapidly changing phenomena.
Naturally, people who choose to ignore these phenomena will have no need for the idea (just as those who choose to ignore societal phenomena have no need for an idea of society) but in both cases this leads to a dramatic impoverishment of their views of the real world.
The global system and the nation-state
What, then, does the idea (or concept, or abstraction) of the global system refer to?
Because the world is divided into sovereign states, most with relatively clear and unified national cultures, it is convenient to identify these states as the basic elements of the global system.
This is what the thriving academic discipline of international relations tends to do.
Nevertheless, even here the notion that there are some important international relations that are not necessarily between states is generally accepted.
This is the position of the British scholar, John Burton, an influential figure in the creation of the modern discipline of international relations.
In a series of books from the 1960s he searched for a theory of world society.
Burton argued that: ‘We are choosing an approach when we choose to speak of world society and not international relations.’
Studies based on states ‘cannot give us that understanding we seek of world society’ either within or between states (1972, pp.19, 20).
What he labels the ‘billiard-ball model’ only recognizes governmental interaction.
Historically, world society has become a believable idea only in the last few hundred years, and science, technology, industry, and universal values are creating a twentieth century world that is different from any past age.
The geographical image of states must be replaced by the  behavioural image of systems.
However, ‘world society appears to be at a transition stage at which it is neither a world comprising only of states, nor a world comprising only systems’(p.51).
Burton's approach can be seriously criticized on the grounds that he pays little attention to such problems as the globalization of capital, class struggle or ideology, and that he often appears to confuse society and system at both the descriptive and the conceptual levels.
This is a consequence of the primacy he gives to communications over power.
Nevertheless, his attempt to move international relations from the study of relations between nations to the study of ‘world society’(leaving aside the essential vagueness of this latter idea), did represent a progressive problem shift for all those interested in the elephants rather than the little creatures.
In parallel, but quite independent of Burton, a group of North Americans began to make an explicit attempt to replace the ‘statecentric’ model, with a ‘transnational relations’model, focused more on transnational interactions and organizations.
In an important collection of essays, Keohane and Nye disclosed that they began to think along these lines under the influence of the French sociologist, Raymond Aron, who introduced the idea of ‘transnational society’.
They found this unsatisfactory because ‘it did not direct attention to governmental manipulation of transnational relations…[and they have]grown progressively more interested in the interaction between governments and transnational society and in transnational coalitions among subunits of governments’(Keohane and Nye, 1973, p vjj) .2
The ‘transnational relations’ approach, therefore, is not a specific theory but more of an injunction to researchers to pay more attention to non-governmental entities, particularly when they are interacting with governments.
This is an important point but, as with Burton's ‘world society’, there is an essential vagueness about the central concept, transnational relations.
One consequence of this is that no systematic research programme has resulted from this approach.
Its eclecticism is what attracts many scholars.
The proponents of the transnational relations approach have a tendency to analyze interactions within systems rather than effects of practices and, though they claim to be transcending the statecentric model, they more often than not permit the state to set the agenda for them.
This is because, for the most part, they conceptualize  the state and its agencies as by far the most importantactors in the global system.
In this they may or may not be correct, empirically, and they may or may not be theorizing in the most fruitful manner, but the very structure of the approach suggests an ambiguity about this key issue.
And this persists in the work of political scientists, sociologists and others who have been impressed by the approach.
Classical Marxists refuse to accept, either empirically or theoretically, that the state is the most important actor in the global system.
For Marxists, the global system is the capitalist global system, and the most important actors are the capitalist classes in the most powerful states.
In practice, however, most contemporary Marxism is state-centred to a greater or lesser extent.
This is illustrated by the ongoing debate about the ‘relative autonomy of the state’.
Few Marxists now hold to the traditional claim that the state is nothing but the executive committee of the bourgeoisie.
Apparent contradictions between state actions and the interests of the capitalist class can be explained in terms of the struggles of the competing fractions of the bourgeoisie and the bureaucracy.
To some extent, this is obviously true.
Neo-Marxists have gone much further and tend to claim that, in advanced capitalist societies, the state and its various bureaucracies have distinctive levels of relative autonomy from the different fractions of the bourgeoisie and, indeed, on occasion state functionaries can successfully play off one section of the bourgeoisie (as well as competing classes) against others, domestically or transnationally, in their own interests.
Again, this is obviously true, to some extent.
Both of these apparently contradictory statements are obviously true, but only at the level of empirical observation.
Theoretically, they can only both be true if we can demonstrate that they truthfully reflect a genuinely contradictory reality, in terms of their competing contributions to the structure and dynamic of a complex system of ideas and propositions, established to theorize that reality.
For example, between 1970 and 1990 the distribution of income on a per capita basis in some Third World countries became more unequal, the top 10 per cent got relatively more and the bottom 10 per cent got relatively less, while the average per capita income (gross national product divided by population) roughly doubled in this period.
Were these countries becoming richer or poorer?
The rich in these societies certainly became richer, on both measures.
On the first measure the poor were becoming poorer, while on the second measure they were becoming richer, though not to ine same extent as the rich.
How can this be explained?
Some theorize that income distribution is mainly a result of government action (wage policy, taxation, etc.) while per capita income is mainly a result of transnational forces (for example, the price that exports bring on the world market).
Government actions may be responsive mainly to the interests of the capitalist class or the interests of a political class dependent on popular or sectional support to maintain its position of power.
Alternatively (as happened in many Third World countries in the 1980s) they may be responsive to the interests of transnational capital in the shape of the World Bank and the IMF imposing ‘restructuring’ policies in order to ensure repayment of Third World debts.
Similarly, transnational forces may be mainly responsive to these international financial organizations, or to the governments of the countries who control them, or to ‘disinterested’ international bureaucrats trying to sort out the mess.
The reality is clearly very complex.
Where a country is largely isolated from the rest of the world, the state-centred approach does seem more plausible than where it is located within an identifiable system of global relationships.
Nevertheless, state-centrists, transnational relations advocates and Marxists of several persuasions, while acknowledging the growing importance of the global system in one form or another, all continue to prioritize the system of nation-states, they all fall back on it to describe what happens in the world, and to explain how and why it happens.
The renaissance of historical sociology since the 1970s, for example, is largely powered by the idea of ‘bringing the state back in’(see Evans et al., 1985).
My argument is that statecentrism, whether in its directly state-centrist form or in indirect forms, takes us quite far but not far enough.
Transnational practices
This book argues that we need to take a step towards a sociology of the global system.
State-centred, transnational relations and neo-Marxist approaches, while often interesting and fruitful, tend to close off other interesting and fruitful avenues of theory and  research.
We cannot ignore the nation-state, but this book attempts to offer in addition a conception of the global system based on transnational practices (TNPs).
TNPs are analytically distinguished on three levels, economic, political and cultural-ideological, what I take to constitute the sociological totality.
In the concrete conditions of the world as it is, a world largely structured by global capitalism, each of these TNPs is typieally, but not exclusively, characterized by a major institution.
The transnational eorporation (TNC) is the major locus of transnational economic practices; what I shall term the transnational capitalist class is the major locus of transnational politieal practices; and the major locus of transnational cultural-ideological practices is to be found in the culture-ideology of consumerism.
Not all culture is ideological, even in eapitalist soeieties.
The reason why I run culture and ideology together to identify the institutionalization of consumerism is that consumerism in the global system can only be fully understood as a cultural-ideological practice.
When we buy something that has been imported we are engaged in a typical economic transnational practice.
When we are influenced to vote or support a cause by those whose interests are transnational we are engaged in a typical political transnational practice.
When we experience the need for a global product we are engaged in a typical cultural-ideological transnational practice.
The TNPs make sense only in the context of the global system.
The theory of the global system based on transnational practices is an attempt to escape from the limitations of state-centrism.
In order to do this, it is necessary to spell out exactly what these limitations are.
The global system is marked by a very great asymmetry.
The most important economic, political and cultural-ideological goods that circulate around the globe tend to be owned and/or controlled by small groups in a relatively small number of countries.
Until recently it was both convenient and accurate to use the term ‘Western’ to describe this asymmetry, and the idea of ‘Western imperialism’was widely acknowledged as a way of analyzing the global system.
However, the present global status of Japan makes these terms obsolete.
In this book I shall use the awkward but evocative term hegemon to describe the asymmetry in the global system.
The hegemon is the agent of the key TNPs, it can be a  representative individual, organization, state or class, whose interests prevail in the struggle for global resources.
Other terms, such as‘superpower’, and the triad of centre, semi-periphery and periphery states (see Wallerstein, 1984) are also common.
These terms are less useful for the purposes of this analysis.
The first tends to refer mainly to the military context which, while obviously important, is not what this book is about; and the second is clearly state-centrist, and does not fully convey the scnse of hegemony where it does not directly involve the state, which I take to be crucial.
While there is only one country, the United States, whose agents, organizations and classes are hegemonic in all three spheres, other countries and agents, organizations and classes are hegemonic, or realistically claim to share hegemony, within each sphere.
The nation-state, therefore, is the spatial reference point for most of the crucial transnational practices that go to make up the structures of the global system, in the sense that most transnational practices intersect in particular countries and come under the jurisdiction of particular nation-states.
But it is not the only reference point.
The most important is, of course, thc global capitalist system, based on a variegated global capitalist class, which unquestionably dictates economic transnational practices, and is the most important single force in the struggle to dominate political and cultural-ideological transnational practices.
There are several other systems, regionally important, ethnically, culturally and/or theologically based but none has, as yet, had the pervasive success that capitalism has enjoyed in the twentieth century.
The success of a system is often bound up with the success of the state that is its main proponent.
Britain in the nineteenth century was, and the United States of America in the twentieth century is, the hegemon of global capitalism, though of rather different versions of it.
Through their (respective) straightforward colonial and convoluted imperialist trajectories the transnational practices of these two countries etched the forms of capitalism onto the global system.
It was this hegemonic combination of a mighty domestic economy, a progressive ruling class (in comparison with most others actually existing), and at least some desirable culturalideological features particularly attractive to ‘modernizing’ elites, that opened the global door to them and ensured the creation, persistence and often aggrandisement of social classes in countries  all over the world willing and eager to adopt their transnational practices.
These classes are widely known by the label ‘comprador’ though this term has attracted a great deal of criticism.
Here, I shall convert the idea into a concept of the transnational capitalist class (TCC).
This class consists of those people who see their own interests and/or the interests of their nation, as best served by an identification with the interests of the capitalist global system, in particular the interests of the countries of the capitalist core and the transnational corporations domiciled in them.
The TCC holds certain transnational practices to be more valuable than domestic practices.
It is quite possible for a fraction of it to identify more with economic transnational practices than with political or cultural-ideological ones, or vice versa.
Indeed, the fundamental in-built instability of the global system, and the most important contradiction with which any theory of the global system has to grapple, is that the hegemonic ideology of the system is under constant challenge, particularly outside the First World.
The substantive content of the theory, how the transnational corporations harness the transnational capitalist classes to solidify their hegemonic control of consumerist culture and ideology, is the site of the many struggles for the global system.
Who will win and who will lose these struggles is not a foregone conclusion.
The place of Britain and the United States in the history of capitalism and the very existence of the TCC that the British and US (and some other) capitalist classes helped create, have historically built in the asymmetries and inequalities that now characterize the global system.
Just as hegemon nation-states (whether acting directly in the interests of the capitalist class or not) can call on superior economic, political and cultural-ideological resources in their dealings with other nation-states, so some transnational agents can command greater resources than others.
Sociologists, economists, political scientists, historians, geogra’ phers, anthropologists and everyone else whose work demanded a global perspective had long been accustomed to perceive the world as split into modern and traditional, advanced and backward, progressive and stagnant societies, to mention only the most commonly used distinctions.
All of these were more or less subsumed under the rubric of the developed (advanced industrial) societies and the developing (usually a euphemism for undeveloped or, more radically, underdeveloped) societies.
With the rise of theories purporting to identify this phenomenon of underdevelopment and to explain it as an active process in the global strategy of capitalist exploitation, First, Second and Third Worlds, despite the emphasis on the nation-state, were usually conceptualized as relatively undifferentiated objects.
Though there have always been differences between countries outside the First World, for a long time it did appear to make sense to speak of The Third World, the title of Worsley's very influential book (1973) on the subject.
Perhaps some countries were exploited rather more for their natural resources and others for their cheap labour, but they all fitted in to a global pattern in which the capitalist-imperialist centre underdeveloped the rest of the world.
The implication of this line of reasoning was that if they could be left alone, insulated from the capitalist global reach, Third World countries would be better off, and would actually be able to develop themselves.
The experiences of some of the Second World (communist) countries, those who had escaped from the grip of global capitalism, particularly the Soviet Union and then China, seemed to lend support to the argument.
The theory was most exhaustively worked out for countries in Latin America, where it swept the board among academics, politicians, bureaucrats and militants for some time under the general rubric of the dependency approach.
It did for a time seem to explain the trajectories of development and underdevelopment in some countries of Latin America, but when it was applied to Africa and Asia it was much less successful.
This led some writers to suspect that the Third World, like the First World, was not of a piece, but that there might be substantial differences of kind as well as the obvious differences of degree between countries.
It is a short step from this view to the position that there are several Third (and First) Worlds and that each of these Worlds has a specific set of relations with global capitalism, or even that there is no such thing as global capitalism but that there are several capitalisms operating nationally and internationally in different ways with different Third Worlds.
One of the problems of the dependency approach is precisely that its proponents too often speak about one country as dependent on another in a vague and unhelpful fashion.
In order to clarify this issue, it is necessary to begin to think about how to classify the constituent parts of the global system.
Classifying the global system
Although most writers warn against the dangers of explaining the plight of contemporary Third World societies in terms of the historical experiences of the advanced industrial societies, it is nevertheless true that the classifications of the three Worlds are mainly based on these historical experiences.
For example, the distribution of the labour force between agriculture and industry has always been regarded as an important indicator of economic growth, if not precisely development, because most of the present advanced industrial societies, in particular the United Kingdom and the United States, exhibited a marked tendency to reduce their agricultural labour force while increasing their industrial labour force.
This is, of course, why industrialization is seen to be so important in most theories of development.
The standard of living is another key measure which has its origins in the same source.
Whether measured by per capita GNP (gross national product), calorific intake or any other indicator, it gives a quick, if not always entirely accurate or meaningful, basis on which to rank societies.
It is important to be aware of the fact that, however obvious and relevant these measures might seem to us, they are all ‘theoryladen’ in the sense that they all assume, usually without argument or justification, a particular theory of economic growth and/or development.
I do not make this point to suggest that all these theories are wrong in every detail, but to underline the importance of looking behind the apparently innocent measures on which so much of the global-system literature is based.
We must know what we are letting ourselves in for, theoretically, when we use such measures.
This is far from an argument that we should avoid such measures (let alone empirical research itself) but rather an argument for a continual critical assessment of them, and perhaps a call for better measures.
While the global system is most commonly classified in terms of First, Second and Third Worlds, and these are very convenient and for many purposes useful labels, it is certain that they conceal as much as they reveal.
If we are to begin to describe the global system in a more theoretically fruitful manner we will have to look behind these labels.
There are at least five main classifications of the global system in current usage and they are all state-centred.
These can be roughly characterised as follows:
1.
Income-based.
2.
Trade-based.
3.
Resource-based.
4.
Quality of life-based.
5.
Bloc-based.
Income-based classification
This is the simplest, most widely used, and in some ways the most misleading of the classifications.
Economists and economic historians have been interested in measuring poverty and wealth on a per capita basis for some time, and such data have been available for some of the advanced industrial countries for many years.
The lack of statistical services in most Third World countries has meant that population figures, let alone GNP per capita figures, have been very sparse and unreliable.
This situation improved somewhat in the 1970s, and international agencies have been systematically organizing the collection of such data.
Since 1978 the World Bank has been publishing an annual World Development Report with a growing number of ‘world development indicators’ tables (eighteen tables in 1978, twenty-seven in 1983, thirty-three in 1988), based for the most part on UN and internal World Bank data sources.
This is certainly the most useful, easily accessible and up-to-date compilation of figures, and it is the one I shall mainly rely on in this book.
A new and probably more reliable set of data from the University of Pennsylvania (see Summers and Heston, 1988) may well displace the World Bank tables as the best available source.
The World Bank ranks all the countries of the world according to their GNP per capita, though countries with populations of less than 1 million (of whom there were 35 identified in the 1988 Report) are excluded from the main tables.
All World Bank financial data are converted into US dollars, and this is, indeed, one serious problem with them as the bank itself acknowledges (see, for example, World Development Report, 1988, pp.290–1).
The 1978 Report has 125 countries with GNP per capita figures ranging from $70 (Bhutan) to $15,480 (Kuwait).
The countries are divided into 6  categories as follows: low-income with GNP per capita up to $250 (34 countries); middle-income over $250 per capita(58 countries); industrialized countries (19); capital surplus oil exporters (3); and centrally-planned economies, communist countries (11).
There are several anomalies in this classification.
In the first place, while countries listed from 1 to 92 are in strict GNP per capita order, countries 93, 94 and 95 (South Africa, Ireland and Italy) all have lower per capita figures than 92 (Israel).
No fewer than 14 middle-income countries have higher per capita figures than ‘industrialized’ South Africa, and 5 of these are ‘richer’than Ireland.
Further, the per capita figures for the oil exporters and the centrally-planned economies would distribute the countries in these categories fairly widely throughout the list.
By 1983, the categories had changed somewhat, though the anomalies remained.
The poorest 34 countries were still identified as low-income economies; the next 60 countries were divided into 39 lower-middle-income and 21 upper-middle-income economies.
Four high-income oil exporters, 19 industrial market economies and 8 East European non-market economies completed the list of 125 countries.
The main differences between the 1978 and the 1983 lists were definitional (the splitting up of the middle-income group) and political (South Africa expelled from the industrial group and relegated to the upper-middle-income group and replaced, incidentally, by Spain; Taiwan expelled altogether from the list and the People's Republic of China integrated into the low-income group at number 21).
The two most populous countries in the world, China and India, in the low-income economies group, were also separated out from the rest of this group for averaging purposes; as were oil exporters and oil importers in the middle-income economies group.
By 1988 the total number of countries had risen to 129, split into 39 low-income, 34 lower-middle, 24 upper-middle, 4 high-income oil exporters, 19 industrial market, and 9 centrally-planned economies, renamed ‘nonreporting nonmembers’(aptly, as there was.
Iittle information on them outside the demographic and social indicators tables).
Again, a certain amount of category switching had taken place.
For example, Hungary, Poland and Romania were inserted into the upper-middle-income group, where their apparent per capita income scores would locate them in any case, whereas Angola, Cuba and North Korea were transplanted from  lower-middle-income to nonreporting nonmembers.
Further, all the low and middle-income groups were also categorized as ‘developing economies’ subdivided into oil exporters, exporters of manufactures, highly indebted countries, and sub-Saharan Africa (new sub-categories of great ideological significance), for the purposes of averaging.
It is not only the anomalies in these tables to which I wish to draw attention but the assumptions on which they are based.
These assumptions are as follows:
1.
GNP per capita can be determined for all of the countries concerned in such a way that meaningful comparisons can be drawn.
2.
The per capita income is the basic criterion for drawing comparisons.
3.
In some cases other criteria will override the per capita income basis of the classification.
Economists at the World Bank and elsewhere have laboured hard and long to put international data on a sound footing and the ‘Technical Notes’ that follow the tables in the Reports are full of acknowledgements of the difficulties involved.
These difficulties, however, are not simply technical, in the sense of translating one country's GNP or GDP into terms that will bear comparison with those of other countries.
They are also a matter of political economy, in the sense that some measures best represent some socioeconomic systems while they discriminate against, perhaps by undervaluing the products of, other socio-economic systems or classes of people within a system.
A glaring example of this is the neglect of the domestically-consumed products of farmers (particularly women) in the Third World.
Such economic activity is excluded from World Bank data.
Women's work in the countries of the Third World is generally rendered ‘invisible’ by normal national accounting procedures because it usually takes place outside the conventional sphere of wage labour, mostly on the family farm and in the home.
This ‘invisibility’ results in serious understatement of the great economic significance of female labour, especially in the production, collection, preparation and processing of food.
Thus, male-dominated organizations like national statistical services and the World Bank, underestimate the real economic activity of Third World countries (see Boserup, 1970).
It is no accident that the global standard used by the World Bank and most other organizations is the US dollar.
It is a simple indication that the US economy is the most powerful in the world (despite the fact that it is in relative decline) and that global economic activity does tend to be measured in comparison with the sorts of economic activities with which the United States is mainly involved.
Lurking behind these measures, therefore, is a congerie of theories of economic growth and/or development most applicable to the United States and other similar industrial economies.
Income-based classifications of ‘developing’ and non-market economies are therefore inherently problematic.
Where they are used as the basis of inter-country comparisons, which is by far the most common use that is made of them, they predispose the results of such comparisons to certain conclusions which are usually prejudiced by unspoken theory-laden assumptions.
However, as long as we are aware of these provisos, and are able to correct the most crass biases at the empirical and conceptual levels, there is clearly a use to which such classifications can be put.
For example, the countries of the world can be split into groups according to population as well as per capita income.
The logic behind this is obvious.
One important basis of comparison between countries is their size, and it is clearly very relevant to an appreciation of the relative levels of economic growth and development achieved by any country, to know roughly among how many people the social product, however large or small, has to be divided.
The absolute size of a country is a relatively neglected question in the study of the global system.
If we correlate population categories (1–20 million, 20–50 million, 50–100 million, and 100 million plus) with World Bank GNP per capita categories (roughly lower-, middle-, and higher-income countries) we find that two-thirds of countries are relatively small (up to about 20 million in population) and two-thirds of these are quite poor (GNP per capita of less than $1,570), while almost half the relatively rich countries (GNP per capita of more than $8,000), have relatively large populations (over 50 million).
The only real conclusion that we can draw from such an exercise is that there appears to be no simple relationship between population and the wealth of a nation-state.
This might give a little pause to those who dogmatically believe that poverty is a direct consequence of ‘overpopulation’.
Trade-based classifications
Though clearly important, income and population size are not the only important characteristics of countries.
The structure of the economy and society can be broken down in a variety of ways for a variety of purposes.
Those who have investigated the factors that seem to accompany economic growth and development in the second half of the twentieth century have often looked to the historical experiences of the contemporary advanced industrial societies for clues, and they have generally found that patterns of foreign trade are very important.
The quantity, value and type of goods and services traditionally exported and imported by most of the contemporary rich nations, indeed, fell into fairly clear patterns.
Briefly, they exported manufactured goods and capital, and they imported raw materials.
The so-called terms of trade, more accurately labelled ‘unequal exchange’(see Edwards, 1985, ch. 4), ensured that for the most part the prices of raw materials were falling relative to the prices of manufactured goods.
A further and central feature of this system of trade was that while those countries exporting manufactures were usually involved in many diverse lines of business, the raw-material exporters were often engaged in the production of one or two major staples.
Mono-crop economies are particularly vulnerable to the instabilities in the world market directed, not by the hidden hand of the market, but by the actions of a global collection of profit-maximizing capitalists, usually based in hegemon countries and often acting in unison.
Even those writers who specifically warned against using the historical experiences of contemporary rich countries as a guide for the Third World could not resist drawing some conclusions from the realm of foreign trade.
It seemed very obvious, first of all, that a country does not get rich by importing manufactured goods if it can possibly manufacture them itself.
This truism was elevated to the status of a theory of and a strategy for development, particularly in Latin America, and became known as ‘import substitution industrialization’(ISI).
But though they no longer imported some categories of finished products, many Third World manufacturers found they were importing the components, materials and technology for these products instead.
When ISI began to fail, or at least brought with it as many problems as it was solving, a new theory and strategy began to emerge, based this time not on imports  but on exports.
The idea behind this was the mirror image of ISI.
What had enriched the rich was not their insulation from imports (rich countries do, in fact, import massively all sorts of goods) but their success in manufactured exports, where higher prices could be commanded than for Third World raw materials.
This thinking led to the theory and strategy of ‘export-led industrialization’(ELI).
ISI and ELI have been used as complementary and contradictory developmental strategies.
Let it suffice to say, at this point, notwithstanding the criticisms that have been made of the assumptions on which both ISI and ELI theories are based, export-import structure is now a key characteristic of the economic growth and by implication developmental prospects of Third World countries.
That this should be so is not simply a matter of cognitive theory choice, but also a matter of the economic, political and culturalideological interests of theoreticians and practical actors in rich and poor countries.
This is not entirely unconnected to another feature of the economies of many Third World countries that has become of great salience in recent years, namely their foreign debt and the eff–ct that servicing that debt, particularly in times of rising and unpredictable interest rates, has on economic and social planning.
Resource-based classifications
No country in the world is entirely self-sufficient in all the materials it uses.
Even the largest and most richly resource-endowed countries, such as the United States and the Soviet Union, must import some of the raw materials they use, for example rare metals.
The United States is particularly vulnerable in this respect, both because it is lacking in some valuable resources, and because its vast productive machine uses so much of everything.
In a book significantly entitled American Multinationals and American Interests, Bergson and his colleagues worked out the percentage of key minerals and metals supplied by imports in 1976 (Bergson et al., 1978, Table 5.1).
The list includes columbium, sheet mica, strontium (100 per cent); manganese, cobalt, tantalum, chromium (90 per cent plus); asbestos, aluminium, fluorine, bismuth, platinum (80 per cent plus); and tin, mercury, nickel (70 per cent plus).
It is  no wonder that the United States keeps such a large navy patrolling the trade routes of the world.
The United States is still resource-dependent to an appreciable degree.
The list leaves out what many consider to be the single most important US import, namely oil.
This, at least, is the view of Gair (1978), who reports that a Gallup Poll in May 1978 showed that 40 per cent of Americans did not know that the United States imported oil at all , and that hardly any of them knew that it imported about half its crude oil and refined products at that time.
Knowledge on the issue was increased by the Iranian hostage crisis and subsequent events, but the fact remains that the ‘U.S. economy is now absolutely dependent on imported oil [and has]sharply increased its dependence on Arab oil imports since 1973’(p.18).
This is why the United States pays a good price for half of Mexico's oil.
It is not only the United States that has become dependent on imports of oil.
Lucky chance put massive reserves of oil within the national boundaries of some barren and desolate desert kingdoms and political will has, through the organized power of OPEC, turned some of their rulers into the richest men in the world.
But however important the possession of oil is for a country, oil exporters such as Nigeria, Mexico and Egypt demonstrate that oil alone is no guarantee of general prosperity.
The effect of having to rely on imported oil is of great significance for development.
So clear did this become after the 1974 oil crisis, when the upward spiral of oil prices began, that international agencies invented a new category of country: the most seriously affected nations (MSANs), i.e. those countries, mainly in Africa, who could no longer afford to buy oil.
Inability to buy oil is widely interpreted to mean inability to sustain even the very low level of industrialization already achieved.
Prospects for such countries are extremely bleak.
While it is clearly one very important natural resource on the world stage at present, and for the foreseeable future in the absence of entirely new energy sources, oil is not the only important natural resource.
Another is food, and for the hungry it is infinitely more important than oil.
Some countries choose to import food items that they could easily grow for themselves because they find it commercially advantageous to grow industrial raw materials for export and to import the food they need, which tends to be less costly relative to their exports.
There are few countries which choose to rely on imports of basic cereals (wheat, rice etc.) if they can avoid it.
More or  less all the countries in the world which are heavily dependent on cereal imports on a per capita basis are poor countries, or rich countries with relatively little arable land (like Japan).
It would, therefore, be instructive to classify the nations of the world in terms of their oil and cereal resources, as measured by the degree to which they are self-sufficient or seriously dependent on others for their supplies.
We must be careful not to speak of oil and cereal needs which may be very different from consumption.
This point is made not in the interests of pedantry, but because it bears directly on the criticisms of current approaches to the global system that lie at the heart of this book.
To anticipate the argument a little, my view is that consumption patterns of the majority of people (not only in the Third World) are ill-matched to their needs because both consumption and needs are generally dictated by transnational practices.
When we begin to appreciate more clearly and with greater precision how and why so many Third World countries are locked into a global system that is so patently against the interests of the majority of their peoples, we may find one of the keys to the development puzzle, and a valuable clue as to how the global system currently works.
A resource-based classification of the nations of the world represents a step towards this goal (see Cole, 1988).
Quality of life
The structure of the economy is clearly the basis on which to build a classification of the countries of the world in terms of their economic growth, or lack of it.
Development in the global system implies something more.
For many years national and international agencies have been collecting data on some significant social indicators, and it is now possible, with all the provisos about the nature of the data that I have already made, to make some, albeit rough and preliminary ranking of the nations of the world on the most widely accepted social and welfare criteria.
The point of this exercise is to begin to derive a picture of how economic growth and development, as they have been generally defined, are related to the extent that the measures available permit us to draw some conclusions about the relative positions on a world scale of different groups of countries.
The social welfare indicators that are  most commonly agreed to be of relevance here are the degree of literacy, the distribution of health and educational services, the infant mortality rate and the life expectancy of the population.
To this list it would be very desirable to add the status of women and the distribution of income, housing and consumer durables, but there is, as yet, not much reliable information available on these for the poorer countries of the world.
Scholars from various disciplines have been working on these problems since the mid-1940s.
The first substantial efforts came from international organizations, particularly United Nations agencies and the OECD (see, for example, UNESCO, 1976).
Morris (1979) published a ‘Physical Quality of Life Index’ but as this was exclusively based on health and educational criteria, it is of limited utility.
In an attempt to extend the scope of quality of life methodology, Estes (1988) has constructed an ‘Index of Social Progress’ based on forty-four welfare-relevant social indicators, which includes items normally ignored by economically based measures (like the status of women and children, politics, effects of disasters, cultural diversity, and defence expenditures).
The changing distributions between 1970 and 1980 on this index have been calculated for over 100 countries, with some surprising results.
For example, some of the countries of East Europe and Costa Rica, rank higher than the United Kingdom and the United States (Estes, 1988).
Gonzalez (1988, Table 4.2), usefully compares four different indexes for a large sample of countries.
He finds, not surprisingly, that the two based mainly on economic indicators tend to rank the United States very high (first and second), while the other two, more widely based, classifications rank it lower (sixth and twentyfourth).
This is clearly a very controversial question, and it has been much discussed in the context of the ‘basic needs’ approach to development.
Basic needs theorists argue that it is more fruitful to stress results rather than inputs in order to measure the adequacy of development policy.
For example, life expectancy is a better measure of health services than numbers of doctors per person, and calorie supply per capita is a better measure of nutrition than total production of food.
Thus, the basic needs approach switches attention from ‘how much is being produced…to what is being produced, in what ways, for whom and with what impact’(Hicks and Streeton, 1979, p.577).
As I suggested at the beginning of the discussion on classifying the global system, all measures are theory laden.
This is particularly the case for quality of life, for the ways in which quality of life is measured, and specifically the role and definition of basic needs, virtually define our conceptions of development within the global system.
Bloc-based classifcations
The final type of classification is one that appears to be less rather than more relevant for the 1990s than previously.
This is socio-political blocs.
The major bloc-based classification reflects the economic, political and cultural-ideological struggle between capitalism and communism for control over the global system.
So important is it, that the decades since the end of the Second World War are commonly referred to as the epoch of the ‘Cold War’ between capitalism and communism.
It is interesting to note that in the 1978 World Bank Report some communist countries were given a special category, ‘centrallyplanned economies’.
In the 1983 Report this was changed to ‘East European non-market economies’ and by 1988 the communist countries were either scattered in the ‘developing economies’groups or under the anodyne label of ‘nonreporting nonmembers’.
These changes were partly to handle the massive, though poor, People's Republic of China, incorporated into the ‘low-income economies’ and the dropping of the geographical reference is a nod of recognition in the direction of the African and Asian and other countries who claim to be socialist.
Irrespective of the decisions of the World Bank classifiers, however, it is an undeniable fact that in the 1990s most hitherto self-proclaimed socialist or communist countries are rapidly coming to an understanding with transnational capitalism, and that the scope and volume of the transnational practices of such states with the states and institutions of the capitalist system have increased dramatically in the last decade.
As I shall argue in Chapters 6 and 7, this does not necessarily mean that the socialist or communist countries are ‘going capitalist’, though it does highlight changing relationships between the global capitalist system and its alternatives.
Communism found its first means of expression in the various international organizations (the Internationals) that were established by Marx and Engels and their followers from the 1860s on.
However, it is not until the Bolshevik Party, the first communist party to seize state power, ushers in the birth of the Soviet Union that we can realistically speak of a communist bloc.
In 1949, the Soviet Union organized the Council for Mutual Economic Aid (Comecon), paralleling the Organization for European Economic Cooperation, which had been formed in 1948 as a framework within which the United States could distribute aid to rebuild the warshattered West European economies.
This body was renamed the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 1961, and its membership and functions were extended to promote the global leadership of the capitalist ‘Western’ democracies.
It has the reputation of a ‘rich countries’ club, though some poorer European countries have now joined.
The most visible public presence of the communist and capitalist blocs, however, is through their military alliances.
The Warsaw Pact of East European communist countries is a Soviet-dominated military alliance, established in 1955 in response to the entry of West Germany into US-dominated NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization).
NATO had been formed after the Second World War in order to tie North America and Western Europe together in a military alliance against the perceived threat of world domination by the Soviet Union.
The opposition of these two blocs has had a profound effect on the geopolitics of the global system in the second half of the twentieth century.
However, both the Warsaw Pact and NATO have changed since the 1950s, and although their military hegemony, based largely on phenomenal nuclear overkill capacity, remains unsurpassed, other blocs have arisen to challenge them on a variety of strategic issues.
One such alternative bloc, identified by the World Bank and the rest of the world, is the oil exporters, organized through OPEC.
They deserve to be listed in this context, as they often operate in unison even if they do not always do so.
This idea of collective economic and political action is exactly what is meant when we speak about blocs.
There are also several economic unions which operate more or less in a bloc-like manner.
Prime amongst these, at the present historical juncture, is the European Community (EC), whose progress towards economic and political integration  has been slow, a fact which does not dismay its competitors in world trade.
A more fundamental integration is promised in 1992.
Other economic unions, some short-lived and some longer-lived, in Africa, Asia and the Americas, have had a modicum of influence locally, but none can be said to have had a major influence in global terms.
This is largely explained by the realization that most, if not all, of these unions begin from a position of economic and political weakness.
The feeble achievements of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Group of 77 confirm this in the political sphere.
NAM originated in the Bandung Conference of 1955, where a large number of poor African and Asian countries called for a better economic deal from the rich countries of the world.
The Group of 77, named for 77 underdeveloped southern countries, unaligned with either the Soviet or the US camp, came together in 1964 through their common membership of the United Nations (Sauvant, 1981).
The Group, now with over 100 members, also presses for a better deal from the rich countries of the world, mainly in the north.
The only common interest of these ‘southern’ countries is their general view that they are being more or less exploited by the rich countries of the ‘north’.
An expression of this was the call for a ‘New International Economic Order’.
This produced a torrent of words but little effective action.
Such practical failures make it difficult to sustain economic solidarity, political unity or cultural-ideological sympathy.
Blocs are being seen as increasingly irrelevant today largely because the global capitalist system is perceived as increasingly salient.
As the countries of the world, irrespective of bloc, appear to become more and more bound up with one another through the extension of transnational practices, some of which are directly identifiable as practices of global capitalism and some of which not, the fact of the global system becomes more and more obvious to ever more people, though the nature of the global system might still appear extremely difficult to grasp.
Conclusion
These five classifications, based on nation-state classifications of income/population, trade, resources, quality of life and blocs, serve  different purposes in theory and practice.
They can be used, for example, to organize the evidence for and justify morally one or other theory of development or the lack of development.
As I have emphasized, it is very important to be aware of the assumptions that lie behind these classifications and the theories based on them.
These theories often guide the practice of those who make and carry out the policies which have led to so little actual economic growth and development in most Third World countries.
These classifications, then, give us a wealth of empirical data, but the result is conceptual confusion and general inconclusiveness when we try to explain anything in terms of such state-centred categories.
The tremendous variation in the experiences of First, Second and Third World countries in terms of income, population, foreign trade, resources, quality of life and blocs might lead the faint-hearted to conclude that the global system either does not exist or that it is so hopelessly complex that there is no point in trying to conceptualize it at all.
This is precisely the limitation of state-centrist approaches and why all analyses that begin and end with nation-states have such difficulty in finding explanations of what is going on in the global system.
To illustrate this point, let us return to the phenomenon that motivates so much research on the global system, namely the gap between rich and poor.
What some writers now term the ‘widening gap’ between the rich and the poor, both within countries and between the First and the Third Worlds, might tempt us to subscribe pessimistically to the view that the countries of the Third World are passive victims of the exercise of First World hegemon countries' power.
This view is a direct consequence of the state-centrist approach, and has to be rejected on the grounds that it is theoretically mechanical and empirically false.
There are underprivileged individuals and groups in the First World, as well as in the Third and Second Worlds.
It is not a geographical accident of birth that determines whether an individual or group is going to be rich or poor, but a question of class location.
Of course, there are relatively as well as absolutely very many more poor people in the Third World than in the First World but this is not only a question of geography but also of transnational class location.
The poor in all countries struggle against the domestic and global forces that oppress them and their resistance takes many forms.
Where this involves opposition to those who run the global  system in their own interests it will naturally involve transnational practices in the economic, political and cultural-ideological spheres.
It is important to recognize how the global capitalist system uses the myth of the nation-state, sometimes in the form of reactionary nationalist ideologies, to deflect criticism and opposition to its hegemonic control of the global system onto the claims of competing nations.
Dividing the world up into nation-states, as it is for most practical purposes for most people, is therefore a profoundly ideological strategy.
It is not common sense, and the fact that for most people it is one of the fundamental taken-forgranted assumptions of daily life is a measure of the tremendous success and power of the capitalist global system project.
In contrast, ideologies not based on the nation-state tend to be more genuinely transnational in scope.
These are of two types, namely those that necessarily exclude outsiders and create an ingroup; and those that are inclusively internationalist, and promote the common human characteristics of all who share the planet.
A powerful example of the first type is ethnic exclusivism, whose extreme form is found in the fascist idea of ‘race pride’.
Similarly, some religious fundamentalisms classify all non-believers (generally an ascribed rather than an achieved status) as devilish.
The second type includes the several versions of democratic socialist internationalism (as opposed to bureaucratic communist chauvinism).
An integral part of this global project is its feminist goal.
Therefore it is best labelled democratic feminist socialism.
Its ideal of international comradeship is based on the belief that the survival of humanity is incompatible with capitalist exploitation, imperialism and the patriarchal nation-state.
Many tactical and strategic differences separate those who hold these views, particularly between women and men, and between libertarians and those who attach gr.eat importance to the construction of organizations and institutions.
It is certainly the case that the global capitalist project is a great deal more consistent at this point in time than any democratic feminist socialist project.
It is also certainly the case that the global capitalist system has brought to hundreds of millions of people a standard of living that their parents would never have believed possible.
In this sense it is a proven success, while democratic feminist socialism is, to most people in the world, an obscure jumble of aspirations.
A central feature of this book is to show how global capitalism produces the material conditions for  socialism, but closes down the political and cultural-ideological space for it.
In the next two chapters a theory of the global system based on economic, political, and cultural-ideological transnational practices will be introduced to explain this.
2
Towards a theory of transnational practices
The impact of transnational practices in the global system at the level of immediate observation is plain for all to see.
The tourist or business or conference traveller will more often than not travel on a plane manufactured by one of the few aerospace TNCs that dominate the civil airline industry, occupy a hotel room subcontracted to or owned or managed by the local affiliate of one of the few chains that dominate the global hotel industry, hire a car from an agency of one of the international firms that dominate the car rental industry, and will pay for all this with one of the credit cards issued by the few TNCs that control global personal finance.
Within most First, Second and Third World countries the traveller will be able to watch television programmes and films of hegemon origin, will be able to buy hegemon branded goods, at a price, and will usually be able to get around using English, the major hegemon language.
The traveller is also liable to be bombarded with advertisements for global consumer goods placed by the local affiliates of the transnational advertising agencies.
While the TNCs from the United States no longer dominate these sectors as they once did, they are still the leaders in a wide variety of fields and even when they are not the leaders it tends to be ‘American’ cultural products or local adaptations of them that are on offer.
This much is obvious at the level of perception.
However, it would be simplistic to conclude that the two Mcs (McLuhan  and McDonald's) have succeeded in shaping the global village in the form of a fast food outlet or that the ‘real’ world is in the process of being reconstructed as a universal theme park along the lines of Disneyland.
The reality is much more complex than this, though we would be well advised to remember the central insight of McLuhan, that the world is becoming a global village, and of McDonald s, that global packaging creates global desires.
In the first chapter I dealt briefly with some of the major ways in which the global system has been categorized.
Now is the time to look at how some theories specifically address the question of development within the global system.
Lying behind my summary evaluations of these theories is the conviction that most of them are fixated around the unhelpful idea that hegemon states exploit other states.
The view that is propounded here is that it is more fruitful to conceptualize the global system in terms of transnational practices.
The agents and institutions of transnational practices in one country may exploit or indeed may facilitate the development of those in other countries.
The state-centrist approach leads to empirical enlightenment, as I tried to show in the previous chapter, but at the expense of some theoretical confusion.
Theories of the global system
There are many classifications of theories of the global system and I claim no great privilege for the classification adopted here.
It does, however, cover the main theories that have attracted a following in the twentieth century.
This book is not intended as a textbook of theories, so there will be no detailed exegetical analysis of each one.
My purpose here will be to give a very brief sketch of what each of the theories attempts and to direct the interested reader to a few of the many other books that do give detailed accounts and critiques of them.
The theories are classified as follows:
1.
Imperialist and neo-imperialist.
2.
Modernization and neo-evolutionist.
3.
Neo-Marxist (including various dependency theories).
4.
World system (and new international division of labour theory).
5.
Modes of production theory.
Imperialism
The theory of imperialism (or colonialism) tries to explain the structure of the modern world in terms of the struggles between the major powers to find new markets, sources of raw materials, investment opportunities, and to extend their political and cultural influence.
It puts the necessity for capitalist expansion at the centre of the theory.
Although Marx himself did discuss the issue of colonialism in various places, it was twentieth-century Marxists like Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg, Hilferding and Bukharin who laid the foundations for a Marxist theory of imperialism.
As is often the case in the creation of new ideas, there were many scholars working along the same lines as these theorists, particularly those trying to analyze the experience of the British Empire at the end of the nineteenth century, pre-eminently the ‘social-liberal’ J.A.
Hobson.
The Marxist theory of imperialism has been robustly challenged and robustly defended from many directionsl and it has left its mark on most subsequent theories of the global system.
It raises two questions crucial for the understanding of the modern world.
First, is the theory historically true in the sense that the phenomenon of imperialism is best explained in terms of the expansion of the world capitalist system?
This is still a crucial question because, with the end of direct colonial rule (political imperialism) in most of the Third World by the 1970s, the idea that imperialism was finished was widely believed.
However, if imperialism is a consequence of capitalist expansionism and not simply a colonial system of government, then some form of economic neo-imperialism could persist after independence for ex-colonies (see Abel and Lewis, 1985).
Second, if this is true, can capitalism develop the Third World?
Bill Warren, a self-styled orthodox Marxist, took this question by the scruff of the neck in his book Imperialism: Pioneer of Capitalism (1980), and argued, to the consternation of a wide variety of antagonists, that the problem with the Third World is not that there is too much capitalist influence, but that there is too little.
We shall return to these issues below when the neoMarxist theories are discussed.
Modernization
Modernization theories of the global system are largely based on the distinction between the traditional and the modern.
The central idea of the theory is that development revolves around the question of attitudes and values (rather than the material interests entailed in capitalist expansionism).
Traditional societies are run by traditionally-minded individuals, typically those who are inward-looking, not prepared to innovate and influenced by magic and religion; while modern societies are run by modern-minded individuals, outward-looking, keen to try out new things, influenced by rational thought and practical experience.
This theory is partly derived from Max Weber's attempts to relate the rise of capitalism (the epitome of modern society) with the Protestant ethic and to show how other different belief systems (like the religions of the Orient) inhibited the rise of modern society.
Modernization theory, like the Weber thesis, has its strong supporters and its strong detractors.
Despite recent efforts to strengthen it, modernization theory has few academic supporters today.
There are two main problems with the theory, now generally acknowledged.
The first is that the distinction between traditional and modern is too crude to be theoretically useful, and that there may well be clear material interests behind at least some ‘traditional’ as well as some ‘modern’attitudes and values.
The second main criticism is that modernization theory tends to ignore the role that class and other interests play in the promotion or inhibition of development.
The main strength of the theory is that it directs attention to the entrepreneurial or innovative personalities who seem to be so important in the developmental process, but even here the theory does tend to ignore the inconsistencies and contradictions that are inherent in explanations based on individual characteristics.
The search for a theory that will combine structural explanations in terms of societal forces and psychological explanations in terms of individual attributes is as far from success in this as in all other fields of sociological research.
The idea of neo-evolutionism is often coupled with the theory of modernization.
Neo-evolutionism provides an historical context for the analysis of traditional and modern societies, in the sense that modern societies are said to evolve from traditional ones through the processes of social differentiation.
For example, in  so called traditional societies the political, economic and educationalfunctions all tend to be fulfilled by the same umbrella institution, whereas in so-called modern societies we have separate social structures and organizations to deal with politics, the economy, education and so on .
Modern societies are therefore institutionally differentiated, on the analogy of biological organisms, from the relatively simple to the relatively complex.
This is called neo-evolutionism, because the nineteenth-century evolutionism which tended to insist that there was a single path along which societies would evolve (usually from the primitive to the civilized states), was considered unacceptable.
Neo-evolutionism rejects this unilinear dogma, and argues that there are many possible paths from the traditional to the modern, though there is a strong supposition that the capitalist road via pluralist democracy resulting in something like the contemporary United States and Western Europe, is the best and most efficient of the alternatives.
In the 1950s and the 1960s, as an off shoot of the sociological functionalism of Talcott Parsons, theories of modernization and neo-evolutionism dominated the social science study of development and the global system (see Parsons, 1977).
However, by the mid-1960s, with antiimperialist wars raging in Africa, Asia and Latin America, various neo-Marxist theories were beginning to challenge the functionalist orthodoxies.
Neo-Marxist theories
Marx did not himself create a systematic theory of the global system, though his work certainly guided Lenin and others in their attempts to construct a theory of imperialism.
The Leninist theory of capitalist expansionism is generally considered to be the orthodox Marxist position.
But even if Lenin was correct in his analysis of the capitalist-imperialist roots of the First World War, by the 1950s and 1960s the capitalist global system and the Third World had both changed so much that many Marxists felt the need to generate new theories to explain what was happening and to show the way forward from a political point of view.
This is why these theories are labelled neo-Marxist.
The single most influential neo-Marxist conceptual innovation for the analysis of development within the global system in general in the last few decades has been dependency theory, or what might be more accurately termed the dependency metatheory.
The dependency metatheory, created by a group of Latin American social scientists, came to prominence in the 1960s and, despite formidable criticism since then, has obstinately refused to disappear.
It is useful to distinguish three theories connected with the metatheory.
These are the theories of dependent underdevelopment, dependent development and dependency reversal (see Sklair, 1988a).
The dependentistas argued that the global capitalist system, largely but not exclusively through transnational corporations (TNCs), operated actively to underdevelop the Third World and that no genuine development was possible as long as this system survived.
While substantial general support for the dependency approach was accumulated, most scholars now acknowledge that the dependentistas were never able to explain satisfactorily the economic growth and social and industrial development that had clearly taken place in some Third World countries.
The widespread acceptance of a new nomenclature for these, the Newly Industrializing Countries (NICs), was undoubtedly an implicit recognition of the inadequacy of Frank's (1967) version of dependency theory as the development of underdevelopment, dependent underdevelopment (but see Frank, 1984).
Other writers in the dependency tradition saw this, but were unwilling to discard the dependency approach entirely.
Cardoso called what was plainly ‘development’ to pragmatists, ‘associated dependent industrialization’(see Cardoso and Faletto, 1979), and in the hands of Evans (1979) this evolved into a more general theory of dependent development.
Dependency theorists, therefore, were still trying to answer the question that had troubled Marxists since the turn of the century, namely ‘can capitalism develop the Third World?’
Frank, and those who agreed with his theory of the development of underdevelopment, unequivocally denied that capitalism could ever develop the Third World.
The best it could do would be to permit a small degree of enclave development, which only reproduced First World-Third World exploitation within the Third World.
Dependent development theorists, on the other hand, acknowledged capitalist development in the Third World, particularly in the NICs, but it was development of a peculiar kind, namely dependent development.
The problem is that dependent development seems to be possible not only in the Third World but also in underprivileged areas within the hegemonic countries of the First World.
This conceptual inflation tends to reduce the effectiveness of the idea by playing into the hands of critics who maintain that the concept of dependency is unviable because it closes off the theoretical space for explaining growth and development, however limited, where it does occur.
To those who argue along these lines, the idea of dependent development seems entirely ad hoc, dragged in to explain away phenomena that the theory seems to forbid.
One possible exit from this cul-de-sac may be the idea (it is not yet a fully articulated theory) of dependency reversal.
This suggests that certain Third World countries, or institutional sectors within them, which were once in the thrall of dependency, can escape and reverse their previous disadvantage.
This is an interesting and, in the case of institutions rather than countries, an eminently testable idea.
For example, there has been a good deal of solid research on the changing nature of the mining industries in the Third World, once entirely and now less entirely dominated by First World TNCs.
Some of this research suggests that in certain cases, for example the bauxite and aluminium industry, the global disposition of power is still very much in favour of the First World TNCs, while in other cases, for example petroleum and perhaps copper, the balance of power has shifted in recent decades, and the First World TNCs have to be content with a smaller share of the revenues.
One problem with dependency reversal is that it tends to take development strategies for granted while it assesses the benefits, or costs, of particular activities.
The price that an institution (or a whole country) might have to pay for success in reversing a particular state of dependency might in the long run not be worth paying.
For example, a Third World producer might win the battle to process a mineral or an industrial crop on site, but if this leads to a crisis in foreign currency because the machinery and the technology necessary for the task have to be imported, then it may eventually result in greater dependence.
Nevertheless, if there is any sense in which capitalism can develop the Third World, and there is evidence that this is happening in some countries or in some sectors, then the theoretical elaboration of the idea of dependency reversal may be useful.
World system theory
In parallel with the dependency framework, but distanced theoretically and empirically from it by conceptual innovations and differences of interpretation, is the ‘world system’ approach whose origins can be found in the works of Immanuel Wallerstein, particularly his volumes on the modern world system (see Wallerstein, 1974).
The world system theorists, who publish regularly in Review, the journal of the Braudel Center at the State University of New York at Binghamton, of which Wallerstein is the intellectual inspiration, have developed a systematic and far-reaching analysis based on a dynamically changing division of labour between the core, peripheral and semi-peripheral countries within the orbit of the capitalist world system.
At least two main shortcomings of Wallerstein's work have been critically exposed.
He is accused of first, neglecting the class struggle, and second, distorting the history of capitalism and thus the progressive role of capitalism in development (Brenner, 1977; Cor’ bridge, 1986, ch.2).
Though argument continues on all these points, for almost twenty years this school of thought has been the most systematic available for the analysis of the global system, and those working within its orbit have produced an impressive volume of theoretical and substantive research.’
Nevertheless, there are signs that the paradigm is approaching exhaustion.
A key indication of this is that the world system approach, like the dependency approach, is having increasing difficulty in dealing with the development, or at least industrialization, of nonhegemon countries.
Wallerstein elaborated the concept of the semi-periphery to describe such countries, and this idea has been picked up by many scholars as a useful tool in analyzing the NICs and, increasingly, those countries that are on the fringes of the First World, but not exactly in the Third World, like Ireland, Portugal, and the Balkan states (for example, Mouzelis, 1986).
Critics of world systems theory have suggested that the idea of the semiperiphery is an ad hoc invention to deal with those cases that do not fit neatly into the core-periphery framework.
This criticism is strengthened to some extent by the observation that much creative work in this genre in recent years has been precisely in the elaboration of dependent development in the countries of the semiperiphery.
An implicit attempt to make connections between the dependency metatheory and world systems has been formulated on the basis of an influential conceptual innovation, the new international division of labour (NIDL) theory, particularly as elaborated by Frobel et al.(1980).
This theory draws attention to the consequences of the changes in global production strategies of the TNCs in recent decades.
In common with Wallerstein and the ‘world systems’ theorists the proponents of the NIDL share a general conception of the capitalist world system divided into core, semi-periphery and periphery in which a division of labour has evolved to maximize the profits of transnational corporations and/ or to solve the problems of the major capitalist societies.
In common with the dependentistas the NIDL theorists see no prospects whatsoever for any genuine Third World development in these changes in global capitalist strategies.
The idea of the new international division of labour has excited a great deal of research interest (for example, the volumes edited by Nash and Fernandez Kelly, 1983; Sanderson, 1985 and Caporaso, 1987).
The theory of the new international division of labour has been criticized for its uncompromising condemnation of TNC operations in the Third World, on the grounds that there is not very much that is new about it and that it relies on an empirical base that is far too limited (see, for example, Cohen, 1987, ch.7; Jenkins, 1984; Gordon, 1988).
Much of this criticism appears quite justified.
Nevertheless, the activities of TNCs, wherever they are and in whatever industry, are increasingly being integrated into global processes of supply, production and marketing and the theorists of the new international division of labour have rendered great service by highlighting these phenomena even if they have done so in a rather one-sided manner.
By concentrating too much on the TNCs' search for cheap labour, the NIDL fails to connect economic with political and culturalideological transnational practices.
It is true that most foreign investment is for the domestic markets of host countries, and that the ‘export processing’ industries that are at the centre of the NIDL thesis account for only a small part of TNC foreign investment in the Third World but, as I have argued for the cases of Mexico and China (Sklair, 1989, forthcoming), the symbolic significance of export oriented development strategies is extremely important in the contemporary global system.
To this extent, the neo-Marxist, world systems and NIDL theorists are in general agreement.
Modes of production theory
There are, however, many who call themselves Marxists, who appear to have rejected entirely the whole problematic of dependency.
They argue that the reasons for underdevelopment in any given Third World country lie mainly within the country itself rather than in the position of the country within any particular part of the global capitalist system.
More specifically, the prospecls for revolution can be deduced from the mode of production within a particular social formation (society) and the class forces that are struggling for power.
The mode of production concept has been theoretically developed by a group of French structuralists (see Taylor, 1979).
So while dependency theorists argue for general delinking from the world capitalist system, some mode of production theorists argue that capitalist industrialization is the only reliable path to development and, eventually, socialist revolution in the Third World (Warren, 1980).
Edwards (1985, ch.5) usefully characterizes these as ‘destructive’ and ‘regenerating’views of capitalism, respectively.
On this theory, global capitalism provides the necessary impetus for revolution in the countries where TNCs are most active.
So, where neo-Marxists argue that the revolutionary forces in the Third World need not wait for Western-style capitalism in order to produce successful communist revolution, mode of production theorists maintain the orthodox Marxist thesis that communism can only come about when the organized working class, the proletariat, destroys the class power of the bourgeoisie through an anti-capitalist revolution.
Marx himself even suggested that this need not necessarily be a violent revolution, but might be achieved by democratic mcans in advanced societies (see Kagarlitsky, 1989, pp.101–2).
Mode of production theorists may have more in common with the dependentistas than they seem to realize.
Their arguments suggest that the lack of development in the Third World is due to obstacles, both internal and externally-imposed, to capitalist industrialization.
This is really not very different from what dependency theories argue.
The mode of production approach produces a type of dependency reversal theory in its insistence that capitalist industrialization can succeed in the Third World.
In this they agree with the advocates of the TNCs who continually proclaim that they are the only reliable vehicles for development though, of course, there  is a serious disagreement about the nature and likely outcome of the process.
The disagreement revolves around the role of the class struggle in the Third World, and it is not only with representatives of the transnational capitalist class, but also with dependency theorists.
Marxists criticize neo-Marxists for concentrating too much on questions of international exchange and terms of trade (exploitation by the First World of the Third World) and too little on questions of productiou and ownership (capital accumulation and class struggle).
The argument begins to move from economics to politics.
The politics of development
How do dominant and subordinate classes deal with the problems of development within the global system?
All these actors have development strategies, articulated and most actively propagated by ‘modernizing elites’ of one type or another (see Gereffi and Wyman, 1987; Lewis and Kallab, 1986).
As the government and the ruling class and its allies are almost always the main actors in the pursuit of development strategies, much of the research in this area has been focused on the political centre.
The basic problem of any government in any society is to secure its own power, with or against ‘modernizing’ and ‘traditional’elites, both in terms of the monopoly of force and the creation of legitimacy.
While conventional theories of ‘modernization’ have identified TNCs as carriers of democratic values and practices to the Third World, such views have been powerfully criticized from many quarters.
The theory of bureaucratic authoritarianism (BA) elaborated by O'Donnell (1979) is one of the strongest and most influential challenges to the idea that the TNCs have exerted a benevolent influence on economic and political development, particularly in Latin America.
BA refers to the tendency of ruling classes in Third World societies to turn to authoritarian solutions in order to implement their development strategies, particularly the project of export led industrialization, which requires rather more social discipline than other strategies.
The argument suggests that the participation of the TNCs in Third World countries can only be assured when they have an ‘acceptable’ business climate in which to operate, and that BA  regimes are more likely to provide such a climate.
Therefore, whether or not TNCs actually intervene in the internal politics of countries in which they invest (sometimes they do, and sometimes they do not), their very presence is said to predispose towards BA regimes.
It is of great significance that most of the NICs are presently or have been in recent times one-party states, not necessarily totalitarian in the classic sense, but certainly lacking in most of the genuinely pluralistic institutions that characterize advanced industrial societies.
This has led many people to argue that, under the conditions of the global capitalist system, industrialization is only possible for developing countries where bureaucratic authoritarian regimes can organize the production process, and particularly the labour force, to satisfy the demands of the transnational corporations and the world market.
However, some argue that TNCs are indifferent to democracy rather than hostile to it (see Becker, 1987).
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that the TNCs are ‘indifferent’ to democracy in the Third World as long as the people do not elect left wing governments!
The idea that regimes in developing countries have institutionalized specific mechanisms for dealing with TNCs, and vice versa, has been conceptualized in terms of the ‘triple’ or ‘tripartite’alliance between the host state, the TNCs and the outward oriented elements in the indigenous bourgeoisie.
The studies by Evans (1979) on Brazil, Gillespie (1984) on Egypt and Ihonvbere and Shaw (1988) on Nigeria, all focus on the ways in which transnational triple alliances operate in the developing countries.
The so-called ‘comprador bourgeoisie’, groups that orient themselves to the interests of foreigners in general and TNCs in particular, play a central role in these analyses of the triple alliance.
The idea of the triple alliance gives a concrete ciass structure to dependency of various types and, as I shall go on to argue, it is the economic, political, and cultural-ideological power of the triple alliance (expanded into a transnational capitalist class) that keeps any development that takes place ‘dependent’.
The very idea of the ‘comprador bourgeoisie,’ central to the dependency approach, appears to have fallen into disuse in recent years and there have been various attempts to reconceptualize what it refers to.
Sklar's (1987) post-imperialism theory identifies a new class, a managerial bourgeoisie This new class is said to have a local wing and a corporate international wing.
Compradors have  usually identified with the interests of the TNCs, whether they are directly employed by them or not, for both encourage the transformation of traditional patterns of consumption and behaviour in developing societies, though post-imperialism theory has yet to confront this particular issue.
This is an important part of what I intend by the transnational capitalist class (TCC), but with two important differences.
First, the theoretical functions of the TCC and the managerial bourgeoisie are quite different.
The managerial bourgeoisie is the key class in a post-imperialist world where the struggle between capital and labour, and probably capitalism and communism too, has become less important.
This class, in the Sklar-Becker formulation, encapsulates the best interests, in a developmentalist sense, of the nation.
It is engaged in a non-deadly, if not always exactly friendly, struggle for business with transnational capital abroad and a relatively consensual, if not always cooperative, project for national development at home.
The concept of the TCC, on the contrary, is embedded in a theory of the capitalist global system, operating through the transnational practices of the TNCs, as they attempt to achieve a reformation of capitalist hegemony in the Third and the Second Worlds.
Second, Sklar's concept lacks a genuinely global dimension because it has no clear analysis of the cultural-ideological sphere, and in particular, it misses what I consider to be the fundamental significance of the culture-ideology of consumerism.
This class, whatever we call it, cannot be properly understood and its historic role cannot be adequately explained, outside the necessity that produces the eternal contradiction of capitalist accumulation on a mass scale.
The central issue is whether or not a Third World bourgeoisie can become hegemonic in its own realm and drive towards ‘real’ development (as Becker asserts for Peru's ‘New Bourgeoisie’) or whether the only realistic option for Third World bourgeoisies, under the present system of global capitalist hegemony, is to throw their lot in with the TNCs, as Evans argues for the triple alliance in Brazil.
The logical extension of this argument is that some form of interdependence might be possible, where Third World actors could carve out niches for themselves in the crevices that the hegemon TNCs leave unattended.
And this is precisely the conclusion that Evans reaches in his more recent work on the computer  industries of Brazil and South Korea (Evans and Bastos Tigre, 1989).
Of course, Evans is not alone in this opinion, for it is a short step from the interdependence thesis to a full-blown ‘production sharing’ conception of the global system, the positive capitalistic version of international division of labour theory (discussed in Sklair, 1989, ch.1).
This is not only the case for the capitalist class, but also for the working class and other subordinate classes.
Where the TNCs are active in Third World direct investment, in the form of factory production, they naturally augment (and sometimes almost create) an industrial proletariat.
Very often the jobs in TNC factories are among the best paid and most highly valued in developing countries.
This has led to a new lease of life for the old concept of ‘labour aristocracy’ and it has been attached to the workers who have these jobs, in comparison with the workers in the informal or the indigenous sectors (see Lloyd, 1982; Boyd et al., 1987).
Particular attention has recently been paid to the position of women in TNC factories (Lim, 1985; Elson and Pearson, 1989), and this will be examined in Chapter 4.
In addition, many other categories of workers in the formal and informal sectors in all three worlds have been progressively drawn in to the global capitalist system by the simple expedient of severely restricting and in more and more cases absolutely destroying their prospects for selfsufficiency in the provision of food, shelter and other ‘necessities’ of life.
While barter-based natural economies can coexist with monetized market economies, the latter relentlessly marginalize the former.
In this process the TNCs have played a key role, particularly in the privatization of consumption.
These theories of development and their implicit or explicit approaches to the analysis of the global system all remain quite controversial, each with its own adherents and detractors, and each guiding substantive research in a variety of problem areas.
The inability of critics to kill off previous theories entirely, and of theories to defend themselves against their critics to the satisfaction of all concerned, have led several writers to conclude that development theory is in crisis (see Booth, 1985; Mouzelis, 1988; Sklair, 1988a).
The way out of the crisis, in my view, is to refocus our attention away from state-centrist ideas of First World countries exploiting Third World countries, to the analysis of the global system.
In order to do this it is necessary to show how trans  national practices have been monopolized by key institutions inthe capitalist global system.
This entails a conception of the economic, the political and the cultural-ideological spheres.
Economy, polity, culture-ideology
The bearers of transnational practices within the global system stand in determinate relationships to all other categories of actors.
Groups may be included or excluded from participation in the system.
One of the most important historic tasks of transnational capitalism has been to include various previously excluded groups within its realm of influence.
This inclusion is, however, partial and it is not the same within the economic, the political and the cultural-ideological spheres.
In the economic sphere, the global capitalist system offers a more or less circumscribed place to the wage-earning majorities in most countries.
The workers, the direct producers of goods and services, have occupational choices that are generally free within the range offered by national capitalisms, but they do change over time and place.
For example, the reduction in manufacturing jobs over the last decades in some high wage countries has forced workers to seek jobs in other less well paid and less secure sectors or, as has happened particularly in the United States and the United Kingdom, forced older workers displaced from traditional industries (like mining and steel-making) into permanent unemployment.
The other side of the coin is that some of the manufacturing jobs lost in high wage countries have turned up in low wage countries.
This has, undoubtedly, over the last few decades, brought many rural people in the Third World into the towns and cities, whether forced off their lands by hunger or predatory landlords, or as willing migrants in search of a better life.
As Brydon and Chant show (1989, ch.5), there is an important gender dimension to this.
Transnational migration, by no means a novel phenomenon, is also a prominent feature of many communities.
In the twentieth century, large numbers of people have migrated from poor countries to richer countries in search of work, from Europe to the Americas, from black to white-ruled Southern Africa, from Mexico and Central America and the Caribbean to North America, from the Caribbean and the Indian subcontinent to Britain and  from southern to northern Europe.
The rapid increase in such migration since the 1950s has prompted one commentator to speak of the ‘New Helots’(Cohen, 1987).
The inclusion of the subordinate classes in the political sphere is very partial.
To put it crudely, the global capitalist system has very little need of the subordinate classes in this sphere.
In the parliamentary democracies the parties must be able to mobilize the masses to vote every so often, but very few countries make voting compulsory.
In most parliamentary democracies voter turnout tends to be around half to three-quarters of the electorate.
While political organization is usually unfettered, the structural obstacles to genuine opposition to the capitalist system are such that there are rarely any serious challenges to it.
Where serious challenges do emerge, for example in the case of the election of the socialist, Salvador Allende, as president of Chile in 1970, the threat is removed by violent overthrow of the constitutional power by the capitalist class through the army and the police, with the support of other key sectors of the establishment.
In the Chilean case, as is well known, this was done with the active collaboration of the US government and TNCs.
In one-party states, spontaneous political participation by the masses is actively discouraged and realistic threats to the prevailing order tend to be focused on changing the people at the top, coup d'etat, rather than on changing the conditions under which global capitalism operates.
The cultural-ideological sphere is, however, entirely different.
Here, the aim of the global capitalist system is total inclusion of all classes, and especially the subordinate classes in so far as the bourgeoisie can be considered already included.
The cultural-ideological project of global capitalism is to persuade people to consume above their own perceived needs in order to perpetuate the accumulation of capital for private profit, in other words, to ensure that the global capitalist system goes on for ever.
The culture-ideology of consumerism proclaims, literally, that the meaning of life is to be found in the things that we possess.
To consume, therefore, is to be fully alive, and to remain fully alive we must continuously consume.
The notions of men and women as economic beings, or political beings, are discarded by global capitalism, quite logically, as the system does not even pretend to satisfy everyone in the economic or the political spheres.
Men and  women are consumers.
The point of economic activity for ‘ordinary members’ of the system is simply to provide the resources to be consumers, and the point of political activity is to ensure, usually through inactivity, that the conditions for consuming are maintained.
This system has been evolving for centuries, first for bourgeoisies all over the world, then spreading to the working classes in the First World, and slowly but surely penetrating to all those with disposable income everywhere.
This is why I have persisted in using the label cultural-ideological, risking the sin of inelegance for the possibility of clarity.
Culture always has an ideological function for consumerism in the capitalist global system, so all cultural transnational practices in this sphere are at the same time ideological practices, thus cultural-ideological.
This is not an empirical assertion, for if it was it would no doubt sometimes be false and usually impossible to prove one way or the other.
The idea of cultural-ideological transnational practices and, in particular the idea of the culture-ideology of consumerism in the global system, are conceptual tools in the theory of the global system.
Global capitalism does not permit cultural neutrality.
Those cultural practices that cannot be incorporated into the culture-ideology of consumerism become oppositional counter-hegemonic forces, to be harnessed or marginalized, and if that fails, destroyed physically.
Ordinary so-called ‘counter-cultures’ are regularly incorporated and commercialized and pose no threat, indeed through thc process of differentiation (illusory variety and choice), are a source of great strength to the global capitalist system.
For example, the celebrations of the twentieth anniversary of the revolts of 1968 became a media event in Europe, less so in the Americas, and were relentlessly commercially exploited, with the willing and presumably lucrative participation of many of those who had then been (and still are) dedicated to the overthrow of the capitalist system.
Consumerist appropriations of the bicentennial of the French Revolution are another interesting example.
We shall have to wait for the year 2017 to see what the culture-ideology of consumerism makes of the Bolshevik revolution!
The culture-ideology of consumerism is, as it were, the fuel that powers the motor of global capitalism.
The driver is the transnational capitalist class.
But the vehicle itself is the mighty transnational corporation.
History and theory of the transnational corporation (TNC)
As D.K. Fieldhouse (1986) remarks in his critique of the concept, the term multinational corporation was first coined by David Lilienthal, the head of the great US public utility the Tennessee Valley Authority, in 1960, long after its reality had made itself felt.
Notwithstanding its apparent novelty, the multinational (or, hereafter, transnational) corporation dates back to at least 1867.
Until the 1940s it was predominantly a European phenomenon, and ‘is neither homogeneous in function nor consistent in character’(Fieldhouse, 1986, p.24).
Despite Fieldhouse's erudite attempt to consign the concept to the dustbin of history, most observers agree that it is both sufficiently homogeneous in function and consistent in character to be useful.
While TNCs are certainly to be found in a wide variety of economic sectors they share the same basic function of capital accumulation on a global scale, and the same consistent character of having to work out global strategies to ensure their continued growth.
However, Fieldhouse does have a point.
TNCs are not all of a piece.
Take the question of size.
In the mid-1970s, only eight oil companies shared 30 per cent of the market, seven copper companies shared 25 per cent, six bauxite companies shared 58 per cent , seven iron ore companies shared 50 per cent , and a few tea, coffee, banana and tobacco companies shared 60 per cent or more of their markets (see Dunning, 1981, ch.1).
This left thousands of other, smaller TNCs scrambling for tiny market shares in most branches of production.
Thus, the first major distinction to be made is between the major TNCs, the Fortune 500 type of corporations and the rest.
The rest is, of course, made up of many different types of TNCs.
For example, a relatively small company in terms of employees, sales or assets, may still hold a dominant place in the global distribution of a crucial commodity, usually by virtue of its technological superiority over its competitors.
Research on the TNCs
Research on the transnational corporations relies on no single  methodology but borrows from comparative and cross-cultural research, for which there are long and varying traditions in the social sciences.
Concretely, the main types of inquiry can be categorized as follows:
Conceptual studies
This includes works where the substantive and theoretical consequences of the internationalization or globalization of capital rather than a particular industry or country are the focus.
Though their interpretations differ widely, the theories of scholars like Hymer (1979) and Vernon (1971)(both conveniently excerpted along with other important contributions in Modelski, 1979), Barnet and Maller (1974), Bornschier and Chase-Dunn (1985), Moran (1985) and Dunning (1981), agree on the centrality of the TNC in the analysis of the global system.
By explicitly identifying categories of corporations like the Fortune 500, they also convey the impression that a qualitatively new force is at work in the global system.
Sectoral case studies
In these studies TNCs in specific industries are investigated globally.
Sectors are often split into manufacturing, service and natural resource based industries.
Within these broad categories further subdivisions are common.
Examples include Gereffi (1983) on pharmaceuticals and Henderson (1989) on electronics; Gorostiaga (1984) on financial TNCs, Anderson (1984) on transnational advertising agencies and Price and Blair (1989) on the service sector in general; Tullis and Hollist (1986) on food and Nwoke (1987) on minerals.
Country and/or regional case studies
The focus here is on the impact of the TNCs as a whole on one country or region.
There are now few areas in the world where the impact of the TNCs has not been researched by someone and good examples of this type of study are Kowaleski (1982) on the Caribbean, Onimode et al.(1983) on Nigeria, Wang (1984) on China and Jenkins (1984) and Newfarmer (1985) on Latin America.
Gender-based studies
The spread of the TNCs has brought significant changes to the sexual division of labour in both the First and the Third World.
Several industries in which TNCs are active, like electronics and apparel, employ many more women than men, whether they are located in poor or rich countries.
Good examples of such studies are Nash and Fernandez-Kelly (1983), Lim (1985) and Elson and Pearson (1989).
Promotional literature
Global business publications are full of material whose main aim is to further the interests of the TNCs.
Much of it is clearly apologist, particularly that produced directly by TNCs or by public relations firms on their behalf (for which see the analysis of Stauffer, 1979).
However, some is based on serious research, like Micou (1985) on TNCs in the Third World, and Mertz (1984).
There are also many volumes in which academics join forces with TNC executives to state ‘the case for the multinationals’(see Madden, 1977).
TNCs and foreign direct investment
The history of the TNC is, of , bound up with the history of foreign direct investment (FDI).Although FDI had been substantial from the beginning of the twentieth century, it really took off in the 1950s, as a result of the flow of funds from the United States into Europe aher the Second World War.
US firms already had considerable sums invested in European subsidiaries between the two wars, and post-1945 FDI served both to rebuild what had been destroyed and to extend it.
A political motive was clearly bound up with this economic activity.
US foreign policy was based on the necessity of stopping the worldwide advance of communism in Europe and elsewhere through the economic development of areas under ‘threat’.
US firms did not meekly follow the foreign policy line of their government against their own interests.
There were large profits to be made from investing in a whole host of European industries.
In the 1950s and the 1960s many US firms grew so large so fast that Europeans began to speak of the ‘American takeover’ of their economies.
The widely read and influential book of the French politician and columnist, ServanSchreiber, translated as The Amer–can Challenge (1968), summed up these fears ahout the loss of economic independence, and recommended that European industry and commerce should learn from the methods of the Americans and try to beat them at their own game.
American economic activity in the international arena (or American economic imperialism, as it was increasingly being labelled) began to be identified as a problem in urgent need of resolution, and to be conceptualised in terms of the multinational or transnational corporation.
In the 1970s, almost all the major international agencies in the economic and trade fields produced recommendations on how to regulate the activities of the TNCs, in the recognition that even more than the rich countries in which the bulk of FDI was located, the poorer countries needed protection (see Tharp, 1976; Grosse, 1982).
Transnational corporation investments might appear minor relative to the total GNP of most countries, but they were extremely important in the context of particular branches of the economies of poor and some richer but small countries.
The UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs took a special interest in these issues and a series of intensively-researched reports in the 1970s led to the creation of a Commission on Transnational Corporations and a research centre.
This eventually became institutionalized as the UN Centre on Transnational Corporations, which now has the difficult task of trying to reconcile the interests of the TNCs and the communities eager for their investments (see Caplan, 1989).
Activity at the quasi-governmental level, like the UN and OECD, has been more than paralleled by a plethora of unofficial pressure groups that monitor the activities of the TNCs, wherever they may be.
The Transnationals Information Exchange (TIE), for one, is a particularly active global network which has developed counter-strategies to combat the overwhelming resources that the TNCs can muster when they are attacked.
These strategies are based on research to identify the interests behind the target companies ‘to such an extent that their image, reputation and credibility  are jeopardized by continued support of corporate denial ofjustice’(TIE, 1985, p.33).
Some of the campaigns in which TIE has been involved have lasted many years, for example the Nestle Infant Formula boycott (to be discussed in detail in Chapter 5), the campaign to force corporations to divest in South Africa, the struggles on behalf of Coca Cola workers in Guatemala and Control Data workers in Korea, as well as several campaigns against TNC policies in the United States.
Church and consumer groups, mostly in North America and Europe, campaign frequently against perceived abuses of TNC power.
CIE, the US-based Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility, and the International Organization of Consumer Unions, have all collaborated on many projects, and there are literally hundreds, perhaps thousands of transnational networks now monitoring the TNCs all over the world.
Many of these organizations have regular newsletters, for example the Interfaith Center has The Corporate Examiner and the flood of environmentalist and consumer-advice literature that began in the 1980s often contains material critical of the TNCs.
The TNCs' own views can be found in a variety of sources, for example in their ‘public interest’ advocacy advertising in the world's mass media (see Sethi, 1977), and in countless USgovernment sponsored settings (for example, US Congress 1973).
The contest between the TNCs and their critics is, however, very unequal.
For the United States, Mander (1978, pp.19–20) notes, in all seriousness: ‘During the early 1970s, all environmental groups together spent about $500,000 per year in advertising in order to offset an average of about $3 billion in corporate expenditures on the same subjects.
This ratio was relatively small, only 6,000 to 1, which may help explain the early success of the environmental movement.’
These struggles pit the small people against the might of the transnational corporations, some of whom are richer than most countries.
Nevertheless, even the poorest or smallest countries can, theoretically at least, frustrate the expansion plans of any one of these TNC giants by the simple, if often costly, expedients of refusing permission to trade or manufacture within that country's territory or by nationalizing (expropriating) the property of a TNC already in business there.
There is a large amount of literature on this question.’
TNCs and Third World governments
The experience of expropriating countries, especially in the Third World, is very mixed.
While there do seem to be systematic differences between extractive industries like petroleum and metal ore mining, and manufacturing industries like consumer goods, the general conclusion is that where the TNCs are patient and persistent they usually at least recover the value of their seized assets.
Either they have a sufficient leverage over processing and marketing, for example in the extractive industries, as shown in Moran's book (1974) on the copper industry in Chile, or they have sufficient control over intra-firm transfers, particularly transfer pricing.
As Sigmund (1980) demonstrates for Latin America, when compensation is finally paid, it often overstates the value of the assets.
Here the foreign and the domestic elements of the transnational capitalist class are clearly seen working through the agency of the homecountry state in defence of their interests.
The most thoroughly studied case is ‘indigenization’ in Nigeria, and I shall discuss this in detail in Chapter 4.
Most of this research, as is immediately obvious, is posed within the logic of state-centrism.
There have, however, been some attempts to go beyond this and to develop conceptions of TNCs not as representatives of the power of the state, as tends to happen within state-centrist analyses, but as independent of and even, on occasion, opponents of the state.
While all TNCs are domiciled, for legal purposes if no other, in particular countries, many people have argued that some TNCs are actually more powerful than most nation-states.
Such notions as Barnet and Muller's (1974)‘global reach’ of the TNCs, and Vernon's (1971)‘sovereignty at bay’thesis reflecting the increasingly powerful positions of TNCs in their dealings with governments, though emanating from totally different perspectives, illustrate just how widespread such ideas were (and still are).
In some respects these ideas are clearly quite realistic.
Many of the largest TNCs have assets and annual sales far in excess of the GNP of about half of the countries of the world.
In 1986, according to the World Bank, 64 out of 120 countries had a GDP (gross domestic product) of less than $10 billion.
United Nations data for 1985–6 show that 68 TNCs in mining and manufacturing had annual sales in excess of ten billion dollars, while all the top 50 banks, the top 20 securities firms, and all but one of the top 30 insurance companies had net assets in excess of ten billion.
The McDonald's fast food corporation (total sales of $12.4 billion), Japanese and West German Railways (total revenues $16 and $12.5 billion, though both actually lost money in that year), and 12 retailing and supermarket chains (sales ranging from the US-based Sears Roebuck's $44 billion to the Japanese Daiei chain's $10 billion) were also members of what could be called the ‘10 billion dollar club’(see UNCTC, 1988, annex tables).
The dependency perspective focused attention on this unequal relationship between, on the one hand, mighty TNCs and the powerful home countries that looked after their interests all over the globe and, on the other, the relatively weak and powerless Third World countries in which they were involved.
Norman Girvan's (1976) study of mining TNCs in the Caribbean evocatively labels this relationship ‘Corporate Imperialism’.
However, many have argued that the dependency perspective failed to explain how the practices of the TNCs and those who act as their agents in the Third World actually operated to produce underdevelopment, particularly where something like the kinds of development that are taken for granted in the First World have occurred regionally or in particular industries in some Third World countries.
The principal methodological difficulty of the attempt to specify the developmental effects of TNCs in the global system is to isolate their effects and differentiate them from the general effects of the processes of ‘modernization’(a concept abandoned by most researchers but which lives on regardless).
The complexity of this issue lies in the fact that the TNCs are themselves directly and explicitly responsible for the ways in which such processes work out in most societies, but they are also often indirectly and implicitly responsible in ways that are hidden from view.
Modern techniques of communication have intensified the demonstration effect whereby the practices and beliefs of one society are introduced to other societies and have increased the speed with which consumption patterns common to one socio-cultural grouping spread to all corners of the world.
Few will wonder why the products and lifestyles of the industrialized world seem desirable and relatively accessible to many in the developing countries.
However, the extent to which this is due to the deliberate efforts of TNCs to sell their products and services is often difficult to determine.
It is for this reason that it may be useful to begin to analyze these processes, not with the nation-state or with the transnational corporation, but with the idea of transnational practices.
3 Corporations, classes and consumerism
The conceptual space for transnational practices (TNP)
The concept of transnational practices refers to the effects of what people do when they are acting within specific institutional contexts.
It focuses attention on observable phenomena, some of which may even be measurable, instead of highly abstract and often very vague relations between conceptual entities.
It is not only impossible to theorize fruitfully on the basis of abstract relations which are nothing but abstract relations, but it is only possible to theorize fruitfully on the basis of abstract relations that refer directly to observable phenomena in material reality.
Transnational practices are, of course, abstract concepts, but they refer directly to the practices of agents and derive meaning from the institutional settings in which they occur, and because of which they have determinate effects.
TNPs do not, themselves, constitute a theory.
They do, however, provide a conceptual framework within which a theory may be constructed.
At this point, I shall briefly sketch out the theory of the global system based on the three spheres, the economic, political and cultural-ideological transnational practices.
The global system is most fruitfully conceptualized as a system that operates at three levels, knowledge about which can be organized in three spheres, namely the economic, the political and the cultural-ideological.
Each sphere is typically characterized by a  representative institution, cohesive structures of practices, organized and patterned, which can only be properly understood in terms of their transnational effects.
The global system, at the end of the twentieth century, is not synonymous with the global capitalist system, but the driving forces behind global capitalism are the dominant though not the only driving forces behind the global system.
Thus, the primary agent and institutional focus of economic transnational practices is the transnational corporation.
However, there are others.
The World Bank, the IMF, commodity exchanges and so on are mostly driven by the interests of the TNCs.
The underlying goal of keeping global capitalism on course is in constant tension with the selfish and destabilizing actions of those who cannot resist system-threatening opportunities to get rich quick or to cut their losses.
It is, however, the direct producers, not the capitalist class who usually suffer most when this occurs as, for example, the tin miners of Bolivia and the rest of the world found out when the London Metal Exchange terminated its tin contract in 1985 (Crabtree, 1987).
The primary agents of the political and cultural-ideological TNPs may be somewhat more contentious.
The theory of the global system being developed in this book proposes that the primary agent in the political sphere is a still-evolving transnational capitalist class.
The institutions of the culture-ideology of consumerism, as expressed through the transnational mass media, are the primary agents in the cultural-ideological sphere.
It may be helpful to explain this in terms of what each of these three primary agents typically produces, the results of its practices.
TNCs produce commodities and the services necessary to manufacture and sell them.
The transnational capitalist class produces the political environment within which the products of one country can be successfully marketed in another.
The culture-ideology of consumerism produces the values and attitudes that create and sustain the need for the products.
These are analytical rather than empirical distinctions.
In the real world they are inextricably mixed.
TNCs get involved in host country politics, and the cultureideology of consumerism is largely promulgated through the transnational corporations involved in mass media and advertising.
Members of the transnational capitalist class often work directly for TNCs, and their life styles are a major exemplar for the spread  of consumerism.
Nevertheless, it is useful to make these analytical distinctions, particularly where the apparent and real empirical contradictions threaten to swamp the theory.
This theory of the global system, then, revolves around the perceived necessity for global capitalism to continually increase production and international trade, to guarantee the political conditions for this to occur uninterruptedly all over the world, and to create in people the need to want to consume all the products that are available, on a permanent basis.
There are, of course, other forces at work in the global system, and in some respects global capitalism has had to come to terms with these, particularly when they become opposing forces.
This can be illustrated by looking more closely at the economic, political and culturalideological spheres.
Economic transnational practices
Economic transnational practices are economic practices that transcend national boundaries.
These may be entirely contained within the borders of a single country even though their effects are transnational.
For example, there may within one country be a consumer demand for a product which is unavailable from domestic supply.
The retailer places an order with a supplier who fills the order from a foreign source.
Neither the retailer nor the consumer needs to know or care where the product comes from, though some countries now have ‘country of origin' rules making mandatory the display of this information.
There may be a parallel situation in the supplier country.
Local producers may simply sell their products to a domestic marketing board or wholesaler and neither know nor care who the final consumers will be.
The transnational corporation enters the scene when sellers, intermediaries and buyers are parts of the same global organization.
One important consequence of the expansion of the capitalist world economy has been that individual economic actors (like workers and entrepreneurs) and collective economic actors (like trade unions and TNCs) have become much more conscious of the transnationality of their practices and have striven to extend their global influence.
Over recent years imports and exports have been vested with great political and cultural-ideological significance, and it is very likely that increasing numbers of consumers now register the country of origin of what they are buying, and producers now register the destination of what they are producing, and this knowledge may affect their actions.
The volume of economic transnational practices has increased phenomenally since the 1950s, as evidenced by the tremendous growth of foreign trade, l and this means that even some quite poor people in some poor countries can now distinguish many consumer goods in terms of their origins and the status-conferring advantages that some origins have over others.
Jobs
The most obvious and tangible eftect of economic TNPs is the creation of jobs when a foreign corporation opens a factory or an office abroad.
These jobs are usually seen as benefits, certainly by the workers who flock to take them up, and by the governments that have established incentive programmes to attract them in the first place.
In addition to jobs, the measurable benefits of economic TNPs include the exports due to foreign firms, and the backward linkages that they set up in the host economy, that is the locally produced goods and services they purchase, either from existing firms or from firms established primarily to supply the TNCs.
Backward linkages also create jobs.
But all these jobs have costs.
In the first place, governments all over the world offer fiscal incentives to attract foreign firms to open factories.
For example, in 1958 the Irish Republic decreed that profits from exports by Shannon Industrial Estate companies would be exempt from tax for 25 years, and profit tax remission for firms outside Shannon was to be 100 per cent for a period of 10 years.
This was extended subsequently several times (Sklair, 1988b).
This is quite common in Second and Third World countries too.
Further costs are the bureaucracies set up to woo and service foreign manufacturers; and the imported goods that the foreign firms use in the production process.
It is difficult to know whether FDI would take place without incentives and to work out the actual cost to the people of the tax remissions and infrastructural investments made by the host governments of the countries where TNCs enjoy these privileges.
The  relentless drive to attract more and more foreign investment (high tech by preference, but practically any would do) that characterized the 1980s continues and there are now very few countries anywhere in the world that do not have some incentives to attract FDI.
This is a measure of the potency of economic transnational practices in the global system.
A seemingly simple and straightforward phenomenon like a TNC opening a factory or an office ‘offshore’(in a foreign country) has very wide ramifications.
It is clearly a central economic transnational practice.
Let us pursue this further.
Much of the expansion in manufacturing employment in the global system since the 1950s has come from relatively few industries, such as automobiles, electronics, textiles, household goods, and toys.
In some countries which have tried to promote export led industrialization, the most dynamic parts of their economies have tended to be those with heavy foreign involvement.
Cases of this can be found in southern Europe, Latin America and in Asia.
But the growth of new industry jobs in many countries has hardly kept pace with the loss of jobs in traditional indigenous industries, and TNCs have directly caused the loss of at least some of these indigenous jobs by forcing domestic competitors out of business.
For example, foreign electronics firms have pre-empted the creation of a domestically-owned electronics industry in all but a few countries.
However, a domestic, if not entirely domestically-controlled, electronics industry can survive as a result of the stimulus given by foreign firms, as Grieco (1984) illustrates in the case of India's struggle with IBM.
There are two issues to be considered: first, the desirability of incentives for foreign firms, and second, which incentives are most liable to be effective.
While it might seem simple common sense to argue that, for example, tax relief on profits must be an important factor in the decision of a manufacturer to produce offshore, this is not always relevant.
For most foreign investors involved in export processing in low wage locations, foreign plants are cost centres, rather than profit centres.
Where profits are declared, tax relief tends to represent an extra bonus rather than a necessary incentive to foreign investors.
Host countries are interested not only in how many jobs are created for how long at what cost, but also what kinds of jobs, are created.
One of the main criticisms levelled at US and  European transnational corporations in Asia, Africa and Latin America is that their operations are predominantly of the export processing variety, employing low wage workers (mainly ‘nimblefingered’ young women) in monotonous and often physically debilitating labour, the products of which constitute a small proportion of the value-added of the final commodity.
In such enterprises top managers and technicians tend to be expatriates and little if any advanced training is offered to the local workers.
In the extreme cases, this type of foreign investment will not upgrade the host economy in any meaningful sense.
This is not the case in all countries, however, and the composition of the labour force in a particular export-oriented industry or zone may change over time.
As most of these zones are in Third World countries, these issues will be taken up in the next chapter.
The size and character of the domestic market and the types of foreign companies that investment agencies set out to attract, bear heavily on the nature and effects of economic TNPs.
Foreign-owned industry tends to outperform domestically-owned industry in exporting in most Third World and indeed in some sectors in First World countries.
However, many exporters import the materials and components used in their exported goods rather than buy them locally.
This reduces the magnitude of local value added, a key measure of the benefit of foreign investment.
What the TNCs spend locally can be broken down into three components, namely wages and salaries, utility and service costs, and material linkages.
Jobs created by FDI in the Second and Third Worlds have added significance to those created in the First World.
One difference is in the nature of the foreign currency involved.
Few countries outside the First World have transferable currencies.
The hard currencies of the First World, especially US dollars, Japanese yen, and the major European currencies, can be used freely in international trade, while the soft currencies of the rest of the world's countries are generally not acceptable for the settlement of international accounts.
If a soft-currency country wants to import something it must earn or borrow one of the hard currencies to pay for it.
Usually, the hard currency exchanged by foreign investors to pay wages, salaries and utility and other costs, has a significance in Second and Third World countries that it does not have in First World countries.
Linkages
The purchase of materials and components, backward linkages, is usually in foreign currency, but linkages also have a more general industrial significance in all three Worlds alike.
Linkages may be either backward, when the purchasing firm, which need be neither foreign nor an exporter, buys what it needs locally, or forward, when the seller firm supplies a local firm with what it needs to produce something else.
The ideal state of affairs from the point of view of host countries is where foreign firms actually stimulate the creation and growth of the suppliers of their needs, particularly those materials and components that have a high value-added quality, within the local economy, and where the output of these foreign firms goes into the local economy for further processing.
These are what Hirschman calls ‘input-provision, derived demand, or backward linkage effects’ and ‘output-utilization or forward linkage effects’(Hirschman, 1958, ch.6).
These linkages constitute the first criterion of what I have labelled a ‘successful development effect’(Sklair, 1989, ch.9).
This is one of the key issues involved in the transformation of economic growth into general development.
Suffice it to say, at this point, that even in the midwest region of Ireland, widely regarded as the most successful free zone in the world, whose agencies have an unsurpassed international reputation, the impact on the Irish economy of the foreign-owned sector in terms of linkages is uninspiring.
Repeated official and unofficial enquiries have suggested that the foreign exporting sector buys very little that is of Irish manufacture, and even when it does buy locally it tends to buy low value-added goods, like packaging materials and industrial consumables.
As my own research shows, local purchases in the export-oriented zones in Egypt, Mexico and China are very much less than in Ireland, perhaps in the region of 1 or 2 per cent(Sklair, 1988c, 1989, pp.197–202, forthcoming).
It is important to look behind the aggregate figures of local sourcing to try to identify where linkage effects could realistically be expected to result from the transnational practices of established and potential TNCs, and what the host authorities could realistically hope to do about it in terms of their transnational practices.
In Ireland, three separate initiatives were established in the midwest region to tackle this problem.
The Shannon Development  Company had a ‘Matchmaker’ service to match up the capacities of local suppliers with the needs of industrial purchasers, the Irish Development Authority ‘Project Identification Unit’supplied local firms with information on the purchasing requirements of the multinationals, and the Irish Goods Council did the same thing.
These activities are mirrored in many countries all over the world where TNCs are seen as potential purchasers of local goods.
The effort to create backward linkages reveals some important economic transnational practices.
The logic of transnational production either forbids, permits, or encourages backward linkages.
Where a product is entirely integrated within the TNC or its captive suppliers' networks, or where the intermediate components or materials used are of such a specialized nature that there are simply no available suppliers outside the existing TNC network, then backward linkages are literally forbidden by the logic of global production.
For TNCs involved in more traditional and non-state-of-the-art product lines, where materials and components are more readily available, on the surface at least, the logic of TNC production appears to permit backward linkages.
This is seen, correctly, as potentially very rewarding for the domestic industry, and in some First World non-hegemon countries and in the NICs the supply of materials and components, for example to the automobile TNCs, has certainly been economically rewarding.
In most Second and Third World countries this has not generally happened.
The reasons are that local production is not of the quality required by the world market, prices are too high and delivery is unreliable.
No one familiar with the performance of domestic industry in most countries outside and some inside the First World would be surprised by this but, even so, one might wonder why the figures for local sourcing are quite so low when local materials and components are available.
The logic of global production is again operating, but through transfer pricing and the use of captive suppliers.
By the very nature of the case, the demands of commercial secrecy, this is difficult to research.
Only when Second and Third World factories actually begin to produce what TNCs need at competitive price, quality and delivery, will host country governments be in a position to challenge the TNCs on linkages.
Where this has already happened, particularly in the case of automobile parts, it tends to be connected with local content requirements.
TNCs tend to get  round this by buying up or establishing their own local suppliers (see Bennett and Sharp, 1985).
However, in such cases, TNCs can occasionally be seen actually to encourage backward linkages.
The job creation and job destruction effects of TNCs have very wide ramifications and they are sociologically the most important economic transnational practices.
This will be illustrated further in the next chapter, with particular reference to the developmental effects of TNC practices, and the sexual division of labour they have created.
Political transnational practices
In a paper entitled ‘Transnationalism and the New Tribe’, James Field Jr describes the historical occurrence of what he labels ‘transnational individuals’ and the growth of the tendency towards ‘purposeful transnational philanthropy’in the United States (Field, 1973, pp.11–12).
In Field's view, by the late nineteenth century the organizational revolution had transformed transnationalism from an individual to a company affair, and two levels of culture emerged, global and local, with a New Tribe of those imbued with transnational global culture.
This is a good first approximation of the concept of the transnational capitalist class that I want to develop.
What is missing from Field's account is the connection between political transnational practices and the global capitalist system.
The reason for this is that Field's New Tribe is imbued with the rather vague mission of transmitting ‘Western techniques’ to traditional societies and although this opens the door to many fascinating details about the structures of culture contact, it is at a rather high level of generality for explanatory purposes and it seriously underplays the role of the classes responsible for capitalist expansionism.
Nevertheless, there is a considerable degree of interest in transnational political practice at this level.
The Yearbook of International Organizations (Union of International Associations, 1988–9) lists thousands of bodies classified as: federations of international organizations, universal membership organizations, inter-continental membership organizations, regionally defined membership organizations, organizations emanating from places, persons and other bodies, and organizations having a special form, including foundations and funds.
The subject guide traverses the spectrum from ‘abattoir’ to ‘zymurgy’(the art of fermentation); a sample page from the universal membership organizations section details the International Association of Legal Science, World Alliance of Reformed Churches, Association of Geoscientists for International Development and Amnesty International.
Most of these are what Willetts (1982) labels ‘Pressure Groups as Transnational Actors’.
Willetts identifies two main categories, namely sectional groups (including TNCs, trade unions, professional associations and recreational clubs), and promotional groups (welfare agencies, religious organizations, communal groups, political parties and specific-issue groups).
Any such classification is bound to be somewhat arbitrary and, as Willett acknowledges, many groups can be placed in more than one category.
Research emphasis is usually on the relationships between governments and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
A large number of these are attached to the ultimate NGO, the United Nations Organization, and over 1,200 NGOs were instrumental in the creation of the UN.
It is difficult to assess the importance of such organizations.
Clearly, within particular realms of human experience they may play crucial roles in assisting individuals and groups to achieve their ends.
However, in the terms of the theory of the capitalist global system elaborated here, apart from those directly or indirectly responsive to the interests of the TNCs as expressed by the transnational capitalist class, their transnational practices are dis’ tinctly marginal.
Another way of putting this is that where their activities are not marginal, they tend to be very responsive to the TNCs.
Therefore, in the following discussion, the emphasis will be on the political practices of the transnational capitalist class (TCC) and the groups or classes with which it has its most significant contacts.
A terminological point is in order here.
The term transnational capitalist class is used interchangeably in the singular and the plural.
This is to signify that its national and its global membership may be distinguished for the sake of convenience, but that the concept of the TCC entails global interests.
There are, of course, cases where the interests of the class as a whole, to promote global capitalism, are transcended by other interests for individual members, where Jews refuse to do business with Germans, or Arabs  with Jews, or North Americans with communists, for example .
The strength and unity of the transnational capitalist class are, therefore, always open to empirical questions.
The weight of the evidence is that it is growing stronger and more united and, as I shall go on to argue, this can be best explained within the context of the culture-ideology of consumerism.
The transnational capitalist class
The transnational capitalist class is not made up of capitalists in the traditional Marxist sense.
Direct ownership or control of the means of production is no longer the exclusive criterion for serving the interests of capital, particularly not the global interests of capital.
The international managerial bourgeoisie, of which I made some conceptual criticisms above, is defined as: ‘a socially comprehensive category, encompassing the entrepreneurial elite, managers of firms, senior state functionaries, leading politicians, members of the learned professions, and persons of similar standing in all spheres of society’(Becker and Sklar, 1987, p.7).
This is a very useful formulation, all the more so because it echoes another one, developed quite independently from a case study of the Mexico-US border.
The membership of the ‘political cliques’ that assisted the entrepreneurs in running the Mexican Border Industrialization Programme in its first decade is described as:
a local government official, lawyer, accountant, banker, customs broker, labor contractor and in most cases the owner of factory land and buildings.
US businessmen from industrial development committees and chambers of commerce from nearby US cities also usually form part of this clique.
(Baird and McCaughan, 1975, p.9)
The most important elements specifically missing from both of these formulations are the professional purveyors of the culture-ideology of consumerism, the mass media and promotional personnel whose task it is to sell the consumerist goals of the global capitalist system to the masses.
These goals have to be sold to producers, citizens and consumers.
The political practices of the transnational capitalist class will be analyzed in terms of two issues.
First, how the TCC operates to  change the nature of the political struggle between capital and labour.
This can be measured in terms of its domestic and transnational political organization, direct and indirect TNC interference in host country politics and the extent to which these constrain and are constrained by the domestic and/or transnational labour movement.
Second, the transnational capitalist class aims to downgrade certain domestic practices by comparison with new and more glamorous transnational practices and to create a ‘comprador’ mentality.
This can be measured by the local and in some cases international brain drain from domestic to transnational enterprises, mainly but not exclusively TNCs.
The people who make up this brain drain are the backbone of the transnational capitalist class, the class whose political role is to persuade co-nationals that their interests are identical with, or at least best served by, those of the TNCs.
Labour and capital
Neither the global capitalist class nor the global working class operates to any great extent through transnational political parties or trade unions.
However, such groupings do exist and they do have some effects on, and are affected by, the political practices of the TCC in most countries.
There are no genuine transnational political parties, though there appears to be a growing interest in international associations of parties, which are sometimes mistaken for transnational parties.
The post-Comintern Communist Movement, the Socialist International, international Fascist organizations, and the Green movement (about which more will be said below) provide the only models we have for such organizations, and none of these can be currently regarded as successful in global terms.
Building on the rather flimsy basis of European Community elections where there is some evidence of multi-state party platforms, Goldman (1983) argues that the prospects for transnational political parties are increasing.
Few would agree with even this modest claim.
There are various transnational political organizations through which fractions of the TCC operate, for example, the Rotary Club and its offshoots and the network of American Chambers of Commerce that straddles the globe.
Prominent among these  organizations is the Trilateral Commission, made up of the great and good from the United States, Europe and Japan, whose business is ‘Elite Planning for World Management’(see Holly Sklar, 1980).
There are few major cities in any First or Third World country which do not have members of or connections with one or more of these organizations.
They vary in strength from the sophisticated First World centres, through important Third World cities, like Cairo and Mexico City, to nominal presences in some of the poorer African and Asian countries.
They are backed up to a greater or lesser extent by many powerful bodies, such as the foreign trade agencies of the major hegemon powers, and (in parts of the Third World) specialized bodies like the World Bank and the US Agency for International Development (USAID).
Labour is represented by some genuinely transnational trade unions.
S The World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) was founded in 1945, with 350 delegates representing 67 million workers in 56 countries.
This immediately postwar show of labour unity included members from the United States (the CIO, but not the AFL), Britain, the Soviet Union, China and India.
WFTU split under the pressure of the Cold War in 1949, when the British TUC and the CIO from the United States (followed by the AFL) set up in opposition the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU).
ICFTU followed a strict international and national ‘no contact’ policy with the WFTU, which it saw as entirely Soviet dominated.
In the 1980s, the WFTU had over 200 million members in 70 countries (most of Eastern Europe and communist unions in Western Europe and Japan), though the Italian communist trade union had withdrawn and the French began to distance themselves from WFTU in the mid-1970s, ostensibly to improve the climate for domestic solidarity.
ICFTU has about 90 million members (in 92 countries, including Western Europe, the Americas and most of the Third World).
The World Council of Labour, a Christian oriented movement, has about 15 million members.
In addition, there are some industrially based transnational union organizations, for example the International Metalworkers Federation, and the International Union of Food and Allied Workers' Associations, and these have been involved in genuine transnational labour struggles, and have gained some short term  victories.
However, they face substantial difficulties in their struggles against organized capital, domestically and transnationally (see Rowan et al., 1980) and they must be considered as marginal most of the time in the global system.
While they would not disagree entirely with this judgement, there are some researchers who see rather more positive future prospects for a transnational labour movement, or a ‘new labour internationalism’ as it is called.
In part a response to the new international division of labour, a new international labouroriented labour studies is rapidly emerging (see the bibliography by Waterman and Klatter in Boyd et al., 1987).
However, the interest and acuity of these studies cannot obscure the fact that the labour internationalism they set out to document and analyze has occurred only fleetingly.
These scholars know the reasons why, and they do not hide them.
The level of unionization to be found in TNC-owned industry in different countries varies a great deal.
The question cannot be realistically discussed, however, unless there is some measure of the genuine independence of the union.
We must distinguish at least three cases: first, where unions are prohibited or repressed; second, where official government or company unions are permitted; third, where genuinely independent unions actually operate.6 While most TNCs in most countries will follow the local rules regarding the unions, host governments, particularly in export processing industries (not always under pressure from foreign investors), have suspended national labour legislation.
Some cases will be discussed in the next chapter.
Downgrading of domestic practices
Even the most casual observer of the Second and Third Worlds, and even some non-hegemon members of the First World, cannot but be struck by the widespread belief that indigenous practices are often unfavourably compared with foreign practices.
The downgrading of domestic industry, for example, is a subtle and circular process, in which the newcomer has all the advantages and the incumbent all the handicaps.
The necessity for and the presence of the foreign company are constant reminders of the deficiencies of the domestic economy; new methods are defined as more efficient (if not necessarily more desirable) than the traditional  methods of production current in the host economy; andwhere entirely new products enter, this only underlines the inadequacies of the host.
These can all have a depressing effect on local industry.
Although academic researchers have questioned the notion of ‘dualism’(the division of socio-economic structures into ‘traditional’ and ‘modern’sectors), as rather too clearcut and simplistic, there may be an element of the self-fulfilling prophecy at work here.
The more powerful the belief that domestic industry is inferior and unreliable, the more likely is it actually to become so.
It is useful to distinguish between economic and political practices here.
In terms of economic logic, a traditional enterprise may be fulfilling the needs of the local consumers through efficient use of domestic inputs, while in terms of political (transnational) logic the traditional enterprise is perceived as quite inefficient because of its lack of international competitiveness.
In more dramatic terms, the downgrading of domestic industries reflects the success of the transnational capitalist class in dragging them into the global economy and thereby transforming them, even in a rather minimal sense, into transnational industries.
The-presence of expatriate managers and technicians in foreign firms in even the most industrially advanced countries, serves to intensify the distinction between foreign new and domestic old industry.
Recruitment of top management appears to be through two circuits, but with a predominantly one-way flow.
Transnational companies, particularly those with international reputations, have less difficulty in recruiting the available staff, either from indigenous firms or from other foreign companies.
Indeed, there is some evidence of a transnational staff circuit as random conversations in airports and more systematic interviews with TNC executives confirm.
The larger transnationals commonly train key staff at headquarters (usually US and European) and for some, a job in the factory of such a parent is the first step in a global career.
There is a good deal of evidence to suggest that managerial and technical talent flows from the domestic sector to the transnational companies rather than vice versa, particularly but not exclusively in the Third World (see Gershenberg, 1987, on Kenya; Okada, 1983, on Indonesia).
The local economy may derive benefits from this brain drain, even sufficient to offset the costs, if there is seen to be fair competition between the TNCs and the indigenous firms for trained managerial, technical and craft personnel.
The optimum  situation would be a policy that would force the TNCs to train young people rather than entice away those already trained and working in the domestic sector.
These young people are, of course, those from whom tomorrow's transnational capitalist class will be recruited.
The downgrading of domestic industry may be compensated for by the more progressive business environment that foreign, and particularly high technology US, European or Japanese companies promote.
Transnational corporations can give a competitivc stimulation to existing domestic companies by demonstrating the business potential of new lines or products, and they can also directly influence the creation of new indigenous firms.
In general, higher expectations of transnational firms for business services and a better-educated workforce may provoke the state into public spending that might otherwise not have taken place.
For example, some governments would probably not have spent as much on telecommunications as they have done without the stimulus of a foreign-dominated export sector that produces hard-currency earnings, and the expectation that such facilities, however expensive, would attract even more companies.
The management and workers of those domestic firms which join the TCC may well benefit from this in the long run, as well as the foreign-controlled sector.
It must be noted, however, that the managers and workers of those domestic firms that go under will not see this as an undiluted benefit.
There can also be a knock-on effect of the higher and more innovative technology that some foreign firms employ, all through society.
This generates a climate for the technological upgrading of industry as a commercial proposition, and it also ensures that hardware and software are conveniently available, at a price, for those who wish to take advantage of them in any sphere.
Contact with famous name international firms undoubtedly encourages local manufacturers, impressed by the demonstration effect of the success of prestigious foreign firms, to consider seriously the uses they could make of the new technologies.
The price that the state will pay to sustain the costs of the TNCs will depend largely on the power of the transnational capitalist class and its domestic members.
Whatever the price happens to be at a given time, and this can vary dramatically, it will be a price worth paying for some and not for others.
What accounts for the  complexity of the problem of evaluation is not only the economic and social costs involved themselves, but the interests, conflicting or in harmony, of those who pay the costs and those who reap the benefits.
It may be an over-simplification to conceptualize all the different interests in terrns of class struggle, particularly as some of the interest groups involved and some of the alliances of interests forged may defy analysis in conventional Marxist terms.
Nevertheless, there are class interests involved even though they may not always conveniently reduce to one labouring class versus one capitalist class.
The transnational capitalist class, fractions of the labour force, and other support strata that the TNCs have created, will all increasingly identify their own interests with those of the capitalist global system and, if necessary, against the interests of their ‘own’ societies as the transnational practices of the system penetrate ever deeper into the areas that most heavily impact on their daily lives.
The specific function of the agents of transnational political practices is to create and sustain the organizational forms within which this penetration takes place and to connect them organically with those domestic practices that can be incorporated and mobilized in the interests of the global capitalist system.
In order to do this the transnational capitalist class must promote, outside the First World heartlands of capitalism, a ‘comprador’ mentality throughout society.
‘Comprador’ mentality
A comprador mentality is the attitude that the best practices are invariably connected with the global capitalist system.
Comprador mentality is either a ‘cost’ or a ‘benefit’and whichever way we look at it we are bound to beg a very important question.
This is the point at issue in the ideological struggle between those who believe that TNCs will inevitably damage Third World development prospects in the long run, as against those who believe that there will be no development prospects without the TNCs.
This struggle revolves around opposing material interests of competing classes and groups in all countries.
There are those who see the destiny of the Third World as bound up with the adoption of all that is ‘modern’, often embodied  in the products and practices of the TNCs.
On the other hand, there are those who are deeply suspicious of the modernization represented by the TNCs, particularly where this is perceived as Western or US dominance in culture, industry, warfare, science and technology.
This is a field riddled with dilemmas.
Modern warfare and the modern economy, for example, require increasingly higher levels of technology and this cannot be avoided if any state wishes to participate, or if threatened, survive in the contemporary world.
A battery of concepts, some of which have migrated from social science jargon to the mass media, identify those on either side of the divide.
The academically discredited distinction between traditional and modern is now common currency, while the notions of inward-oriented and outward-oriented describe those who look for guidance and sustenance to the resources of their own groups as opposed to those who look outside, usually to the West.
Much the same idea is expressed by the distinction between local and cosmopolitan orientation.
As it is, more or less by definition, an extra First World phenomenon, the question of the comprador mentality will be resumed in the next chapter.
It is difficult to think productively about ‘modernization’ for many reasons, not least the problem of what is appropriate in the adoption of innovation.
The proper approach to development lies, no doubt, somewhere between a slavish attachment to all things foreign and an atavistic distaste for any type of change.
An illustration of how appropriate choices for the different groups and classes in the capitalist global system can and do change is provided by the analysis of counter movements to the global capitalist project.
These are movements that aim to undermine the power of the TNCs, and the transnational capitalist class, and to force people to think critically about the ways in which the system as a whole promotes the culture-ideology of consumerism.
Counter movements
Although the agents of global capitalism are firmly in control and the TNCs are clearly the dominant institutional force, there are, as we approach the millennium, two counter movements that could represent real threats to the global capitalist system.
The first, rich  country protectionism, comes from within global capitalism, but in the form of national as opposed to systemic interests.
The second, the Green movement, is a very widely based and variegated collection of individuals and groups that includes those on the fringes of the global capitalist system as well as some who are fundamentally opposed to it, mainly from the libertarian left but also from the authoritarian right.
Protectionism
Protectionism is, of course, not a new phenomenon.
Indeed, the most potent argument against it may be that we know only too well how protectionism contributed to the great depression of the 1930s.
Nevertheless, as the World Bank and other august proponents of the perpetual increase of global trade never tired of reminding us throughout the 1980s, many First World countries began to step up protectionist measures in that decade.
The free entry of goods (particularly consumer goods) from abroad has never been a feature of global trade.
Restrictive measures have been directed at Third World manufacturers whose electronic and electrical products, garments, shoes, toys, sporting and household goods were said to be unfairly flooding vulnerable First World markets.
The interesting twist to this issue is that it was Japan, clearly now a First World country, and in the opinion of many now the most dynamic economic power, that was often identified in the United States and in Europe, as the worst offender, with the four East Asian NICs not far behind.
The tendency to protectionism is increased by the belief that a substantial part of TNC manufacturing industry is ‘footloose’.
Transnational corporation production tends to be globally integrated into vertically organized production processes.
Offshore plants tend to be financially controlled from abroad, they tend to be rented rather than owned, and their managers tend to have cosmopolitan rather than local perspectives.
All of these factors weaken the ties that such businesses have with the communities in which they are located and make it less difficult for them to close down and/or relocate if and when business conditions deteriorate in one country relative to other countries.
This happens in the First World as well as in the Third World.
For example, Hood and  Young (1982) document the closure of several old established US firms in Scotland to seek cheaper production sites elsewhere.
The mobility of the TNCs, the job losses that usually follow, and the identification of ‘cheap imports’ with goods previously produced at home, increase protectionist pressures among labour and small domestic capitalists alike.
While protectionism as a transnational political force appears to have little likelihood of success in the forseeable future, the threat of it is ever present as a reminder that the orderly progress of global trade in the interests of the TNCs has to be maintained and those who transgress will be punished.
This works both ways.
First World markets are open to Third and Second World goods only as long as their markets are also open to First World goods and, increasingly, services.
Protectionism is not a serious counter movement to global capitalism because if it was successful it could do great damage to the system and, ultimately, destroy it.
All parties realize this, and so protectionism acts as a bargaining counter for the rich, and a bluff for the poor, and mainly comes to life in its use as a rhetorical device to satisfy domestic constituencies.
For example, desperate politicians tend to fall back on it to appease working class voters in the United States and the United Kingdom.
The Green movement is much more serious, actually and potentially.
The Green movement
With the sole exception of the global communist movement, the Green or environmentalist movement presents the greatest contemporary challenge to the global capitalist system.
This is paradoxically confirmed by the fact that both capitalist and socialist economists, politicians and ideologues are increasingly trying to jump on to the Green bandwaggon and to appropriate its policies for themselves.
This is not surprising, because although capitalists and socialists are usually reluctant to spell out their plans for global domination, Green politics are largely based on a straightforward conception of planet earth and what needs to de done at the global level to sustain human life on it.
The key threat that Green politics poses to the capitalist global system is in the matter of the consumption of non-renewable  resources.
While Green politics are based on the belief that the resources of the planet are finite and have to be carefully tended, global capitalist politics are based on the belief that the resources of the planet are virtually infinite, due to the scientific and technological ingenuity released by the capitalist system that will ensure unlimited replacement or substitution of resources as they are used up.
Green politics are closely connected with the emergence of a critical consumer movement.
The idea of consumerism has experienced an important dialectical inversion in recent years.
It is commonly used in two senses.
In this book I use it to denote an uncritical obsession with consumption.
It is, however, also commonly used in an opposite sense, as in the consumer movement's version of consumerism, to denote suspicion of consumer goods, a wish to know more about how they are produced and who produces them.
This version of consumerisrn can lead to a radical critique of consumption.
To minimize confusion, I shall use consumerism where I mean the first, and the consumer movement to denote the second.
Kaynak (1985, p.15) defines the consumer movement ‘as a movement seeking to increase the rights and powers of buyers in relation to sellers’ and presents a useful historical account from the first cooperative society, founded in Scotland in 1769, to the present.
He connects the rise of consumer movements in different countries with the position of the country in the world market, but from a marketing rather than a political economy point of view.
His discussion of consumer movements in the Third World, however, does confuse the two meanings of consumerism.
Food riots in North Africa, he writes, ‘are examples of what LDC consumers are concerned with — the right to consume’(p.20).
But this misses the real distinction between diametrically opposed beliefs based on entirely different conceptions of the satisfaction of human needs.
Thus, it is to the culture-ideology of consumerism, and how it is broadcast in the global capitalist system through a variety of transnational practices, that we must now turn.
Cultural-ideological transnational practices
There are many who argue that the key to hegemonic control in  any societal system lies not in the economic nor in the political sphere, but in the realm of culture and ideology.
Those for whom this idea is a novelty may be surprised to learn that it was the writings and political practice of a Marxist, and a communist militant at that, which were largely responsible for the present currency of this view among radical thinkers.
Antonio Gramsci, who spent most of his adult life in one of Mussolini's prisons, elaborated on Marx's insight that the ruling ideas of an epoch are the ideas of its ruling class, to create a theory of hegemony and a theory of classes of intellectuals whose function it is in any literate society to propagate or to challenge these leading ideas.
Gramsci's Prison Notebooks represent not only a stirring monument to the human spirit under adversity, but a significant turning-point in the history of Marxist ideas and their relevance for the twentieth century.
This is partly because in the sphere of culture and ideology the material conditions have changed to such an extent that what Gramsci was arguing about hegemonic processes in the 1930s has become more, not less, relevant today than it was then.
To put the point graphically, while Marx and his nineteenth-century comrades would have no great difficulty in recognizing the economic and the political spheres today, despite the major changes that have undoubtedly taken place in the last hundred years, in the cultural-ideological sphere the opportunities for hegemonic control on a global scale have changed out of all recognition.
In one of the first quantitative studies of what he terms the communication explosion, Cherry (1978) argues that global telecommunications are based on a ‘tripod skeleton’ of three main circuits, transatlantic/Europe, Far East/Europe, and North/South America.
Shipping, air transport, telephone and telegraph generally follow these routes.
The Pacific satellite system, just emerging when he was writing in the 1970s, turns the tripod into a quadripod.
This is, of course, not an analysis of the technical possibilities, for modern telecommunications and transportation of goods and people can go virtually anywhere by any route.
It is an analysis of the actual communications practices in the global system in terms of traffic.
Under the umbrella of the United Nations, dozens of agencies are involved in the organization of global communications.
The Rome Plan of 1963, revised in the Mexico City Plan of 1967, divided the world into thirty-four communications zones.
The fact  that Europe was split into ten zones reflects the politics of the global system rather than its technology, and suggests that ‘the world is not shrinking everywhere like a deflated balloon, but very irregularly, more like a dried apple, furrowed and distorted’(Cherry, 1978, p.135).
The 1980s witnessed an unprecedented increase in the scale and scope of the electronic media of communication, as well as genuine innovations in their nature.
Technological advances, international competition and consequent relative price reductions in producer and consumer electronics have led the US, European and Japanese TNCs, that for the most part control the electronic media, to develop global strategies for the establishment and aggrandisement of their various hegemonic practices that would have been technically impossible, and in some cases even unthinkable a few decades ago (see Schiller, 1981; McPhail, 1987).
This gives the potential for distribution of messages on a scale never before achieved.
The claim that it is a qualitatively new stage in the global history of communications is quite justified.
The fact that this is happening within and as a result of the capitalist global system suggests to me that a qualitatively new relationship between culture and ideology is being forged.
All those who argue that it is the medium not the message that characterizes this revolution are, in my view, entirely wrong.
The fact that a greater variety of messages may be broadcast on a vastly greater scale does not alter the fact that the central messages are still and more powerfully those of the capitalist global system.
McLuhan's famous ‘the medium is the message’ is true to the extent that corporations, increasingly transnational corporations, control the media to propagate their message, as McLuhan himself occasionally acknowledges.
An excellent indicator of this is the phenomenal increase in the 1980s in commercial sponsorship of what used to be considered purely cultural events, such as operas, museum exhibits and sports.
The commercialization of the Olympic Games by some of the world's largest TNCs is a paradigm case (see Tomlinson and Whannel, 1984).
The recognition that the transnational practices in the culture-ideology sphere were seriously asymmetrical had to be addressed in a way that was not necessary for economic and political TNPs.
The reason for this is the peculiar status of culture-ideology in the reproduction of global capitalism.
Here it is useful to distinguish  between private and public media.
The main difference between them is that private media are used mainly to transmit commercial data and documents, often under conditions of extreme security, while public (mass) media are used mainly to broadcast ‘entertainment’, always under conditions of the greatest visibility to the paying public.
Both forms were revolutionized in the 1980s by the development and dissemination of new information and communication technologies, such as cable and satellite television, video and the institutionalization of the capacity for total packaging of cultural products.
Bagdikian (1989) characterizes those who control this system as ‘the lords of the global village’.
They purvey their product (a relatively undifferentiated mass of news, information, ideas, entertainment and popular culture) to a rapidly expanding public, eventually the whole world.
Bagdikian argues that national boundaries are growing increasingly meaningless as the main actors (five groups at the time he was writing) strive for total control in the production, delivery, and marketing of what we can call the cultural-ideological goods of the global capitalist system.
Their goal is to create a ‘buying mood’ for the benefit of the global troika of media, advertising and consumer goods manufacturers.
‘Nothing in human experience has prepared men, women and children for the modern television techniques of fixing human attention and creating the uncritical mood required to sell goods, many of which are marginal at best to human needs’(Bagdikian, 1989, p.819).
Two random facts: by the age of 16, the average North American youth has been exposed to more than 300,000 television commercials; and the Soviet Union is now selling advertising slots on cosmonaut suits and space ships!
In order to connect and explain these facts, we need to generate a new framework, namely the culture-ideology of consumerism.
The culture-ideology of consumerism
The mass media perform many functions for global capitalism.
They speed up the circulation of material goods through advertising, which reduces the time between production and consumption.
They begin to inculcate the dominant ideology from an early age, in the words of Esteinou Madrid, ‘creating the political/cultural  demand for the survival of capitalism’(1986, p.119).
The systematic blurring of the lines between information, entertainment, and promotion of products lies at the heart of this practice.
This has not in itself created a culture and ideology of consumerism; for these have been in place for at least the last century and perhaps longer in the First World and among comprador classes elsewhere.
What it has created is a reformulation of consumerism that transforms all the public mass media and their contents into opportunities to sell ideas, values, products, in short, a consumerist worldview.
The medium is the message because the message, the culture and ideology of consumerism, has engulfed the medium.
The problem, therefore, is not Understanding Media (the title of McLuhan's great if somewhat misconceived book) but Understanding Global Capitalism, the system that produces and reproduces both the message and the media that incessantly transmit it.
The connections between global capitalism and the culture-ideology of consumerism must be laid bare.
In an attempt to do this, Featherstone, for example, develops a useful composite picture of contemporary consumer culture.
He writes:
1.
Goods are framed and displayed to entice the customer, and shopping becomes an overtly symbolic event.
2.
Images play a central part, constantly created and circulated by the mass media.
3.
Acquisition of goods leads to a ‘greater aestheticisation of reality.
(Featherstone, 1987, p.21)
The end result of these processes is a new concept of lifestyle, enhanced self-image.
This ‘glosses over the real distinctions in the capacity to consume and ignores the low paid, the unemployed, the old’(p.22), though the ubiquity of the culture-ideology of consumerism actually does include everyone (or, at least, all urban dwellers) however poor, because no one can escape its images.
And, it must be added, very few people would choose to escape its images and what they represent in terms of the good, or better, life.
This is the central dilemma of any critique of consumerism (and also of the politics of the consumer movement).
Many scholars (pre-eminently Ewen, 1978) point up the distinctive role of the United States in the campaign to make consumer culture universal.
Through Hollywood, and the globalization of the  movies, via Madison Avenue, from where Ewen's ‘captains of consciousness’ created the modern advertising industry, to the more geographically diffuse but ideologically monolithic television net’working conceptualizers, the transnational capitalist class in the United States has assumed leadership of the culture-ideology of consumerism in the interests of global capitalism in the twentieth century.
A good illustration of this is in the origin of the soap opera, one of the most highly developed media forms through which mass consumerism is projected.
It began in the 1920s when Glen Sample, an American advertising agent, had the idea of adapting a newspaper serial for the radio, a medium already dominated by commercial interests.
The programme, ‘Betty and Bob’, was sponsored by a flour manufacturer, and Sample used the same idea to promote Oxydol washing powder for Proctor and Gamble, under seige from Unilever's Rinso in the US market.
Oxydol won out, and the so-called soap opera that was used to sell it gave its name to a genre, massively reinforced by its wholesale adoption by television all over the world since the 1950s.
The universal availability of the mass media has been rapidly achieved through relatively cheap transistor radios, cassette recorders and televisions, which now totally penetrate the First World, almost totally penetrate the urban Second and Third Worlds, and are beginning to penetrate deeply into the countryside in every country.
Thus, the potential of global exposure to global communication, the dream of every merchant in history, has arrived.
The socialization process by which people learn what to want, which used to occur mainly in the home and the school, is increasingly taking place through the media of the global communications industries.
Informatics and consumerism
There is general agreement that on all key measures there has been an enormous growth not only in the availability but also in the use of the mass media in the developed world over the last few decades.
Even in many poor developing societies substantial growth has been achieved.
The motor of this growth has been the rapid spread of corporate computerization (and also personal  computers among the better off) and personal receivers, the relative prices of which have been reduced substantially over time.
This development parallels (not accidentally) the enormous growth of the TNCs themselves since the 1950s, both in scope and geographical spread.
There is now hardly a country in the world where the TNCs are not active in some form or another.
TNCs (like national businesses) are dependent on accurate and rapid information.
Logistical problems of corporations operating outside their home countries increase this dependence.
Electronic communications, and especially computer to computer links, not only give the possibility of extra-efficient operations to TNCs within the network, but also give increasing competitive advantage over those outside.
This is where size, generally, and globalization, in particular, become conditions of survival in some fields.
The systematic study of information technology (informatics) is in its infancy and although there is general agreement that its potential for human progress is enormous, there is a good deal of pessimism as to the probability that those who control it will actively seek this end over their own private interests (see Schiller, 1989; Journal of Communication, 1989).
Through advanced informatics, for example, many agencies have been analyzing, disseminating and predicting information about the likelihood of famine in Africa.
Whether all this activity actually reduces the suffering in the region is very doubtful.
Control over data processing and telecommunications is, unsurprisingly, dominated by US, Japanese and European TNCs.
While manufacturing capacity is more evenly spread, overall, the dominance of US-based TNCs is clear.
TNCs from the United States were said to control over three-quarters of the total volume of transborder data flows, including transmission, storage and processing in the early 1980s (see Mowlana, 1985, ch.5).
The contribution of the non-hegemon countries is mainly restricted to assembly and fabrication, usually on contract or as quasi-captive suppliers to a TNC.
Nevertheless, control does not entail specific effects in the economic, political and cultural-ideological spheres.
In order to demonstrate a connection and to begin to document specific effects it is first necessary to show how the structural conditions of the global system are inherent in the ways in which the communications TNCs operate.
Hamelink makes what appears to be the useful  distinction between the information-independent and the information-dependent countries.
He points to the increase in ‘global cultural synchronization’ through which information dependent countries are made more similar in commercially relevant areas to the information-independent countries from which most of the messages they receive about the world emanate.
Global use of data flows — particularly through transnational corporations — is thus likely to have an impact on the synchronization of techniques (e.g. via the standardization of equipment), symbols (e.g. through the use of the universal computer language) and social relations (e.g. through the organisation of industrial production and job patterns).
(Hamelink, 1984, p.72).
From the 1970s on there has been a considerable surge of scholarly and public interest in the private media and, latterly, in their role in the Third World.
UNESCO-sponsored research, particularly associated with the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems, led to the publication of Many Voices, One World (MacBride Commission, 1980), which set the agenda for the 1980s and provided a spur to the creation of World Communications Year (1983), continuing World Conferences on Strategies and Policies for Informatics, and other initiatives.
Three inter-connected themes informed these activities, namely the continued control of cultural industries by a small group of immensely powerful TNCs; the effects of this control on those countries too poor to have much of an independent presence in these industries; and the opportunities that the new technologies offer for the development of the Third World.
Given the disparities between the information capacities of developed and developing countries, and the technical nature of these disparities, ‘a vital question becomes, do transnational data flows increase the informational advantage and social impact of transnational corporations?’
(Hamelink, 1984, p.14).
These all look like important questions but, once again, the methodology of state-centrism serves to blur rather than clarify the issues.
The national origin of the agents of media control is not the point.
Many TNCs in and of the Third World, and even some in and of the Second World, have entirely independent systems of communication and, of course, more or less all sovereign states run their own mass media.
The issue is not whether nationals or  foreigners control the media, but whether the interests of those who do control the media, nationals or foreigners, are those of the capitalist global system.
It is the culture-ideology of consumerism, not the nationality of the lords and stewards of the global village, that is at issue.
These questions will be further analyzed through a discussion of what has been labelled cultural, and more specifically, media imperialism, in Chapter 5.
Hamelink sums up the impact of informatics in the developed countries in a manner that suggests a gloomy future for Third World countries caught in the TNC-woven web of private and public communications.
Despite its state-centrism, it is worth quoting at length as it catches some key specifics of the practices of the communications industries' project for global consumerism.
In developed countries it can be observed that the widespread utilization of informatics:
offers some new job opportunities but on balance creates more unemployment;
offers some decentralization in social decision-making, but on balance reinforces centralized administration and tends to erode democracy;
offers potentially to enhance citizen participation in local government, to inform citizens of their rights and duties, and to provide new information-services to citizens, but on balance it reinforces local dominant coalitions, makes local government more expensive to run, makes it less responsive to the general public, and tends to exclude many interests;
offers potentially more security for data processing and transmission, but on balance threatens privacy in unprecedented ways;
offers the suggestion of more social equity, but on balance adds to existing social disparities the phenomenon of information inequality.
(Hamelink, 1984, p.89)
The stirrings of a global debate on the creation of new consumption needs provides a complex set of tests for these hypotheses.
Consumption tends to be more class-specific in poor societies than in rich societies.
In poor societies not many people have much discretionary income left after they have satisfied their basic needs of food and shelter, if indeed they can satisfy these at all.
In rich societies, on the other hand, most people do have enough discretionary income left (or have easy access to credit) after they have paid for their food and shelter, though the numbers who do not  appear to be growing at an alarming rate in some rich countries (as the growth of homelessness in the United States and the United Kingdom seems to suggest).
Thus, different strata in such societies may spend their money on rather different things.
The creation of needs depends on multi-layered structures and dynamics connecting individual characteristics of the consumer with processes operating at the societal level.
The global capitalist system propagates an integrated culture and ideology of consumerism through the manipulation of existing consumption needs and the creation of new ones.
The creation of these new consumption needs by TNCs tends to be neither random nor arbitrary, but structured in terms of a hegemonic world view.
In one interesting analysis of this issue, Sauvant and Mennis (1980) argue that the TNCs act as transmission belts along which the contents of what they label the TNC ‘business culture’ are carried from the rich countries to the poor countries of the world.
This results in ‘inappropriate sociocultural patterns’ which impede independent development.
This provocative thesis, very much connected with the questions of the transnational capitalist class discussed above, and their influence over the popular masses in developing countries, lies at the centre of the debate over the economic, political and cultural-ideological TNPs in developing countries.
It is precisely the ‘business culture’ introduced and propagated by the TNCs that is considered by many to be the sine qua non for ‘modernization’(as opposed to‘dependency reversal’or radical ‘development’) in the Third World.
The struggle to create a new ‘modernist’ concept and practice of consumerism in the Third World is one of the crucial conjunctures of economic, political and cultural-ideological transnational practices.
The theory of the global system: a summary
The theory of the global system can be summarized, graphically, as follows.
The global system is made up of economic transnational practices and at the highest level of abstraction these are the building blocks of the system.
The political practices are the principles of organization of the system.
They have to work with the materials on hand, but by manipulating the design of the system they can  build variations into it.
The cultural-ideological practices are the nuts and bolts and the glue that hold the system together.
Without them, parts of the system would drift off into space.
In order to work properly the dominant forces in each of the three spheres have to monopolize the key resources for which there is great competition.
The transnational corporations strive to control global capital and material resources, the transnational capitalist classes strive to control global power, and the transnational agents and institutions of the culture-ideology of consumerism strive to control the realm of ideas.
Effective TNC control of global capital and resources is almost complete.
There are few important national resources that are entirely exempt from economic transnational practices.
Transnational capitalist classes rule directly, through national capitalist political parties or social democratic parties that cannot fundamentally threaten the global capitalist project, or they exert authority indirectly to a greater or lesser extent as the price levied on non-capitalist states as a sort of entrance fee into the global capitalist system.
In the last resort, it is the global control of capital and labour that is the decisive factor for those who do not wish to be excluded from the system.
The control of ideas in the interests of consumerism is almost total.
The ideas that are antagonistic to the global capitalist project can be reduced to one central counter-hegemonic idea, the rejection of the culture-ideology of consumerism itself.
Without consumerism, the rationale for continuous capitalist accumulation dissolves.
It is the capacity to commercialize and commodify all ideas and the material products in which they adhere, television images, advertisements, newsprint, books, tapes, films and so on, not the ideas themselves, that global capitalism strives to appropriate.
4 Transnational practices in the Third World
There is a strong tendency in some quarters to assume that all transnational practices (TNPs) in the Third World are unwelcome and malign, just as there is a strong tendency in other quarters to assume that they are all welcome and benign.
Transnational corporations, transnational capitalist classes and the culture-ideology of consumerism are all seen as evil attempts to undermine the freedom and cultural autonomy of weak and poor victims, or the only true paths to development and the only reliable vehicles for releasing the poor from their misery.
These are very significant differences.
Nevertheless, there is one point on which both interpretations tend to agree, namely the general unstoppability of the spread of TNPs in the global system, and particularly in the poorer and hence more vulnerable parts of it.
This is a very central issue for any sociology of the global system in so far as it makes the difference between a dismal chronicle of inevitability, which is absolutely not my intention, and an attempt to illuminate what is happening by a theory of what makes it happen and, by implication, what could make other things happen in other ways.
The ultimate strength of capitalist global hegemony is that it continually works, and works very hard, to persuade people that the system is natural, fair and fundamentally better than any realistic alternative.
Global capitalism is successful to the extent that it does persuade people.
Where the capitalist state has to use force, the army or the police, then this is clearly a failure of hegemony, though where people are persuaded that the use of force is legitimate, this may actually increase hegemony.
Most Third World countries are one-party states of one type or another and many are ruled through the routine exercise of physical force by the army and the police.
This is not in the long term interests of global capitalism, and TNCs through their governments have been known to put pressure on dictators for the purpose of creating or restoring pluralist political systems.
Capitalism depends on both the reality and the illusion of choice, but people are not fools and the global capitalist system offers many genuine choices.
This creates many contradictions and paradoxes.
In the previous chapter some general contradictions and paradoxes of economic, political and cultural-ideological TNPs were discussed.
In this chapter the focus will be on the economic TNPs of transnational corporations, and the political TNPs of transnational capitalist classes in the Third World.
The culture-ideology of consumerism in the Third World will be the subject of Chapter 5.
Economic TNPs in the Third World
The analysis of economic TNPs, and particularly the role of the transnational corporations, begins with a paradox.
Historically, what has come to be known as the Third World has attracted only a tiny proportion of all the foreign investment that has taken place, while the economies of many poor countries, and even some rich ones, are commonly said to be dominated by foreign capital and/or foreign firms.
All of the Fortune 500 corporations do not have the same economic impact on the United States, for example, as a few copper TNCs have had on Chile, or fruit companies on Central America or mining corporations on Southern Africa.
Up to the early years of the twentieth century, the typical pattern of foreign investment was of the portfolio type, where private capitalists individually, or through financial organizations, would invest funds in such foreign enterprises such as railways or mines or trading companies, and simply collect the dividends as they came in.
Naturally, some of these investors, particularly those who were speculating in the more unpredictable ventures, lost money, but by and large the European and American ‘coupon clippers’ as they were sometimes called, did very well out of their overseas investments.
Portfolio investment had low visibility in the sense that it was very difficult for the general population to discover who actually owned how much of the resources and enterprises in their countries.
There was often very little foreign involvement in the day-today running of the enterprises.
Nevertheless, some large firms were directly active overseas in the nineteenth century, the names and identities of which were (and in some cases still are) well known.
These included the great British trading companies in West Africa, in which are to be found the origins of Unilever, the North American fruit companies in Central America, whose activities gave rise to the expression ‘banana republic’, and the East India Company which was to provide the basis for British colonial administration in India.
This type of investment, which involves the establishment of an enterprise over which the parent company exercises decisive management control, is termed foreign direct investment (FDI), and it is this type of foreign investment with which this chapter is mainly concerned.
A serious contradiction lies at the heart of much of the critical research on TNCs in the Third World.
The rhetoric of most Third World governments and radical researchers on the damage done by FDI in general and specific TNCs in particular, seems at odds with the almost universal scramble of these same Third World governments advised by (in some cases) the same radical researchers to create policies to attract more and more FDI into their countries.
The best way to approach this contradiction is to see it as a genuine clash of radical theory and pragmatic experience.
The theory is that development for a Third World country is not possible within the orbit of capitalist imperialism, a dependency theory of the type discussed in Chapter 2; while the experience is that FDI has often led to some ‘development’, apparently for the benefit of all.
This is particularly the case where TNCs become involved in the creation of much-needed infrastructural resources.
A good example of the complexities involved is the Volta Dam project in Ghana.
The Volta Dam and linkages
Ghana is fortunate in having large accessible bauxite and hydroelectric potential, both of which have been at the centre of the  country's development planning.
When Ghana became independent in 1957 the US aluminium corporations, Kaiser and Reynolds, outbid British interests to develop the bauxite industry.
The plan was that foreign capital would build a dam on the Volta river to generate power, and that the private sector would own the smelter.
The original idea that Ghana should take a 40 per cent stake in the project vanished early on.
As the magazine West Africa put it:
By stripping the Volta scheme of all the ancillary facilities which could have stimulated a Ghanaian industrial revolution, Kaiser and Reynolds succeeded in creating the conditions for one of the most prosperous aluminium smelters in the world…at what was then the lowest power rate in the world.
(West Africa, 1980, p.523)
The companies set up the Volta Aluminium Company (VALCO) in 1959.
Girvan isolates four main aspects of this type of project:
1.
Resource accessibility.
Ghana agreed to provide cheap power, but the Ghanaians never expected the smelter to take as much as 65 per cent of the dam's power.
Many other industrial projects never got off the ground due to energy shortages, and Ghana has been forced to import power from the Ivory Coast.
2.
Bauxite supply.
VALCO got the monopoly rights over ore which they did not exploit for marketing reasons; and the company operated as an enclave industry.
3.
Payment stream.
VALCO became ‘the most spectacular beneficiary of the tax regime in Ghana devised to attract foreign investment’.
Revenues from the bauxite are used to service the debt incurred to build the dam which provides the TNCs with the cut price power to smelt the ore.
4.
Status of the Master Agreement.
The agreement was geared to the details on the prevention of nationalization and left little room for re-negotiation (cited in West Africa, 1980, p.573).
By 1974 Kaiser operated in twenty-five countries and was
a crazy shipping system which sends Ghanaian bauxite to Scotland, Guinean alumina to the US, Jamaican alumina to Ghana and Ghanaian aluminium all round the world.
Such policies only make sense to the corporate investors and stem from the perceived need to avoid integrating the industry in any but the core capitalist countries.
(West Africa, 1980, p.612)
Despite the cheap Volta power (and water supply) that permits expansion on smelting, the TNCs refused to build an alumina plant to process local bauxite.
Eventually, Ghana was forced to build one itself (Tsikata, 1986, ch.1).
Over the years, the British taxpayer has paid hundreds of millions of pounds to provide electricity below cost for British Aluminium to smelt Ghanaian bauxite in Scotland.
The Kaiser Corporation has a similar deal in New Zealand.
The real developmental loss for Ghana is that most of the power from the Volta goes to VALCO, so there is little left for local use.
In 1980, only 5 per cent of Ghana's people had access to electricity.
So while it would be difficult to argue that there were no benefits for Ghana, or for other Third World countries in similar projects, it is quite clear that the interests of the TNCs in obtaining cheap power in Ghana as part of their global industrial strategy run counter to the interests of Ghanaian development.
How, then, can a poor country maximize its benefits from such projects?
Vernon's theory of the product cycle and its ‘obsolescing bargain' is an attempt to answer this question.
Vernon (1971) argues that over a period of time, and particularly as a new technology matures, host countries are more able to drive harder bargains with the TNCs that wish to invest in them.
This may be the case in some industries, or for some products but as, for example, both Moran's study of the Chilean copper industry (1974) and Girvan's of the Caribbean bauxite industry (1976) demonstrate in rather different ways, the control that globally integrated corporations can exert on distribution and marketing may nullify what appears on the ground to be a better bargain for the host.
The concrete form in which the host may benefit is, as noted in the previous chapter, the creation of linkages.
Both backward linkages, when a TNC buys local materials and goods and adds value to them, and forward linkages, when domestic companies buy intermediate goods that the TNCs produce and add value to them, can have substantial financial, employment and technical effects.
Lim and Pang (1982) in a study of three export-oriented electronics TNCs in Singapore show that productive local linkages are possible, but both the firms and the location are atypical.
Hill (1982), in a study on the Philippines, illustrates a more typical pattern, where local linkages are created by assemblers who establish joint ventures with licensees or foreign firms.
However, in  these cases, what is labelled ‘local sourcing’ often conceals import content through assembly kits for various products.
Lall's study of the Indian truck industry (1985, ch.5) is more encouraging, but India until quite recently has treated the TNCs relatively strictly (Stoever, 1989).
My own studies of export oriented zones in China (Sklair, forthcoming), Egypt (1988c), Mexico (1989), and Ireland (1988b), suggest that backward and forward linkages tend to be very meagre, and these cases may be rather more typical of the Third World as a whole than the relatively highly developed enclave, Singapore.
The developmental effects of TNC investment must be judged on a case by case basis and cannot be judged in isolation from the development goals of the countries concerned.
The six criteria of positive development that I use in my own research (linkages, retained foreign currency earnings, genuine technology transfer, upgrading of personnel, conditions of work and equitable distribution) are one way to tackle this problem.
It must be immediately obvious that such arguments will be somewhat confused unless a definition of development can be agreed.
This realization has led to a great deal of debate and, although it cannot be said that a general consensus has been reached on how best to define development, a good deal of light has been shed on the processes involved in different types of development.
For my part, it seems clear that a viable distinction can be made between economic growth (measured on such criteria as GNP per capita, proportion of the labour force engaged in industry, and the proportion of manufactured goods in total exports) and development, which has somewhat wider social and political implications.
The crucial difference between economic growth and development, as I am using the term here, is that development may include everything that is already included in economic growth plus criteria of distribution of the social product and democratic politics.
It is not possible to be much more precise than this without becoming hopelessly entangled in a series of impossible dilemmas.
This approximate definition, not unlike others in hotly contested areas of inquiry, is also a guide to further research.
The world system as a system of nation-states and state-centrism as an explanatory framework, obviously do have a place in the analysis of these problems, as was illustrated in Chapter 1.
The theory being propounded here sees the global system as primarily  a capitalist global system and the main forces in it as the transnational corporations, transnational capitalist classes and the culture-ideology of consumerism.
In order to lay bare the workings of the global system we must focus on the TNC.
As the analysis of the Volta Dam project suggests, economic transnational practices in the Third World are largely what the TNCs are doing in the economic, the political and the cultural-ideological spheres.
Transnational corporations in the Third World
Transnational corporations, like all businesses, are not charitable organizations but organizations devoted to the pursuit of profit.
It is irrelevant to critieize TNCs operating in the Third World because they are out to make profits.
However, the means by whieh TNCs make profits in the Third World are a legitimate area of interest.
Radical critics argue that TNCs in the Third World make their profits by exploiting cheap labour to produce goods that people often do not really need.
The logic of transnational production and marketing is at least partly based on standardization.
Naturally, there are many TNCs that run specific production lines to serve specific markets (see Hill and Still, 1984a, b), but it is usually the case that a TNC will prefer to enter a new market with a standard product rather than incur the costs of retooling, redesign and perhaps restructuring of distribution.
Therefore, it follows logically that it will normally be in the interests of the TNCs to try to create the market for their standard products in new locations irrespective of the perceived social needs of the indigenous populations, as Levitt (1983) persuasively argues.
TNC production and trade create new consumption needs in developing countries.
Armstrong and MeGee (1985), for example, show how cities in Asia and Latin America play a crucial role in the dissemination of ‘Western’ cultural values, particularly the philosophy of consumerism, and the central functions of the TNCs in this.
These processes are not universally welcomed.
A typical criticism is:
The presence of transnational corporations in the manufacturing sectors of developing countries facilitates the transmission of their  ‘business culture,’ their management concepts and operational techniques, to Third World partners and to local entrepreneurs…
Their sales campaigns have resulted, for example, in increasing consumption of white bread, confections and soft drinks among the poorest people in the world by convincing people that status, convenience, and sweet taste are more important than nutrition.
(Jefkins and Ugboajah, 1986, pp.170–1)
This charge is illustrated with many telling examples from advertisements on Nigerian radio and television.
Hamelink (1988, pp.23), among others, extends the geographical scope.
A study of laundry cleaning products (detergents and soaps) in Barbados (James, 1983), shows in detail how TNCs go about transforming consumption needs and capturing Third World markets.
In the early 1970s the local firm that had been producing soap since 1943 was closed down by the action of its major shareholder, who also owned an import agency.
For the previous few years the soap factory had been losing business because of imports of synthetic detergents, mainly through Lever Bros, the local branch of Unilever.
The importer had decided to clear the way for a more profitable relationship with Lever Bros by eliminating the local laundry soap competition entirely.
The consequence of this was that by the end of the decade the Unilever detergent and one other brand had captured 90 per cent of the market in Barbados.
Both brands had heavy advertising expenditure and James demonstrates empirically that consumers ranked the brands according to the claims of the advertisers (soil and stain removal etc.), despite the fact that independent tests showed very little actual difference between the brands.
The Unilever product cost twice as much per ounce in Barbados as it did in England, and by driving out cheaper local alternatives the end result for the lower income consumer in Barbados was a product that was too expensive, too well-packaged and often surplus to requirements.
It is difficult to disagree with James when he argues:
it is the existence of Lever Bros which itself sets a limit to the extent of the trade-offs by ensuring the dominance of the type of products in which multinational companies in general, and Lever Bros in particular , have a comparative advantage, namely, brand differentiated goods which are intensively promoted.
That is to say, the barriers to entry to the industry are such as to ensure the  dominance of the highly priced and expensively packaged products.
Those involved in packaging and distributing the unbranded varieties wrapped in plastic are small-scale operators lacking both the necessary resources and marketing skills to capture a larger share of the detergent market.
One of them expressed the fear that Lever's would cut off his sources of supply if his share of the market expanded sizeably.
As far as competing local production is concerned, a number of industrialists interviewed said that they had considered the possibility but stressed the superior marketing skills of Lever Bros, diseconomies of small scale production and consumer preference for imported goods as the major disincentives.
(James, 1983, p.148)
It is most unlikely that this is a special case, either in terms of product (detergents are a typical branded and highly competitive consumer product) or location (Barbados has no exceptional rules to encourage or discourage TNC products or advertising).
There is no straightforward way to deal with the question of appropriate products.
The TNCs will naturally and in many cases justifiably argue that what their critics consider to be the creation of new needs in developing countries in order to boost profits is, in fact, a response to changing consumer needs that arise in societies that are in the process of urbanization and industrialization.
I shall discuss in detail the underlying issue of the culture-ideology of consumerism and the role of the TNCs in it, in the next chapter.
However we may criticize the practices of the TNCs in the Third World, for most people whatever they do will be secondary to the major benefit they bring, namely the creation of employment.
TNC employment
As the discussion in the previous chapter indicated, the central sociological effect of economic transnational practices revolves around the impact of the TNCs on employment.
There are some TNCs that have been operating in Latin America, Africa and Asia for decades and have won enviable reputations as model employers.
At the other extreme there are others, for example in export processing zones, in which minimum wages are suspended, unions are forbidden and benefits, job security and conditions of work are very poor by any standards.
Vaitsos some years ago made the important point that:
In the same product lines where foreign investors generally specialize, national firms do not necessarily behave differently and in some cases they might promote the direct use of less labor.
In such cases the issue is not the foreignness of the ownership of the firm but the foreignness of the product and its technology to the conditions characterizing the producing country.
(Vaitsos, 1974, p.345)
For most TNCs, plant size and branch of industry are more important determinants of their employment practices than the bare fact of foreign ownership.
The biggest, the Fortune 500 corporations, often take the question of corporate identity very seriously and, although the wages they offer are not necessarily any better than those of other companies, their facilities and non-wage benefits do tend to be superior.
Such firms strive, though not always successfully, to inculcate feelings of membership of a global family among their mainly female employees through company magazines, competitions related to work and non-work activities, and widespread use of company logos on small gifts and prizes (see Fuentes and Ehrenreich, 1984).
TNCs have been responsible for the introduction of new industries and thus new categories of manufacturing (and also some non-manufacturing) employment into many developing countries over recent decades (see Grunwald and Flamm, 1985).
There are several industries in which TNC Third World employment is significant.
In consumer electronics, toys, apparel, automobile parts and sports goods, a major part of global production is carried out in the assembly plants of TNCs.
This has repercussions all through the labour force.
Operatives who have never previously held factory jobs need to be trained, expatriates are replaced with indigenous managerial and technical personnel, and indigenous capacity springs up in unfamiliar and/or high technology industries.
Almost all of what was said about this in Chapter 3 is relevant wherever TNCs create jobs, but there are some additional factors to be considered where this occurs in the Third World.
We may distinguish the following cases:
1.
The introduction by TNCs of industries where there were previously none at all.
Export processing zones (EPZ) are often established in industrially virgin territory, for example, the Special Economic Zone at Shenzhen in China, some of the  maquila towns along Mexico's border with the United States and the Bataan EPZ in the Philippines.
2.
The introduction by TNCs of new types of production into developing countries that are already industrializing in a substantial way.
The technological upgrading of manufacturing and services in many of the Newly Industrializing Countries for which the TNCs are responsible is one example.
3.
The direct or indirect intervention of TNCs in the structure of Third World industries through the processes of acquisition of indigenous companies, predatory pricing and restrictive practices to destroy local competition and enticements designed to attract key personnel from domestic to TNC employment.
4.
There may also be differences between TNC employment in wholly-owned subsidiaries and in joint ventures, licensing agreements and other forms of foreign investment.
While TNC investment in the developing countries levelled off somewhat in the 1980s (UNCTC, 1988), the growth of export-oriented employment, mainly due to increased TNC activity in export processing (often referred to as ‘production sharing’ in the business press) continued to be rapid.
In many of the lower-wage countries the growth of this type of employment has been the only real employment growth.
This comment in a recent ILO/UNCTC study of EPZs in the Caribbean is very typical: ‘In spite of the small number of jobs generated so far, the rate at which EPZs create employment is, however, so high that they rank as the most dynamic agents for job creation compared with other sources of national employment’(Long, 1986, p.60).
The point to note here is that it is the lower-wage countries for which this is the case and the crucial impact of the TNCs has been to create intense pressure to keep down labour costs in order to attract foreign investment.
It is, therefore, not surprising to discover that in some, though not all, export oriented zones (EOZs) the rights of workers to organize is curtailed, either formally or in practice, and that trade unions are either suppressed or manipulated through government-TNC collaboration (see Edgren, 1982).
There is a good deal of controversy over this issue.
Frobel and his colleagues, who developed the idea of the new international division of labour (1980), used the export processing zones and the ‘world market factories’ in them, to illustrate their thesis that the  NIDL was basically an extremely exploitative system.
The main characteristics of this system they identified as disposable cheap labour, minimal skill transmission due to the fragmentation of work and maximum locational flexibility (footloose factories).
In similar vein, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, the non-communist bloc transnational labour movement, issued a pessimistic report on export processing zones in 1983, focusing on the ‘suppression of trade union rights’.
ICFTU listed the problems of EPZs as a disappointing level of job creation, an extremely unbalanced structure of employment, low wages and poor working conditions, minimal job security, long hours and high intensity of production, minimal social services, poor living conditions, health and safety risks, special labour legislation and suppression of unions, and cases of non-ratification of ILO Conventions (ICFTU, 1983).
Similarly, among researchers (with the panial exception of some free-market economists), it is rare to find a good word about EPZs.
This is particularly true of feminist research on the TNCs.
The sexual division of labour
The spread of the transnational corporations has brought significant changes to the sexual division of labour in the Third World.
It is well known, for example, that in many export oriented zones around the world most of the employees are women, often in the 16 to 24 years old, unmarried group.
From the maquilas along the Mexico-US border to the electronics and garment factories of South East Asia, reports of 75 per cent of jobs being taken by young females in the foreign-owned sector are common.
The entrance of women into the manufacturing workforce, particularly into its most modern sectors, is clearly having important consequences in many Third World countries (see Tiano, 1988).
This state of affairs produces a dilemma.
In most countries women are glad to have jobs in factories and to earn cash, however tedious the work and however low their earnings are relative to male wages (but not to previous or alternative female pay).
The geographical distribution of foreign direct investment (FDI) in many developing countries has meant job openings for women not only in the cities but also in small country towns and rural areas.
Foreign direct  investment in some countries of the Third World has resulted in a predominantly male state sector industrial labour force being augmented by many more women in private, especially foreignowned, industry.
The entry of the TNCs, therefore, has had effects on the sexual division of labour as well as on the division of labour in general(see Brydon and Chant, 1989, ch.7).
The impact of modern industry TNCs on patriarchal social relations in the developing countries has stimulated a great deal of interesting research in the 1980s (see, for example, Lim, 1985; Nash and Fernandez-Kelly, 1983; Garnsey and Paukert, 1987).
There are three analytically separate (but empirically intertwined) dimensions to be considered.
These are as follows:
1.
The sex composition of the TNC shopfloor labour force in the developing countries.
2.
The opportunities for women to be upwardly mobile within TNCs compared with domestically-owned industries.
3.
The impact of both of these on the position of women outside the sphere of employment in Third World countries.
1.
The sex composition of the TNC shopfloor labour force, particularly in EOZs, has to be seen in the context of a substantial body of evidence to suggest that, in general, urban employers in the Third World tend to prefer men over women (Anker and Hein, 1986).
Garnsey and Paukert (1987, pp.12–24) suggest that there are relatively more women working in industry in Asia than in Africa and Latin America.
However, the TNC-dominated export industries tend to employ more women than men.The reasons for this have stimulated a great deal of argument and it is not always possible to generalize cross-culturally.
For example, in Mauritius women have a legislated lower minimum wage than men (Hein, in Anker and Hein, 1986, ch.7), whereas in Mexico there is no legal difference, though men do tend to monopolize the higher-paying jobs (Sklair, 1989, ch.8).
So while differential wage rates might explain the preponderance of women in the Mauritius EPZ, they do not explain it in the Mexican maquilas (in-bond factories).
However, as is widely attested, irrespective of minimum wages, women do tend to earn less than men in the First as well as the Third World.
A more convincing explanation is that the industries that are most common in the EPZs, apparel and electronics assembly, are  industries that employ many more women than men wherever they are (see Nash and Fernandez-Kelly, 1983, Part IV; Mitter, 1986).
Why do these industries employ mostly women?
The answer to this question is usually in terms of the boring, monotonous and repetitive nature of the work and the widespread belief that women make a more docile, patient (long-suffering?) labour force, less likely to join unions and/or organize to improve their conditions.
Despite some evidence to the contrary of Third World women in EOZs organizing fierce resistance to exploitation, of a sexual as well as a general nature, the overwhelming weight of evidence SuppOns the view that most women workers in EOZs, while not necessarily enthralled by their jobs, are glad to have them and much prefer them to the alternatives on offer.
This issue will be resumed in (3) below.
2.
While TNCs are not universally renowned for their commitment to feminist principles, there is a sense in which the generally more egalitarian employment practices of the United States and Europe spill over into developing countries through TNC direct investment.
The increasing though still very minimal panicipation of women in managerial, technical and higher professional occupations within the corporation has already attracted a good deal of attention, but there is little research specifically on the phenomenon of the female salariat in TNCs in the Third World (see Garnsey and Paukert, 1987, pp.57–67).
My own research in Mexico suggests that female managers tend to be found in those depanments that are concerned with interpersonal relations within the plant (personnel, public relations, training) and that women who start off in these areas and succeed are occasionally promoted to higher levels of management.
There is also a route through from secretarial and personal assistant positions to higher levels.
Cultural attributes (English language skills, style of life, adoption of US or European rather than local ‘attitudes and values’) appear to be just as important as more formal job skills in the promotion of women as well as men in the TNCs in developing countries.
In the absence of systematic research on these questions one can only speculate on the likely consequences of changes in employment practices.
There is little evidence that a woman's chance of advancement is any worse in the TNCs than in domestic industry.
More research in this area is needed.
It is difficult to know whether the increasing participation of Third World women  in managerial, technical and professional employment in TNCs in the Third World is simply pan of the ‘indigenization’ process of replacing expatriate with local personnel, or whether it is a qualitatively different phenomenon in its own right.
3.
One entirely unresolved issue revolves around the question of the balance of costs and benefits for women due to the entry of the TNCs in the Third World.
Some have argued that the TNCs have disrupted traditional family life where they have hired more women than men, for example along Mexico's northern border (see Fernandez-Kelly, in Nash and Fernandez-Kelly, 1983).
As Susan Tiano has shown, this view might imply some contradictory sexist assumptions (in Ruiz and Tiano, 1987, ch.4).
Work on TNC investment in Asia has similarly brought to the surface some of the problems and contradictions of the analysis of patriarchal societies from a progressive feminist perspective.
There is clearly a connection between the preference of TNCs to hire women over men in EPZs in order to procure a more docile labour force (regularly cloaked in the rationale that ‘nimble-fingered girls’ are more suited for assembly work), and the cruder forms of patriarchy in some Third World countries.
However, as Lim and Foo (1987) argue, it is difficult to generalize on the impact of TNC employment on different groups of women even within the same society.
Their research on Malaysian and Singaporean women export-industry workers (a category that mostly includes TNC workers) shows that ethnicity and the availability of alternative employment can be key factors in the social and moral evaluation of women workers, and that there are substantial variations in the conceptions of factory work for women (whether in TNCs or not) across different communities.
This does not necessarily disprove the contention that TNCs exploit women workers in particular in the Third World, though it does modify the thesis to the extent that in some developing countries TNCs do provide some good jobs for women that help them to fulfil relatively freely chosen cultural needs.
The point, however, is not whether exploitation of women or men occurs in TNC factories, for they are capitalist institutions predicated on the exploitation of all the factors of production.
The point is, to what extent is the abuse of women and men as workers over and above capitalist exploitation in a particular society more characteristic inside than outside of TNCs?
Are they guilty of  more abuse than domestic companies?
The International Labour Organization (ILO), the Asian Regional Team for Employment Promotion (ARTEP) and others have conducted worthwhile research on these issues.
The ILO's ‘Multinational Enterprises Project’ has produced a series of reports on the employment effects of the TNCs, mostly in Third World countries and, although some abuses are documented, the general conclusions of Frobel et al.
Fernandez-Kelly, ICFTU, and other leftist-populist critics are not entirely supported.
For example, in an ARTEP study of export zones in Sri Lanka, South Korea, the Philippines, Malaysia and India, Maex (1983) demonstrates that poor wages and conditions are explained better by the characteristics of the workforce in zone industries (mainly young women), than by their location or the ownership of the plants.
Young women are not poorly paid because they work for TNCs in export zones, they are poorly paid wherever they work, but TNCs may well employ young women in the zones because they are cheaper to employ than older men in some countries.
Dror points out that: ‘With few exceptions, the incentive package does not include easily identifiable features pertaining directly to labour, such as suspension of labour laws, prohibition of trade union activity or lower (minimum) wage’(1984, p.706).
His four case studies, of Mauritius, Pakistan, Philippines and Sri Lanka, however, reveal a variety of repressive labour practices.
In Pakistan: ‘The wholesale exemption of EPZ enterprises from the provisions of so many labour laws leaves many issues to the mercy of the individual contract of employment’(p.709), while in the Philippines: ‘The Bataan administrator said that some EPZ employees were paying 75 per cent of the minimum wage for six months, then dismissing the workers and hiring others at the 75 per cent rate’(p.711).
Similar practices can be found elsewhere, for example in the Mexican maquila industry and in China's Special Economic Zones.
The trade unions have been particularly strong in the Bataan EPZ, but this is unusual in export zones (see Mitter, 1986, pp.74–9).
It is not surprising that the typical EPZ worker does not join a union because most unions are male-dominated and tend to be completely unresponsive to the needs of women workers.
The absence of strong unions has been connected with the alleged propensity of TNCs to hop from one cheap labour zone to another  (Frobel et al., 1980), though Dror finds little evidence of ‘footloose’ industries.
Despite some notorious examples of TNCs abandoning their Third World (and sometimes First World) workers without legal compensation, there is no evidence to suggest that TNC plants inside or outside of zones are statistically any more likely to close down than domestic companies.
To add to the complexity, Maex finds that wages in Asian EPZs tend to be somewhat lower than national averages (Maex, 1983, p.53), while Dror suggests that ‘in most EPZs remuneration is often somewhat higher than in comparable occupations in the same country’(1984, p.715).
My own research in Mexico (Sklair, 1989, ch.7–9) similarly shows the impact of gender and ownership on wages to be very complex.
We are, therefore, forced to conclude that it is impossible to generalize about TNC employment practices in export zones per se, though we can generalize about the effects of TNC employment practices on particular industries and particular workforces.
To recall Vaitsos' point, it is not the foreignness of the firm that makes the difference but the foreignness of the product and its technology, what can be called its transnationality within the global capitalist system.
Transnational pressures on TNCs
Many TNCs embark on offshore production to escape from their domestic unions, particularly in the United States.
This is another area of considerable controversy.
While some argue that the anti-labour nature of many of the governments in such low-wage countries makes the task of the TNCs even easier, others argue that the TNCs tend to bring a more progressive atmosphere into labour relations than had previously been the case in such countries.
It must be said, however, that it is not only the obviously authoritarian Third World regimes, desperate for FDI, that have sometimes been prepared to sacrifice the interests of their workers in order to insure the jobs created by the TNCs.
And this, of course, has always been the central dilemma and one that the critics of TNC practices in the Third World cannot escape.
The problematic global economic situation of the 1980s sharpened the horns of this dilemma for both TNCs and Third World governments and workers.
While there is no convincing  evidence that the TNCs can bring salvation to the Third World, in many poor countries the TNCs are seen as responsible for the only bright spots in the economy and society.
This is why the strategy of ‘export led industrialization fuelled by foreign investment and technology’(ELIFFIT) has been so powerful.
The most visible aspect of this is the jobs that the TNCs have created.
Irrespective of the fact that many, perhaps most of these jobs are low paid, dirty (even the gleaming electronics industry is on the defensive against charges of health and safety problems for its workforce) and monotonous, they are very widely sought after and they carry high prestige.
It is not only the numbers of TNC jobs but their specific character in Third World contexts that imbues them with prestige.
At the lowest level in the TNC hierarchy, the operatives, there is clearly a reputational element at work, in so far as working for a company that has an international name appears to mean something positive for most people.
Further, the huge resources of the larger TNCs always promise skill enhancement and local promotion.
The evidence on this question is sketchy (Enderwick, 1985).
Transnational corporations are sensitive to home country criticisms that they are exporting jobs and, the less menial the jobs, the more vulnerable the TNCs.
Transnational corporations label this process ‘production sharing’.
The argument is that the First World will contribute the high-value technology and components for the production process, while the Third World will contribute the low-value low skill labour.
Any upgrading of skills in Third World TNC production is liable to be challenged by home-country constituencies, at the same time as it is welcomed by those in the host country.
This is a zero-sum game (particularly in the United States) in that each occurrence of technical upgrading of a TNC plant in a developing country is at the same time proudly announced for host-country consumption by the TNC, and seized upon in the home country as evidence of job destruction.
Technological developments, in particular computer aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM), introduce further complexities.
An example of this process is in the fashion garment industry.
Here, information on current consumer preferences can be transmitted by computer almost instantaneously from the marketplace to the factory, wherever it might be, and even design modifications or completely new designs can be electronically fed into CAD/  CAM equipment in the factory for instant production.
This has led to some repatriation of the apparel industry from the Third World back to the First.
For the small producer, subcontracting to a TNC, the system is prohibitively expensive and the expertise required to run it is considerable, so it tends to be controlled by TNCs, or by the gargantuan retailers that they supply.
This means that garment workers in the Third World who benefited from the search for cheap labour by the TNCs in the past, can no longer assume that their jobs will always be safe from relocation back to the First World (Elson, in Elson and Pearson, 1989).
However, it is too soon to say with any degree of certainty to what extent computerization spells the end of TNC jobs in the Third, or in the First World (Caulkin, 1989).
The case of the Mexican maquila industry illustrates this well.
The maquila (in-bond) industry was introduced along Mexico's northern border in the mid-1960s and was extended to the rest of the country in 1972.
The Mexican government set up the maquila programme to create jobs, earn dollars and introduce technology.
For the US firms, including many Fortune 500 corporations, the main point was that labour was much cheaper in Mexico.
From very small beginnings, by 1990 about 1,500 plants employed almost half a million workers producing a great variety of goods.
The maquilas have been accused of causing job losses in the United States due to companies moving to Mexico.
United States proponents of the maquilas argue that these jobs are bound to go anyway and that the advantage of the maquila industry on the border is that it has always used a high proportion of US materials, components and services.
They have claimed that far from destroying jobs the maquilas may actually create new jobs in the United States.
It may be difficult to persuade a television assembly worker whose plant in the United States has closed and relocated to Mexico that the maquila industry creates jobs in the United States, but it is not so difficult to persuade a worker who makes television components in a US factory that supplies an assembly plant in Mexico, that the maquila industry protects US jobs.
Maquila proponents have also had to persuade successive Mexican governments that the maquilas are good for Mexico.
Many US-owned maquilas claim to be in the market for locally produced materials and components, backward linkages.
As I explained in the previous chapter, there is no export zone anywhere that has a  good record on linkages, but few have a worse record than the maquila industry.
The inability of Mexico to produce (or to sell) these materials and components is a fact that Mexican and US maquila facilitators tend to obscure when presenting their case in Mexico!
Clearly, both sides cannot win.
Either the maquilas continue to buy from the United States and protect the jobs of US suppliers, or the maquilas buy in Mexico, and these jobs are lost.
Another supposed benefit for Mexico is the replacement of US managers, technicians and highly trained personnel in the maquilas by Mexicans.
This has happened to an appreciable extent.
United States-owned maquilas have, of course, great incentives to employ Mexican managers and technicians.
They speak Spanish, they are familiar with local conditions and they are much cheaper than equivalent US personnel.
Technology transfer has also taken place to some extent and there are a few highly advanced maquilas.
But, again, any gain for Mexico will usually mean a loss for the United States.
Every case has its special characteristics.
For Mexico, the shared border with the United States and the dramatic devaluations of the peso explain the rapid growth in the 1980s, but other features, for example, the changing positions of indigenous managers and technicians, are quite typical of the spread of economic transnational practices in employment and other areas.
Gradually, TNCs appear to have seen the benefits of (or in some countries accepted the inevitability of) employing host-country managers and technicians to run their plants.
It is likely that the chief executive of a TNC plant in a Third World country will still be from the home country, but it is now quite common to see host-country nationals occupying salaried positions at all levels.
Studies show that up to 40 per cent of expatriate US executives fail on foreign assignments, and have to be sent home, and that expatriate managers are increasingly considered by the TNCs to be a source of avoidable trouble and expense (Harvey, 1985).
The rise of the international business schools over the last decades and the substantial increase in the numbers of Third World students in the universities and technical institutes of the First World have provided an ever-increasing pool of potential local employees for the TNCs, and recruitment is brisk.
The business schools also provide recruits for domestic industry, and in many Third World countries the government gives young graduates from such institutions posts  with high degrees of responsibility in national development agencies where they can make substantial contributions to the welfare of their nations.
Training and technology
The role of the TNCs in training is quite controversial.
Not everyone accepts the ‘received knowledge’ that TNCs are good at training managers, and that these managers spread their know-how throughout Third World host societies.
For example, in the case of Kenya, Gershenberg (1987) found that publically-owned firms, and to a lesser extent TNCs in equity joint ventures with the Kenyan government, are more likely to foster local management training and dissemination of know-how than private firms.
Although there is an important ethnic factor in this research, namely the predominance of Asian over African managers in the sample, the finding is still significant.
Another study, on Indonesia, has suggested that the TNCs are more liable to attract managers from local firms than to do their own training (Okada, 1983).
Much more research is needed on the differences between TNC, joint venture and domestic firms, in the private and public domains, in this context, particularly as it is likely that more Third World governments will insist on joint venture and similar agreements as a condition for the continued presence of the TNCs.
From the point of view of the TNC, the main point of managerial and technical recruitment is often posed in terms of the need to transfer technology to the host society.
There is a large literature on technology transfer, though not much of it is from the perspective of the developing countries.
There are, however, a few exceptions.
Adikibi (1983) analyzes how the TNCs that controlled the modern tyre sector in Nigeria produced to global standards and did so with a good complement of indigenous managers and technicians.
There was no doubt that these people could produce tyres, but when the TNCs withdrew from Nigeria during the Biafran war, production ceased in the factories because of the ways in which the TNCs had organized the division of labour on the shop floor.
The indigenous personnel, while they were fully trained in the specific features of their own parts of the process, were excluded from positions that gave access to the whole of the production process.
Thus, the TNCs protected their monopoly in technique while appearing to transfer the technology to local people.
This is neither uncommon (see, for example, Sano, 1983) nor surprising (Stewart, 1978, ch.5), in light of the technological dependence of most Third World industries, and the analogous technological dominance of the TNCs.
For many TNCs, protection of technology is a matter of corporate life and death.
Exposure to hostile action by host governments might be substantially increased if the host governments believed that their nationals could run the plants.
Therefore, many TNCs might feel that there were risks inherent in training local technicians and managers too well.
Such considerations are relevant for the ways in which TNCs set out to create ‘comprador bourgeoisies’(and ‘comprador proletariats’ in some cases) as specific elements in the transnational capitalist class in their Third World operations.
Nevertheless, TNCs do introduce much useable technology into the Third World, and while it may not lead to the conquest of global markets it may still have a very positive effect on industry and employment in particular countries.
The ILO ‘Multinational Enterprises’ programme, noted above in connection with export processing zones, also sponsored a series of studies on the employment generation effects of technology choice by TNCs in the Third World.
Studies in Singapore, Nigeria, Brazil, India and Kenya uncovered a very wide range of technologies in use and if indirect employment is taken into account, a considerable job creation effect is visible.
Though technological change does tend to lead to more capital intensive than labour intensive development, there can be substantial employment created indirectly through backward and forward linkages.
An example from the Kenya study is where employees left a TNC car assembly plant to set up their own roadside workshops (ILO, 1984, ch.III).
In the case of joint ventures (and similar arrangements) there are different issues at stake.
Here, the transfer of technology is often the main point of the exercise.
In a study of thirty-three European chemical and pharmaceutical joint ventures in Indonesia, Thailand, Philippines, Singapore and Malaysia, Lasserre (1982) discovered that home-country technicians were not trained to train in specific socio-cultural settings.
Training, in any case, was  very limited, local staff visits to home-country plants were not very involving, and on-the-job training tended to consist of little more than watching expatriates at work.
Thus, ‘although on paper there is a training effort, the results are far from satisfactory’(Lasserre, 1982, p.57).
This is not very surprising when we consider that most joint ventures appear not to be entirely voluntary.
One study, based on sixty-six Third World firms (and the evidence from other studies), found three main reasons for setting up joint ventures: host-government pressure, the need for the partner's skills and the need for other attributes or assets.
In addition, the creation of joint ventures was often due to non-tariff barriers threatening the market position of the TNC (see Beamish, 1985).
The difference between such joint ventures and indigenization (forcing domestic ownership on a foreign company) may be narrow.
Where developing countries restrict the numbers of expatriates that are permitted to remain in TNC employment in the host country or the level of ownership that the TNC retains, the power of the TNC appears to be undermined.
But there is little evidence to suggest that where a TNC has actually survived indigenization, its effective control has been very much affected.
The TNCs are extraordinarily adept at creating and managing the transnational managerial and corporate bourgeoisies.
Indigenization can in some cases be seen as a force strengthening the TNC by disarming its opponents, as studies of Indonesia (Okada, 1983) and of Nigeria suggest.
I shall look at the case of Nigeria in more detail below, in the section on the transnational capitalist class.
Transnational corporations and Third World food
In many Third World countries food industries constitute the bulk of the industrial sector.
Food products account for about 30 per cent of Third World manufacturing output and more of employment (Fath, 1985).
This is not surprising, for one would suppose that every country has to satisfy the basic needs of its people for food as a first priority.
As many developing countries are slowly but surely moving from economies based predominantly on agriculture into manufacturing and service industries, and as Third World populations are moving in great numbers from rural to  urban areas, there are concomitant changes in the structures of food provision in these countries (Abbott, 1987).
Briefly put, all these changes in employment and residence mean that fewer and fewer people in the developing countries are able or willing to procure their own food directly from the land and so they are becoming more and more dependent on bought and processed food and drink.
This has, of course, been the case in the advanced industrial societies for a very long time, but with the difference that the food and beverage industry today is concentrated in the hands of a relatively small number of TNCs (see Clairrnonte and Cavanagh, 1988).
This has introduced a qualitatively new circumstance that was not operating when today's First World countries were making their transitions to industrialization and urbanization (see Leopold, 1985).
Women and food production
It is impossible to analyze food production in the Third World in isolation from the relationship between the sexual division of labour and the sources of economic power.
In land-scarce societies, like many Latin American countries, men will tend to monopolize the land, both through male peasant appropriation of family plots and the big landlord system of production.
In sub-Saharan Africa, where land hunger is more rare, women tend to be left alone to cultivate and market their produce.
However, where agriculture starts to become mechanized, usually under the auspices of the colonial powers and/or foreign investors, men begin to take more interest and to appropriate the economic gains for themselves (see Boserup, 1970; Brydon and Chant, 1989, ch.3).
Patrilocal residence, where women join the households of their husbands rather than vice versa, and the continued strength of the system of domestic production, where families consume most of what they produce rather than buy and sell in the market, have always been seen as obstacles to capitalist development in the Third World and as strong reinforcements for the maintenance of feudal-patriarchal relations.
Ever since the earliest days of colonialism, however, capitalism has developed long-standing mechanisms to integrate such recalcitrant social formations into the global system of production and distribution.
Third World rural  economies were brought into the global system by making it more difficult for their populations to live outside the market, thus forcing them to produce crops that could be sold, as opposed to producing crops that they themselves consumed.
The global commodity system was largely based on persuading the peoples of the non-industrial countries to produce the food and industrial raw materials that were necessary for the continuous growth of capitalism and industrialization in the First World.
In order to achieve this the colonial authorities had to engineer a switch from subsistence production of basic food crops to the production of cash crops for the international market and to replace what is often termed the ‘natural’ economy of non-industrial societies with the ‘money’economy of industrial societies.
This has undoubtedly led to the enrichment of specific rural and urban groups in the Third World, those who have successfully adapted to the changing demands of the global marketplace, but it has also resulted in many Third World countries losing their original self-sufficiency in food and becoming highly dependent on food imports from the First World.
Such economic transformations tend to undermine both the national independence of Third World countries, and the autonomy of women where this is based on some degree of control over land.
Historically, this is a surprising and a disturbing conclusion.
In the nineteenth century, the effects of economic development, colonialism and capitalism were widely thought to be wholly favourable to women.
The assumption that modernization would help to liberate women from the semi-servitude of ‘primitive’ patriarchal societies was deeply embedded in the consciousness of charitable institutions and individuals in the West, not least the Christian missionaries who flocked to save souls, introduce underwear and establish proper moral codes in the empires of the colonial powers.
However, these optimistic hopes, while not entirely misconceived, appear to have ignored the many formidable traditional obstacles to the emancipation of women that still remain in most Third World societies, as well as new obstacles created by the so-called ‘modernization’ processes themselves.
Thus, women's work in domestic food production has remained largely invisible (see Boserup, 1970; Petritsch, 1985), while the role of the TNCs is broadcast from television, radio, newsprint and billboards all over the Third World.
Agribusiness is global!
Agribusiness
According to United Nations studies (see Fath, 1985), in the 1970s less than one-third of the food consumed in the Third World was processed.
Affiliates of TNCs accounted for about one-eighth of the Third World food processing industry, and about 90 per cent of this was in the branded goods and the export sector.
TNCs tend to be active in wheat and corn milling, animal feed, poultry, processed dairy products, canned fruit and vegetables, breakfast cereals, margarine and table oils, confectionery, soft drink concentrates, beer, coffee and cocoa products.
In the export sector, TNCs are still central in bananas, fish, canned fruit and tea; quite important in vegetable oils, cocoa, coffee and flowers; but no longer central in sugar and beef products.
In no single developing country will the TNCs entirely dominate the production and marketing of food and, indeed, compared with some industries, the role of the TNCs in food looks quite minor.
TNCs tend to dominate specific product markets rather than whole industries.
In Mexico in 1970, for example, there were no foreign dairy bottlers and only one ice-creamer, but ten out of twelve canned milk producers were foreign.
The primary interest of the TNCs in Mexico, as everywhere else in the Third World, is in the urban middle-class market.
For example, Nestlé refused to develop a cheap infant milk for the Mexican government low-cost food agency, and Nabisco refused to develop a soy-based breakfast cereal for government distribution.
‘Rather than investing in research and development of new products for the poor, foreign firms invest in advertising existing products for the well-to-do’(Whiting, 1985, p.370).
While Mexico exports food, but not processed foods, foreign food processors are net importers, and where TNCs use local raw materials the contracting arrangements tend to drive the poorer peasants off the land.
The relationship between cash crops, particularly those for export, and subsistence crops for local consumption, has occasioned an intense and sometimes bitter debate that has been going on for decades, if not centuries, and goes to the very heart of the global capitalist system and its transnational contradictions.
In the 1980s the debate revolved round what has been labelled the World Bank ‘complementarity thesis’.
Bassett's (1988) case study of Ivory Coast cotton is a good example.
Four parts of the thesis are distinguished.
First, the trickle-down fertilizer hypothesis predicts that local food crops will benefit from increased fertilizer use on the cash crop.
In the study area what actually happened was that food crops were displaced from the head to the end of the fertilizer rotation in more than half the cases.
The second hypothesis is that cash cropping increases the general mechanization of agriculture.
What actually happened was that mechanization was concentrated on land clearing incentives, representing an ‘extraordinary subsidy to the relatively wealthy progressive farmer’(Bassett, 1988, p.52).
The third prediction is that cash crops will create regional food markets.
The rice that the peasants in the research area bought came from Burma, Thailand and China, not from the Ivory Coast or its neighbours.
Finally, the complementarity thesis predicts that services and subsidies for export crops will also benefit food crops.
They did not, for the obvious reason that the cash crop companies have no interest in developing food crops.
In this case, subsistence requirements could still be met from cotton income, but as there appears to be no clearly demonstrated link between cash crop promotion and improvements in food crops to make up for the shortfall in the cropping area that results from giving over the land to cash crops, the issue of food security must be raised.
Between 1970 and 1986 the Ivory Coast, often regarded as one of Africa's success stories, more than tripled its cereals imports, its external debt rose more than thirty-fold, and food production per capita barely kept up with population growth (World Bank, 1988, Tables).
Like other Third World countries its quest for World Bank-induced export earnings through cash crops has been purchased at a high price with no apparent significant complementarity in food crops.
Not everyone, however, fully accepts that TNC involvement in Third World agriculture always does lead to food insecurity.
Scott (1985) argues that the criticisms of TNCs in food processing export industries in the Third World often fail to distinguish between national and personal food security.
Foreign investment, Scott claims, may reduce food insecurity in a variety of ways, for example by increasing export diversification.
But what is possible in theory, does not always happen in practice, and there are many Third World countries that were recently more or less self-sufficient in basic foodstuffs, that are now increasingly dependent on imports.
This is not entirely explained by huge increases in  population, as is widely propagated by the mass media and widely believed.
Many very poor countries, and even some that have suffered famines in the 1980s, like Ethiopia, have actually turned over land to cash crops for export.
In Egypt, the growing reliance on huge imports of cheap grain from the United States has made it uneconomical for local farmers to grow grain, and large tracts of land that once grew food for local consumption now grow strawberries, luxury vegetables and other cash crops for export (see Steif, 1989).
In different circumstances this might be a great success story, after all, the world's largest food grain importer is Japan.
However, Egypt's grain imports more than doubled between 1970 and 1986, from under 4 million to almost 9 million tonnes (about 180 kg per head), foreign debt increased twenty-five fold, to over $22 billion, and when the IMF forced the government to increase the price of bread, there were riots in the streets.
Transnational involvement in the Egyptian food system can by no stretch of the imagination be said to have improved Egypt's long-term food security.
How, we may ask, can a country like Egypt, by no means the poorest or most vulnerable in the Third World, find itself in this position?
There are, of course, many answers to this question at many levels.
The role of the TNCs in solving or intensifying the problems of hunger in the Third World is extremely controversial.
The range of views put forward in a small sample of recent works on the subject (see Abbott, 1987; Berardi, 1985; George, 1985; Tullis and Hollist, 1986), illustrates well the complexities of the issues and the difficulty of solving them.
For example, the TNCs that control the world grain trade are criticized if they do not sell grain to the Third World, and they are criticized if they do.
Everyone agrees, however, that a few TNCs control the global trade in grain, as well as the trade in other basic commodities.
Andrae and Beckman (1985), in a provocative study of Nigeria, label the global grain system, a ‘wheat trap’.
Burbach and Flynn (1980) suggest that similar problems in Latin America have similar explanations.
Let us focus our attention on where Third World grain imports come from and how they happen to be available in such massive quantities.
For this, we need to look at the history of the United States Public Law 480 (PL 480).
Foreign Agriculture, a US Department of Commerce magazine, under the unequivocal title ‘U.S. Food Aid Builds Cash Markets in Developing Countries’(February  1984, pp.20–1) provides an account of PL 480, in celebration of its thirtieth anniversary.
‘PL 480 was enacted as a means of exporting surplus U.S. commodities to dollar-short nations’ and ‘has become an important vehicle for developing commercial export markets, for meeting humanitarian food needs, and for spurring economic and agricultural growth in the developing world’(p.20).
Since 1954, over 300 million tonnes of agricultural products valued at $33 billion have been sent to more than 100 countries under the programme.
Over 70 per cent has moved under Title I, concessional sales, of which 80 per cent has gone to the Third World, representing almost one-third of total US direct aid to them.
The main recipients have been India ($6 billion), Egypt ($2.7 billion), South Korea ($1.9 billion) and Indonesia ($1.7 billion).
‘Aid often is a springboard to trade…
PL 480 has established itself as one of the United States’ most successful market development tools’(p.20).
Korea, Taiwan and Mexico now buy significant amounts of US produce, and Egypt, Indonesia, the Dominican Republic, Morocco, Tunisia and Peru are beginning to do so.
About half of US grain exports go under PL 480.
All the expertise of a fully computerized trade and product information service is available for US exporters and no corner of the global marketplace is left un-intelligenced.
The United States spends hundreds of millions of dollars on a Targeted Export Assistance Program (TEA) under the interestingly labelled Food Security Act of 1985, to help US producers disadvantaged by unfair competition from abroad.
The ‘Country Briefs’ section of Foreign Agriculture for September 1986 lists the following:
Jamaica's programme for local milk production is an ‘excellent opportunity to export high-quality U.S. dairy cattle’(p.20).
Egypt's growing demand for protein meals for animal feed is welcomed as the United States is the largest supplier of feeds.
A new floating elevator at Abu Keer near Alexandria (built with USAID funds) will facilitate bulk shipments.
Korea's growing rapeseed imports are causing anxiety, as they could cut into US soybeans sales.
Taiwan's cattle industry is expanding, opening the door for US alfalfa sales.
Foreign Agriculture is full of evidence to suggest what the cynical reader must have already suspected, and what the open  minded reader may well be beginning to suspect.
Is the global food strategy of the United States designed to undermine the capacity of Third World countries to feed themselves, and render them dependent on cash crop earnings to buy food from ever-bulging US silos supplied by fully mechanized US farms?
When anything is being grown in the Third World, the United States seems to stand ready to supply all the technical inputs required.
This is an understandable conclusion, but it is flawed in one essential respect, namely its state-centrism.
The US government as such has no interest in rendering the Third World unable to feed itself.
Apart from the assumed humanitarian philosophies of most US politicians and citizens, nothing is better designed to drive poor countries into the arms of the communists than shortages of food.
It is quite absurd to suggest that the US government, or any other food surplus government, plans such things.
It is not absurd, however, to suggest that, implicitly, TNCs might see their best interests served in such a strategy.
Transnational corporations in the grain business, financing its production, trans’ porting it around the world, building handling facilities, processing it, breeding fine seeds, might well consider that the inhibition of Third World grain production will maximize their profits.
They might also, and in a perverse way, quite sensibly believe that if US farmers can produce grain ‘cheaper’ than farmers in the Third World then it will also be in the interests of the Third World to participate in such a global food system.
In this they will find enthusiastic allies within the Third World in the political sphere, in the bureaucracy and in business circles, who might prefer cash crops (see Burnell, 1986, ch.3).
As Tullis and Hollist (1986) point out in the introduction to their book on the international political economy of food:
Urban-biased policy makers frequently have fostered an increase in exports in order to earn foreign exchange without much regard for impacts on rural employment, nutrition, migration, or domestic food security.
Until now, fostering economic growth through export expansion has been the easiest and safest thing to do politically.
(1986, p.viii)
We can be sure that this is true of most transnational capitalist classes.
Cash crop exports are politically ‘safe’ in the sense that hard currency earnings allow Third World governments to buy in cheap  grain to feed their urban populations, and relieve them of the problems of ensuring adequate food supplies from what sometimes appears to be a permanently disgruntled peasantry.
Cash crops can also, of course, be commercially very lucrative, but only when they are acceptable on the world market.
This is rarely under the control of the producer country, even less the actual direct producer, the farmer, but is increasingly coming under the control of the TNC conglomerates that manage the global food system.
The case study by Sanderson (1985) on the emergence of the ‘World Steer’ is a good illustration of this process.
The world steer, like the world car, has emerged over the last decades through an international standardization of producer technology and a specific set of social relations.
These are transnational in scope (combining US feedlot technology, European antibiotics and the Japanese market for boxed beef); and based on international standards for consumption and trade.
This is not synonymous with foreign domination, for national firms in Brazil, Mexico and Argentina are also into the world steer.
The homogenization of tastes for certain products (and the productive processes they imply) shows that there is little difference in the creation of a luxury commodity for foreign consumers and its creation for domestic elites at the expense of the rural poor.
(Sanderson, 1986, p.127)
There are two very important points here.
First, the global standardization of taste is global only in a class sense.
Capitalism has yet to make high quality beefsteak available on a regular basis for all the inhabitants of the rich countries, let alone those in the poor countries.
Second, the system tends to work for more affluent foreign consumers and domestic elites by making life more difficult for the rural poor.
For example, as Mexico exports more and more live cattle for processing in the United States, the hides and byproducts traditionally used by poor Mexican consumers and artisans are now being re-imported for sale at much higher prices.
This raises two questions.
Why should the TNCs produce what the poor need?
Who is to determine what the poor in the Third World really do need?
Mindful of questions such as these, many Third World governments have tried to establish food policies in order to ensure an acceptable level of food security over the medium and long term.
With few exceptions, they have turned to the TNCs for help in this daunting task.
Consequently, some transnational economic practices have increased the capacity of Third World countries to feed themselves.
But even in such cases, there are those who argue that it is the interests of the global capitalist system that are being primarily served, even if some of these interests happen to be those of the transnational capitalist class within a Third World country, and benefits eventually filter down.
Sano's book on food in Nigeria demonstrates how a government's attempt to cut its food imports by stimulating domestic production led to an increasing dependency on imports of farm inputs, especially fertilizer and machinery.
The TNCs control research and production of new seed varieties and, as many studies have argued, the so-called Green Revolution was managed in large part through the TNCs and ended up benefiting the rich farmer and merchant classes, and increasing the poverty of the rural masses.
Even some apparently successful agricultural projects are suspect:
though they might be instrumental in reducing the level of food imports in the course of the next five to ten years, they will increase Nigerian dependency on foreign-manufactured commodities and know-how…imports like fertilizers, pesticides and agricultural machinery.
(Sano, 1983, p.66)
In this case, dependency moves from the primary level of food imports, to a secondary level of technical inputs, and then to a tertiary level of import substitution plants run by the TNCs.
As with import substitution in Latin America and parts of Asia, the heavy costs of imports sustained by these projects seriously reduced their economic benefits for Nigeria.
State government claims that
contracts for machinery and equipment were primarily awarded to foreign firms at overvalued prices, even when the items were available in Nigeria, and that the training of the Nigerian staff in the project was insufficient to enable it to take over the project (p.71)
are all too familiar.
Criticisms like this of TNCs, based on their foreignness, are often confused with those based on transnational practices, which domestic firms may share.
The choice in the Third World is not  between foreign exploitative private capitalism and domestic altruistic communitarian enterprise, in the food or in any other industry.
The choice is more likely to be between more or less efficient foreign exploitative transnational corporations and highly protected and perhaps corrupt local state, parastatal or private firms.
The point at issue is not whether a corporation and its practices are foreign, but to what extent they are transnational.
This raises the question of political practices and the transnational capitalist class, to which I now turn.
The transnational capitalist class in the Third World
The term comprador, from the Portuguese ‘to buy’, has its origins in the employment of the domestic servants of white colonialists in India and China.
These people would handle the household accounts of their employers and act as go-betweens with the local population.
In China, the European trading houses began to employ local Chinese to act as their agents from the middle of the nineteenth century, and the term began to be attached to those who would serve the interests of the foreigner before the interests of their co-nationals.
In many Third World countries, therefore, comprador is a term of abuse and, as a consequence has lost most of the little value it ever had for analysis.
This is why I much prefer the term transnational capitalist class or classes (TCC), for it has fewer of the pejorative connotations that have bedevilled the comprador class.
Transnational capitalist classes do not identify with any foreign country in particular, or even necessarily with the First World, or the white world, or the Western world.
They identify with the global capitalist system, reconceptualize their several national interests in terms of the global system, and take on the political project of reconceptualizing the national interests of their co-nationals in terms of the global capitalist system.
What I referred to previously as the comprador mentality, the slavish attachment to things foreign, is not a necessary component of the ideology of the TCC, but it does occur (see Chan, 1987, ch.18).
Although the comprador class in one form or another has existed for centuries, the transnational capitalist class is a relatively new phenomenon.
The basic difference between the two is that, whereas the compradors are entirely beholden to TNCs and foreign interests, the transnational capitalist class can develop into a class that may, under certain circumstances, begin to dictate its own terms to the TNCs and foreign interests.
That this is rarely understood is a direct consequence of the combined influence of the state-centrist idea and the dependency thesis, both of which consistently confuse the power of the First World with the power of the TNCs, and the weakness of the Third World with the presumed weakness of its economic institutions.
Of course, most TNCs are domiciled for legal purposes in the First World, and most Third World economic institutions are weak, but the number of exceptions to both rules is growing rapidly.
The numbers of TNCs based in Third World countries, particularly the NICs, has grown rapidly in recent years, and some Third World TNCs are extremely large and wield considerable influence (Lall, 1983).
So, it is not the country of domicile of economic institutions or the classes that dominate them that is the primary consideration in explaining how the global system works, but rather the structural locations of institutions and classes in the global capitalist system.
Frank and Wallerstein's versions of the international division of labour may have been accurate for some countries during some periods, but the re-formation of capitalism on a global scale in the latter part of the twentieth century has rendered it increasingly less so.
This has been obscured because the connection between accumulation in the national context and the growth of the transnational capitalist class has been rather different in the First and the Third (and also now the Second) Worlds for a variety of reasons, of which corruption is one.
The transnational capitalist class in the Third World will undoubtedly be connected with foreign TNCs, though its members will not necessarily work for them.
They may work through their own TNCs, which may be in a position to challenge other TNCs anywhere in the world, or as officials, or as independent professionals.
In so far as these people share the interests of and are engaged in the practices of the global capitalist system they are members of the transnational capitalist class.
So the idea of the transnational capitalist class includes fractions of both the old indigenous bourgeoisie and the comprador bourgeoisie.
How do these groups work in the interests of global capitalism?
In one interesting project, Geyikdagi (1984), examined the attitudes of political elites in the Middle East to the TNCs.
He found two types, the highly suspicious and the willing business partners.
Regimes of the latter type, it appears, tend to be very susceptible to coups.
Since the 1960s Third World governments have become better disposed to TNCs ‘as they have experienced the benefits derived from foreign investment’(Geyikdagi, 1984, p.15).
It is not clear whether personal benefits or benefits to the development of the host country, or both, are meant.
Whatever the case, it is not only governments in the Middle East that appear to be more pragmatic now than in the recent past and although anti-TNC rhetoric is still common for public consumption, the line is substantially moderated in regulations for and negotiations with the TNCs.
Despite the political problems that basically anti-Western regimes have in dealing with the TNCs, the Arab desire for Western, particularly US, technology is the crucial test, as Bassiry and Dekmejian (1985) illustrate in the case of the TNCs and the Iranian revolution.
This is only possible where there is a transnational capitalist class willing to deal with the TNCs when, for example, the comprador role may be too dangerous or has actually been abolished.
They can thus be isolated from particular transnational corporations identified with particular imperialist powers.
Such is the efficacy of propaganda for the global capitalist system that it is rarely capitalism itself that is targetted in such cases, but the symbols of American or European national power.
The transnational capitalist class can exact a much higher price for its services than the comprador class ever could, for two reasons.
First, the stakes are bigger than ever before, due to the expansion of global capitalism and its Third World interests.
Second, Third World transnational capitalists have more choice in who to deal with than before.
This does not necessarily put the country of origin of the individual capitalist in a better position, for most of the benefits of this changing situation may accrue to the Swiss banking industry, or the real estate markets in California and New York and the Cote d'Azur, as well as the purveyors of super-luxury consumer goods.
Let us take some examples of Third World bourgeoisies and see to what extent they confirm or refute the emergence of a transnational capitalist class.
The African bourgeoisie
A useful place to start such a discussion is with some recent research on the African bourgeoisie.
Lubeck, elaborating on de Janvry, contrasts the force of internal against external factors in explaining capital accumulation.
The autonomy of indigenous accumulation is opposed to some form of dependency in terms of the economic rationality of the capitalist class in a poor society.
It is in the interests of this class that the workers can afford to buy the types of products that it can realistically expect to sell them.
Thus:
the internally oriented bourgeoisie possesses an objective interest in wage-led rather than externally-determined demand for its products…productivity increases will extend workers' consumption into new commodities that were once considered luxury goods (motorcycles, housing materials, and small appliances), which in turn will provide new areas of investment for the indigenous bourgeoisie.
It is a class alliance that creates an objective link between indigenous capital and labour and one that is also linked to the progressive features of capitalist development.
(Lubeck, l987, p.14)
This is a sentiment I strongly agree with, but as an argument it has three problems.
First, the opposition between ‘wage-led’ and ‘externally-determined’demand is more apparent than real.
In all but the smallest countries export success, at least in manufactures, depends largely on a solid domestic market.
The interests of the internally-oriented bourgeoisie may start with-wage-led demand.
But as the walls of protectionism tumble down in one Third World country after another, under the influence of the World Bank, GATT etc., externally-determined demand becomes more difficult to ignore.
The only way around this is through some sort of arrangement with the TNCs.
Second, Nigeria, like most Third World countries, imports most of its motorcycles and motorcycle parts, non-traditional building materials and appliances.
Import substitution or indigenous investment in these products is not unproblematic.
Third, although Lubeck does not actually say it, the implication of the argument is that ‘progressive capitalist development’ is an indigenous, national, project.
The gist of my argument is that the global capitalist system leaves less and less space for exclusively national capitalist projects.
It follows that members of the indigenous  bourgeoisie who resist incorporation into the transnational capitalist class are, with few exceptions, going to be trapped in a spiral of declining markets, low technology and uncompetitiveness
It is easy to ridicule such an argument by pushing it to absurd limits.
To avoid this it is necessary to distinguish foreign and transnational, and also autonomous development and national development.
Not all of the practices of the transnational capitalist class are transnational.
There is still space for genuinely national economic, political and cultural-ideological practices, but the global capitalist system increasingly marginalizes such practices, making them commercially irrelevant.
The transnational capitalist class is a bridge between the nation-state and the global system and the more assiduously it brings transnational practices into what were once the realm of the regional or the national, then the more faithfully it serves the interests of the system.
Kitching, in an otherwise excellent analysis of the problem of autonomous development, seems to confuse autonomous and national development when he argues that if there is no ‘national capitalist development’ then the bourgeoisie must be comprador in character (1987, ch.2).
Confronting the problem of ‘autocentric development’ he argues that the ‘progressiveness of capitalism’may produce ‘genuinely transformatory capitalist development (…massively raising productivity and the general income level)’without a national bourgeoisie (p.50).
But this reduces the distinction between the national and the comprador bourgeoisie to a quite arbitrary judgement on what constitutes national development.
This returns us to the notion of the ‘objective’ interests of the capitalist class.
The objective interest of all capitalist classes, whether regional, indigenous, national, foreign or transnational, is the private accumulation of capital.
How individual capitalists or groups of them choose to accumulate will have to be explained in terms of personality, entrepreneurial history and material opportunities.
The argument presented here is that in the latter part of the twentieth century more and more capitalists have come to believe that their objective interests are best served through transnational practices, as evidenced by the phenomenal growth of the presence and influence of the TNCs outside the hegemon countries, and what I am describing as transnational capitalist classes.
Most of the scholars writing in Lubeck's book.
while discussing African indigenous bourgeoisies, actually confirm this judgement.
Swainson concludes a detailed study of indigenous capitalism in Kenya and the export promotion strategy of the late 1970s as follows: ‘At this stage, an indigenous bourgeoisie is unlikely to supplant foreign capital in any Third World country, whatever its level of development.
A more likely picture is a varying degree of integration and interpenetration’(Swainson, 1987, p.160).
Biersteker, on Nigeria, argues that: ‘Indigenization thus encourages a comprador role for local business in a society already plagued by strong comprador tendencies’(1987b, p.272) and that ‘foreign capital has not been seriously threatened by the indigenization exercise’(p.275).
And Campbell (1987) demonstrates that indigenization in the Ivory Coast did not really challenge the dominance of foreign capital because to do so would have been to put the mode of accumulation at risk.
Indigenization is not the only test of the existence of a transnational capitalist class, but it is certainly a critical one.
The case of Nigeria has attracted a good deal of scholarly attention in this respect and is worth looking at more closely.
Indigenization in Nigeria
We should distinguish here between expropriation, which suggests that little or no compensation is paid; nationalization and forced divestment, which leave the question open; and indigenization, which suggests that foreign personnel and control are changed to indigenous personnel and control.
Divestment suggests that it is the TNC that is the prime mover.
Kobrin has studied no less than 511 acts of forced divestment involving 1,500 firms in 76 Third World countries from 1960 to 1976.
His underlying hypothesis is that ‘in the vast majority of countries where forced divestment is used selectively its being chosen vis-a-vis alternate regulatory or administrative policies is, inter alia, a function of firm and industry-specific characteristics’(Kobrin, 1980, p.69).
His results refute the commonly expressed ‘irrational economic nationalism’ explanation of forced divestment in the countries of the Third World.
Third World states tend to take over the foreign investments that they consider to be important for national development.
Indigenization implies that there are locals, official or private, standing in the wings ready to take over  the indigenized companies.
Can it be demonstrated that what at first sight appears to be a paradigm case of indigenous, national forces dispossessing transnational corporations, is in fact a clear illustration of the emergence of the transnational capitalist class in Nigeria?
Nigeria is by no means an exceptional case though, like any country, it has its own peculiarities.
One of these is the long history of incorporation into the global capitalist system by the TNCs (see Shenton and Freund, 1978).
Oil-rich Nigeria, with a population of over 100 million, is by far the most populous and also one of the richest countries, on a per capita income basis, in Africa.
The legacy of British colonialism and the lure of oil money are mixed blessings.
Scholars have documented significant levels of TNC participation in agriculture (Oculi, 1987), the oil industry (Ihonvbere and Shaw, 1988), import substituting manufacturing industries (Biersteker, 1987a), and in the mining, service, financial and infrastructure sectors (in Onimode et al.1983, passim).
The Nigerian case is illustrative of a common pattern.
As a proportion of the total economy, TNC investment is small, but as a proportion in some industries, for example oil, machinery and financial services, it is substantial.
In the advanced sectors, it is dominant.
Nigerian scholars have pointed to major structural distortions in economy and society for which the TNCs are at least partly responsible.
For example:
Proposals for domestic production of iron and steel, petrochemicals, machine-tools and the like are typically discouraged or delayed by the mnc's in preference for quick profit-yielding manufacturing of semi-luxury consumer goods like lace, car assembly, beer, carpets, and so on.
This is largely the result of a wooly acceptance of import substitution industrialisation, which implies that import substitutesbased on the imported semi-luxury consumption habits, rather than the basic needs of the mass-majority, would enjoy industrial priority.
(Onimode et al.1983, p.122)
Transnational corporations also exert influence by manipulating class contradictions through a compliant comprador bourgeoisie and a denationalised labour aristocracy.
This encourages corruption and ‘cultural degradation…foreign intellectual domination, the imposition of imperialist values and the ossification of national culture’(ibid, p.125).
These are the circumstances under which  successive Nigerian governments have attempted to indigenize, in the hope of gaining control over their economic and ultimately their developmental destinies.
Indigenization occurred in Nigeria in three phases.
The first decree was issued in 1972 by the military regime in alliance with the local bourgeoisie, who clearly expected to benefit from the initiative.
This first wave of indigenization had few practical effects, and Nigeria's many TNCs managed to evade serious loss of control by enlisting members of the local bourgeoisie to ‘front’ for them, a universal practice where there are restrictions on foreigners engaging in certain economic activities.
The second decree, in 1977, represented a further attempt by the military government to wrest control from the TNCs, particularly to counter the defensive measures that the TNCs had developed to nullify the effects of the first decree.
Because it appeared tougher, the second decree encouraged the TNCs to develop even more defences to protect their interests.
Biersteker (1987a) lists the most important of them.
In addition to fronting, TNCs resorted to public sale of shares to dilute ownership and retain effective control, technical agreements with Nigerian partners, negotiation of exemptions from the authorities, the two company strategy, changes in voting rules to disenfranchise local partners, dividing boards of directors, bringing in expatriate executives, bribery and simply ignoring the law.
A further decree in 1982, this time initiated by a civilian government, reinforced state control of the banking and finance sectors and went a little way to encourage Nigerian capital to invest more in the manufacturing sector.
However, the TNCs are still as strong as they ever were and the notion that the Nigerian government, let alone the average Nigerian, has any more control of the economy than before indigenization, is very doubtful.
All agree that the main beneficiaries of the indigenization process have been the state functionaries and those few Nigerians who now sit on the boards of TNCs (see Ake, 1985; Hoogvelt, 1979).
The companies that were indigenized did not cease to be transnational, and did not cease to engage in transnational practices.
Those who were running them were thus also engaging in transnational practices and were thus, potentially at least, members of the transnational capitalist class.
Their new transnational roles would naturally increase the likelihood that they would identify their interests with the global capitalist system, objectively if not subjectively.
This is a crucial point in the argument that links indigenization with the creation of the transnational capitalist class.
Subjectively, patriotic Nigerians who have taken control of indigenized TNCs will see their own and Nigeria's best interests served by the success of their enterprises.
They may be hostile to the global capitalist system and feel that they and Nigeria are victims of exploitation within it.
But objectively, as participants in the system through their own transnational practices, they identify their interests and those of their country with it.
So indigenization can actually create the conditions for a transnational capitalist class in what appears to be the most unfruitful soil.
Triple alliances and transnational capitalist classes
This argument can be criticized on the grounds that a state bureaucracy cannot be called a class.
The Marxist definition of class in terms of private ownership of the means of production used to work well for most First World societies, but it always left much to be desired in the analysis of the Second and Third Worlds where the larger part of the means of production are owned and controlled not by private capitalists but by state or parastatal enterprises.
There is some justification for treating those who run these enterprises as capitalists if they manifest certain characteristics.
The term ‘state capitalist’ has ohen been used to refer to those who run state enterprises in a manner that is virtually indistinguishable from private enterprises.
This group is often seen as part of what is termed the ‘triple alliance’ between TNCs, the local bourgeoisie, and the state bureaucracy.
This has been documented in various Third World countries, notably Nigeria (see Ihonvbere and Shaw, 1988), Brazil (Evans, 1979) and Egypt (Gillespie, 1984), and my own research on class forces along the US-Mexican border (Sklair, 1989) and the Hong Kong-China border (Sklair, forthcoming) is cast in the same mould.
The triple alliance is one form that the transnational capitalist class takes, particularly in those societies marked by export-oriented foreign investment.
Alliances between foreign and local entrepreneurs in joint ventures, and between TNCs and parastatals in resource-based and infrastructural projects, are also common.
However, where we cannot identify a triple alliance, a society may still be dominated by a transnational capitalist class whose practices are genuinely transnational whether or not all three parties are represented.
The TCC sees its interests bound up not with TNCs or foreign capital as such, but with the global capitalist system.
It sees its mission as organizing the conditions under which the interests of the system can be furthered within the national context.
While the comprador class may (but not necessarily) admit that its interests and those of the foreigners it serves are antagonistic to those of co-nationals, the transnational capitalist class conceives of its interests and the interests of the global capitalist system that it serves, as identical with those of national development.
Indigenization such as has occurred in Nigeria has the function of transforrning a comprador class formerly identified with foreign TNC interests, into a transnational capitalist class, increasingly identified with the interests of nominally or actually Nigerian transnational corporations.
Ake (1985, p.175) puts this well when he suggests that indigenization may have ‘reinforced the division of labour between the Nigerian bourgeoisie (as specialists in maintaining the political conditions of accumulation) and foreign capital (as specialists in production)’.
Evans (1979) argues that the countries of the capitalist core rely on political stability in the semi-periphery (the NICs), in order to assure the continuing accumulation of capital, and that the triple alliance delivers this, primarily through the ‘state bourgeoisies’ and the autocratic regimes that nurture them.
On this thesis, state enterprise is the path to local accumulation, but it falls far short of meeting the needs of the masses.
Purging this of its state-centrism, we must ask why the capitalist global system relies on stability in the Third World and how it uses the transnational capitalist class, whether in the form of the triple alliance or some other grouping, to deliver this.
The answers to these questions will be found in the analysis of cultural-ideological transnational practices and, in particular, the culture-ideology of consumerism in the Third World, to which I turn in the next chapter.