

LONDON
BELFAST
1975
CHAPTER ONE
THERE was an Angel of Death on top of an ornate mausoleum in one corner, arms extended.
I remember that well because someone was practising the organ and light drifted across the churchyard in coloured bands through stained-glass windows.
The church wasn't particularly old, built on a high tide of Victorian prosperity like the tall houses surrounding it.
St Martin's Square.
A good address once.
Now, just a shabby backwater in Belsize Park, but a nice, quiet area where a woman alone might walk down to the corner shop at midnight in safety and people minded their own business.
The flat at number thirteen was on the ground floor.
My agent had borrowed it for me from a cousin who had gone to New York for six months.
It was old-fashioned and comfortable and suited me fine.
I was on the downhill slope of a new novel and needed to visit the Reading Room at the British Museum most days.
But that November evening, the evening it all started, it was raining heavily and just after six I passed through the iron gates and followed the path through the forest of Gothic monuments and gravestones.
In spite of my umbrella the shoulders of my trenchcoat were soaked, not that it bothered me.
I've always liked the rain, the city at night, wet streets stretching into winter darkness, a peculiar feeling of freedom that it contains.
And things had gone well that day with the work, the end was very definitely in sight.
The Angel of Death was closer now, shadowed in the half-light from the church, the two marble attendants on guard at the mausoleum's bronze doors, everything as usual except that tonight, I could have sworn that there was a third figure and that it moved out of the darkness towards me.
For a moment I knew genuine fear and then, as it came into the light, I saw a young woman, quite small and wearing a black beret and soaked raincoat.
She had a briefcase in one hand.
The face was pale, the eyes dark and somehow anxious.
‘Mr Higgins?
You are Jack Higgins, aren't you?’
She was American, that much was obvious.
I took a deep breath to steady my nerves.
‘That's right.
What can I do for you?’
‘I must talk to you, Mr Higgins.
Is there somewhere we could go?’
I hesitated, reluctant for all sorts of obvious reasons to take this any further and yet there was  something quite out of the ordinary about her.
Something not to be resisted.
I said, ‘My flat's just over the square there.’
‘I know,’ she said.
I still hesitated and she added, ‘You won't regret it, believe me.
I've information of vital importance to you.’
‘About what?’
I asked.
‘What really happened afterwards at Studley Constable.
Oh, lots of things you don't know.’
Which was enough.
I took her arm and said,
‘Right, let's get in out of this damn rain before you catch your death and you can tell me what the hell this is all about.’
The house interior had changed very little, certainly not in my flat where the tenant had stayed with a late Victorian decor, lots of mahogany furniture, red velvet curtains at the bow window and a sort of Chinese wallpaper in gold and green, heavily patterned with birds.
Except for the central heating radiators, the only other concession to modern living was the kind of gas fire which made it seem as if logs burned brightly in a stainless steel basket.
‘That's nice,’ she said and turned to face me, even smaller than I had thought.
She held out her right hand awkwardly, still clutching the briefcase in the other.
‘Cohen,’ she said.
‘Ruth Cohen.’
I said, ‘Lets have that coat, I'll put it in front of one of the radiators.’
Thank you She fumbled at her belt with one hand and i laughed and took the briefcase from her.
Here, let me' As I put it down on the table I saw that her initials were etched on the flap in black.
The only difference was that it said Phd at the end of it
Ph.D.?’
I said.
She smiled slightly as she got out of the coat.
‘Harvard modern history.’
‘That's interesting,’ I said I'll make some tea, or would you prefer coffee?
She smiled again ‘Six months post doc at London University, Mr Higgins, I'd very definitely prefer your tea.’
I went through to the kitchen and put on the kettle and made a tray ready.
I lit a cigarette as I waited and turned to find her leaning on the doorway, arms folded.
Your thesis,’ I said.
‘For your doctorate.
What was the subject?’
‘Certain aspects of the Third Reich in the Second World War.’
Interesting Cohen — are you Jewish?’
I turned to make the tea.
My father was a german Jew.
He survived Auschwitz and made it to the US, but died the year after I was born 
I could think of no more than the usual inadequate response.
‘I'm sorry.’
She stared at me blankly for a moment, then turned and went back to the sitting room.
I followed with the tray, placed it on a small coffee table by the fire and we sat opposite each other in wingback chairs.
‘Which explains your interest in the Third Reich,’ I said as I poured the tea.
She frowned and took the cup of tea I handed her.
‘I'm just an historian.
No axe to grind.
My particular obsession is with the Abwehr, German Military Intelligence.
Why they were so good and why they were so bad at the same time.’
‘Admiral Wilhelm Canaris and his merry men?’
I shrugged.
‘I'd say his heart was never in it, but as the SS hanged him at Flossenburg concentration camp in April forty-five, we'll never know.’
‘Which brings me to you,’ she said.
‘And your book The Eagle Has Landed.’
‘A novel, Dr Cohen,’ I said.
‘Pure speculation.’
‘At least fifty per cent of which is documented historical fact, you claim that yourself at the beginning of the book.’
She leaned forward, hands clenched on her knees, a kind of fierceness there.
I said softly, ‘All right, so what exactly are you getting at?’
‘Remember how you found out about the affair in the first place?’ she said.
‘The thing that started you off?’
‘Of course,’ I said.
‘The monument to Steiner and his men the villagers of Studley Constable had hidden under the tombstone in the churchyard.’
‘Remember what it said?’
‘Exactly,’ she said.
‘Here lies Lieutenant Colonel Kurt Steiner and thirteen German paratroopers killed in action on sixth November, nineteen forty-three.’
‘So what's your point?’
‘Thirteen plus one makes fourteen, only there aren't fourteen bodies in that grave.
There are only thirteen.’
I stared at her incredulously.
‘How in the hell do you make that out?’
‘Because Kurt Steiner didn't die that night on the terrace at Meltham House, Mr Higgins.’
She reached for the briefcase, had it open in a second and produced a brown manilla folder.
‘And I have the proof right here.’
Which very definitely called for Bushmills whiskey.
I poured one and said, ‘All right, do I get to see it?’
‘Of course, that's why I'm here, but first let me explain.
Any study of Abwehr intelligence affairs during the Second World War constantly refers to the work of SOE, the Special Operations Executive  set up by British Intelligence in 1940 on Churchill's instructions to coordinate resistance and the underground movement in Europe.’
‘Set Europe ablaze, that's what the old man ordered,’ I said.
‘I was fascinated to discover that a number of Americans worked for SOE before America came into the war.
I thought there might be a book in it.
I arranged to come over here to do the research and a name that came up again and again was Munro — Brigadier Dougal Munro.
Before the war he was an archaeologist at Oxford.
At SOE he was head of Section D. What was commonly known as the dirty tricks department.’
‘I had heard of him,’ I said.
‘I did most of my research at the Public Records Office.
As you know, few files dealing with intelligence matters are immediately available.
Some are on a twenty-five-year hold, some fifty…
‘And exceptionally sensitive material, a hundred years,’ I said.
‘That's what I have here.’
She held up the folder.
‘A hundred-year-hold file concerning Dougal Munro, Kurt Steiner, Liam Devlin and others.
Quite a story, believe me.’
She passed it across and I held it on my knees without opening it.
‘How on earth did you come by this?’
‘I checked out some files concerning Munro yesterday.
There was a young clerk on duty on his own.
Got careless, I guess.
I found the file sandwiched in between two others, sealed, of course.
You have to do your research on the premises at the Records Office, but since it wasn't on the booking-out form, I slipped it into my briefcase.’
‘A criminal offence under the Defence of the Realm Act,’ I told her.
‘I know.
I opened the seals as carefully as I could and read the file.
It's only a thirty-page resume of certain events — certain astonishing events.’
‘And then?’
‘I photocopied it.’
‘The wonders of modern technology allow them to tell when that's been done.’
‘I know.
Anyway, I resealed the file and took it back this morning.’
‘And how did you manage to return it?’
I asked.
‘Checked out the same file yesterday.
Took the Munro file back to the desk and told the duty clerk there'd been an error.’
‘Did he believe you?’
‘I suppose so.
I mean, why wouldn't he?’
‘The same clerk?’
‘No — an older man.’
I sat there thinking about it, feeling decidedly uneasy.
Finally I said, ‘Why don't you make us some fresh tea while I have a go at this?’
‘All right.’
She took the tray and went out.
I hesitated, then opened the file and started to read.
I wasn't even aware that she was there, so gripped was I by the events recorded in that file.
When I was finished, I closed it and looked up.
She was back in the other chair watching me, a curiously intent look on her face.
I said, ‘I can understand the hundred-year hold.
The powers that be wouldn't want this to come out, not even now.’
‘That's what I thought.’
‘Can I hang on to it for a while?’
She hesitated, then nodded.
‘Till tomorrow if you like.
I'm going back to the States on the evening flight.
Pan Am.’
‘A sudden decision?’
She went and got her raincoat.
‘That's right.
I've decided I'd rather be back in my own country.’
‘Worried?’
I asked.
‘I'm probably being hypersensitive, but sure.
I'll pick the file up tomorrow afternoon.
Say three o'clock on my way to Heathrow?’
‘Fine.’
I put the file down on top of my coffee table.
The clock on the mantelpiece chimed the half-hour, seven thirty, as I walked her to the door.
I opened it and we stood for a moment, rain driving down hard.
‘Of course there is someone who could confirm the  truth of that file,’ she said.
‘Liam Devlin.
You said in your book he was still around, operating with the Provisional IRA in Ireland.’
‘Last I heard,’ I said.
‘Sixty-seven he'll be now, but lively with it.’
‘Well, then.’
She smiled again.
‘I'll see you tomorrow afternoon.’
She went down the steps and walked away through the rain, vanishing in the early evening mist at the end of the street.
I sat by the fire and read the file twice, then I went back into the kitchen, made myself some more tea and a chicken sandwich and sat at the table, eating the sandwich and thinking about things.
Extraordinary how events coming right out of the blue can change things.
It had happened to me once before, the discovery of that hidden memorial to Steiner and his men in the churchyard at Studley Constable.
I'd been researching an article for an historical magazine.
Instead, I'd found something unlooked for that had changed the course of my entire life.
Produced a book which had gone round the world from New York to Moscow, made me rich.
Now this — Ruth Cohen and her stolen file, and I was filled with the same strange, tingling excitement.
I needed to come down.
Get things in perspective.
So, I went to have a shower, took my time over it, shaved and dressed again.
It was only eight-thirty and it didn't seem likely that I'd go to bed early, if I went at all.
I didn't have any more whiskey as I needed to think, so I made even more tea and settled on the chair again by the fire, lit a cigarette and started to work my way through the file again.
The doorbell rang, shaking me from my reverie.
I glanced at the clock.
It was just before nine.
The bell rang again insistently and I replaced the file in the folder, put it on the coffee table and went out into the hall.
It occurred to me that it might be Ruth Cohen again, but I couldn't have been more wrong, for when I opened the door I found a young police constable standing there in his navy-blue mac wet with rain.
‘Mr Higgins?’
He looked at a piece of paper in his left hand.
‘Mr Jack Higgins?’
Strange the certainty of bad news so that we don't even need to be told.
‘Yes,’ I said.
He stepped into the hall.
‘Sorry to trouble you, sir, but I'm making an enquiry relevant to a Miss Ruth Cohen.
Would you be a friend of hers, sir?’
‘Not exactly,’ I said.
‘Is there a problem?’
‘I'm afraid the young lady's dead, sir.
Hit-and-run accident at the back of the British Museum an hour ago.’
—
‘My God!’
I whispered.
‘The thing is sir, we found your name and address on a card in her handbag.’
It was so difficult to take in.
She'd stood there at the door where he was such a short time before.
He was no more than twenty-one or -two.
Still young enough to feel concern and he put a hand on my arm.
‘Are you all right, sir?’
I said, ‘Rather shocked, that's all.’
I took a deep breath.
‘What is it you want of me?’
‘It seems the young lady was at London University.
We've checked the student accommodation she was using.
No one there with it being the weekend.
It's a question of official identification.
For the Coroner's Office.’
‘And you'd like me to do it?’
‘If you wouldn't mind, sir.
It's not far.
She's at Kensington Mortuary.’
I took another deep breath to steady myself ‘All right.
Just let me get my raincoat.’
The mortuary was a depressing-looking building in a side street, more like a warehouse than anything else.
When we went into the foyer, there was a uniformed porter on duty at the desk and a small dark man in his early fifties standing at the window looking out at the rain, a cigarette dangling from the corner of his mouth.
He wore a trilby hat and trenchcoat.
He turned to meet me, hands in pockets.
‘Mr Higgins, is it?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
He didn't take his hands out of his pockets and coughed, ash falling from the tip of his cigarette on to his coat.
‘Detective Chief Superintendent Fox.
An unfortunate business, sir.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘This young lady, Ruth Cohen, was she a friend of yours?’
‘No,’ I said.
‘I only met her for the first time earlier this evening.’
‘Your name and address were in her handbag.’
Before I could reply he carried on, ‘Anyway, best to get it over with.
If you'd come this way.’
The room they took me into was walled with white tiles and bright with fluorescent lighting.
There was a line of operating tables.
The body was on the end one covered with a white rubber sheet.
Ruth Cohen looked very calm, eyes closed, but her head was enclosed in a rubber hood and blood seeped through.
‘Would you formally identify the deceased as Ruth Cohen, sir?’ the constable asked.
I nodded.
‘Yes, that's her,’ and he replaced the sheet.
When I turned Fox was sitting on the end of the table in the corner, lighting another cigarette.
‘As I said, we found your name in her handbag.’
It was then, as if something had gone click in my  head, that I came back to reality.
Hit and run — a serious offence, but when had it merited the attention of a Detective Chief Superintendent?
And wasn't there something about Fox with his saturnine face and dark, watchful eyes?
This was no ordinary policeman.
I smelled Special Branch.
It always pays to stick as closely to the truth as possible, I found that out a long time ago.
I said,
‘She told me she was over from Boston, working at London University, researching a book.’
‘About what, sir?’
Which confirmed my suspicions instantly.
‘Something to do with the Second World War, Superintendent, which happens to be an area I've written about myself.’
‘I see.
She was looking for help, advice, that sort of thing?’
Which was when I lied totally.
‘Not at all.
Hardly needed it.
A Ph.D., I believe.
The fact is, Superintendent, I wrote a rather successful book set during the Second World War.
She simply wanted to meet me.
As I understood it she was flying back to the States tomorrow.’
The contents of her handbag and briefcase were on the table beside him, the Pan Am ticket conspicuous.
He picked it up.
‘So it would appear.’
‘Can I go now?’
‘Of course.
The constable will run you home.’
We went out into the foyer and paused at the door.
He coughed as he lit another cigarette.
‘Damn rain.
I suppose the driver of that car skidded.
An accident really, but then he shouldn't have driven away.
We can't have that, can we?’
‘Good night, Superintendent,’ I told him and went down the steps to the police car.
I'd left the light on in the hall.
When I went in, I carried on into the kitchen without taking my coat off, put the kettle on and then went into the living room.
I poured a Bushmills into a glass and turned towards the fire.
It was then that I saw that the folder I'd left on the coffee table was gone.
For a wild moment I thought I'd made a mistake, had put it elsewhere, but that was nonsense of course.
I put the glass of whiskey down and lit a cigarette, thinking about it.
The mysterious Fox — I was more certain than ever that he was Special Branch now — that wretched young woman lying there in the mortuary, and I remembered my unease when she'd told me how she had returned that file at the Records Office.
I thought of her walking along the pavement and crossing that street in the rain at the back of the British Museum and then the car.
A wet night and a skidding car, as Fox had said.
It could have been an accident, but I knew that was hardly likely, not with the file missing.
Which raised the problem of my own continued existence.
Time to move on for a while, bur where?
And then I remembered what she had said.
There was one person still left who could confirm the story in that file.
I packed an overnight bag and went and checked the street through a chink in the curtain.
Cars parked everywhere it was impossible to see whether I was being watched
Left by the kitchen door at the rear of the house, walked cautiously up the back alley and quickly worked my way through a maze of quiet back streets thinking about it.
It had to be a security matter of course.
Some anonymous little department at D15 that took care of people who got out of line, but would that necessarily mean they'd have a go at me?
After all the girl was dead, the file back in the Records Office, the only copy recovered.
What could I say that could be proved or in any way believed?
On the other hand, I had to prove it to my own satisfaction and I hailed a cab to the next corner.
The Green Man in Kilburn, an area of London popular with the Irish, featured and impressive painting of an Irish tinker over the door which indicated the kind of custom the place enjoyed.
The bar was full, I could see that through the saloon window and I went round to the yard at the rear.
The curtains were drawn and Sean Riley sat at a crowded desk doing his accounts.
He was a small man with cropped hair, active  for his age, which I knew was seventy-two.
He owned the Green Man, but more importantly, was an organizer for Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, in London.
I knocked at the window, he got up and moved to peer out.
He turned and moved away.
A moment later the door opened.
Mr Higgins.
What brings you here?’
‘I won't come in, Sean.
I'm on my way to Heathrow.’
‘Is that a fact.
A holiday in the sun, is it?’
‘Not exactly.
Belfast.
I'll probably miss the last shuttle, but I'll be on the breakfast plane.
Get word to Liam Devlin.
Tell him I'll be staying at the Europa Hotel and I must see him.’
‘Jesus, Mr Higgins, and how would I be knowing such a desperate fella as that?’
Through the door I could hear the music from the bar.
They were singing ‘Guns of the IRA’.
‘Don't argue, Sean, just do it,’ I said.
‘It's important.’
I knew he would, of course, and turned away without another word.
A couple of minutes later I hailed a cab and was on my way to Heathrow.
The Europa Hotel in Belfast was legendary amongst newspaper men from all over the world.
It had survived numerous bombing attacks by the IRA and stood in Great Victoria Street next to the railway station.
I stayed in my room on the eighth floor for  most of the day, just waiting.
Things seemed quiet enough, but it was an uneasy calm and in the late afternoon, there was a crump of a bomb and when I looked out of the window I saw a black pall of smoke in the distance.
Just after six, with darkness falling, I decided to go down to the bar for a drink, was pulling on my jacket when the phone went.
A voice said, ‘Mr Higgins?
Reception here, sir.
Your taxi's waiting.’
It was a black cab, the London variety, and the driver was a middle-aged woman, a pleasant-faced lady who looked like your favourite aunty.
I pulled back the glass panel between us and gave her the ritual Belfast greeting.
‘Good night to you.’
‘And you.’
‘Not often I see a lady cab driver, not in London anyway.’
‘A terrible place that.
What would you expect?
You sit quiet now like a good gentleman and enjoy the trip.’
She closed the panel with one hand.
The journey took no more than ten minutes.
We passed along the Falls Road, a Catholic area I remembered well from boyhood and turned into a warren of mean side streets, finally stopping outside a church.
She opened the glass panel.
‘The first confessional box on the right as you go in.’
‘If you say so.’
I got out and she drove away instantly.
The board said ‘Church of the Holy Name’ and it was in surprisingly good condition, the times of Mass and confession listed in gold paint.
I opened the door at the top of the steps and went in.
It was not too large and dimly lit, candles flickering down at the altar, the Virgin in a chapel to one side.
Instinctively, I dipped my fingers in the holy water and crossed myself, remembering the Catholic aunt in South Armagh who'd raised me for a while as a child and had anguished over my black little Protestant soul.
The confessional boxes stood to one side.
No one waited, which was hardly surprising, for according to the board outside I was an hour early.
I went in the first on the right and closed the door.
I sat there in the darkness for a moment and then the grill slid open.
‘Yes?’ a voice asked softly.
I answered automatically.
‘Bless me, Father, for I have sinned.’
‘You certainly have, my old son.’
The light was switched on in the other box and Liam Devlin smiled through at me.
He looked remarkably well.
In fact, rather better than  he'd seemed the last time I'd seen him.
Sixty-seven, but as I'd said to Ruth Cohen, lively with it.
A small man with enormous vitality, hair as black as ever, and vivid blue eyes.
There was the scar of an old bullet wound on the left side of his forehead and a slight, ironic smile was permanently in place.
He wore a priest's cassock and clerical collar and seemed perfectly at home in the sacristy at the back of the church to which he'd taken me.
‘You're looking well, son.
All that success and money.’
He grinned.
‘We'll drink to it.
There's a bottle here surely.’
He opened a cupboard and found a bottle of Bushmills and two glasses.
‘And what would the usual occupant think of all this?’
I asked.
‘Father Murphy?’
He splashed whiskey into the glasses.
‘Heart of corn, that one.
Out doing good, as usual.’
‘He looks the other way, then?’
‘Something like that.’
He raised his glass.
‘To you, my old son.’
‘And you, Liam.’
I toasted him back.
‘You never cease to amaze me.
On the British Army's most wanted list for the last five years and you still have the nerve to sit here in the middle of Belfast.’
‘Ah, well, a man has to have some fun.’
He took a cigarette from a silver case and offered me one.
‘Anyway, to what do I owe the pleasure of this visit?’
Does the name Dougal Munro mean anything to you?
His eyes widened in astonishment.
‘What in the hell have you come up with now?
I haven't heard that old bastard's name mentioned in years.’
‘Or Schellenberg?’
‘Walter Schellenberg?
There was a man for you.
General at thirty.
Schellenberg — Munro?
What is this?’
‘And Kurt Steiner?’
I said, ‘Who, according to everyone, including you, died trying to shoot the fake Churchill on the terrace at Meltham House.’
Devlin swallowed some of his whiskey and smiled amiably.
‘I was always the terrible liar.
Now tell me what is this all about?’
So, I told him about Ruth Cohen, the file and its contents, everything, and he listened intently without interrupting.
When I was finished, he said, ‘Convenient, the girl's death, you were right about that.’
‘Which doesn't look too good for me.’
There was an explosion not too far away and as he got up and opened the door to the rear yard, the rattle of small arms fire.
‘It sounds like a lively night,’ I said.
‘Oh, it will be.
Safer off the streets at the moment.’
He closed the door and turned to face me.
I said,
‘The facts in that file.
Were they true?’
‘A good story.’
‘In outline.’
‘Which means you'd like to hear the rest?’
‘I need to hear it.’
‘Why not.’
He smiled, sat down at the table again and reached for the Bushmills.
‘Sure and it'll keep me out of mischief for a while.
Now, where would you like me to begin?’
2
CHAPTER TWO
BRIGADIER Dougal Munro s flat in Haston Place was only ten minutes' walk from the London headquarters of SOE in Baker Street.
As head of Section D, he needed to be on call twenty-four hours a day and besides the normal phone had a secure line routed directly to his office.
It was that particular phone he answered on that late November evening as he sat by the fire working on some files.
‘Carter here, Brigadier.
Just back from Norfolk.’
‘Good,’ Munro told him.
‘Call in on your way home and tell me about it.’
He put the phone down and went and got himself a malt whisky, a squat, powerful-looking man with white hair who wore steel-rimmed spectacles.
Strictly a non-professional, his rank of brigadier was simply for purposes of authority in certain quarters and at sixty-five, an age when most men faced retirement, even at Oxford, the war had been the saving of him, that was the blunt truth.
He was thinking about that  when the doorbell rang and he admitted Captain Jack Carter.
‘You look frozen, Jack.
Help yourself to a drink Jack Carter leaned his walking stick against a chair and shrugged off his greatcoat.
He was in the uniform of a captain in the Green Howards, the ribbon of the Military Cross on his battledress.
His false leg was a legacy of Dunkirk and he limped noticeably as he went to the drinks cupboard and poured a whisky.
‘So, what's the situation at Studley Constable?’
Munro asked.
‘Back to normal, sir.
All the German paratroopers buried in a common grave in the churchyard.’
‘No marker of course?’
‘Not at the moment, but they're a funny lot, those villagers.
They actually seem to think quite highly of Steiner.’
‘Yes, well, one of his sergeants was killed saving the lives of two village children who fell into the mill race, remember.
In fact, that single action was the one thing that blew their cover, caused the failure of the entire operation.’
‘And he did let the villagers go before the worst of the fighting started,’ Carter said.
‘Exactly.
Have you got the file on him?’
Carter got his briefcase and extracted a couple of sheets stapled together.
Munro examined it.
‘Oberstleutnant Kurt Steiner, age twenty-seven.
Remark  able record.
Crete, North Africa, Stalingrad.
Knight's Cross with Oak Leaves.’
‘I'm always intrigued by his mother, sir.
Boston socialite.
What they call ‘Boston Brahmin’.’
‘All very fine, Jack, but don't forget his father was a German general and a damn good one.
Now, what about Steiner?
How is he?’
‘There seems no reason to doubt a complete recovery.
There's an RAF hospital for bomber crews with burns problems just outside Norwich.
Rather small.
Used to be a nursing home.
We have Steiner there under secure guard.
The cover story is that he's a downed Luftwaffe pilot.
Rather convenient that German paratroopers and Luftwaffe aircrews wear roughly the same uniform.’
‘And his wounds?’
‘He was damn lucky there, sir.
One round hit him in the right shoulder, at the rear.
The second was a heart shot, but it turned on the breastbone.
The surgeon doesn't think it will take long, especially as he's in remarkable physical shape.’
Munro went and got another small whisky.
‘Let's go over what we know, Jack.
The whole business, the plot to kidnap Churchill, the planning.
Everything was done without Admiral Canaris's knowledge?’
‘Apparently so, sir, all Himmler's doing.
He pressured Max Radl at Abwehr headquarters to plan it all behind the Admiral's back.
At least that's what our sources in Berlin tell us.’
‘He knows all about it now, though?’
Munro said.
‘The Admiral I mean?’
‘Apparently, sir, and not best pleased, not that there's anything he can do about it.
Can't exactly go running to the Führer.’
‘And neither can Himmler,’ Munro said.
‘Not when the whole project was mounted without the Führer's knowledge.’
‘Of course Himmler did give Max Radl a letter of authorization signed by Hitler himself,’ Carter said.
‘Purporting to be signed by Hitler, Jack.
I bet that was the first thing to go into the fire.
No, Himmler won't want to advertise this one.’
‘And we don't exactly want it on the front of the Daily Express, sir.
German paratroopers trying to grab the Prime Minister, battling it out with American Rangers in an English country village?’
‘Yes, it wouldn't exactly help the war effort.’
Munro looked at the file again.
‘This IRA chap, Devlin.
Quite a character.
You say that your information is that he was wounded?’
‘That's right, sir.
He was in hospital in Holland and simply took off one night.
We understand he's in Lisbon.’
‘Probably hoping to make it to the States in some way.
Are we keeping an eye on him?
Who's the SOE's man in Lisbon?’
‘Major Arthur Frear, sir.
Military attaché at the Embassy.
He's been notified,’ Carter told him.
‘Good.’
Munro nodded.
‘So what do we do about Steiner, sir?’
Munro frowned, thinking about it.
‘The moment he's fit enough, bring him up to London.
Do we still house German prisoners of war in the Tower?’
‘Only occasionally, sir, transients passing through the small hospital.
Not like the early days of the war when most of the captured U-boat people were housed there.’
‘And Hess.’
‘A special case, sir?’
‘All right.
We'll have Steiner at the Tower.
He can stay in the hospital till we decide on a safe house.
Anything else?’
‘One development, sir.
Steiner's father was involved, as you know, in a series of army plots aimed at assassinating Hitler.
The punishment is statutory.
Hanging by piano wire and by the Führer's orders the whole thing is recorded on film.’
‘How unpleasant,’ Munro said.
‘The thing is, sir, we've received a film of General Steiner's death.
One of our Berlin sources got it out via Sweden.
I don't know if you'll want to see it.
It's not very nice.’
Munro was angry, got up and paced the room.
He paused suddenly, a slight smile on his mouth.
‘Tell me, Jack, is that little toad Vargas still at the Spanish Embassy?’
‘José Vargas, sir, trade attaché.
We haven't used him in a while.’
‘But German Intelligence are convinced he's on their side?’
‘The only side Vargas is on is the one with the biggest bank book, sir.
Works through his cousin at the Spanish Embassy in Berlin.’
‘Excellent.’
Munro was smiling now.
‘Tell him to pass the word to Berlin that we have Kurt Steiner.
Tell him to say in the Tower of London.
Sounds very dramatic.
Most important, he makes sure that both Canaris and Himmler get the information.
That should get them stirred up.’
‘What on earth are you playing at, sir?’
Carter asked.
‘War, Jack, war.
Now have another drink, then get yourself off home to bed.
You're going to have a full day tomorrow.’
Near Paderborn in Westphalia in the small town of Wewelsburg was the castle of that name which Heinrich Himmler had taken over from the local council in 1934.
His original intention had been to convert it into a school for Reich SS leaders, but by the time the architects and builders had finished and many millions of marks had been spent, he had created a Gothic monstrosity worthy of stage six at MGM, a vast film set of the kind Hollywood was fond of when  historical pictures were the vogue.
The castle had three wings, towers, a moat and in the southern wing the Reichsführer had his own apartments and his especial pride, the enormous dining hall where selected members of the SS would meet in a kind of Court of Honour.
The whole thing had been influenced by Himmler's obsession with King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, with a liberal dose of occultism thrown in.
Ten miles away on that December evening, Walter Schellenberg lit a cigarette in the back of the Mercedes which was speeding him towards the castle.
He'd received the order to meet the Reichsführer in Berlin that afternoon.
The reason had not been specified.
He certainly didn't take it as any evidence of preferment.
He'd been to Wewelsburg on several occasions, had even inspected the castle's plans at SD headquarters, so knew it well.
He also knew that the only men to sit round that table with the Reichsführer were cranks like Himmler himself who believed all the dark-age twaddle about Saxon superiority, or time-servers who had their own chairs with names inscribed on a silver plate.
The fact that King Arthur had been Romano-British and engaged in a struggle against Saxon invaders made the whole thing even more nonsensical, but Schellenberg had long since ceased to be amused by the excesses of the Third Reich.
In deference to the demands of Wewelsburg, he wore the black dress uniform of the SS, the Iron Cross First Class pinned to the left side of his tunic.
‘What a world we live in,’ he said softly as the car took the road up to the castle, snow falling gently.
‘I sometimes really do wonder who is running the lunatic asylum.’
He smiled as he sat back, looking suddenly quite charming although the duelling scar on one cheek hinted at a more ruthless side to his nature.
It was a relic of student days at the University of Bonn.
In spite of a gift for languages, he'd started in the Faculty of Medicine, had then switched to law.
But in Germany in 1933 times were hard, even for well-qualified young men just out of university.
The SS were recruiting gifted young scholars for their upper echelons.
Like many others, Schellenberg had seen it as employment, not as a political ideal, and his rise had been astonishing.
Because of his language ability, Heydrich himself had pulled him into the Sicherheitsdienst, the SS security service, known as the SD.
His main responsibility had always been intelligence work abroad, often a conflict with the Abwehr, although his personal relationship with Canaris was excellent.
A series of brilliant intelligence coups had pushed him up the ladder rapidly.
By the age of thirty, he was an SS Brigadeführer and Major General of Police.
The really astonishing thing was that Walter Schellenberg  didn't consider himself a Nazi, looked on the Third Reich as a sorry charade, its main protagonists actors of a very low order indeed.
There were Jews who owed their survival to him, intended victims of the concentration camps rerouted to Sweden and safety.
A dangerous game, a sop to his conscience, he told himself, and he had his enemies.
He had survived for one reason only.
Himmler needed his brains and his considerable talents and that was enough.
There was only a powdering of snow in the moat, no water.
As the Mercedes crossed the bridge to the gate, he leaned back and said softly, ‘Too late to get off the roundabout now, Walter, far too late.’
Himmler received him in his private sitting room in the south wing.
Schellenberg was escorted there by an SS sergeant in dress uniform and found Himmler's personal aide, a Sturmbannführer named Rossman, sitting at a table outside the door, also in dress uniform.
‘Major.’
Schellenberg nodded.
Rossman dismissed the sergeant.
‘A pleasure to see you, General.
He's waiting.
The mood isn't good, by the way.’
‘I'll remember that.’
Rossman opened the door and Schellenberg entered a large room with a vaulted ceiling and flagged  floor.
There were tapestries on the walls and lots of dark oak furniture.
A log fire burned on a great stone hearth.
The Reichsführer sat at an oak table working his way through a mound of papers.
He was not in uniform, unusual for him, wore a tweed suit, white shirt and black tie.
The silver pince-nez gave him the air of a rather unpleasant schoolmaster.
Unlike Heydrich who had always addressed Schellenberg by his Christian name, Himmler was invariably formal.
‘General Schellenberg.’
He looked up.
‘You got here.’
There was an implied rebuke and Schellenberg said, ‘I left Berlin the moment I received your message, Reichsführer.
In what way can I serve you?’
‘Operation Eagle, the Churchill affair.
I didn't employ you on that business because you had other duties.
However, by now you will be familiar with most of the details.’
‘Of course, Reichsführer.’
Himmler abruptly changed the subject.
‘Schellenberg, I am increasingly concerned at the treasonable activities of many members of the High Command.
As you know, some wretched young major was blown up in his car outside the entrance to the Führer's headquarters at Rastenburg last week.
Obviously another attempt on our Führer's life.’
‘I'm afraid so, Reichsführer.’
Himmler stood up and put a hand on his shoulder.
‘You and I, General, are bound by a common  brotherhood, the SS.
We are sworn to protect the Führer and yet are constantly threatened by this conspiracy of generals.’
‘There is no direct proof, Reichsführer,’ Schellenberg said, which was not strictly true.
Himmler said, ‘General von Stulpnagel, von Falkenhausen, Stief, Wagner and others, even your good friend Admiral Wilhelm Canaris, Schellenberg.
Would that surprise you?’
Schellenberg tried to stay calm, envisaging the distinct possibility that he might be named next.
‘What can I say, Reichsführer?’
‘And Rommel, General, the Desert Fox himself The people's hero.’
‘My God!’
Schellenberg gasped, mainly because it seemed the right thing to do.
‘Proof.’
Himmler snorted.
‘I'll have my proof before I'm done.
They have a date with the hangman, all of them.
But to other things.’
He returned to the table and sat.
‘Have you ever had any dealings with an agent named Vargas?’
He examined a paper in front of him.
‘José Vargas.’
I know of him.
An Abwehr contact.
A commercial attaché at the Spanish Embassy in London.
As far as I know, he has only been used occasionally.’
‘He has a cousin who is also a commercial attaché at the Spanish Embassy here in Berlin.
One Juan Rivera.’
Himmler glanced up.
‘Am I right?’
‘So I understand, Reichsführer.
Vargas would use  the Spanish diplomatic bag from London.
Most messages would reach his cousin here in Berlin within thirty-six hours.
Highly illegal, of course.’
‘And thank God for it,’ Himmler said.
‘This Operation Eagle affair.
You say you are familiar with the details?’
‘I am, Reichsführer,’ Schellenberg said smoothly.
‘There is a problem here, General.
Although the idea was suggested by the Führer, it was, how shall I put it, more a flight of fancy than anything else?
One couldn't rely on Canaris to do anything about it.
I'm afraid that total victory for the Third Reich is low on his list of priorities.
That is why I personally put the plan into operation, aided by Colonel Radl of the Abwehr, who's had a heart attack, I understand, and is not expected to live.’
Schellenberg said cautiously, ‘So the Führer knows nothing of the affair?’
‘My dear Schellenberg, he carries the responsibility for the war, its every aspect, on his own shoulders.
It is our duty to lighten that load as much as possible.’
‘Of course, Reichsführer.’
‘Operation Eagle, however brilliantly conceived, ended in failure, and who would wish to take failure into the Führer's office and place it on his desk?’
Before Schellenberg could reply, he carried on.
‘Which brings me to this report which has reached me from Vargas in London via his cousin here in Berlin, the man Rivera.’
He handed across a signal flimsy and Schellenberg glanced at it.
‘Incredible!’ he said.
‘Kurt Steiner alive.’
‘And in the Tower of London.’
Himmler took the signal back.
‘They won't keep him there for very long,’ Schellenberg said.
‘It may sound dramatic, but the Tower isn't really suitable to house high-security prisoners long term.
They'll move him to some safe house just as they did with Hess.’
‘Have you any other opinion in the matter?’
‘Only that the British will keep quiet about the fact that he's in their hands.’
‘Why do you say that?’
‘Operation Eagle almost succeeded.’
‘But Churchill wasn't Churchill,’ Himmler reminded him.
‘Our Intelligence people discovered that.’
‘Of course, Reichsführer, but German paratroopers did land on English soil and fought a bloody battle.
If the story was publicized, the effect on the British people at this stage of the war would be appalling.
The very fact that it's SOE and their Brigadier Munro who are handling the matter, is further proof.’
‘You know the man?’
‘Know of him only, Reichsführer.
A highly capable intelligence officer.’
Himmler said, ‘My sources indicate that Rivera has also passed this news on to Canaris.
How do you think he will react?’
‘I've no idea, Reichsführer.’
‘You can see him when you get back to Berlin.
Find out.
My opinion is that he will do nothing.
He certainly won't go running to the Führer.’
Himmler examined another sheet in front of him.
‘I'll never understand men like Steiner.
A war hero.
Knight's Cross with Oak Leaves, a brilliant soldier, and yet he ruined his career, risked failure, everything, for the sake of some little Jewish bitch he tried to help in Warsaw.
It was only Operation Eagle that saved him and his men from the penal unit they were serving in.’
He put the sheet down.
‘The Irishman, of course, is a different matter.’
‘Devlin, Reichsführer?’
‘Yes, a thoroughly obnoxious man.
You know what the Irish are like, Schellenberg?
Everything a joke.’
‘I must say that from all reports he seems to know his business.’
‘I agree, but then he was only in it for the money.
Someone was singularly careless to allow him to walk out of that hospital in Holland.’
‘I agree, Reichsführer.’
‘My reports indicate that he's in Lisbon now,’ Himmler said.
He pushed another sheet across.
‘You'll find the details there.
He's trying to get to America, but no money.
According to that, he's been working as a barman.’
Schellenberg examined the signal quickly then said,
‘What would you like me to do on this matter, Reichsführer?’
‘You'll return to Berlin tonight, fly to Lisbon tomorrow.
Persuade this rogue Devlin to return with you.
I shouldn't think that would prove too difficult.
Radl gave him twenty thousand pounds for taking part in Operation Eagle.
It was paid into a numbered account in Geneva.’
Himmler smiled thinly.
‘He'll do anything for money.
He's that sort.
Offer him the same — more if you have to.
I'll authorize payments up to thirty thousand pounds.’
‘But for what, Reichsführer?’
‘Why, to arrange Steiner's escape, of course.
I should have thought that's obvious.
The man is a hero of the Reich, a true hero.
We can't leave him in British hands.’
Remembering how General Steiner had met his end in the Gestapo cellars at Prinz Albrechtstrasse, it seemed likely to Schellenberg that Himmler might have other reasons.
He said calmly, ‘I take your point, Reichsführer.’
‘You know the confidence I repose in you, General,’ Himmler said.
‘And you've never let me down.
I leave the whole matter in your capable hands.’
He passed an envelope across.
‘You'll find a letter of authorization in there that should take care of all contingencies.’
Schellenberg didn't open it.
Instead he said, ‘You  said you wanted me to go to Lisbon tomorrow, Reichsführer.
May I remind you it's Christmas Eve?’
‘What on earth has that got to do with anything?’
Himmler seemed genuinely surprised.
‘Speed is of the essence here, Schellenberg, and reminding you of your oath as a member of the SS, I will now tell you why.
In approximately four weeks, the Führer will fly to Cherbourg in Normandy.
January twenty-first.
I shall accompany him.
From there, we proceed to a château on the coast.
Belle Ile.
Such strange names the French employ.’
‘May I ask the purpose of the visit?’
‘The Führer intends to meet with Field Marshal Rommel personally, to confirm his appointment as Commander of Army Group B. This will give him direct responsibility for the Atlantic Wall defences.
The meeting will be concerned with the strategy necessary if our enemies decide to invade next year.
The Führer has given to me the honour of organizing the conference and, of course, responsibility for his safety.
It will be purely an SS matter.
As I've said, Rommel will be there, probably Canaris.
The Führer particularly asked for him.’
He started to sort his papers into a neat pile, putting some of them into a briefcase.
Schellenberg said,
‘But the urgency on the Steiner affair, Reichsführer, I don't understand.’
‘I intend to introduce him to the Führer at that meeting, General.
A great coup for the SS, his escape  and near victory.
His presence, of course, will make things rather difficult for Canaris which will be all to the good.’
He closed the briefcase and his eyes narrowed.
‘That is all you need to know.’
Schellenberg, who felt that he was only hanging on to his sanity by his fingernails, said, ‘But, Reichsführer, what if Devlin doesn't wish to be persuaded?’
‘Then you must take appropriate action.
To that end, I have selected a Gestapo man I wish to accompany you to Lisbon as your bodyguard.’
He rang a bell on the desk and Rossman entered.
‘Ah, Rossman.
I'll see Sturmbannführer Berger now.’
Scheilenberg waited, desperate for a cigarette, but aware also of how totally Himmler disapproved of smoking and then the door opened and Rossman appeared with another man.
Something of a surprise, this one.
A young man, only twenty-five or -six, with blond hair that was almost white.
Good-looking once, but one side of his face had been badly burned.
Schellenberg could see where the skin graft stretched tightly.
He held out his hand.
‘General Schellenberg.
Horst Berger.
A pleasure to work with you.’
He smiled, looking with that marred face like the Devil himself and Schellenberg said, ‘Major.’
He turned to Himmler.
‘May I get started, Reichsführer?’
‘Of course.
Berger will join you in the courtyard.
Send Rossman in.’
Schellenberg got the door open and Himmler added, ‘One more thing.
Canaris is to  know nothing.
Not Devlin, not our intentions regarding Steiner and for the moment, no mention of Belle Ile.
You understand the importance of this?’
‘Of course, Reichsführer.’
Schellenberg told Rossman to go in and walked along the corridor.
On the next floor, he found a toilet, slipped in and lit a cigarette, then took the envelope Himmler had given him from his pocket and opened it.
FROM THE LEADER AND CHANCELLOR OF THE STATE
General Schellenberg acts upon my direct and personal orders in a matter of the utmost importance to the Reich.
He is answerable only to me.
All personnel, military and civil, without distinction of rank will assist him in any way he sees fit.
ADOLF HITLER
Schellenberg shivered and put it back in the envelope.
The signature certainly looked right, he'd seen it often enough, but then it would be easy for Himmler to get the Führer's signature on something, just one document amongst many.
So, Himmler was giving him the same powers as he had given Max Radl for Operation Eagle.
But why?
Why was it so important to get Steiner back and in the time scale indicated?
There had to be more to the whole business than Himmler was telling him, that much was obvious.
He lit another cigarette and left, losing his way at the end of the corridor.
He hesitated, uncertain, then realized that the archway at the end led on to the balcony above the great hall.
He was about to turn and go the other way when he heard voices.
Intrigued, he moved forward on to the balcony and peered down cautiously.
Himmler was standing at the head of the great table flanked by Rossman and Berger.
The Reichsführer was speaking.
‘There are those, Berger, who are more concerned with people than ideas.
They became sentimental too easily.
I do not think you are one of them.’
‘No, Reichsführer,’ Berger said.
‘Unfortunately, General Schellenberg is.
That's why I'm sending you with him to Lisbon.
The man, Devlin, comes whether he likes it or not.
I look to you to see to it.’
‘Is the Reichsführer doubting General Schellenberg's loyalty?’
Rossman asked.
‘He has been of great service to the Reich,’ Himmler said.
‘Probably the most gifted officer to serve under my command, but I've always doubted his loyalty to the Party.
But there is no problem here, Rossman.
He is too useful for me to discard at the present time.
We must put all our energies into the preparation for Belle Ile while Schellenberg busies himself with the Steiner affair.’
He turned to Berger.
‘You'd better be off.’
‘Reichsführer.’
Berger clicked his heels and turned away.
When he was halfway across the hall, Himmler called, ‘Show me what you can do, Sturmbannführer.’
Berger had the flap of his holster open, turned with incredible speed, arm extended.
There was a fresco of knights on the far wall done in medieval style in plaster.
He fired three times very fast and three heads disintegrated.
The shots echoed through the hall as he replaced his weapon.
‘Excellent,’ Himmler said.
Schellenberg was already on his way.
He was good himself, maybe as good as Berger, but that wasn't the point.
In the hall he retrieved his greatcoat and cap, was sitting in the rear of the Mercedes when Berger joined him five minutes later.
‘Sorry if I've kept you waiting, General,’ he said as he got in.
‘No problem,’ Schellenberg said and nodded to the driver who drove away.
‘Smoke if you like.’
‘No vices, I'm afraid,’ Berger said.
‘Really?
Now that is interesting.’
Schellenberg turned up the collar of his greatcoat and leaned back in the corner pulling the peak of his cap over his eyes.
‘A long way to Berlin.
I don't know about you, but I'm going to get some sleep.’
He did just that.
Berger watched him for a while, and then he also pulled up the collar of his greatcoat and turned into the corner.
Schellenberg's office at Prinz Albrechtstrasse had a military camp bed in one corner for he often spent the night there.
He was in the small bathroom adjacent to it shaving when his secretary, Ilse Huber, entered.
She was forty.
-one at that time, already a war widow, a sensual, attractive woman in white blouse and black skirt.
She had once been Heydrich's secretary and Schellenberg, to whom she was devoted, had inherited her.
‘He's here,’ she said.
‘Rivera?’
Schellenberg wiped soap from his face.
‘And Canaris?’
‘The Herr Admiral will be riding in the Tiergarten at ten o'clock as usual.
Will you join him?’
Schellenberg frequently did, but when he went to the window and saw the powdering of snow in the streets he laughed.
‘Not this morning, thank you, but I must see him.’
Dedicated as she was to Schellenberg's welfare, she had an instinct about things.
She went and poured coffee from the pot on the tray she had put on his desk.
‘Trouble, General?’
‘In a way, my love.’
He drank some of the coffee and smiled, that ruthless, dangerous smile of his that made the heart turn over in her.
‘But don't worry.
Nothing I can't handle.
I'll fill you in on the details before I leave.
I'm going to need your help with this one.
Where's Berger, by the way?’
‘Downstairs in the canteen, last I saw of him.’
‘All right.
I'll see Rivera now.’
She paused at the door and turned.
‘He frightens me that one.
Berger, I mean.’
Schellenberg went and put an arm around her.
‘I told you not to worry.
After all, when has the great Schellenberg ever failed to manage?’
His self-mockery, as always, made her laugh.
He gave her a squeeze and she was out of the door smiling.
Schellenberg buttoned his tunic and sat down.
A moment later the door opened and Rivera came in.
He wore a dark brown suit, an overcoat over one arm, a small man, sallow skin, black hair carefully parted.
Just now he looked decidedly anxious.
‘You know who I am?’
Schellenberg asked him.
‘Of course, General.
An honour to meet you.’
Schellenberg held up a piece of paper which was actually some stationery from the hotel he'd stayed at in Vienna the previous week.
‘This message you received from your cousin, Vargas, at the London Embassy concerning the whereabouts of a certain Colonel Steiner.
Have you discussed it with anyone?’
Rivera seemed genuinely shocked.
‘Not a living soul, General.
Before God I swear this.’
He spread his hands dramatically.
‘On my mother's life.’
‘Oh, I don't think we need to bring her into it.
She's quite comfortable in that little villa you bought her in San Carlos.’
Rivera looked startled and Schellenberg said, ‘You see, there is nothing about you I  don't know.
There is no place you could go where I couldn't reach you.
Do you understand me?’
‘Perfectly, General.’
Rivera was sweating.
‘You belong to the SD now and Reichsführer Himmler, but it is me you answer to and no one else, so to start with: this message from your cousin in London.
Why did you also send it to Admiral Canaris?’
‘My cousin's orders, General.
In these matters there is always the question of payment and in this case…
’ He shrugged.
‘He thought you might get paid twice?’
Schellenberg nodded.
It made sense and yet he had learned never to take anything for granted in this game.
‘Tell me about your cousin.’
‘What can I say that the General doesn't know?
José's parents died in the influenza epidemic just after the First World War.
My parents raised him.
We were like brothers.
Went to the University of Madrid together.
Fought in the same regiment-in the Civil War.
He's one year older than me, thirty-three.’
‘He isn't married, you are,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Does he have a girlfriend in London?’
Rivera spread his hands.
‘As it happens, José's tastes do not run to women, General.’
‘I see.’
Schellenberg brooded about it for a moment.
He had nothing against homosexuals, but such people were susceptible to blackmail and that  was a weakness for anyone engaged in intelligence work.
A point against Vargas, then.
‘You know London?’
Rivera nodded.
‘I served at the Embassy there with José in thirty-nine for one year.
I left my wife in Madrid.’
‘I know London also,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Tell me about his life.
Does he live at the Embassy?’
‘Officially he does, General, but for the purposes of his private life he has a small apartment, a flat as the English call it.
He took a seven-year lease on the place while I was there so he must still have it.’
‘Where would that be?’
‘Stanley Mews, quite close to Westminster Abbey.’
‘And convenient for the Houses of Parliament.
A good address.
I'm impressed.’
‘José always did like the best.’
‘Which must be paid for.’
Schellenberg got up and went to the window.
It was snowing lightly.
He said, ‘Is he reliable, this cousin of yours?
Any question of him ever having had any dealings with our British friends?’
Rivera looked shocked again.
‘General Schellenberg, I assure you, José, like me, is a good Fascist.
We fought together with General Franco in the Civil War.
We….’
‘All right, I was just making the point.
Now listen to me carefully.
We may well decide to attempt to rescue Colonel Steiner.’
‘From the Tower of London, senor?’
Rivera's eyes bulged.
‘In my opinion, they'll move him to some sort of safe house.
May well have done so already.
You will send a message to your cousin today asking for all possible information.’
‘Of course, General.’
‘Get on with it then.’
As Rivera reached the door Schellenberg added, ‘I need hardly say that if one word of this leaks out you will end up in the River Spree, my friend, and your cousin in the Thames.
I have an extraordinarily long arm.’
‘General, I beg of you.’
Rivera started to protest again.
‘Spare me all that stuff about what a good Fascist you are.
Just think about how generous I'm going to be.
A much sounder basis for our relationship.’
Rivera departed and Schellenberg phoned down for his car, pulled on his overcoat and went out.
Admiral Wilhelm Canaris was fifty-six.
A U-boat captain of distinction in the First World War, he had headed the Abwehr since 1935 and despite being a loyal German had always been unhappy with National Socialism.
Although he was opposed to any plan to assassinate Hitler, he had been involved with the German resistance movement for some years, treading a dangerous path that was eventually to lead to his downfall and death.
That morning, as he galloped along the ride between the trees in the Tiergarten, his horse's hooves kicked up the powdered snow filling him with a fierce joy.
The two dachshunds which accompanied him everywhere, followed with surprising speed.
He saw Schellenberg standing beside his Mercedes, waved and turned towards him.
‘Good morning, Walter.
You should be with me.’
‘Not this morning,’ Schellenberg told him.
‘I'm off on my travels again.’
Canaris dismounted and Schellenberg's driver held the horse's reins.
Canaris offered Schellenberg a cigarette and they went and leaned on a parapet over-looking the lake.
‘Anywhere interesting?’
Canaris asked.
‘No, just routine,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Come on, Walter, out with it.
There's something on your mind.’
‘All right.
The Operation Eagle affair.’
‘Nothing to do with me,’ Canaris told him.
‘The Führer came up with the idea.
What nonsense!
Kill Churchill when we've already lost the war.’
‘I wish you wouldn't say that sort of thing out loud,’ Schellenberg said gently.
Canaris ignored him.
‘I was ordered to prepare a feasibility study.
I knew the Führer would forget it within a matter of days and he did, only Himmler  didn't.
Wanted to make life disagreeable for me as usual.
Went behind my back, suborned Max Radl, one of my most trusted aides.
And the whole thing turned out to be the shambles I knew it would.’
‘Of course Steiner almost pulled it off,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Pulled what off?
Come off it, Walter, I'm not denying Steiner's audacity and bravery, but the man they were after wasn't even Churchill.
Would have been quite something if they'd brought him back.
The look on Himmler's face would have been a joy to see.’
‘And now we hear that Steiner didn't die,’ Schellenberg said.
‘That they have him in the Tower of London.’
‘Ah, so Rivera has passed on his dear cousin's message to the Reichsführer also?’
Canaris smiled cynically.
‘Doubling up their reward as usual.’
‘What do you think the British will do?’
‘With Steiner?
Lock him up tight until the end of the war like Hess, only they'll keep quiet about it.
Wouldn't look too good, just as it wouldn't look too good to the Führer if the facts came to his attention.’
‘Do you think they're likely to?’
Schellenberg asked.
Canaris laughed out loud.
‘You mean from me?
So that's what all this is about?
No, Walter, I'm in enough trouble these days without looking for more.
You can tell the Reichführer that I'll keep quiet if he will
They started to walk back to the Mercedes.
Schelenberg said’ I suppose he's to be trusted, this Vagas?
We can believe him?
Canaris took the point seriously.
I'm the first to admit our operations in England have gone badly.
The British secret service came up with a a stroke of some genius when the stopped having our operatives shot when they caught them and simply turned them into double agents.’
‘And Vargas?’
One can never be sure, but I don't think so.
His position at the Spanish Embassy, the fact that he has only worked occasionally and as a freelance.
No contacts with any other agents in England, you see.’
They had reached the car.
He smiled, ‘Anything else?’
Schelenberg couldn't help saying it, he liked the man so much.
‘As you well know there was another attempt on the Führer's life at Rastenburg.
As it happened, the bombs the young officer involved was carrying went off prematurely.’
‘Very careless of him.
What's you point Walter?’
‘Take care, for God's sake.
These are dangerous times.
‘Walter I have never condoned the idea of assassinating the Führer.’
The Admiral climbed back into the saddle and gathered his reins.
However desirable  that possibility may seem to some people, and shall I tell you why, Walter?’
‘I'm sure you're going to.’
‘Stalingrad, thanks to the Führer's stupidity, lost us more than three hundred thousand dead.
Ninety-one thousand taken prisoner including twenty-four generals.
The greatest defeat we've ever known.
One balls-up after another, thanks to the Führer.’
He laughed harshly.
‘Don't you realize the truth of it, my friend?
His continued existence actually shortens the war for us.’
He put his spurs to his horse, the dachshunds yapping at his heels, and galloped into the trees.
Back at the office, Schellenberg changed into a light grey flannel suit in the bathroom, speaking through the other door to Ilse Huber as he dressed, filling her in on the whole business.
‘What do you think?’ he asked as he emerged.
‘Like a fairy tale by the Brothers Grimm?’
‘More like a horror story,’ she said as she held his black leather coat for him.
‘We'll refuel in Madrid and carry straight on.
Should be in Lisbon by late afternoon.’
He pulled on the coat, adjusted a slouch hat and picked up the overnight bag she had prepared.
‘I expect news from Rivera within two days at the outside.
Give him thirty-six hours then apply pressure.’
He kissed her on the cheek.
‘Take care, Ilse.
See you soon,’ and he was gone.
The plane was a JU52 with its famous three engines and corrugated metal skin.
As it lifted from the Luftwaffe fighter base outside Berlin, Schellenberg undid his seat belt and reached for his briefcase.
Berger, on the other side of the aisle, smiled.
‘The Herr Admiral was well, General?’
Now that isn't very clever, Schellenberg thought.
You weren't supposed to know I was seeing him.
He smiled back.
‘He seemed his usual self.’
He opened his briefcase, started to read Devlin's background report and examined a photo of him.
After a while he stopped and looked out of the window remembering what Canaris had said about Hitler.
His continued existence actually shortens the war for us.
Strange how that thought went round and round in his brain and wouldn't go away.
3
CHAPTER THREE
BARON Oswald von Hoyningen-Heune, the Minister to the German Legation in Lisbon, was a friend, an aristocrat of the old school who was also no Nazi.
He was delighted to see Schellenberg and showed it.
‘My dear Walter.
Good to see you.
How's Berlin at the moment?’
‘Colder than this,’ Schellenberg told him as they moved out through French windows and sat at a table on the pleasant terrace.
The garden was a sight to see, flowers everywhere.
A houseboy in white jacket brought coffee on a tray and Schellenberg sighed.
‘Yes, I can understand you hanging on here instead of coming back to Berlin.
The best place to be these days, Lisbon.’
‘I know,’ the Baron told him.
‘The constant worry all my staff have is of being transferred.’
He poured the coffee.
‘A strange time to arrive, Walter, Christmas Eve.’
‘You know Uncle Heini when he gets the bit  between his teeth,’ Schellenberg told him, using the nickname common in the SS behind Himmler's back.
‘It must be important,’ the Baron said.
‘Especially if he sends you.’
‘There's a man we want, an Irishman — Liam Devlin.’
Schellenberg took Devlin's photo from his wallet and passed it across.
‘He worked for Abwehr for a while.
The IRA connection.
Walked out of a hospital in Holland the other week.
Our information is that he's here, working as a waiter at a club in Alfama.’
‘The old quarter?’
The Baron nodded.
‘If he's Irish, this man, I hardly need to point out that makes him officially a neutral.
A situation of some delicacy.’
‘No rough stuff needed,’ Schellenberg said.
‘I hope we can persuade him to come back peaceably.
I have a job to offer him that could be rather lucrative.’
‘Fine,’ the Baron said.
‘Just remember that our Portuguese friends really do value their neutrality.
Even more so now that victory seems to be slipping away from us.
However, Captain Eggar, my police attaché here, should be able to assist you.’
He picked up his phone and spoke to an aide.
As he put it down he said, ‘I caught a glimpse of your companion.’
‘Sturmbannführer Horst Berger-Gestapo,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Doesn't look your sort.’
‘A Christmas present from the Reichsführer.
I didn't have much choice.’
‘Like that, is it?’
There was a knock at the door and a man in his forties slipped in.
He had a heavy moustache and wore a brown gaberdine suit that didn't fit too well.
A professional policeman, Schellenberg recognized the type.
‘Ah, there you are, Eggar.
You know General Schellenberg, don't you?’
‘Of course.
A great pleasure to see you again.
We met during the course of the Windsor affair in nineteen forty.’
‘Yes, well we prefer to forget all about that these days.’
Schellenberg passed Devlin's photo across.
‘Have you seen this man?’
Eggar examined it.
‘No, General.’
‘He's Irish, ex-IRA if you ever can be ex-IRA, age thirty-five.
He worked for Abwehr for a while.
We want him back.
Our latest information is that he's been working as a waiter at a bar called Flamingo.’
‘I know the place.’
‘Good.
You'll find my aide, Major Berger of the Gestapo, outside.
Bring him in.’
Eggar went out and returned with Berger and Schellenberg made the introductions.
‘Baron von Hoyningen-Heune, Minister to the Legation and Captain Eggar, police attaché.
Sturmbannführer Berger.’
Berger, in his dark suit with that ravaged face of his, was a chilling presence as he nodded formally and clicked his heels.
‘Captain Eggar knows this Flamingo place.
I want you to go  there with him and check if Devlin still works there.
If he does, you will not, I repeat not, contact him in any way.
Simply report to me.’
Berger showed no emotion, and turned to the door.
As he opened it Schellenberg called, ‘During the nineteen thirties Liam Devlin was one of the most notorious gunmen in the IRA.
You gentlemen would do well to remember that fact’
The remark, as Berger immediately knew, was aimed at him.
He smiled faintly, ‘We will, General,’ turned and went out followed by Eggar.
‘A bad one that.
You're welcome to him.
Still…
The Baron checked his watch.
‘Just after five, Walter.
How about a glass of champagne?’
Major Arthur Frear was fifty-four and looked older, with his crumpled suit and white hair.
He'd have been retired by now on a modest pension leading a life of genteel poverty in Brighton or Torquay.
Instead, thanks to Adolf Hitler, he was employed as military attaché at the British Embassy in Lisbon where he unofficially represented SOE.
The Lights of Lisbon at the southern edge of the Alfama district was one of his favourite places.
How convenient that Devlin was playing piano there although there was no sign of him at the moment.
Devlin, in fact, was watching him through a bead curtain at the rear.
He wore a linen suit in off-white, dark hair falling across his forehead, the vivid blue eyes full of amusement as they surveyed Frear.
The first Frear knew of his presence was when Devlin slid on the stool next to him and ordered a beer.
‘Mr Frear, isn't it?’
He nodded to the barman.
‘José here tells me you're in the port business.’
‘That's right,’ Frear said jovially.
‘Been exporting it to England for years, my firm.’
‘Never been my taste,’ Devlin told him.
‘Now if it was Irish whiskey you were talking about…’
‘Can't help you there, I'm afraid.’
Frear laughed again.
‘I say, old man, do you realize you're wearing a Guards Brigade tie?’
‘Is that a fact?
Fancy you knowing that.’
Devlin smiled amiably.
‘And me buying it from a stall in the flea market only last week.’
He slid off the stool and Frear said, ‘Aren't you going to give us a tune?’
‘Oh, that comes later.’
Devlin moved to the door and grinned.
‘Major,’ he added, and was gone.
The Flamingo was a shabby little bar and restaurant.
Berger was forced to leave things to Eggar who spoke the language fluently.
At first they drew a blank.
Yes, Devlin had worked there for a while, but he'd left three days ago.
And then a woman who had come in to sell flowers to the customers overheard their conversation and intervened.
The Irishman was  working another establishment she called at, the Lights of Lisbon, only he was employed not as a waiter but as a pianist in the bar.
Eggar tipped her and they moved outside.
‘Do you know the place?’
Berger said.
‘Oh yes, quite well.
Also in the old quarter.
I should warn you, the customers tend to the rougher side.
Rather common round here.’
‘The scum of this life never give me a problem,’ Berger said.
‘Now show me the way.’
The high walls of the Castelo de Sao Jorge lifted above them as they worked their way through a maze of narrow alleys and then, as they came into a small square in front of a church, Devlin emerged from an alley and crossed the cobbles before them towards a cafe.
‘My God, it's him,’ Eggar muttered.
‘Exactly like his photo.’
‘Of course it is, you fool,’ Berger said.
‘Is this the Lights of Lisbon?’
‘No, Major, another cafe.
One of the most notorious in Alfama.
Gypsies, bullfighters, criminals.’
‘A good job we're armed then.
When we go in, have your pistol in your right pocket and your hand on it.’
‘But General Schellenberg gave us express instructions to…
‘Don't argue.
I've no intention of losing this man now.
Do as I say and follow me,’ and Berger led the  way towards the cafe where they could hear guitar music.
Inside, the place was light and airy in spite of the fact that dusk was falling.
The bar top was marble, bottles ranged against an old-fashioned mirror behind it.
The walls were whitewashed and covered with bullfighting posters.
The bartender, squat and ugly with one white eye, wore an apron and soiled shirt and sat at a high stool reading a newspaper.
Four other men played poker at another table, swarthy, fierce-looking gypsies.
A younger man leaned against the wall and fingered a guitar.
The rest of the place was empty except for Devlin who sat at a table against the far wall reading a small book, a glass of beer at his hand.
The door creaked open and Berger stepped in, Eggar at his back.
The guitarist stopped playing, and all conversation died as Berger stood just inside the door, death come to visit them.
Berger moved past the men who were playing cards.
Eggar went closer as well, standing to the left.
Devlin glanced up, smiling amiably and picked up the glass of beer in his left hand.
‘Liam Devlin?’
Berger asked.
‘And who might you be?’
‘I am Sturmbannführer Horst Berger of the Gestapo.’
‘Jesus and why didn't they send the Devil?
I'm on reasonable terms there.’
‘You're smaller than I thought you'd be,’ Berger told him.
‘I'm not impressed.’
Devlin smiled again.
‘I get that all the time, son.’
‘I must ask you to come with us.’
‘And me only halfway through my book.
The Midnight Court and in Irish.
Would you believe I found it on a stall in the flea market only last week?’
‘Now!’
Berger said.
Devlin drank some more beer.
‘You remind me of a medieval fresco I saw on a church in Donegal once.
People running in terror from a man in a hood.
Everyone he touched got the Black Death, you see.’
‘Eggar!’
Berger commanded.
Devlin fired through the table top, chipping the wall beside the door.
Eggar tried to get the pistol out of his pocket.
The Walther Devlin had been holding on his knee appeared above the table now and he fired again, shooting Eggar through the right hand.
The police attaché cried out, falling against the wall and one of the gypsies grabbed for his gun as he dropped it.
Berger's hand went inside his jacket, reaching for the Mauser he carried in a shoulder holster there.
Devlin tossed the beer in his face and upended the table against him, the edge catching the German's shins so that he staggered forward.
Devlin rammed the muzzle of the Walther into his neck and reached  inside Berger's coat, removing the Mauser which he tossed on to the bar.
‘Present for you, Barbosa.’
The barman grinned and picked the Mauser up.
The gypsies were on their feet, two of them with knives in their hands.
‘Lucky for you you picked on the sort of place where they don't call the peelers,’ Devlin said.
‘A real bad lot, these fellas.
Even the man in the hood doesn't count for much with them.
Barbosa there used to meet him most afternoons in the bullrings in Spain.
That's where he got the horn in the eye.’
The look on Berger's face was enough.
Devlin slipped the book into his pocket, stepped around him, holding the Walther against his leg and reached for Eggar's hand.
‘A couple of knuckles gone.
You're going to need a doctor.’
He slipped the Walther into his pocket and turned to go.
Berger's iron control snapped.
He ran at him, hands outstretched.
Devlin swayed, his right foot flicking forward, catching Berger under the left knee-cap.
As the German doubled over, he raised a knee in his face, sending him back against the bar.
Berger pulled himself up, hanging on to the marble top and the gypsies started to laugh.
Devlin shook his head, ‘Jesus, son, but I'd say you should find a different class of work, the both of you,’ and he turned and went out.
When Schellenberg, vent into the small medical room, Eggar was sitting at the desk while the Legation's doctor taped his right hand.
‘How is he?’
Schellenberg asked.
‘He'll live.’
The doctor finished and cut off the end of the tape neatly.
‘He may well find it rather stiffer in future.
Some knuckle damage.’
‘Can I have a moment?’
The doctor nodded and went out and Schellenberg lit a cigarette and sat on the edge of the desk.
‘I presume you found Devlin?’
‘Hasn't the Herr General been told?’
Eggar asked.
‘I haven't spoken to Berger yet.
All I heard was that you'd come back in a taxi the worse for wear.
Now tell me exactly what happened.’
Which Eggar did for as the pain increased, so did his anger.
‘He wouldn't listen, Herr General.
Had to do it his way.’
Schellenberg put a hand on his shoulder.
‘Not your fault, Eggar.
I'm afraid Major Berger sees himself as his own man.
Time he was taught a lesson.’
‘Oh, Devlin took care of that,’ Eggar said.
‘When I last saw it, the Major's face didn't look too good.’
‘Really?’
Schellenberg smiled.
‘I didn't think it could look worse.’
Berger stood stripped to the waist in front of the wash-basin in the small bedroom he had been allocated and examined his face in the mirror.
A bruise  had already appeared around his left eye and his nose was swollen.
Schellenberg came in, closed the door and leaned against it.
‘So, you disobeyed my orders.’
Berger said, ‘I acted for the best.
I didn't want to lose him.’
‘And he was better than you are.
I warned you about that.’
There was rage on Berger's face in the mirror as he touched his cheek.
‘That little Irish swine.
I'll fix him next time.’
‘No you won't because from now on I'll handle things myself,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Unless, of course, you'd prefer me to report to the Reichsführer that we lost this man because of your stupidity.’
Berger swung round.
‘General Schellenberg, I protest.’
‘Get your feet together when you speak to me, Sturmbannführer,’ Schellenberg snapped.
Berger did as he was told, the iron discipline of the SS taking control.
‘You took an oath on joining the SS.
You vowed total obedience to your Führer and to those appointed to lead you.
Is this not so?’
‘Jawohl, Brigadeführer.’
‘Excellent,’ Schellenberg told him.
‘You're remembering.
Don't forget again.
The consequences could be disastrous.’
He moved to the door, opened it and shook his head.
‘You look awful, Major.
Try and do  something about your face before going down to dinner.’
He went out and Berger turned back to the mirror.
‘Bastard!’ he said softly.
Liam Devlin sat at the piano in the Lights of Lisbon, a cigarette dangling from the corner of his mouth, a glass of wine on one side.
It was ten o'clock, only two hours till Christmas Day and the cafe was crowded and cheerful.
He was playing a number called ‘Moonlight on the Highway’, a particular favourite, very slow, quite haunting.
He noticed Schellenberg the moment he entered, not because he recognized him, only the kind of man he was.
He watched him go to the bar and get a glass of wine, looked away, aware that he was approaching.
Schellenberg said, '’ Moonlight on the Highway’.
I like that.
One of Al Bowlly's greatest numbers,’ he added, mentioning the name of the man who had been England's most popular crooner until his death.
‘Killed in the London Blitz, did you know that?’
Devlin asked.
‘Would never go down to the cellars like everyone else when the air-raid siren went.
They found him dead in bed from the bomb blast.’
‘Unfortunate,’ Schellenberg said.
‘I suppose it depends which side you're on.’
Devlin moved into ‘A Foggy Day in London Town’ and Schellenberg said, ‘You are a man of many talents, Mr Devlin.’
‘A passable bar room piano, that's all,’ Devlin told him.
‘Fruits of a misspent youth.’
He reached for his wine, continuing to play one-handed.
‘And who might you be, old son?’
‘My name is Schellenberg — Walter Schellenberg.
You may have heard of me?’
‘I certainly have.’
Devlin grinned.
‘I lived long enough in Berlin for that.
General now, is it, and the SD at that?
Are you something to do with the two idiots who had a try at me earlier this evening?’
‘I regret that, Mr Devlin.
The man you shot is the police attaché at the Legation.
The other, Major Berger, is Gestapo.
He's with me only because the Reichsführer ordered it.’
‘Jesus, are we into old Himmler again?
Last time I saw him he didn't exactly approve of me.’
‘Well he needs you now.’
‘For what?’
‘To go to England for us, Mr Devlin.
To London, to be more precise.’
‘No thanks.
I've worked for German Intelligence twice in this war.
The first time in Ireland where I nearly got my head blown off.’
He tapped the bullet scar on the side of his forehead.
‘And the second time in Norfolk you took a bullet in the right shoulder and only got away by the skin of your teeth, leaving Kurt Steiner behind.’
‘Ah, so you know about that?’
‘Operation Eagle?
Oh, yes.’
‘A good man, the Colonel.
He wasn't much of a Nazi….
‘Did you hear what happened to him?’
‘Sure — they brought Max Radl into the hospital I was in in Holland after his heart attack.
He got some sort of report from intelligence sources in England that Steiner was killed at a place called Meltham House trying to get at Churchill.’
‘Two things wrong about that,’ Schellenberg told him.
‘Two things Radl didn't know.
It wasn't Churchill that weekend.
He was on his way to the Tehran conference.
It was his double.
Some music hall actor.’
‘Jesus, Joseph and Mary!’
Devlin stopped playing.
‘And more importantly, Kurt Steiner didn't die.
He's alive and well and at present in the Tower of London which is why I want you to go to England for me.
You see I've been entrusted with the task of getting him safely back to the Reich and I've little more than three weeks to do it in.’
Frear had entered the cafe a couple of minutes earlier and had recognized Schellenberg instantly.
He retreated to a side booth where he summoned a waiter, ordered a beer, and watched as the two men went out into the garden at the rear.
They sat at a  table and looked down at the lights of the shipping in the Tagus.
‘General, you've lost the war,’ Devlin said.
‘Why do you keep trying?’
‘Oh, we all have to do the best we can until the damn thing is over.
As I keep saying, it's difficult to jump off the merry-go-round once it's in motion.
A game we play.’
‘Like the old sod with the white hair in the end booth watching us now,’ Devlin observed.
Schellenberg looked round casually.
‘And who might he be?’
‘Pretends to be in the port business.
Name of Frear.
My friends tell me he's military attaché at the Brit Embassy here.’
‘Indeed.’
Schellenberg carried on calmly.
‘Are you interested?’
‘Now why would I be?’
‘Money.
You received twenty thousand pounds for your work on Operation Eagle paid into a Geneva account.’
‘And me stuck here without two pennies to scratch myself with.’
‘Twenty-five thousand pounds, Mr Devlin.
Paid anywhere you wish.’
Devlin lit another cigarette and leaned back.
‘What do you want him for?
Why go to all the trouble?’
‘A matter of security is involved.’
Devlin laughed harshly.
‘Come off it, General.
You  want me to go jumping out of Dorniers again at five thousand feet in the dark like last time over Ireland and you try to hand me that kind of bollocks.’
‘All right.’
Schellenberg put up a hand defensively.
‘There's a meeting in France on the twenty-first of January.
The Führer, Rommel, Canaris and Himmler.
The Führer doesn't know about Operation Eagle.
The Reichsführer would like to produce Steiner at that meeting.
Introduce him.’
‘And why would he want to do that?’
‘Steiner's mission ended in failure, but he led German soldiers in battle on English soil.
A hero of the Reich.’
‘And all that old balls?’
‘Added to which the Reichsführer and Admiral Canaris do not always see eye to eye.
To produce Steiner.’
He shrugged.
‘The fact that his escape had been organized by the SS…
‘Would make Canaris look bad?’
Devlin shook his head.
‘What a crew.
I don't much care for any of them or that old crow Himmler's motives, but Kurt Steiner's another thing.
A great man, that one.
But the bloody Tower of London…
He shook his head and Schellenberg said, ‘They won't keep him there.
My guess is they'll move him to one of their London safe houses.’
‘And how can you find that out?’
‘We have an agent in London working out of the Spanish Embassy.’
‘Can you be sure he's not a double?’
‘Pretty sure in this case.’
Devlin sat there frowning and Schellenberg said, ‘Thirty thousand pounds.’
He smiled.
‘I'm good at my job, Mr Devlin.
I'll prepare a plan for you that will work.’
Devlin nodded.
‘I'll think about it.’
He stood up.
‘But time is of the essence.
I need to get back to Berlin.’
‘And I need time to think, and it's Christmas.
I've promised to go up country to a bull ranch a friend of mine called Barbosa runs.
Used to be a great torero in Spain where they like sharp horns.
I'll be back in three days.’
‘But Mr Devlin,’ Schellenberg tried again.
‘If you want me, you'll have to wait.’
Devlin clapped him on the shoulder.
‘Come on now, Walter, Christmas in Lisbon?
Lights, music, pretty girls?
At this present moment they've got a blackout in Berlin and I bet it's snowing.
Which would you rather have?’
Schellenberg started to laugh helplessly and behind them, Frear got up and went out.
Urgent business had kept Dougal Munro at his office at SOE Headquarters on the morning of Christmas Day.
He was about to leave when Jack Carter limped in.
It was just after noon.
Munro said, ‘I hope it's urgent, Jack.
I'm due for Christmas lunch with friends at the Garrick.’
‘I thought you'd want to know about this, sir.’
Carter held up a signal flimsy.
‘From Major Frear, our man in Lisbon.
Friend Devlin.’
Munro paused.
‘What about him?’
‘Guess who he was locked in conversation with last night at a Lisbon club?
Walter Schellenberg.’
Munro sat down at his desk.
‘Now what in the hell is the good Walter playing at?’
‘God knows, sir.’
‘The Devil, more like.
Signal Frear most immediate.
Tell him to watch what Schellenberg gets up to.
If he and Devlin leave Portugal together I want to know at once.’
‘I'll get right on to it, sir,’ Carter told him and hurried out.
It had tried to snow over Christmas, but in London on the evening of the 27th, it was raining when Jack Carter turned into a small mews near Portman Square not far from SOE Headquarters; which was why he had chosen it when he'd received a phone call from Vargas.
The cafe was called Mary's Pantry, blacked out, but when he went in the place was bright with Christmas decorations and holly.
It was early evening and there were only three or four customers.
Vargas sat in the corner drinking coffee and reading a newspaper.
He wore a heavy blue overcoat and there was a hat on the table.
He had olive skin, hollow cheeks and a pencil moustache, his hair brilliantined and parted in the centre.
Carter said, ‘This had better be good.’
‘Would I bother you if it were not, senor?’
Vargas asked.
‘I've heard from my cousin in Berlin.’
‘And?’
‘They want more information about Steiner.
They're interested in mounting a rescue operation.’
‘Are you certain?’
‘That was the message.
They want all possible information as to his whereabouts.
They seem to think you will move him from the Tower.’
‘Who's they?
The Abwehr?’
‘No.
General Schellenberg of the SD is in charge.
At least that is who my cousin is working for.’
Carter nodded, fiercely excited, and got up.
‘I want you to phone me on the usual number at eleven, old chum, and don't fail.’
He leaned forward.
‘This is the big one, Vargas.
You'll make a lot of cash if you're smart.’
He turned and went out and hurried along Baker Street as fast as his game leg would allow.
In Lisbon at that precise moment Walter Schellenberg was climbing the steep cobbled alley in Alfama towards the Lights of Lisbon.
He could hear the music even before he got there.
When he went inside, the place was deserted except for the barman and Devlin at the piano.
The Irishman stopped to light a cigarette and smiled.
‘Did you enjoy your Christmas, General?’
‘It could have been worse.
And you?’
‘The bulls were running well.
I got trampled.
Too much drink taken.’
‘A dangerous game.’
‘Not really.
They tip the ends of the horns in Portugal.
Nobody dies.’
‘It hardly seems worth the candle,’ Schellenberg said.
‘And isn't that the fact?
Wine, grapes, bulls and lots and lots of sun, that's what I had for Christmas, General.’
He started to play ‘Moonlight on the Highway’.
‘And me thinking of old Al Bowlly in the Blitz, London, fog in the streets.
Now isn't that the strange thing?’
Schellenberg felt the excitement rise inside him.
‘You'll go?’
‘On one condition.
I can change my mind at the last minute if I think the thing isn't watertight.’
‘My hand on it.’
Devlin got up and they walked out to the terrace.
Schellenberg said, ‘We'll fly out to Berlin in the morning.’
‘You will, General, not me.’
‘But Mr Devlin-’
‘You have to think of everything in this game, you  know that.
Look down there.’
Over the wall, Frear had come in and was talking to one of the waiters as he wiped down the outside tables.
‘He's been keeping an eye on me, old Frear.
He's seen me talking to the great Walter Schellenberg.
I should think that would figure in one of his reports to London.’
‘So what do you suggest?’
‘You fly back to Berlin and get on with the preparations.
There'll be plenty to do.
Arrange the right papers for me at the Legation, travelling money and so on and I'll come the low-risk way by rail.
Lisbon to Madrid, then the Paris Express.
Fix it up for me to fly from there if it suits or I could carry on by train.’
‘It would take you two days at least.’
‘As I say, you'll have things to do.
Don't tell me the work won't be piling up.’
Schellenberg nodded.
‘You're right.
So, let's have a drink on it.
To our English enterprise.’
‘Holy Mother of God, not that, General.
Someone used that phrase to me last time.
They didn't realize that's how the Spanish Armada was described and look what happened to that lot.’
‘Then to ourselves, Mr Devlin,’ Schellenberg said.
‘I will drink to you and you will drink to me,’ and they went back inside.
Munro sat at his desk in the Haston Place flat and  listened intently as Carter gave him the gist of his conversation with Vargas.
He nodded.
‘Two pieces of the jigsaw, Jack.
Schellenberg's interested in rescuing Steiner and where is Schellenberg right now?
In Lisbon hobnobbing with Liam Devlin.
Now, what conclusion does that lead you to?’
‘That he wants to recruit Devlin to the cause, sir.’
‘Of course.
The perfect man.’
Munro nodded.
‘This could lead to interesting possibilities.’
‘Such as?’
Munro shook his head.
‘Just thinking out loud.
Time to think of moving Steiner anyway.
What would you suggest?’
‘There's the London Cage in Kensington,’ Carter said.
‘Come off it, Jack.
That's only used for processing transients, isn't it?
Prisoners of war such as Luftwaffe aircrews.’
‘There's Cockfosters, sir, but that's just a cage, too, and the school opposite Wandsworth Prison.
A number of German agents have been held there.’
Munro wasn't impressed and Carter tried again.
‘Of course there's Mytchett Place in Hampshire.
They've turned that into a miniature fortress for Hess.’
‘Who lives there in splendour so solitary that in June nineteen forty-one he jumped from a balcony and tried to kill himself.
No, that's no good.’
Munro went to the window and looked out.
The rain had  turned to sleet now.
‘Time I spoke with friend Steiner, I think.
We'll try and make it tomorrow.’
‘Fine, sir.
I'll arrange it.’
Munro turned.
‘Devlin — there is a photo on file?’
‘Passport photo, sir.
When he was in Norfolk he had to fill in an alien's registration form.
That's a must for Irish citizens and it requires a passport photo.
Special Branch ran it down.
It's not very good.’
‘They never are, those things.’
Munro suddenly smiled.
‘I've got it, Jack.
Where to hold Steiner.
That place in Wapping.
St Mary's Priory.’
‘The Little Sisters of Pity, sir?
But that's a hospice for terminal cases.’
‘They also look after chaps who've had breakdowns, don't they?
Gallant RAF pilots who've cracked up?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘And you're forgetting that Abwehr agent Baum in February.
The one who got shot in the chest when Special Branch and MIs tried to pick him up in Bayswater.
They nursed him at the Priory and interrogated him there.
I've seen the reports.
MIs don't use it regularly, I know that for a fact.
It would be perfect.
Built in the seventeenth century.
They used to be an enclosed order so the whole place is walled.
Built like a fortress.’
‘I've never been, sir.’
‘I have.
Strange sort of place.
Protestant for years  when Roman Catholics were proscribed, then some Victorian industrialist who was a religious crank turned it into a hostel for people off the street.
It stood empty for years and then in nineteen ten some benefactor purchased it.
The place was reconsecrated Roman Catholic and the Little Sisters of Pity were in business.’
He nodded, full of enthusiasm.
‘Yes, I think the Priory will do nicely.’
‘There is one thing, sir.
I would remind you that this is a counter-espionage matter which means it's strictly an MIS and Special Branch affair.’
‘Not if they don't know about it.’
Munro smiled.
‘When Vargas phones, see him at once.
Tell him to leave it three or four days, then to notify his cousin that Steiner is being moved to St Mary's Priory.’
‘Are you actually inviting them to try and mount this operation, sir?’
‘Why not, Jack?
We'd bag not only Devlin, but any contacts he would have.
He couldn't work alone.
No, there are all sorts of possibilities to this.
Off you go.’
‘Right, sir.’
Carter limped to the door and Munro said, ‘Silly me, I'm forgetting the obvious.
Walter Schellenberg is going to want a source for this information.
It's got to look good.’
‘May I make a suggestion, sir?’
‘By all means.’
‘José Vargas is a practising homosexual, sir, and  there's a company of Scots Guards on duty at the Tower at the moment.
Let's say Vargas has picked one of them up in one of those pubs the soldiers frequent round the Tower.’
‘Oh, very good, Jack.
Excellent,’ Munro said.
‘Get on with it then.’
From a discreet vantage point on the concourse at the airport outside Lisbon, Frear watched Schellenberg and Berger walk across the apron and board the Junkers.
He stayed there, watching it taxi away, and only went out to the cab rank when the plane had actually taken off.
Half an hour later, he went into the Lights of Lisbon and sat at the bar.
He ordered a beer and said to the barman, ‘Where's our Irish friend today?’
‘Oh, him?
Gone.’
The barman shrugged.
‘Nothing but trouble.
The boss sacked him.
There was a guest here last night.
Nice man.
A German, I think.
This Devlin had a row with him.
Nearly came to blows.
Had to be dragged off.’
‘Dear me,’ Frear said.
‘I wonder what he'll do now?’
‘Plenty of bars in Alfama, senhor,’ the barman said.
‘Yes, you're certainly right there.’
Frear swallowed his beer.
‘I'll be off then.’
He went out and Devlin stepped through the bead  curtain at the back of the bar.
‘Good man yourself, José.
Now let's have a farewell drink together.’
It was late afternoon and Munro was at his desk in his office at SOE Headquarters when Carter came in.
‘Another signal from Frear, sir.
Schellenberg left for Berlin by plane this morning, but Devlin didn't go with him.’
‘If Devlin is as smart as I think he is, Jack, he's been on to Frear from the start.
You can't be a military attaché at any embassy in a place like Lisbon without people knowing.’
‘You mean he's gone to Berlin by another route, sir?’
‘Exactly.
Twisting and turning like the fox he is and all to no avail.’
Munro smiled.
‘We have Rivera and Vargas in our pockets and that means we'll always be one step ahead.’
‘So what happens now, sir?’
‘We wait, Jack, we just wait and see what their next move is.
Did you arrange the meeting with Steiner?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Munro went to the window.
The sleet had turned to rain and he snorted.
‘Looks as if we're going to get some fog now.
Bloody weather.’
He sighed.
‘What a war, Jack, what a war.’
4
CHAPTER FOUR
As the car went along Tower Hill, fog rolled in from the Thames.
Munro said, ‘What's the situation here now?’
‘The whole place is guarded, Brigadier.
Public aren't allowed in like they used to be before the war.
I understand they run sightseeing trips for Allied servicemen in uniform some days.’
‘And the Yeomen?’
‘Oh, they still function and still live in the married quarters with their families.
The whole place has been bombed more than once.
Three times while Rudolf Hess was there, remember?’
They were stopped at a sentry post to have passes checked and moved on through the wool of the fog, traffic sounds muted, an anguished cry from the Thames as a ship sounded its foghorn on the way down to the sea.
They were checked again then carried on over the drawbridge and through the gate.
‘Not exactly a day to fill the heart with joy,’ Munro observed.
There wasn't much to see with the fog, only grey stone walls as they carried on, eventually reaching the Inner Ward, everything cut off around them.
‘The hospital's over there, sir,’ Carter said.
‘You've made the arrangements as I ordered?’
‘Yes, sir, but with some reluctance.’
‘You're a nice man, Jack, but this isn't a nice war.
Come on, we'll get out here and walk across.’
‘Right, sir.’
Carter struggled to follow him, his leg the usual problem.
The fog was yellow and acrid and bit at the back of the throat like acid.
‘Shocking, isn't it?’
Munro said.
‘Real pea-souper.
What was it Dickens called it?
A London particular?’
‘I believe so, sir.’
They started to walk.
‘What a bloody place, Jack.
Supposed to be haunted by ghosts.
That wretched little girl, Lady Jane Grey, Walter Raleigh ceaselessly prowling the walls.
I wonder what Steiner makes of it?’
‘I shouldn't think it exactly helps him to sleep, sir.’
One of the Tower's famous black ravens emerged from the fog, enormous, wings flapping as it cawed at them.
Munro started violently.
‘Get away, you filthy great creature.’
He shuddered.
‘There, what did I tell you, spirits of the dead.’
The small hospital room was painted dark green.
There was a narrow bed, a cupboard and a wardrobe.
There was also a bathroom adjacent to it.
Kurt Steiner in pyjamas and towelling robe, sat by the window reading.
The window was barred although it was possible to reach through and open the casement He preferred to sit there because in better weather he could see out into the Inner Ward and the White Tower.
It gave an illusion of space and space meant freedom.
There was a rattle of bolts at the stout door: it opened and a military policeman stepped in
‘Visitors for you Colonel.’
Munro moved in followed by Carter.
‘You may leave us, corporal,’ he told the MP.
‘Sir.’
The man went out, locking the door.
Munro more for the effect than anything else, was in uniform.
He shrugged off his British Warm greatcoat and Steiner took in the badges of rank and red tabs of a staff officer.
Oberstleutnant Kurt Steiner?’
Steiner stood up.
‘Brigadier?’
Munro, and this is my aide, Captain Jack Carter.’
Gentlemen I gave my name, my rank, and my number some time ago, ' Steiner said.
‘I've nothing to add except to say that I'm surprised no one 's tried to squeeze more out of me since and I apologize for the  fact that there's only one chair here so I can't ask you to sit down.’
His English was perfect and Munro found himself warming to him.
‘We'll sit on the bed if we may.
Jack, give the Colonel a cigarette.’
‘No, thanks,’ Steiner said.
‘A bullet in the chest was a good excuse to give up.’
They sat down.
Munro said, ‘Your English is really excellent.’
‘Brigadier,’ Steiner smiled.
‘I'm sure that you're aware that my mother was American and that I lived in London for many years as a boy when my father was military attaché at the German Embassy.
I was educated at St Paul's.’
He was twenty-seven and in good shape except for a slight hollowing in the cheeks, obviously due to his hospitalization.
He was quite calm, a slight smile on his lips, a kind of self-sufficiency there that Munro had noticed in many airborne soldiers.
‘You haven't been pressured into any further interrogation, not only because of the condition you were in for so long,’ Munro said, ‘but because we know everything there is to know about Operation Eagle.’
‘Really?’
Steiner said drily.
‘Yes.
I work for Special Operations Executive, Colonel.
Knowing things is our business.
I'm sure you'll be surprised to discover that the man you tried to shoot that night at Meltham House wasn't Mr Churchill.’
Steiner looked incredulous.
‘What are you trying to tell me now?
What nonsense is this?’
‘Not nonsense,’ Jack Carter said.
‘He was one George Howard Foster, known in the music halls as the Great Foster.
An impressionist of some distinction.’
Steiner laughed helplessly.
‘But that's wonderful.
So bloody ironic.
Don't you see?
If it had all succeeded and we'd taken him back…?
My God, a music hall artist.
I'd love to have seen that bastard Himmler's face.’
Concerned that he was going too far, he took a deep breath and pulled himself together.
‘So?’
‘Your friend, Liam Devlin, was wounded but survived,’ Carter said.
‘Walked out of a Dutch hospital and escaped to Lisbon.
As far as we know, your second-in-command, Neumann, still survives and is hospitalized.’
‘As is Colonel Max Radl, your organizer,’ Munro put in.
‘Had a heart attack.’
‘So, not many of us left,’ Steiner said lightly.
‘Something I've never understood, Colonel,’ Carter said.
‘You're no Nazi, we know that.
You ruined your career trying to help a Jewish girl in Warsaw and yet that last night in Norfolk, you still tried to get Churchill.’
‘I'm a soldier, Captain, the game was in play and it is a game, wouldn't you agree?’
‘And in the end, the game was playing you?’
Munro said shrewdly.
‘Something like that.’
‘Nothing to do with the fact that your father, General Karl Steiner, was being held at Gestapo Headquarters at Prinz Albrechtstrasse in Berlin for complicity in a plot against the Führer?’
Carter asked.
Steiner's face shadowed.
‘Captain Carter, Reichsführer Himmler is noted for many things, but charity and compassion are not among them.’
‘And it was Himmler behind the whole business,’ Munro told him.
‘He pressured Max Radl into working behind Admiral Canaris's back.
Even the Führer had no idea what was going on.
Still hasn't.’
‘Nothing would surprise me,’ Steiner said, stood up and paced to the wall.
He turned.
‘Now, gentlemen.
What is this all about?’
‘They want you back,’ Munro told him.
Steiner stared at him, incredulous.
‘You're joking.
Why would they bother?’
‘All I know is that Himmler wants you out of here.’
Steiner sat down again.
‘But this is nonsense.
With all due respect to my fellow countrymen, German prisoners of war have not been noted for escaping from England, not since the First World War.’
‘There has been one,’ Carter told him.
‘Luftwaffe pilot, but even he had to do it from Canada into the States before they were in the war.’
‘You miss the point,’ Munro said.
‘We're not talking  of a prisoner simply making a run for it.
We're talking about a plot, if you like.
A meticulously mounted operation master-minded by General Walter Schellenberg of the SD.
Do you know him?’
‘Of him only,’ Steiner replied automatically.
‘Of course it would require the right man to pull it off which is where Liam Devlin comes in,’ Carter added.
‘Devlin?’
Steiner shook his head.
‘Nonsense, Devlin is one of the most remarkable men I have ever known, but even he couldn't get me out of this place.’
‘Yes, well it wouldn't be from here.
We're moving you to a safe house in Wapping.
St Mary's Priory You'll be given the details later.’
‘No, I can't believe it.
This is some trick,’ Steiner said.
‘Good God, man, what profit would there be in it for us?’
Munro demanded.
‘There's a man at the Spanish Embassy here in London called José Vargas, a commercial attaché.
He works for your side on occasion for money.
Operates via his cousin at the Spanish Embassy in Berlin using a diplomatic pouch.’
‘He works for us, -you see, also for money,’ Carter said.
‘And they have been in touch, indicated their interest in pulling you out and requesting more information as to your whereabouts.’
‘And we've told him what he needs to know,’ Munro put in.
‘Even your new home at the Priory.’
‘So, now I understand,’ Steiner said.
‘You allow  the plan to proceed, Devlin comes to London.
He will need help, of course, other agents or what have you and at the appropriate moment you arrest the lot.’
‘Yes, that is one way,’ Munro said.
‘There is another possibility, of course.’
‘And what would that be?’
‘That I simply allow it all to happen.
You escape to Germany…’
‘Where I work for you?’
Steiner shook his head.
‘Sorry, Brigadier.
Carter was right.
I'm no Nazi, but I'm still a soldier — a German soldier.
I'd find the word traitor difficult to handle.’
‘Would you say your father and others were traitors because they tried to remove the Führer?’
Munro asked.
‘In a sense that's different.
Germans trying to handle their own problem.’
‘A neat point.’
Munro turned and said, ‘Jack?’
Carter went and knocked on the door.
It opened and the MP appeared.
Munro got up.
‘If you'd be kind enough to follow me, Colonel, there's something I'd like you to see.’
As far as Adolf Hitler was concerned there was to be no possibility of an honourable death for a traitor.
No officer convicted of plotting against him met his end at the hands of the firing squad.
The punishment  was statutory, death by hanging, usually from a meat hook and often piano wire was employed.
Victims frequently took a long time to die, often very unpleasantly.
The Führer had ordered all such executions to be recorded on film.
Many were so appalling that even Himmler had been known to walk out of the showings, sick to the stomach.
The one which was being shown now in the large stockroom at the end of the corridor was flickering and rather grainy.
The young Intelligence sergeant, anonymous in the darkness behind the film projector, was using the white painted wall as a screen.
Steiner sat on a chair alone, Munro and Carter behind him.
General Karl Steiner, carried in by two SS men, was already dead from a heart attack, the only good thing about the entire proceedings.
They hung him to the hook anyway and moved away.
For a little while the camera stayed on that pathetic figure, swaying slightly from side to side, then the screen went blank.
The projectionist switched on the light.
Kurt Steiner stood, turned and moved to the door without a word.
He opened it, went past the MP and walked down the corridor to his room.
Munro and Carter followed.
When they went into the room, Steiner was standing at the window gripping the bar and looking out.
He turned, his face very pale.
‘You know I really think it's about time I took up smoking again, gentlemen.’
Jack Carter fumbled a cigarette out of a packet of Players and gave him a light.
‘I'm sorry about that,’ Munro said, ‘but it was important you knew that Himmler had broken his promise.’
‘Come off it, Brigadier,’ Steiner said.
‘You're not sorry about anything.
You wanted to make your point and you've made it.
I never thought my father stood much of a chance of survival, whatever I did.
As far as Himmler is concerned, keeping promises is a low priority.’
‘And what do you think now?’
Munro asked.
‘Ah, so we come to the purpose of the exercise?
Will I now, in a white-hot rage, offer my services to the Allies?
Allow myself to be spirited off to Germany where I assassinate Hitler at the first opportunity?’
He shook his head.
‘No, Brigadier.
I'll have some bad nights over this.
I may even ask to see a priest, but the essential point remains the same.
My father's involvement in a plot on Hitler's life was as a German.
He wasn't doing it to advance the Allied cause.
He was doing it for Germany.’
It was Carter who said, ‘Yes, one sees that.’
Steiner turned to him.
‘Then you must also realize that for me to do what the Brigadier suggests would be a betrayal of everything my father stood for and gave his life for.’
‘All right.’
Munro stood up.
‘We're wasting our time.
You'll be transferred to St Mary's Priory in the  New Year, Colonel.
Your friend Devlin hasn't a hope of getting you out, of course, but we'd love him to try.’
He turned to Carter.
‘Let's get moving Jack.’
Steiner said, ‘One thing, Brigadier, if I may?’
‘Yes?’
‘My uniform.
I would remind you that under the Geneva Convention I am entitled to wear it.’
Munro glanced at Carter who said, ‘It has been repaired, Colonel, and cleaned.
I'll arrange for you to have it later today together with all your medals, naturally.’
‘That's all right then,’ Munro said and went out.
Carter took out his packet of cigarettes and a box of matches and laid them on the locker.
‘You mentioned a priest.
I'll arrange for one if you like.’
‘I'll let you know.’
‘And a supply of cigarettes?’
‘Better not.
This one tasted terrible.’
Steiner managed a smile.
Carter went to the door, hesitated and turned.
‘If it helps at all, Colonel, it was apparently a heart attack your father died of.
I don't know the circumstances…’
‘Oh, I can imagine them well enough, but my thanks anyway,’ Steiner answered.
He stood there, hands thrust into the pockets of his robe, quite calm, and Carter, unable to think of anything else to say, stepped into the corridor and went after Munro.
As they drove through the fog along Tower Hill, Munro said, ‘You don't approve, do you, Jack?’
‘Not really, sir.
An unnecessary cruelty in my opinion.
‘Yes, well, as I told you before, it's not a nice war.
At least we know where we stand with friend Steiner now.’
‘I suppose so, sir.’
‘As for Devlin — if he's mad enough to try, let him come whenever he wants.
With Vargas tipping us off on every move he makes we can't go wrong.’
He settled back in the seat and closed his eyes.
It was actually New Year's Day when Devlin finally arrived in Berlin.
It had taken him two days to get a seat on the Paris Express from Madrid.
In Paris itself, his priority, thanks to Schellenberg, had got him on the Berlin Express, but B17 bombers of the American 8th Air Force operating out of England had inflicted severe damage on the Frankfurt railway marshalling yards.
This had necessitated a rerouting of most rail traffic from France or the Netherlands into Germany.
The weather was bad in Berlin, the kind of winter that couldn't make up its mind, a thin snow changing to sleet and driving rain.
Devlin, still wearing a suit more apt for Portugal, had managed to procure a raincoat in Paris, but he was freezing and quite miserable  as he trudged through the crowds in the railway station at Berlin.
Ilse Huber recognized him at once from his file photo as she stood at the barrier beside the security police.
She had already made arrangements with the sergeant in charge and when Devlin appeared, bag in hand, his papers ready, she intervened at once.
‘Herr Devlin?
Over here please.’
She held out her hand.
‘I am Ilse Huber, General Schellenberg's secretary.
You look awful.’
‘I feel bloody awful.’
‘I have transport waiting,’ she said.
The car was a Mercedes saloon with an SS pennant conspicuously on display.
Devlin said, ‘I suppose that thing makes people get out of the way fast?’
‘It certainly helps,’ she said.
‘It occurred to General Schellenberg that you might be caught out by the weather.’
‘You can say that again.’
‘I've made arrangements to take you to a second-hand shop.
We'll get everything you need there.
And you'll need some place to stay.
I have an apartment not too far from headquarters.
There are two bedrooms.
If it suits, you can have one of them while you're here.’
‘More to the point, does it suit you?’ he asked.
She shrugged.
‘Mr Devlin, my husband was killed in the Winter War in Russia.
I have no children.
My mother and father died in an RAF raid on Hamburg.
Life could be difficult except for one thing.
Working for General Schellenberg usually takes at least sixteen hours out of my day, so I'm hardly ever home.’
She smiled and Devlin warmed to her.
‘It's a deal, then.
Ilse, is it?
Let's get on with the clothes.
I feel as if some of my more particular parts have frozen solid.’
When they emerged forty minutes later from the second-hand shop she'd taken him to, he wore a tweed suit, laced boots, a heavy overcoat almost ankle-length, gloves and a trilby hat.
‘So, you are equipped to handle Berlin in January,’ she said.
‘Where to now?
Your apartment?’
‘No, we can go there later.
General Schellenberg wants to see you as soon as possible.
He's at Prinz Albrechtstrasse now.
Devlin could hear the sounds of shooting as they descended the steep stairway.
‘And what's all this then?’
Ilse said, ‘The basement firing range.
The General likes to keep in practice.’
‘Is he any good?’
She looked almost shocked.
‘The best.
I've never seen anyone shoot better.’
‘Really?’
Devlin was unconvinced.
But he had cause to revise his opinion a moment later when they opened the door and went in.
Schellenberg was firing at a series of cardboard Russian soldiers, watched by an SS sergeant-major who was obviously in charge.
He worked his way across three targets, placing two rounds neatly in each heart.
As he paused to reload, he noticed their presence.
‘Ah, Mr Devlin, so you finally got here?’
‘A hell of a journey, General.’
‘And Ilse's taken care of your wardrobe, I see.’
‘And how did you guess?’
Devlin said.
‘It can only have been the smell of the mothballs.’
Schellenberg laughed and reloaded his Mauser.
‘Schwarz,’ he said to the sergeant-major.
‘Something for Mr Devlin.
I believe he's quite a marksman.’
Schwarz rammed a magazine into the butt of a Walther PPK and handed it to the Irishman.
‘All right?’
Schellenberg asked.
‘Your shout, General.’
Fresh targets sprang up and Schellenberg fired six times very fast, again two holes in the heart area on three separate targets.
‘Now isn't that something?’
Devlin's hand swung up, he fired three rounds so close together that they might almost have been one.
A hole appeared between the eyes of all three targets.
He laid the Walther down and Ilse Huber said,
‘My God!’
Schellenberg handed his pistol to Schwarz.
‘A remarkable talent, Mr Devlin.’
‘Remarkable curse more like.
Now what happens, General?’
‘The Reichsführer has expressed a desire to see you.’
Devlin groaned.
‘He didn't like me the last time around.
A glutton for punishment that man.
All right, let's get it over with.’
The Mercedes turned out of Wilhelmplatz and into Vosstrasse and drove towards the Reich Chancellery.
‘What's all this?’
Devlin demanded.
‘Times have changed since Goering said that if a single bomb fell on Berlin you could call him Meier.’
‘You mean he got it wrong?’
‘I'm afraid so.
The Führer has had a bunker constructed below the Chancellery.
Subterranean headquarters.
Thirty metres of concrete, so the RAF can drop as many bombs as they like.’
‘Is this where he intends to make his land stand then?’
Devlin enquired.
‘Wagner playing over the loudspeakers?’
‘Yes, well, we don't like to think about that,’ Schellenberg said.
‘The important people have secondary accommodation down there which obviously includes the Reichsführer.’
‘So what goes on now?
Are they expecting the RAF to plaster the city tonight or what?’
‘Nothing so exciting.
The Führer likes to have staff meetings now and then in the map room.
He gives them dinner afterwards.’
‘Down there?’
Devlin shuddered.
‘I'd rather have a corned beef sandwich.’
The Mercedes drew into the car ramp and an SS sentry approached.
In spite of Schellenberg's uniform the sentry checked their identities thoroughly before allowing them through.
Devlin followed Schellenberg down a seemingly endless passage, concrete walls, dim lighting.
There was a soft humming from electric fans in the ventilating system, the occasional blast of cold air.
There were SS guards here and there, but no great evidence of people, and then a door opened, a young corporal emerged and behind him Devlin saw a room crammed with radio equipment and a number of operatives.
‘Don't make the mistake of thinking there's no one here,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Rooms everywhere.
A couple of hundred people tucked in all over the place like that radio room.’
A door opened further along the passage and to Devlin's astonishment, Hitler emerged followed by a broad, rather squat man in a nondescript uniform.
As they approached, Schellenberg pulled Devlin to one side and stood at attention.
The Führer was talking to the other man in a low voice and totally  ignored them as he passed and descended the stairs at the other end of the passage.
‘The man with him was Bormann,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Reichsleiter Martin Bormann.
Head of the Nazi Party Chancellery.
A very powerful man.’
‘So that was the Führer?’
Devlin said.
‘And me almost getting to touch the hem of his robe.’
Schellenberg smiled.
‘Sometimes, my friend, I wonder how you've managed to last as long as you have.’
‘Ah, well, it must be my good looks, General.’
Schellenberg tapped on a door, opened it and led the way in.
A young woman, an SS auxiliary in uniform, sat at a typewriter in the corner.
The rest of the room was mainly taken up by filing cabinets and the desk behind which Himmler sat, working through a file.
He glanced up and removed his pince-nez.
‘So, General, he's arrived.’
‘God bless all here,’ Devlin said cheerfully.
Himmler winced and said to the girl, ‘Leave us.
Come back in fifteen minutes.’
She went out and he carried on.
‘I expected you in Berlin sooner, Herr Devlin.’
‘Your railway system seemed to be having trouble with the RAF,’ Devlin told him and lit a cigarette, mainly because he knew Himmler detested the habit.
Himmler was annoyed, but didn't tell him to stop.
Instead, he said to Schellenberg, ‘You seem to have wasted an inordinate amount of time so far, General.
Why didn't Herr Devlin return from Lisbon with you?’
‘Ah, the General did a fine job,’ said Devlin.
‘It was me had plans for Christmas you see.
No, the General was very reasonable.
More than I can say for the other fella, Berger.
We didn't get on at all.’
‘So I understand,’ Himmler said.
‘But that scarcely matters as Sturmbannführer Berger has other duties to take care of.’
He leaned back.
‘So, you think this thing can be done?
You believe you could get Steiner out?’
‘Depends on the plan,’ Devlin said, ‘but anything's possible.’
Himmler nodded.
‘It would be a remarkable coup for all of us.’
‘That's as may be,’ Devlin said.
‘It's getting back in one piece that worries me.
I only just made it last time.’
‘You were well paid then and I would remind you that you're being well paid this time.’
‘And that's a fact,’ Devlin said.
‘As my old mother used to say, money will be the death of me.’
Himmler looked extremely annoyed.
‘Can't you take anything seriously, you Irish?’
‘When I last had the pleasure of meeting your honour, I gave you the answer to that one.
It's the rain.’
‘Oh, get him out of here,’ Himmler said.
‘And get  on with it, General.
Needless to say, I expect a regular progress report.’
‘Reichsführer.’
Schellenberg ushered Devlin out.
The Irishman was grinning hugely.
‘I enjoyed that.’
He dropped his cigarette on the floor and stamped on it as Berger came round the corner, a rolled-up map under his arm.
He was in uniform and wore the Iron Cross First and Second Classes.
He stiffened when he saw them and Devlin said cheerfully, ‘Very pretty, son, but it looks to me as if someone's been spoiling your good looks.’
Berger's face was very pale and although the swelling had subsided it was obvious his nose was broken.
He ignored Devlin and nodded formally to Schellenberg.
‘General.’
He passed on and knocked at Himmler's door.
‘He must be well in there,’ Devlin observed.
‘Yes,’ Schellenberg nodded.
‘Interesting.’
‘Where to now?
Your office?’
‘No, tomorrow will be soon enough.
I'll take you for a meal and drop you at Ilse's place afterwards.
You get a good night's sleep and we'll go over things in the morning.’
As they reached the mouth of the tunnel, fresh air drifted in and Devlin took a deep breath.
‘Thank God for that,’ and then he started to laugh.
‘What is it?’
Schellenberg demanded.
There was a poster on the wall that carried a picture  of a rather idealized SS soldier and underneath it said, ‘At the end stands victory.’
Devlin laughed again.
‘God save us, General, but some people will believe anything.’
Berger clicked his heels in front of Himmler's desk.
‘I have the plan of the Château de Belle Ile here, Reichsführer.’
‘Excellent,’ Himmler said.
‘Let me see.’
Berger unrolled the plan and the Reichsführer examined it.
‘Good.
Very good.’
He looked up.
‘You will be in sole charge, Berger.
How many men would you suggest for the honour guard?’
‘Twenty-five.
Thirty at the most, Reichsführer.’
‘Have you visited the place yet?’
Himmler asked.
‘I flew down to Cherbourg the day before yesterday and drove out to the Château.
It's quite splendid.
The owners are French aristocrats who fled to England.
There is at the moment only a caretaker and his wife.
I've informed him that we'll be taking the place over in the near future, but not why, naturally.’
‘Excellent.
No need to go near the place again for another couple of weeks.
In other words, wait as long as possible before you and your men take over.
You know what this so-called French Resistance is like.
Terrorists, all of them.
They bomb — murder.’
He rolled the plan up and returned it to Berger.
‘After all, the Führer will be our direct responsibility at this  conference, Major.
A sacred responsibility.’
‘Of course, Reichsführer.’
Berger clicked his heels and went out.
Himmler picked up his pen and started to write again.
The Mercedes moved along the Kurfurstendamm as snow started to fall again.
There was evidence of bomb damage everywhere and with the blackout and dusk falling, the prospect was less than pleasing.
‘Look at it,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Used to be a great city this.
Art, music, theatre.
And the clubs, Mr Devlin.
The Paradise and the Blue Nile.
Always filled with the most beautifully dressed transvestites you've ever seen.’
‘My tastes never ran that way,’ Devlin told him.
‘Nor mine,’ Schellenberg laughed.
‘I always think they're missing out on a good thing.
Still, let's eat.
I know a little restaurant in a back street not far from here where we'll do reasonably well.
Black market, but then they do know me, which helps.’
The place was homely enough with no more than a dozen tables.
It was run by a man and his wife who obviously did know Schellenberg well.
The general apologized for the dearth of corned beef sandwiches, but was able to produce a mutton broth, lamb, potatoes and cabbage and a bottle of Hock to go with it.
The booth they sat in was quite private and as they finished the meal Schellenberg said, ‘Do you really think it is possible, this thing?’
‘Anything's possible.
I remember a case during the Irish Revolution.
Nineteen twenty, it was.
The Black and Tans had captured a fella called Michael Fitzgerald, an important IRA leader.
Held him in Limerick Prison.
A man called Jack O'Malley who served in the British Army in Flanders as a captain got his old uniform out, dressed up half a dozen of his men as soldiers and went to Limerick Prison with a fake order that said they wanted Fitzgerald at Dublin Castle.’
‘And it worked?’
‘Like a charm.’
Devlin poured the last of the wine into both their glasses.
‘There is one problem here though, a very important problem.’
‘And what's that?’
‘Vargas.’
‘But that's taken care of.
We've told him we must have firm information as to where they intend to move Steiner.’
‘You're convinced they will move him?’
‘Certain of it.
They won't continue to keep him in the Tower.
It's too absurd.’
‘So you think Vargas will come up with the right information?’
Devlin shook his head.
‘He must be good.’
‘He always has been in the past, so the Abwehr  have found.
This is a Spanish diplomat, Mr Devlin, a man in a privileged position.
No ordinary agent.
I have had his cousin, this Rivera fellow, thoroughly vetted.’
‘All right, I accept that.
Let's say Rivera's as clean as a whistle, but who checks out Vargas?
There is no one.
Rivera is just a conduit through which the messages come and go, but what if Vargas is something else?’
‘You mean a neat British Intelligence plot to entice us in?’
‘Well, let's look at the way they would see it.
Whoever drops in needs friends in London, some sort of organization.
If I was in charge on the Brit side, I'd give a little rope, let things get started, then arrest everybody in sight.
From their point of view, quite a coup.
‘Are you telling me you're having second thoughts?
That you don't want to go?’
‘Not at all.
What I'm saying is that if I do, I have to go on the supposition that I'm expected.
That Vargas has sold us out.
Now that's a very different thing.’
‘Are you serious?’
Schellenberg demanded.
‘I'd look a right idiot if we organize things on the basis that Vargas is on our side and I get there and he isn't.
Tactics, General, that's what's needed here.
Just like chess.
You've got to think three moves ahead.’
‘Mr Devlin, you are a remarkable man,’ Schellenberg told him.
‘A genius on my good days,’ Devlin told him solemnly.
Schellenberg settled the account and they went outside.
It was still snowing lightly as they walked to the Mercedes.
‘I'll take you to Ilse's now and we'll meet up in the morning.’
At that moment the sirens started.
Schellenberg called to his driver.
‘Hans, this way.’
He turned to Devlin.
‘On second thought, I think we'll go back to the restaurant and sit in their cellar with the other sensible people.
It's quite comfortable.
I've been there before.’
‘Why not?’
Devlin said and turned with him.
‘Who knows?
They might find us a bottle of something in there.’
Behind them, gunfire was already rumbling like thunder on the edge of the city.
5
CHAPTER FIVE
As they approached Schellenberg's office at Prinz Albrechtstrasse, the morning air was tainted with smoke.
‘They certainly hit the target last night,’ he said.
‘You can say that again,’ Devlin replied.
The door opened and Ilse Huber nodded good morning.
‘There you are, General.
I was a little worried.’
‘Mr Devlin and I spent the night in the cellar of that restaurant in Marienstrasse.’
‘Rivera's on his way,’ she told him.
‘Oh, good, send him in when he arrives.’
She went out and ten minutes later ushered Rivera in.
The Spaniard stood there clutching his hat, nervously glancing at Devlin.
‘You may speak freely,’ Schellenberg said.
‘I've had another message from my cousin, General.
He says they are moving Steiner from the Tower of London to a place called St Mary's Priory.’
‘Did he give an address for that?’
‘He just said it was in Wapping, by the river.’
Devlin said, ‘A remarkable fella, your cousin, to come up with such a prime piece of information so easily.’
Rivera smiled eagerly.
‘José is certain his information is correct, senor.
He got it from a friend of his, a soldier in the Scots Guards.
They have a company serving in the Tower at the moment.
They use the public houses nearby and my cousin.…’
Rivera shrugged.
‘A matter of some delicacy.’
‘Yes, we understand, Rivera.’
Schellenberg nodded.
‘All right, you can go for now.
I'll be in touch when I need you.’
Ilse showed him out and came back.
‘Is there anything you'd like me to do, General?’
‘Yes, find me one of those gazetteers from the files.
You know the sort of thing.
London street-by-street.
See if this place is mentioned.’
She went out.
‘I used to know Wapping well at one stage of my career,’ Devlin said.
‘With the IRA?’
‘The bombing campaign.
They were always having a go, the hard men, those who'd blow up the Pope if they thought it would help the cause.
Nineteen thirty-six, there was an active service unit who set a bomb or two off in London.
You know the sort of thing?
Women, kids, passers-by?
I was used as an enforcer in those days and the men at the top wanted it stopped.
Lousy publicity, you see.’
‘And this is when you knew Wapping?’
‘A friend from my youth in County Down.
Friend of my mother's actually.’
‘Who is this friend?’
‘Michael Ryan.
Ran a safe house.
Not active at all.
Very deep cover.’
‘And you took care of this active service unit?’
‘There were only the three of them.’
Devlin shrugged.
‘They wouldn't be told.
After that, I went to Spain.
Joined the Lincoln-Washington Brigade.
Did my bit against Franco till the Italians took me prisoner.
Eventually the Abwehr pulled me out.’
‘And this friend of yours in Wapping, this Ryan — I wonder what happened to him?’
‘Still in deep, old Michael, I should imagine.
He wouldn't want to know any more.
That kind of man.
Had doubts about the use of violence.
When the Abwehr sent me to Ireland in forty-one I met a friend of his in Dublin.
From what he told me I know for a fact the IRA didn't use Mick during their bombing campaign in England at the beginning of the war.’
‘Could this be of any use?’
Schellenberg suggested.
‘Jesus, General, you've got the cart running before the horse, haven't you?’
Ilse came in with an orange-coloured book.
‘I've found it, General, St Mary's Priory, Wapping.
See, right on the edge of the Thames.’
Schellenberg and Devlin examined the map.
‘That isn't going to tell us much,’ Devlin said.
Schellenberg nodded.
‘I've just had a thought.
Operation Sea Lion, nineteen forty.’
‘You mean the invasion that never was?’
‘Yes, but it was thoroughly planned.
One task the SD was given was a comprehensive survey of London.
Buildings, I'm talking about.
Their usefulness if London were occupied.’
‘You mean which place was suitable for Gestapo Headquarters?
That sort of thing?’
Schellenberg smiled amiably.
‘Exactly.
There was a listing of many hundreds of such places on file and plans, where obtainable.’
He turned to Ilse Huber.
‘See what you can do.’
‘At once, General.’
Devlin sat by the window, Schellenberg at his desk.
They lit cigarettes.
Schellenberg said.
‘You said last night you preferred to proceed with the notion of Vargas being a traitor.’
‘That's right.’
‘So what would you do?
How would you handle it?’
‘Easy — a stroke of genius hit me at the height of the bombing, General.
We don't tell Vargas I'm going.’
‘I don't understand.’
‘We extract what information we need.
In fact, we probably have enough already.
Then, once a week, Rivera asks for more information on your behalf.
Steiner's regime at the Priory, the guard system, that  sort of thing, only I'll already be in London.
Now, Walter, my old son, you've got to admit that's good.’
Schellenberg laughed helplessly, then got up.
‘Very good — bloody marvellous.
Let's go down to the canteen and have a coffee on it.’
Later, Schellenberg called for his Mercedes and they drove to the Tiergarten and walked around the lake, feet crunching in the light powdering of snow.
‘There's another difficulty,’ Devlin said.
‘The Special Branch managed to hunt me down when I was in Norfolk.
A little late in the day as it happened, but they did and one of the things that helped was the fact that as an Irish citizen I had to be entered on the aliens’ register by the local police and that required a passport photo.’
‘I see.
So what are you saying?’
‘A complete change in appearance — a real change.’
‘You mean hair colouring and so on?’
Devlin nodded.
‘Add a few years as well.’
‘I think I can help there,’ Schellenberg said.
‘I have friends at the UFA film studios here in Berlin.
Some of their make-up artists can achieve remarkable things.’
‘Another thing — no aliens’ register this time.
I was born in County Down which is in Ulster and that makes me officially a British citizen.
We'll stick with that when it comes to false papers and so on.’
‘And your identity?’
‘Last time I was a war hero.
A gallant Irishman who'd been wounded at Dunkirk and invalided out.’
Devlin tapped the bullet scar on the side of his head
‘This helped the story, of course.’
‘Good.
Something like that then.
What about method of entry?’
‘Oh, parachute again.’
‘Into England?’
Devlin shook his head.
‘Too chancy and if I'm seen, it's bound to be reported.
No, make it Ireland like last time.
If they see me there, no one gives a bugger.
A stroll across the border into Ulster, the breakfast train to Belfast and I'm on British soil.’
‘And afterwards?’
‘The boat.
Belfast to Heysham in Lancashire.
Last time, I had to take the other route from Larne to Stranraer in Scotland.
The boats get full, just like the train.’
Devlin grinned.
‘There's a war on, General.’
‘So, you are in London.
What happens then?’
Devlin lit a cigarette.
‘Well, if I keep away from Vargas, that means no help from any of your official sources.’
Schellenberg frowned.
‘But you will need the help of others.
Also weapons, a radio transmitter because without the ability to communicate…’
‘All right,’ Devlin said.
‘So a few things are going to have to be taken on trust.
We were talking about my old friend in Wapping earlier, Michael Ryan.
Now the odds are good that he's still around and if he is, he'll help, at least with suitable contacts.’
‘Such as?’
‘Michael ran a cab and he worked for the bookies on the side.
He had a lot of underworld friends in the old days.
The kind of crooks who'd do anything for money, deal in guns, that sort of thing.
That IRA active service unit I had to knock off in London back in thirty-six — they used underworld contacts a lot, even to buy their explosives.’
‘So, this would be excellent.
The help of your IRA friend and the assistance, when needed, of some criminal element.
But for all you know, your friend could no longer be in London?’
‘Or killed in the Blitz, General.
Nothing is guaranteed.’
‘And you're still willing to take a chance?’
‘I reach London, I assess the situation because I have to do that however clever the plan looks that we put together here.
If Michael Ryan isn't around, if it simply looks impossible, the whole thing, I'm on the next boat back to Belfast and over the border and safe in Dublin before you know it.’
Devlin grinned.
‘I'll give you the bad news from your Embassy there.
Now could we go back to your office?
It's so damn cold I think my bollocks are going to fall off.’
In the office, after lunch, they started again, Ilse sitting in the corner taking notes.
Schellenberg said, ‘Say, for argument's sake, that you got Steiner out one dark evening in London.’
‘Broke him out of the Priory, you mean?’
‘Exactly.
And that's only the first step.
How do you get him back?
Do you take him to Ireland?
Return the way you came?’
‘Not so healthy that,’ Devlin said.
‘De Valera, the Irish Prime Minister, has played it very cleverly.
Kept Ireland out of the war, but that doesn't mean he's putting himself out for your people.
All the Luftwaffe crews who've ended up in Ireland have been put in prison camps.
On the other hand, if an RAF plane strays and crash-lands they usually give them bacon and eggs for breakfast and send them home.’
‘And he's been imprisoning IRA members, I understand.’
Devlin said, ‘In forty-one, I got back on a neutral boat, a Brazilian cargo ship from Ireland that put in at Lisbon, but that's a tricky one.
Nothing guaranteed at all.’
Ilse said diffidently, ‘Surely, the moment the Colonel is out, they'll be looking for him.’
‘Exactly,’ Devlin said.
‘Police, Army, Home Guard, the Security Services.
Every port watched, especially the Irish routes.’
He shook his head.
‘No, once out we've got to leave England almost immediately.
Be on our way before they know what's hit them.’
Schellenberg nodded, thinking about it.
‘It occurs to me that one of the cleverest things about Operation Eagle was the way Colonel Steiner and his men were transported to England.’
The Dakota, you mean?’
Devlin said.
‘An RAF Dakota which had crash-landed in Holland and was put back into service.
To all intents, a British plane flying home if anyone saw it and all it had to do to make the drop was fly in under eight hundred feet because many sections of the English coast have no low-level radar.’
‘Worked like a charm,’ Devlin said.
‘Except on the way back.
Gericke, the pilot, was in the same hospital as me.
He was shot down by a Luftwaffe night-fighter.’
‘Unfortunate, but an intriguing thought.
A small plane, flying in under radar.
A British plane.
A suitable landing place.
It could have you and Steiner out and safely in France in no time at all.’
‘And pigs might fly, General.
Not only would you need a suitable plane.
You'd need the landing place.
May I also point out you'd need an exceptional pilot.’
‘Come now, Mr Devlin, anything is possible.
We have what's called the Enemy Aircraft Flight where the Luftwaffe tests captured British and American planes of every kind.
They even have a B17.
I've seen it.’
He turned to Ilse.
‘Get in touch with them at once.
Also extend your research on Operation Sea Lion to cover any sites in the general area of London  that we intended to use for covert operations, landings by night, that sort of thing.’
‘And a pilot,’ Devlin told her.
‘Like I said, something special.’
‘I'll get right on to it.’
As she turned, there was a knock at the door and a young woman in SS auxiliary uniform came in carrying a large file.
‘St Mary's Priory, Wapping.
Was that what the General wanted?’
Ilse laughed triumphantly.
‘Good girl, Sigrid.
Wait for me in the office.
I've got something else for you.’
She turned and handed the file to Schellenberg.
‘I'll get her started on the other thing.’
As she reached the door, Schellenberg said, ‘Another possibility, Ilse.
Check the files on those British right-wing organizations that flourished before the war, the ones that sometimes had Members of Parliament on their books.’
She went out and Devlin asked, ‘And who in the hell would they be, General?’
‘Anti-Semitics, people with Fascist sympathies.
Many members of the British aristocracy and upper classes rather admired the Führer, certainly before the war.’
‘The kind who were disappointed not to see the panzers driving up to Buckingham Palace?’
‘Something like that.’
Schellenberg opened the bulky file, extracted the first plan and opened it.
‘So, Mr Devlin, there you have it in all its glory.
St Mary's Priory.’
Asa Vaughan was twenty-seven years of age.
Born in Los Angeles, his father a film producer, he had been fascinated by flying from an early age, had taken his pilot's licence even before going to West Point.
Afterwards he had completed his training as a fighter pilot, performing so well that he was assigned to take an instructors' course with the Navy at San Diego.
And then came the night his whole world had collapsed, the night he'd got into a drunken brawl in a harbour side bar and punched a major in the mouth.
October 5, 1939.
The date was engraved on his heart.
No scandal, no court martial.
No one wanted that.
Just his resignation.
One week at his parents' opulent home in Beverly Hills was all he could bear.
He packed a bag and made for Europe.
The war having started in September, the RAF were accepting a few Americans but they didn't like his record.
And then on November 30 the Russians invaded Finland.
The Finns needed pilots badly and volunteers from many nations flooded in to join the Finnish Air Force, Asa among them.
It was a hopeless war from the start, in spite of the gallantry of the Finnish Army, and most of the fighter planes available were outdated.
Not that the Russians were much better, but they did have a few  of the new German FW190S which Hitler had promised to Stalin as a goodwill gesture over the Poland deal.
Asa had flown bi-planes like the Italian Fiat Falco and the British Gloucester Gladiator, hopelessly out-classed by the opposition, only his superior skill as a pilot giving him an edge.
His personal score stood at seven which made him an ace and then came that morning of ferocious winds and driving snow when he'd come in at four hundred feet, flying blind, lost his engine at the last moment and crash-landed.
That was in March 1940, two days before the Finns capitulated.
His pelvis fractured and back broken, he'd been hospitalized for eighteen months, was undergoing final therapy and still a lieutenant in the Finnish Air Force when, on June 25, 1941, Finland joined forces with Nazi Germany and declared war on Russia.
He'd returned to flying duties gradually, working as an instructor, not directly involved in any action.
The months had gone by and suddenly, the roof had fallen in.
First Pearl Harbor and then the declaration of war between Germany and Italy and the USA.
They held him in a detention camp for three months, the Germans, and then the officers had come to see him from the SS.
Himmler was extending the SS foreign legions.
Scandinavian, French, the neutral Swedes, Indian prisoners of war from the British Army in North Africa.
There was even the Britisches  Freikorps with their collar patches of three leopards instead of SS runes and the Union Jack on the left sleeve.
Not that they'd had many takers, no more than fifty, mostly scum from prison camps attracted by the offer of good food, women and money.
The George Washington Legion was something else again.
Supposedly for American sympathizers to the Nazi cause, as far as Asa knew, they never had more than half a dozen members and he hadn't met the others.
He had a choice.
To join or be sent to a concentration camp.
He argued as best he could.
The final agreement was that he would serve only on the Russian Front.
As it happened, he seldom flew in straight combat, for his skill as a pilot was so admired he was employed mainly on the courier service, ferrying high-ranking officers.
So, here he was, not too far from the Russian border with Poland, at the controls of a Stork, forest and snow five thousand feet below, Hauptsturmführer Asa Vaughan from the US of A, an SS Brigadeführer called Farber sitting behind him examining maps.
Farber looked up.
‘How long now?’
‘Twenty minutes,’ Asa told him.
He spoke excellent German, although with an American accent.
‘Good.
I'm frozen to the bone.’
How in the hell did I ever get into this?
Asa asked himself.
And how do I get out?
A great shadow swooped in, the Stork bucked wildly and Farber cried  out in alarm.
A fighter plane took station to starboard for a moment, the Red Star plain on its fuselage, then it banked away.
‘Russian Yak fighter.
We're in trouble,’ Asa said.
The Yak came in fast from behind, firing both cannon and machine guns and the Stork staggered, pieces breaking from the wings.
Asa banked and went down, the Yak followed, turning in a half circle, and took up station again.
The pilot, conscious of his superiority in every department, waved, enjoying himself.
‘Bastard!’
Asa said.
The Yak banked again, came in fast, cannon shell punching into the Stork and Farber cried out as a bullet caught him in the shoulder.
As the windscreen shattered he screamed, ‘Do something, for God's sake.’
Asa, blood on his cheek from a splinter, cried, ‘You want me to do something, I'll do something.
Let's see if this bastard can fly.’
He took the Stork straight down to two thousand, waited until the Yak came in, banked and went down again.
The forest in the snow plain below seemed to rush towards them.
‘What are you doing?’
Farber cried.
Asa took her down to a thousand, then five hundred feet, and the Yak, hungry for the kill, stayed on his tail.
At the right moment, the American dropped his flaps, the Yak banked to avoid the collision and  ploughed straight down into the forest at three hundred and fifty miles an hour.
There was a tongue of flame and Asa pulled back the column and levelled out at two thousand feet.
‘You okay, General?’
Farber clutched his arm, blood pumping through.
‘You're a genius — a genius.
I'll see you get the Iron Cross for this.’
‘Thanks.’
Asa wiped blood from his cheek.
‘That's all I need.’
At the Luftwaffe base outside Warsaw, Asa walked towards the officers' mess, feeling unaccountably depressed.
The medical officer had put two stitches in his cheek, but had been more concerned with Brigadeführer Farber's condition.
Asa went into the mess and took off his flying jacket.
Underneath he wore a beautifully tailored uniform in field grey, SS runes on his collar patch.
On his left sleeve was a Stars and Stripes shield and the cuff-title on his left wrist said: ‘George Washington Legion’.
He had the ribbon of the Iron Cross Second Class on his tunic and the Finnish Gold Cross of Valour.
His very uniqueness made most other pilots avoid him.
He ordered a cognac, drank it quickly and ordered another.
A voice said, ‘And it's not even lunchtime.’
As Asa turned, the Gruppenkommandant, Colonel Erich Adler, sat on the stool next to him.
‘Champagne,’ he told the barman.
‘And what's the occasion?’
Asa demanded.
‘First, my miserable Yankee friend, the good Brigadeführer Farber has recommended you for an immediate Iron Cross First Class which, from what he says, you deserve.’
‘But Erich, I've got a medal,’ Asa said plaintively.
Adler ignored him, waiting for the champagne, then passed him a glass.
‘Second, you're out of it.
Grounded immediately.’
‘I'm what?’
‘You fly out to Berlin on the next available transport, priority one.
That's usually Goering.
You report to General Walter Schellenberg at SD Headquarters in Berlin.’
‘Just a minute,’ Asa told him.
‘I only fly on the Russian Front.
That was the deal.’
‘I wouldn't argue if I were you.
This order comes by way of Himmler himself.’
Adler raised his glass.
‘Good luck, my friend.’
‘God help me, but I think I'm going to need it,’ Asa Vaughan told him.
Devlin came awake about three in the morning to the sound of gunfire in the distance.
He got up and padded into the living room and peered out through  a chink in the blackout curtains.
He could see the flashes on the far horizon beyond the city.
Behind him, Ilse switched on the light in the kitchen.
‘I couldn't sleep either.
I'll make some coffee.’
She was wearing a robe against the cold, her hair in two pigtails that made her look curiously vulnerable.
He went and got his overcoat and put it on over his pyjamas and sat at the table smoking a cigarette.
‘Two days and no suitable landing site for a plane,’ he said.
‘I think the General's getting impatient.’
‘He likes to do things yesterday,’ Ilse said.
‘At least we've found a suitable base on the French coast and the pilot looks promising.’
‘You can say that again,’ Devlin told her.
‘A Yank in the SS, not that the poor sod had much choice from what the record says.
I can't wait to meet him.’
‘My husband was SS, did you know that?
A sergeant-major in a panzer regiment.’
‘I'm sorry,’ Devlin said.
‘You must think we're all very wicked sometimes, Mr Devlin, but you must understand how it started.
After the First War, Germany was on her knees, ruined.’
‘And then came the Führer?’
‘He seemed to offer so much.
Pride again — prosperity.
And then it started — so many bad things, the Jews most of all.’
She hesitated.
‘One of my great-grandmothers  was Jewish.
My husband had to get special permission to marry me.
It's there on my record and sometimes I wake in the night and think what would happen to me if someone decided to do something about it.’
Devlin took her hands.
‘Hush now, girl, we all get that three o'clock in the morning feeling when everything looks bad.’
There were tears in her eyes.
‘Here, I'll make you smile.
My disguise for this little jaunt I'm taking.
Guess what?’
She was smiling slightly already.
‘No, tell me.’
‘A priest.’
Her eyes widened.
‘You, a priest?’
She started to laugh.
‘Oh, no, Mr Devlin.’
‘Wait now, while I explain.
You'd be surprised at the religious background I have.
Oh yes.’
He nodded solemnly.
‘Altar boy, then, after the British hanged my father in nineteen twenty-one, my mother and I went to live with my old uncle who was a priest in Belfast.
He sent me to a Jesuit boarding school.
They beat religion into you there all right.’
He lit another cigarette.
‘Oh, I can play the priest as well as any priest, if you follow me.’
‘Well, let's hope you don't have to celebrate Mass or hear confession.’
She laughed.
‘Have another coffee.’
‘Dear God, woman, you've given me an idea there.
Where's your briefcase?
The file we were looking at earlier?
The general file?’
She went into her bedroom and came back with it.
‘Here it is.’
Devlin leafed through it quickly, then nodded.
‘I was right.
It's here in his record.
The Steiners are an old Catholic family.’
‘What are you getting at?’
‘This St Mary's Priory.
It's the sort of place priests visit all the time to hear the confessions.
The Little Sisters of Pity are saints compared to the rest of us, but they need confession before they partake of Mass and both functions need a priest.
Then there would be those patients who were Catholic.’
‘Including Steiner, you mean?’
‘They couldn't deny him a priest and him in a place like that.’
He grinned.
‘It's an idea.’
‘Have you thought any more about your appearance?’ she asked.
‘Ah, we can leave that for another few days, then I'll see one of these film people the General mentioned.
Put myself in their hands.’
She nodded, ‘Let's hope we come up with something in those Sea Lion files.
The trouble is there's so much to wade through.’
She got up.
‘Anyway, I think I'll go back to bed.’
Outside, the air-raid siren sounded.
Devlin smiled wryly.
‘No you won't.
You'll get dressed, like a good girl, and we'll go down and spend another jolly night in the cellars.
I'll see you in five minutes.’
Schellenberg said ‘A priest?
Yes, I like that.’
‘So do I,’ Devlin said.
‘It's like a uniform, you see.
A soldier, a postman, a railway porter-it's the appearance of things you remember, not the face.
As I say, the uniform.
Priests are like that.
Nice and anonymous.’
They were standing at a collapsible map table Schellenberg had erected, the plans of St Mary's Priory spread before them.
‘Having studied these on and off for some days, what is your opinion?’
Schellenberg asked.
‘The most interesting thing is this plan.’
Devlin tapped it with a finger.
‘The architect's plans for the changes made in nineteen hundred and ten when the Priory was reconsecrated Roman Catholic and the Little Sisters took over.’
‘What's your point?’
‘Underneath, London is a labyrinth, a subterranean world of sewers.
I read once there's over a hundred miles of rivers under the city, like the Fleet which rises in Hampstead and comes out into the Thames at Blackfriars, all underground.’
‘So?’
‘Seven or eight hundred years of sewers, underground rivers, tunnels, and nobody knows where half of them are until they're excavating or making changes, as they were at the Priory.
Look at the architect's plan here.
Regular flooding of the crypt beneath the chapel.
They were able to deal with the  problem because they discovered a stream running through an eighteenth-century tunnel next door.
See, it's indicated there on the plan running into the Thames.’
‘Very interesting,’ Schellenberg said.
‘They built a grill in the wall of the crypt to allow water to draw into that tunnel.
There's a note here on the plan.’
‘A way out, you mean?’
‘It's a possibility.
Would have to be checked.’
Devlin threw down his pencil.
‘It's knowing what goes on in that place that's the thing, General.
For all we know it could be dead easy.
A handful of guards, slack discipline.’
‘On the other hand, they could be waiting for you.’
‘Ah, but not if they think I'm still in Berlin,’ Devlin reminded him.
At that moment, Ilse Huber came in, very excited.
‘You were right to recommend me to check on British right-wing organizations, General.
I found details of a man in there cross-referenced to Sea Lion.’
‘What's his name?’
Schellenberg demanded.
‘Shaw,’ she said.
‘Sir Maxwell Shaw,’ and she laid two bulky files on the table.
6
CHAPTER SIX
ROMNEY Marsh, some forty-five miles south-east of London on the coast of Kent, is a two-hundred-square-mile area reclaimed from the sea by a system of dykes and channels started as far back as Roman times.
Much of it is below sea level and only innumerable drainage ditches prevent it from reverting to its natural state.
Charbury was not even a village.
A hamlet of no more than fifteen houses, a church and a village store.
There wasn't even a pub any longer and half the cottages were empty, only the old folk left.
The younger people had departed long ago for war work or service in the armed forces.
It was raining that morning as Sir Maxwell Shaw walked down the village street, a black Labrador at his heels.
He was a heavily built man of medium height, face craggy, the evidence of heavy drinking there and the black moustache didn't help.
He looked morose and angry much of the time, ready for-trouble and most people avoided him.
He wore a tweed hat, the brim turned down, a waterproof shooting jacket and wellingtons.
He carried a double-barrelled twelve-bore shotgun under one arm.
When he reached the store he bent down and fondled the Labrador's ears, his face softening.
‘Good girl, Nell.
Stay.’
A bell tinkled as he went in the shop.
There was an old man in his seventies leaning against the counter talking to a woman behind who was even older.
‘Morning, Tinker,’ Shaw said.
‘Morning, Sir Maxwell.’
‘You promised me some cigarettes, Mrs Dawson.’
The old lady produced a package from beneath the counter.
‘Managed to get you two hundred Players from my man in Dymchurch, Sir Maxwell.
Black market, I'm afraid, so they come expensive.’
‘Isn't everything these days?
Put it on my bill.’
He put the package in one of his game pockets and went out.
As he closed the door he heard Tinker say,
‘Poor sod.’
He took a deep breath to contain his anger and touched the Labrador.
‘Let's go, girl,’ he said and went back along the street.
It was Maxwell Shaw's grandfather who had made the family's fortune, a Sheffield ironmaster who had risen on the high tide of Victorian industrialization.
It was he who had purchased the estate, renamed  Shaw Place, where he had retired, a millionaire with a baronetcy, in 1885.
His son had shown no interest in the family firm which had passed into other hands.
A career soldier, he had died leading his men into battle at Spion Kop during the Boer War.
Maxwell Shaw, born in 1890, had followed in his father's footsteps.
Eton, Sandhurst, a commission in the Indian Army.
He served in Mesopotamia during the First World War, came home in 1916 to transfer to an infantry regiment.
His mother was still alive, Lavinia, his younger sister by ten years, was married to a pilot in the Royal Flying Corps and herself serving as a nurse.
In 1917 Maxwell returned from France badly wounded and with an MC.
During his convalescence he met the girl who was to become his wife at the local hunt ball and married her before returning to France.
It was in 1918, the last year of the war, when everything seemed to happen at once.
His mother died, then his wife, out with the local hunt, when she took a bad fall.
She'd lasted ten days, long enough for Shaw to rush home on compassionate leave to be with her when she died.
It was Lavinia who had supported him every step of the way, kept him upright at the graveside, yet within a month she, too, was alone, her husband shot down over the Western Front.
After the war, it was a different world they inherited like everyone else and Shaw didn't like it.
At least he and Lavinia had each other and Shaw Place although as the years went by and the money grew less, things became increasingly difficult.
He was a Conservative Member of Parliament for a while and then humiliatingly lost his seat to a Socialist.
Like many of his kind, he was violently anti-Semitic and this, exacerbated by the crushing political blow, led to his involvement with Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Fascist Movement.
In all this, he was backed by Lavinia although her main interest lay in trying to keep their heads above water and hanging on to the estate.
Disenchanted with the way society had changed and their own place in it, again like many of their kind, they looked to Hitler as a role model, admired what he was doing for Germany.
And then, at dinner in London in January 1939, they were introduced to a Major Werner Keitel, a military attaché at the German Embassy.
For several months, Lavinia enjoyed a passionate affair with him and he was frequently a visitor to Shaw Place for he was a Luftwaffe pilot and shared Lavinia's love of flying.
She kept a Tiger Moth at the time, housed in an old barn, using the South Meadow as an airstrip.
They frequently flew together in the two-seater bi-plane, covering large sections of the south coast and Keitel had been able to indulge in his interest for aerial photography.
Shaw never minded.
Lavinia had had relationships  before although he himself had little interest in women.
The Keitel thing was different, however, because of what it led to.
‘Well, we know where we are with him,’ Devlin said of Shaw.
‘He's the kind who used to have children transported to Australia for stealing a loaf of bread.’
Schellenberg gave him a cigarette.
‘Werner Keitel was an Abwehr agent employed at the time to select deep cover agents.
Not the usual kind at all.
A war was coming, that was obvious, and there was much forward planning for Sea Lion.’
‘And the old sod's place was perfect,’ Devlin observed.
‘The back of beyond and yet only forty-five miles from London and this South Meadow to land a plane on.’
‘Yes.
Keitel, according to his report, found it amazingly easy to recruit both of them.
He supplied them with a radio.
The sister already knew Morse code.
They were expressly forbidden to engage in any other activities, of course.
Keitel, by the way, was killed in the Battle of Britain.’
‘Did they have a code-name?’
Ilse, who had been sitting quietly, produced another sheet from the file.
‘Falcon.
He was to be alerted by the message: ‘Does the Falcon still wait?
It is now time to strike.’’
Devlin said, ‘So there they were.
Waiting for the  great day, the invasion that never came.
And what's the situation now, I wonder?’
‘As it happens, there is some further information available,’ Ilse told him.
‘We have an article here which appeared in an American magazine.’
She checked the date.
‘March nineteen forty-three.
The British Fascist Movement, it's called.
The journalist got an interview with Shaw and his sister.
There's a photo.’
Lavinia was sitting on a horse, a scarf around her head and was far more attractive than Devlin had expected.
Shaw stood beside her, a shotgun under his arm.
Schellenberg read the article quickly and passed it to Devlin.
‘Rather sad.
You'll see there that like most of his kind he was detained without trial for a few months under Regulation 18B-in nineteen forty.’
‘Brixton Prison?
That must have been a shock,’ Devlin said.
‘The rest is even more sad.
The estate sold off, no servants.
Just the two of them hanging on in that decaying old house,’ Schellenberg said.
‘It could be perfect, you know.
Come and have a look at a map of the Channel.’
They went to the map table.
‘Here.
Cap de la Hague and Chernay.
Used to be a flying club.
It's used as a landing strip for emergencies only by the Luftwaffe.
Refuelling, that sort of thing.
Only half a dozen men there.
It's perfect for our purposes because it's only some thirty miles from the Château  de Belle Ile where the Führer's conference takes place.’
‘How far to our friends in Romney Marsh?’
‘One hundred and fifty miles, most of it over the sea.’
‘Fine,’ Devlin said.
‘Except for one thing.
Would the Shaws be willing to be activated?’
‘Couldn't Vargas find out?’
‘Vargas could drop the lot of us, as I told you This would be exactly what British Intelligence wanted.
The chance to pull in everyone they could.’
Devlin shook his head.
‘No, the Shaws will have to wait till I get there, just like everything else.
If they'll do it, then we're in business.’
‘But how will you communicate?’
Ilse demanded.
‘They may still have that radio and I can handle one of those things.
When the Abwehr recruited me to go to Ireland in forty-one I did the usual radio and Morse code course.’
‘And if they haven't?’
Devlin laughed.
‘Then I'll beg, borrow or steal one.
Jesus, General, you worry too much.’
Shaw saw a rabbit, flung his shotgun up to his shoulder already too late and missed.
He cursed, took a flask from his pocket and drank.
Nell whined, gazing up at him anxiously.
The reeds here were as high as a man, water gurgling in the creeks, running  towards the sea.
It was a scene of complete desolation, the sky black, swollen with rain.
As it started to fall, Lavinia appeared on horseback, galloping along a dyke towards him.
She reined in.
‘Hello, my darling.
I heard your shot.’
‘Can't hit a brick wall these days, old girl.’
He put the flask to his lips then gestured dramatically.
‘Look at it — a dead world, Lavinia, everything bloody dead, including me.
If only something would happen — anything,’ and he raised the flask to his lips again.
Asa Vaughan closed the file and looked up.
Schellenberg leaned across the desk and offered him a cigarette.
‘What do you think?’
‘Why me?’
‘Because they tell me you're a great pilot who can fly anything.’
‘Flattery usually gets you everywhere, General, but let's examine this.
When I was, shall we say, inducted into the SS, the deal was that I only operated against the Russians.
It was made clear to me that I wouldn't have to take part in any act detrimental to my country's cause.’
Devlin, sitting by the window, laughed harshly.
‘What a load of old bollocks, son.
If you believed that, then you'd believe any old thing.
They had you  by your short and curlies the minute they got you into that uniform.’
‘I'm afraid he's right, Captain,’ Schellenberg said.
‘You wouldn't get very far with the Reichsführer with that argument.’
‘I can imagine,’ Asa said, and an expression of gloom settled on his face.
‘What's your problem?’
Devlin demanded.
‘Where would you rather be?
Back on the Eastern Front or here?
And you've no choice.
Say no and that old sod Himmler will have you in a concentration camp.’
‘Sounds like no contest, except for one small point,’ Asa told him.
‘I end up getting caught in England in this uniform, I'll get the fastest court martial in American history and a firing squad.’
‘No you won't, my old son,’ Devlin said.
‘They'll hang you.
Now the flight.
Do you reckon you could make it in?’
‘No reason why not.
If I am going to do it, I'd need to know the English Channel approach backwards.
From what I can see I'd stay over the water for almost the whole trip.
Turn inland for the last few miles.’
‘Exactly,’ Schellenberg said.
‘This house, Shaw Place.
It would mean a night landing.
Even with a moon I'd need some sort of guidance.’
He nodded, thinking about it.
‘When I was a kid in California my flying instructor was a guy who had flown with the Lafayette Escadrille in  France.
I remember him telling me how in those days, things being more primitive, they often used a few cycle lamps arranged in an inverted L-shape with the crossbar at the upwind end.’
‘Simple enough,’ Devlin said.
‘And the plane.
It would have to be small.
Something like a Fieseler Stork.’
‘Yes well, I'm hoping that's taken care of,’ Schellenberg said.
‘I've spoken to the officer in command of the Enemy Aircraft Flight.
They are at Hildorf.
It's a couple of hours’ drive from Berlin, and they're expecting us in the morning.
He thinks he's found us a suitable plane.’
‘Guess that's it.’
Asa got up.
‘What happens now?’
‘We eat, son,’ Devlin told him.
‘The best the black market can offer.
Then you come back to Frau Huber's apartment with me where we'll share the spare room.
Don't worry, it's got twin beds.’
The chapel at St Mary's Priory of the Little Sisters of Pity was cold and damp and smelled of candlegrease and incense.
In the confession box, Father Frank Martin waited until the sister whose confession he had heard was gone.
He switched off the lights and went out.
He was priest in charge at St Patrick's two streets away and with St Patrick's came the job of father confessor to the Priory.
He was seventy-six, a small, frail man with very white hair.
If it hadn't been for the war, they'd have retired him, but it was like everything else these days, all hands to the pumps.
He went into the sacristy, removed his alb and carefully folded his violet stole.
He reached for his raincoat, debating the virtues of an early night, but compassion and Christian charity won the day as usual.
Eighteen patients at the moment, seven of them terminal.
A last round of the rooms wouldn't come amiss.
He hadn't visited since early afternoon and that wasn't good enough.
He went out of the chapel and saw the Mother Superior, Sister Maria Palmer, mopping the floor, a menial task designed to remind herself of what she saw as her greatest weakness: the sin of pride.
Father Martin paused and shook his head.
‘You are too hard on yourself.’
‘Not hard enough,’ she said.
‘I'm glad to see you.
There's been a development since you were here earlier.
They've given us a German prisoner of war again.’
‘Really?’
They walked out of the chapel into the entrance hall.
‘Yes, a Luftwaffe officer, recently wounded, but well on the way to recovery.
A Colonel Kurt Steiner.
They've put him on the top floor like the other ones we've had.’
‘What about guards?’
‘Half a dozen military police.
There's a young second lieutenant called Benson in charge.’
At that moment Jack Carter and Dougal Munro came down the main staircase.
Sister Maria Palmer said, ‘Is everything satisfactory, Brigadier?’
‘Perfectly,’ Munro said.
‘We'll try to inconvenience you as little as possible.’
‘There is no inconvenience,’ she said.
‘This, by the way, is Father Martin, our priest.’
‘Father,’ he said and turned to Carter.
‘I'll be off now, Jack.
Don't forget to get a doctor in to check him over.’
Sister Maria Palmer said, ‘Perhaps it was not made clear to you that I am-a doctor, Brigadier.
Whatever Colonel Steiner's requirements are I'm sure we can take care of them.
In fact now that you're finished, I'll visit him to make sure he's settled in properly.’
Jack Carter said, ‘Well actually, Sister, I'm not too sure about that.’
‘Captain Carter, let me remind you that this Priory, of which I am in charge, is not only a house of God, it is a place where we attend to the sick and the dying.
I have seen Colonel Steiner's medical record and note that it's only been a matter of weeks since he was gravely wounded.
He will need my attention and as I note from his record that he is also a Roman Catholic by religion, he may also need the ministrations of Father Martin here.’
‘Quite right, Sister,’ Munro said.
‘See to it, Jack, will you?’
He went out and Carter turned and led the way up the stairs.
There was a door at the top, heavily studded and banded with steel.
An MP sat at a small table beside it.
‘Open up,’ Carter told him.
The MP knocked on the door which was opened after a moment by another MP.
They passed inside.
Carter said, ‘We're using the other rooms as billets for the men.’
‘So I see,’ Sister Maria Palmer said.
The door to the first room stood open.
There was a-small desk beside a narrow bed and the young lieutenant, Benson, sat at it.
He jumped to his feet.
‘What can I do for you, sir?’
‘Sister and Father Martin have access whenever they require it.
Brigadier Munro's orders.
We'll talk to the prisoner now.’
There was another MP sitting on a chair outside the room at the far end where the passage ran into a blank wall.
‘God help us, you're guarding this man well enough,’ Father Martin said.
Benson unlocked the door and Steiner, standing by the window, turned to greet them, an impressive figure in the blue-grey Luftwaffe uniform, the Knight's Cross with Oak Leaves at his throat, his other medals making a brave show.
Carter said, ‘This is the Mother Superior, Sister 
Maria Palmer.
You didn't get a chance to speak earlier.
And Father Martin.’
Sister Maria Palmer said, ‘Tomorrow, I'll have you down to the dispensary for a thorough check, Colonel.’
‘Is that all right, sir?’
Benson asked.
‘For goodness’ sake, bring him down yourself, Lieutenant, surround him with all your men, but if he's not in the dispensary at ten, we'll have words,’she told him.
‘No problem,’ Carter said.
‘See to it, Benson.
Anything else, Sister?’
‘No, that will do for tonight.’
Father Martin said, ‘I'd like a word with the Colonel in private, if you wouldn't mind.’
Carter nodded and turned to Steiner.
‘I'll check on you from time to time.’
‘I'm sure you will.’
They all went out except for Father Martin who closed the door and sat on the bed.
‘My son, you've had a bad time, I can see it in your face.
When were you last at Mass?’
‘So long ago I can't remember.
The war, Father, tends to get in the way.’
‘No confession either?
A long time since you were able to ease the burden of your sins.’
‘I'm afraid so.’
Steiner smiled, warming to the man.
‘I know you mean well, Father.’
‘Good heavens, man, I'm not concerned with you  and me.
I'm interested only in you and God.’
Father Martin got up.
‘I'll pray for you, my son, and I'll visit every day.
The moment you feel the need for confession and the Mass, tell me and I'll arrange for you to join us in the chapel.’
‘I'm afraid Lieutenant Benson would insist on coming too,’ Steiner said.
‘Now wouldn't that do his immortal soul some good too?’
The old priest chuckled and went out.
Asa Vaughan sat at the dining table in the living room at Ilse Huber's apartment, Devlin opposite him.
‘You really think this thing can work?’ the American asked.
‘Anything will as long as the engine keeps ticking over, isn't that a fact?’
Asa got up and paced restlessly across the room.
‘What in the hell am I doing here?
Can you understand?
Everything kind of overtook me.
It just happened.
I don't seem to have had a choice.
Don't now, when it comes right down to it.’
‘Of course you do,’ Devlin said.
‘You go through with it, fly the plane to England, land and give yourself up.’
‘And what good would that do?
They'd never believe me, Devlin.’
There was a kind of horror on his face when he added, ‘Come to think of it, they never will.’
‘Then you'd better hope Adolf wins the war,’ Devlin said.
But the following morning, at the air base at Hildorf, the American seemed in much better spirits as Major Koenig, the officer commanding the Enemy Aircraft Flight, showed them round.
He seemed to have examples of most Allied planes.
There was a B17, a Lancaster bomber, a Hurricane, a Mustang, all bearing Luftwaffe insignia.
‘Now this is what I thought might suit your purposes,’ he said.
‘Here in the end hangar.’
The plane standing there was a high wing-braced monoplane with a single engine and a wingspan of more than fifty feet.
‘Very nice,’ Asa said.
‘What is it?’
‘A Westland Lysander.
Has a maximum speed of two hundred and thirty at ten thousand feet.
Short landing and take-off.
Only needs two hundred and forty yards fully loaded.’
‘That means you could make the flight in under an hour,’ Schellenberg said to Asa.
Asa ignored him.
‘Passengers?’
‘How many are you thinking of?’
Koenig asked.
‘Two.’
‘Perfect comfort.
Can manage three.
Even four at a pinch.’
He turned to Schellenberg.
‘I thought of it at once when you made your enquiries.
We picked  this up in France last month.
It was RAF.
The pilot caught a bullet in the chest when attacked by a JU night-fighter.
Managed to land and collapsed before he could destroy it.
These planes are used by British Intelligence for covert operations.
They operate with the French Resistance movement, ferrying agents across from England, taking others out.
This is the perfect plane for such work.’
‘Good — then it's mine,’ Schellenberg said.
‘But General-’ Koenig began.
Schellenberg took the Führer Directive from his pocket.
‘Read that.’
Koenig did and returned it, positively clicking his heels.
‘At your orders, General.’
Schellenberg turned to Asa.
‘So, what are your requirements?’
‘Well, obviously I'll want to try her out.
Get used to the thing, though I don't think that should be a problem.’
‘Anything else?’
‘Yes, I'll want the RAF roundels back in place for the flight into England.
But I'd like that to be temporary.
Some sort of canvas covers that can be stripped so that I'm Luftwaffe again for the trip back.’
‘Easily taken care of,’ Koenig said.
‘Excellent,’ Schellenberg told him.
‘Hauptsturmführer Vaughan will remain and test-fly the plane now and as much as he wants for the rest of the day.
After that you will do whatever work is needed and have the aircraft delivered at the weekend, to the destination in France that my secretary will notify you of.’
‘Certainly, General,’ Koenig said.
Schellenberg turned to Asa.
‘Enjoy yourself while you can.
I've arranged to borrow a Fieseler Stork from the Luftwaffe.
We'll fly down to Chernay and inspect the airstrip tomorrow.
I'd also like to have a look at this Château de Belle Ile while we're there.’
‘And you want me to do the flying?’
Asa said.
‘Don't worry, son, we have every confidence in you,’ Devlin told him as he and Schellenberg went out.
In London, Dougal Munro was working at his desk when Jack Carter came in.
‘What is it, Jack?’
‘I've had a medical report from Sister Maria Palmer, sir, on Steiner.’
‘What's her opinion?’
‘He's still not a hundred per cent.
Some residual infection.
She asked me to help her get hold of some of this new wonder drug, penicillin.
Apparently it cures just about everything, but it's in short supply.’
‘Then get it for her, Jack, get it’
‘Very well, sir.
I'm sure I can.’
He hesitated at the door and Munro said  impatiently, ‘For God's sake, what is it, Jack?
I'm up to my ears in work here, not least amongst my worries being a meeting at three of Headquarters staff at SHAEF presided over by General Eisenhower himself.’
‘Well, it's the Steiner thing, sir.
I mean, here he is, installed at the Priory.
What happens now?’
‘Liam Devlin, if it is Devlin they choose, is hardly going to parachute into the courtyard at St Mary's Priory tomorrow night, Jack, and if he did, so what?
The only way we could guard Steiner any closer is by having an MP share his bed and that would never do.’
‘So we just wait, sir?’
‘Of course we do.
If they intend to have a go, it'll take weeks to organize, but that doesn't matter.
After all, we have Vargas in our pocket.
Anything happens and we'll be the first to know.’
‘Very well, sir.’
As Carter opened the door Munro added, ‘We've got all the time in the world, Jack.
So has Steiner.’
When Steiner went into the chapel that evening he was escorted by Lieutenant Benson and a police corporal.
The chapel was cold and damp, slightly eerie with the candles down at the altar and the ruby light of the sanctuary lamp.
Instinctively he dipped his fingers in the holy water, a kind of regression to  childhood, and went and sat on the end of a bench beside two nuns and waited his turn.
The Mother Superior emerged from the confessional box, smiled at him and passed on.
One of the nuns went in.
After a while she came out and was replaced by the other.
When it came to Steiner's turn, he went in and sat down, finding the darkness surprisingly comforting.
He hesitated and then that ghost from childhood rose again and he said, almost automatically, ‘Bless me, Father.’
Father Martin knew it was him of course, had to.
He said, ‘May the Lord Jesus bless you and help you tell your sins.’
‘Dammit, Father,’ Steiner exploded, ‘I don't even know why I'm here.
Maybe I just wanted to get out of that room.’
‘Oh, I'm sure God will forgive you that, my son.’
Steiner had an insane desire to laugh.
The old man said, ‘Is there anything you want to say to me?
Anything?’
And suddenly Steiner found himself saying, ‘My father.
They butchered my father.
Hung him up on a hook like a piece of meat.’
‘Who did this thing, my son?’
‘The Gestapo — the bloody Gestapo.’
Steiner could hardly breathe, his throat dry, eyes hot.
‘Hate, that's all I feel, and revenge.
I want revenge.
Now what good is that to a man like you, Father?
Am I not guilty of a very great sin?’
Father Martin said quietly, ‘May our Lord Jesus Christ absolve you, and I, by his authority, absolve you from your sins in the name of the Father, and the Son and the Holy Spirit.’
‘But Father, you don't understand,’ Kurt Steiner said.
‘I can't pray any more.’
‘That's all right, my son,’ Father Martin told him.
‘I'll pray for you.’
7
CHAPTER SEVEN
THE flight from Berlin to Cap de la Hague took just over three hours, Asa charting a course that took them over parts of occupied Holland, Belgium and then France.
They came in to Chernay from the sea.
It was a desolate-looking little place.
Not even a control tower, just a grass runway, with a wind-sock at one end, three old pre-war hangars and several huts that looked like a Luftwaffe addition.
There was also a fuel dump.
Asa raised them on the radio.
‘Stork as expected from Gatow.’
‘A voice said, ‘Chernay control.
Permission to land granted.
Wind south-east strength three-to-four and freshening.’
‘Takes himself seriously,’ Asa said over his shoulder.
‘Here we go.’
He made a perfect landing and taxied towards the hangars where half a dozen men waited in Luftwaffe overalls.
As Schellenberg and Devlin got out, a sergeant  emerged from the hut with the radio mast, and hurried towards them.
He took in Schellenberg's uniform and got his heels together.
‘General.’
‘And your name is?’
‘Leber, General.
Flight Sergeant.’
‘And you are in charge here?’
‘Yes, General.’
‘Read this.’
Schellenberg handed him the Führer Directive.
‘You and your men are now under my command.
A matter of the utmost importance to the Reich.’
Leber got his heels together again, handed the letter back.
‘At your orders, General.’
‘Hauptsturmführer Vaughan will be making a hazardous and highly secret flight across the English Channel.
The aircraft he will use is an unusual one.
You'll see that for yourself when it's delivered.’
‘And our duties, General?’
‘I'll inform you later.
Is your radio receiving equipment up to scratch?’
‘Oh, yes, General, the best the Luftwaffe can offer.
Sometimes aircraft returning across the Channel are in a bad way.
We have to be able to talk them in when necessary.’
‘Good.’
Schellenberg nodded.
‘Do you happen to know a place called Château de Belle Ile?
According to the map it's about thirty miles from here in the general direction of Carentan.’
‘I'm afraid not, General.’
‘Never mind.
We'll manage.
Now find us a Kubelwagen.’
‘Certainly, General.
May I ask if you'll be spending the night?’
Schellenberg glanced around at the desolate landscape.
‘Well I'd prefer not to, Sergeant, but one never knows.
Have the Stork refuelled and made ready for the return trip.’
‘Jesus,’ Devlin said, as Leber led them towards a field car parked outside the radio hut.
‘Would you look at this place?
What a lousy posting.
I wonder they can put up with it.’
‘Better than Russia,’ Asa Vaughan said.
Asa drove, Devlin beside him, Schellenberg in the rear, a map spread across his knee.
‘Here it is.
The road south from Cherbourg goes to Carentan.
It's off there somewhere on the coast.’
‘Wouldn't it make more sense to land at the Luftwaffe base at Cherbourg?’
Asa asked.
‘As the Führer will when he comes?’
Schellenberg shook his head.
‘I prefer to keep our heads down for the moment.
We don't need to go through Cherbourg at all.
There's a network of country roads south that cut across to the coast.
Thirty miles, thirty-five at the most.’
‘What's the purpose of this little trip anyway?’
Devlin asked him.
‘This Belle Ile place intrigues me.
I'd like to see what we've got there as long as we're in the neighbourhood.’
He shrugged.
Devlin said, ‘I was wondering — does the Reichsführer know we're here?’
‘He knows about our flight to Chernay or he will soon.
He likes a regular report.’
‘Ah, yes, General, that's one thing, but this Belle Ile place would be another.’
‘You could say that, Mr Devlin, you could.’
‘Sweet Mother of God, what a fox you are,’ Devlin said.
‘I pity the huntsman when you're around.’
Many of the country lanes were so narrow that it would not have been possible for two vehicles to pass each other, but after half an hour, they cut into the main road that ran south from Cherbourg to Carentan.
It was here that Schellenberg had trouble with his map and then-they had a stroke of luck, a sign at the side of the road outside the village of St Aubin that said 12th Parachute Detachment.
There was a spread of farm buildings visible beyond the trees.
‘Let's try here,’ Schellenberg said and Asa turned off the road.
The men in the farmyard were all Fallschirmjager, hard young men, old before their time with cropped hair.
Most of them wore camouflaged smocks and jump boots.
A number sat on benches against the wall, cleaning weapons.
A couple worked on the engine of a troop carrier.
They glanced up curiously as the Kubelwagen arrived, rising to their feet when they saw Schellenberg's uniform.
‘That's all right, carry on with what you're doing,’ he said.
A young captain emerged from the farmhouse.
He had the Iron Cross First and Second Class, the cuff-titles for Crete and the Afrika Korps.
He also had a Winter War ribbon, a tough, hard-faced young man.
‘You are in charge here?’
Schellenberg asked.
‘Yes, General.
Hauptmann Erich Kramer.
In what way may I help you?’
‘We're looking for a place called Château de Belle Ile,’ Schellenberg told him.
‘Do you know it?’
‘Very well.
About ten miles east of here on the coast.
Let me show you on my area map.’
They followed him into the farmhouse.
The living room was fitted as a command post with radio and large-scale maps on the wall.
The back road to Belle Ile was plain enough.
‘Excellent,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Tell me something.
What's your unit's purpose here?’
‘Security duties, General.
We patrol the area, try to keep the French Resistance in place.’
‘Do you get much trouble from them?’
‘Not really,’ Kramer laughed.
‘I only have thirty-five men left in this unit.
We were lucky to get out of Stalingrad.
This is a rest cure for us.’
They went outside and as they got back into the Kubelwagen Devlin said, ‘Crete and the Afrika Korps, I see, and Stalingrad.
Did you know Steiner?’
Even the men cleaning their weapons looked up at the mention of the name.
Kramer said, ‘Oberst Kurt Steiner?
Who doesn't in our line of work.
A legend in the Parachute Regiment.’
‘You've met him then?’
‘Several times.
You know him?’
‘You could say that.’
Kramer said, ‘We heard a rumour he was dead.’
‘Ah, well, you mustn't believe everything you hear,’ Devlin told him.
‘Captain.’
Schellenberg returned his salute as Asa drove away.
‘Dear God,’ Devlin said, ‘I sometimes wonder why Steiner doesn't make his own way back across the Channel, walking on water.’
Belle Ile was quite spectacular, a castle crowning a hill beside the sea, a vast estuary stretching beyond it, sand where the tide had just retreated.
Asa took the Kubelwagen up the single winding road.
There was a narrow bridge across a gap that was more  ravine than moat.
Two great doors stood open in an arched entrance and they came out into a cobbled courtyard.
Asa braked at the foot of broad steps leading up to the front entrance, walls and towers rising above them.
They got out and Schellenberg led the way.
The door was of oak, buckled with age and studded with rusting iron bolts and bands of steel.
There was a bell hanging from the wall beside it.
Schellenberg pulled the chain and the jangling echoed around the courtyard, bouncing from the walls.
‘Jesus,’ Devlin said, ‘all we need is Quasimodo.’
A moment later the door creaked open and he appeared, or a fair facsimile, a very old man with grey hair down to his shoulders, a black dresscoat of velvet that had seen better days, a pair of very baggy corduroy trousers beneath of the type worn by peasants on the farm.
His face was wrinkled and he badly needed a shave.
‘Yes, messieurs?’ he said in French.
‘What can I do for you?’
‘You are the caretaker?’
Schellenberg asked.
‘Yes, monsieur.
Pierre Dissard.’
‘You live here with your wife?’
‘When she is here, monsieur.
At present she is with her niece in Cherbourg.’
Devlin said to Asa, ‘Are you getting all this?’
‘Not a word.
I don't speak French.’
‘I suppose you spent all your time playing football.
The General and I, on the other hand, being men of intellect and learning, can understand everything the old bugger is saying.
I'll translate freely when necessary.’
Schellenberg said, ‘I wish to inspect the premises.’
He walked past Dissard into a great entrance hall, flagged in granite, a carpet here and there.
There was an enormous fireplace to one side and a staircase to the first floor wide enough to take a regiment.
‘You are of the SS, monsieur?’
Dissard asked.
‘I should think that was obvious,’ Schellenberg told him.
‘But the premises have already been inspected, monsieur, the other day.
An officer in a similar uniform to your own.’
‘Do you recall his name?’
‘He said he was a major.’
The old man frowned, trying.
‘His face was bad on one side.’
Schellenberg said calmly, ‘Berger?
Was that his name?’
Dissard nodded eagerly.
‘That's it, monsieur, Major Berger.
His French was very bad.’
Asa said, ‘What's going on?’
‘He's telling us someone's been here before us.
An SS major named Berger,’ Devlin said.
‘Do you know him?’
‘Oh, intimately, particularly his nose, but I'll explain later.’
Schellenberg said, ‘Then you are aware that these  premises arc required in the near future.
I would appreciate a conducted tour.’
‘The Château has been closed since nineteen forty, monsieur.
My master, the Comte de Beaumont, went to England to fight the Boche.’
‘Really?’
Schellenberg said drily.
‘So, let's get on with it.
We'll go upstairs and work down.’
The old man looked up the staircase in front of them.
There were innumerable bedrooms, some with four-posters, the furniture draped in sheets, two doors leading to separate wings so long disused that the dust lay thick on the floor.
‘Mother of God, is this the way the rich live?’
Devlin asked as they went down.
‘Have you seen how far it is to the bathroom?’
Schellenberg noticed a door at one end of the landing above the entrance.
‘What's through there?’
‘I'll show you, monsieur.
Another way into the dining hall.’
They found themselves in a long dark gallery above a massive room.
The ceiling had arched oaken beams.
Below was a massive fireplace in a medieval pattern.
In front of it was an enormous oak table surrounded by high-backed chairs.
Battle standards hung above the fireplace.
They went down the stairs and Schellenberg said, ‘What are the flags?’
‘Souvenirs of war, monsieur.
The de Beaumonts have always served France well.
See, in the centre  there, the standard in scarlet and gold.
An ancestor of the count carried that at Waterloo.’
‘Is that a fact?’
Devlin commented.
‘I always thought they lost that one.’
Schellenberg looked around the hall, then led the way out through high oak doors back into the entrance hall.
‘I have seen enough.
What did Major Berger say to you?’
‘That he would be back, monsieur.’
The old man shrugged.
‘One week, maybe two.’
Schellenberg put a hand on his shoulder.
‘No one must know we have been here, my friend, especially Major Berger.’
‘Monsieur?’
Dissard looked puzzled.
Schellenberg said, ‘This is a matter of the greatest secrecy and of considerable importance.’
‘I understand, monsieur.’
‘If the fact that we had been here came out, the source of the information would be obvious.’
He patted Dissard's desk with his gloved hand.
‘This would be bad for you.’
The old man was thoroughly frightened.
‘Monsieur — please.
Not a word.
I swear it.’
They went out to the Kubelwagen and drove away.
Devlin said, ‘Walter, you can be a cold-blooded bastard when you want to be.’
‘Only when necessary.’
Schellenberg turned to Asa.
‘Can we get back to Berlin tonight?’
The light was already fading, dark clouds dropping towards the sea and rain drifted in across the wet sands.
‘Possible,’ Asa said.
‘If we're lucky.
We might have to overnight at Chernay.
Get off first thing in the morning.’
Devlin said, ‘What a prospect.’
He pulled up the collar of his overcoat and lit a cigarette.
‘The glamour of war.’
On the following afternoon, Devlin was delivered to the UFA film studios for his appointment with the chief makeup artist.
Karl Schneider was in his late forties, a tall broad-shouldered man who looked more like a dock worker than anything else.
He examined a passport-type photo which Devlin had had taken.
‘You say this is what they've got on the other side?’
‘Something like that.’
‘It's not much, not for a policeman looking for a face in the crowd.
When would you be going?’
Devlin made the decision then for himself, for Schellenberg, for all of them.
‘Let's say two or three days from now.’
‘And how long would you be away?’
‘Ten days at the most.
Can you do anything?’
‘Oh, yes.’
Schneider nodded.
‘One can change the shape of the face by wearing cheek pads in the mouth  and all that sort of thing, but I don't think it's necessary for you.
You don't carry a lot of weight, my friend, not much flesh on your bones.’
‘All down to bad living,’ Devlin said.
Schneider ignored the joke.
‘Your hair — dark and wavy and you wear it long.
I think the key is what I do to the hair.
What role do you intend to play?’
‘A priest.
Ex-Army chaplain.
Invalided out.’
‘Yes, the hair.’
Schneider draped a sheet about his shoulders and reached for a pair of scissors.
By the time he was finished, Devlin's hair was cropped close to the skull.
‘Jesus, is that me?’
‘That's only a start.
Let's have you over the basin.’
Schneider washed the hair then rubbed some chemical in.
‘I've worked with the best actors.
Marlene Dietrich before she cleared out.
Now she had marvellous hair.
Oh, and there was Conrad Veidt.
What a wonderful actor.
Chased out by these Nazi bastards and he ends up, so I'm told, playing Nazi bastards in Hollywood.’
‘A strange old life.’
Devlin kept his eyes closed and let him get on with it.
He hardly recognized the face that stared out at him.
The close-cropped hair was quite grey now, accentuating the cheekbones, putting ten or twelve years on his age.
‘That's bloody marvellous.’
‘One more touch.’
Schneider rummaged in his make-up case, took out several pairs of spectacles and examined them.
‘Yes, these, I think.
Clear glass, naturally.’
He placed a pair of steel-rimmed glasses on Devlin's nose and adjusted them.
‘Yes, excellent.
I'm pleased with myself.’
‘God help me, but I look like Himmler,’ Devlin said.
‘Will it last, the hair, I mean?’
‘A fortnight and you said you'd be away ten days at the most.’
Schneider produced a small plastic bottle.
‘A rinse with this would keep things going, but not for long.’
‘No,’ Devlin told him.
‘I said ten days and I meant it.
It's all one in the end anyway.
Any longer and I'll be dead.’
‘Astonishing!’
Schellenberg said.
‘I'm glad you think so,’ Devlin told him.
‘So let's have the right photos taken.
I want to get on with it.’
‘And what does that mean?’
‘I want to go as soon as possible.
Tomorrow or the day after.’
Schellenberg looked at him gravely.
‘You're sure about this?’
‘There's nothing else to hang about for now that your friend at UFA has given me a new face.
We  have the set-up at Chernay, Asa and the Lysander.
That leaves us with three uncertainties.
My IRA friend, Michael Ryan, the Shaws and the Priory.’
‘True,’ Schellenberg said.
‘No matter what the situation at the Priory, if your friend Ryan is not available you would be presented with real difficulty.
The same with the Shaws.’
Devlin said, ‘Without the Shaws it would be an impossibility so the sooner I get there, the sooner we know.’
‘Right,’ Schellenberg said briskly, and rang for Ilse Huber who came in.
‘Papers for Mr Devlin from the forgery department.’
‘They'll need photos of the new me,’ Devlin told her.
‘But Mr Devlin, the British identity card is what you need.
A ration book for certain items of food, clothing coupons, driving licence.
None of these require a photo.’
‘That's a pity,’ Devlin told her.
‘If you're being checked out by someone the fact that they can compare you with a photo is so satisfying that you're on your way before you know it.’
‘Have you decided on your name and circumstances yet?’
Schellenberg asked.
‘As I've often said, the best kind of lie is the one that sticks closest to the truth,’ Devlin said.
‘No sense in trying to sound completely English.
Even the great Devlin wouldn't get away with that.
So I'm an Ulsterman.’
He turned to Ilse.
‘Are you getting this?’
‘Every word.’
‘Conlon.
Now there's a name I've always liked.
My first girlfriend was a Conlon.
And my old uncle, the priest in Belfast I lived with as a boy.
He was a Henry, though everyone called him Harry.’
‘Father Harry Conlon then?’ she said.
‘Yes, but more than that.
Major Harry Conlon, Army chaplain, on extended leave after being wounded.’
‘Where?’
Schellenberg asked.
‘In my head.’
Devlin tapped the bullet scar.
‘Oh, I see what you mean.
Geographically speaking.’
‘How about the Allied invasion of Sicily this year?’
Schellenberg suggested.
‘Excellent.
I got clipped in an air strike on the first day.
That way I don't need too much information about the place if anyone asks me.’
‘I've seen a cross-reference with British Army chaplains in the military documentation file,’ Ilse said.
‘I remember because it struck me as being unusual.
May I go and check on it, General?
It would only take a few minutes.’
Schellenberg nodded.
She went out and he said, ‘I'll make the arrangements for your flight to Ireland.
I've already done some checking with the Luftwaffe.
They suggest you take off from Laville base outside Brest.’
‘Talk about deja vu,’ Devlin said.
‘That's where I  left from before.
It wouldn't happen to be a Dornier bomber they suggest, the good old Flying Pencil?’
‘Exactly.’
‘Ah well, it worked last time, I suppose.’
Ilse came in at that moment.
‘I was right.
Look what I found.’
The pass was in the name of a Major George Harvey, Army chaplain, and there was a photo.
It had been issued by the War Office and authorized unrestricted access to both military bases and hospitals.
‘Astonishing how powerful the need for spiritual comfort is,’ Schellenberg said.
‘Where did this come from?’
‘Documents taken from a prisoner of war, General.
I'm certain forging will have no difficulty copying it and it would give Mr Devlin the photo he wanted.’
‘Brilliant,’ Devlin said.
‘You're a marvel of a woman.’
‘You'll need to see the clothing department as well,’ she said.
‘Will you want a uniform?’
‘It's a thought.
I mean, it could come in useful.
Otherwise, a dark suit, clerical collar, dark hat, raincoat, and they can give me a Military Cross.
If I'm a priest, I might as well be a gallant one.
Always impressive.
And I'll want a travel voucher from Belfast to London.
The kind the military use, just in case I do want to play the major.’
‘I'll get things started.’
She went out and Schellenberg said, ‘What else?’
‘Cash.
Five thousand quid, I'd say.
That's to take care of my having to hand a few bribes out as well as supporting myself.
If you find one of those canvas military holdalls officers carry these days, the money could go in a false bottom of some sort.’
‘I'm sure there'll be no problem.’
‘Fivers, Walter, and the real thing.
None of the false stuff I happen to know the SS has been printing.’
‘You have my word on it.
You'll need a codename.’
‘We'll stick with Shaw's.
Falcon will do fine.
Give me the right details for contacting your radio people at this end and I'll be in touch before you know it.’
‘Excellent.
The Führer's conference at Belle Ile is on the twenty-first.
We could be cutting it fine.’
‘We'll manage.’
Devlin stood up.
‘I think I'll try the canteen.’
He turned at the door.
‘Oh, just one thing.’
‘What's that?’
‘When I was dropped by parachute into Ireland in forty-one for the Abwehr, I had ten thousand pounds in a suitcase, funds for the IRA.
When I opened it I found neat bundles of fivers, each one with a Bank of Berlin band around it.
Do you think they could do better this time?’
Schellenberg said, ‘And they wonder why we're losing the war.’
Asa was in the canteen drinking a beer and reading a copy of Signal, the magazine for German forces, when Devlin came in.
The Irishman got a coffee and joined him.’
I can't believe it,’ Asa said.
‘I hardly recognized you.’
‘The new me, Father Harry Conlon, very much at your service.
Also Major Harry Conlon, Army chaplain, and I'm on my way tomorrow night.’
‘Isn't that pushing it?’
‘Jesus, son, I want to get on with it.’
‘Where are you flying from?’
‘Laville, near Brest.’
‘And the plane?’
‘Dornier 215.’
‘Okay, I'll fly you myself.’
‘No, you won't, you're too valuable.
Say you got me to Ireland and dropped me off, then got shot down by a British night-fighter off the French coast on your way back.
A right old balls-up that would be.’
‘Okay,’ Asa said reluctantly, ‘but at least I can fly you down to Laville.
Nobody can object to that.’
‘Always nicer to have a friend see you off,’ Devlin said.
It was just after nine the following night, rain pounding in from the Atlantic, when Asa stood in the control  tower at Laville and watched the Dornier take off.
He opened a window, listened to it fade into the night.
He closed the window and said to the radio man, ‘Send this message.’
Devlin, sitting at the back of the Dornier in a flying suit, his supply bag beside him, was approached by the wireless operator.
‘A message for you, sir.
A bad joke on someone's part.’
‘Read it.’
‘It just says: ‘Break a leg’.’
Devlin laughed.
‘Well, son, you'd have to be an actor to understand that one.’
The Dornier made good time and it was shortly after two in the morning when Devlin jumped at five thousand feet.
As on the last occasion, he had chosen County Monaghan which was an area he knew well and adjacent to the Ulster border.
The necessity of a supply bag to the parachutist is that dangling twenty feet below him on a cord it hits the ground first, a useful precaution when landing in the dark.
A crescent moon showed occasionally which helped.
Devlin made an excellent landing and within minutes had his suitcase and a trenching shovel out of the supply bag, a dark raincoat and trilby.
He found a ditch, scraped a hole, put the supply bag, parachute and flying suit in it then tossed the shovel into a nearby pool.
He put on his raincoat and hat, opened the case and found the steel-rimmed spectacles which he carried in there for safety.
Underneath the neatly folded uniform was a webbing belt and holster containing a Smith & wesson .38 revolver, the type frequently issued to British officers.
There was a box of fifty cartridges to go with it.
Everything seemed in order.
He put on the spectacles and stood up.
‘Hail Mary full of Grace, here am I, a sinner,’ he said softly.
‘Do what you can for me,’ and he crossed himself, picked up his suitcase and moved on.
The Ulster border, to anyone who knew it, was never a problem.
He followed a network of country lanes and the occasional field path and by four fifteen was safe in Ulster and standing on British soil.
And then he had an incredible piece of luck.
A farm truck passed him, stopped and the driver, a man in his sixties, looked out.
‘Jesus, Father, and where would you be walking to at this time of the morning?’
‘Armagh,’ Devlin said.
‘To catch the milk train to Belfast.’
‘Now isn't that the strange thing and me going all the way to Belfast market.’
‘God bless you, my son,’ Devlin said and climbed in beside him.
‘Nothing to it, Father,’ the farmer told him as he drove away.
‘After all, if a priest can't get a helping hand in Ireland, where would he get one?’
It was later that morning, at ten o'clock, when Schellenberg knocked on the Reichsführer's door and went in.
‘Yes?’
Himmler said.
‘What is it?’
‘I've had confirmation from Laville, Reichsführer, that Devlin jumped into Southern Ireland at approximately two a.m.’
‘Really?’
Himmler said.
‘You've moved fast, Brigadeführer.
My congratulations.’
‘Of course none of this guarantees success, Reichsführer.
We have to take even Devlin's safe landing on faith and the whole business when he gets to London is very open-ended.’
‘There's been a change in our plans,’ Himmler said.
‘The Führer's conference at Belle Ile will now take place on the fifteenth.’
‘But Reichsführer, that only gives us a week.’
‘Yes, well we're in the Führer's hands.
It is not for us to query his decisions.
Still, I know you'll do your best.
Carry on, General.’
Schellenberg went out, closing the door, feeling totally bewildered.
‘For God's sake, what's the bastard playing at?’ he said softly and went back to his office.