

PART TWO
1
‘I think they're lovely, Henry, beautiful.
Do you know, I hate to part with them.
I would say don't give them away, if they weren't going to Emma.
You know, you are clever.’
Lizzie picked up a set of strings with handles attached and began to manipulate the beautifully dressed, twelve-inch figure of Cinderella, saying as she did so, ‘Walk!
Prince Charming.’
Henry picked up another set of handles and in a moment Prince Charming was walking towards Cinderella and bowing from the waist.
When Lizzie tried to make Cinderella curtsey she succeeded only in crossing the puppet's feet, and she started to laugh; then, laying the puppet down, she said, ‘But of the three, you know, I think I like Buttons; he's so appealing.’
And she added, ‘She'll soon have a collection, what with the Seven Dwarfs and Jack the Giant Killer.’
‘Oh.’
Henry continued to place the puppets in folds of Christmas paper and lay them in their boxes as he said, ‘It'll be like last year; the Lord  of the Manor will have bought her so much that everybody else's presents will be eclipsed.’
He looked up at Lizzie, saying, ‘Did you ever know anyone dote on a child like he does?’
‘No, I never have.
If Peggy herself had had one tenth of such devotion from her father she would have had a happier time as a child.
But then, there's another side to this.
I think you can have too much of a good thing.
He monopolises her every minute and I have the feeling that Peggy doesn't like it.
She doesn't say anything, but you know Peggy.
Talk about being thrust into maturity: she's still only a month off twenty-two and there she is with the barracks on her shoulders and my mother still dizzying about, and Gran…and Gran kicking eighty, acting skittishly.
Honestly, Henry, when I think back to when I first saw Andrew Jones in that mucky room, the thin weed of a lad with nothing about him, I cannot believe he's the same person represented by Mr Andrew Jones, not only head of the showrooms, but…
Mrs Funnell's right-hand man.’
‘Well, you've got to hand it to him.
I do myself.
He was the first one to get it through to your grandmother that it would be a good thing to use the forecourt on a Sunday for the sale of second-hand cars.’
‘Yes; but you had thought about it before, hadn't you?
You didn't think she would approve.
But it was  you who had to fight to get double time for the men who worked on a Sunday.’
‘That's beside the point, dear; he got it through.’
—‘But you started the driving school.’
He laughed.
‘Yes, yes, I did,’ he said, ‘but he topped that with the car-wash.’
‘My goodness, yes.’
She nodded.
‘And what did that cost?
It makes me wild when I think, it does really, that Gran's as much taken with him as he is with the child.
And there's Peggy: she could be an outsider of no consequence.
When you're in the house, it's always Andrew this and Andrew that from Gran.
And Andrew's monotone, ‘What does Mrs Funnell say about it?’
Oh! he's got his buttons on all right, that one.
I first realised it the day of Len's funeral, when I spilled the beans.
That's when his mind started working…
. He'll be after your job next, you'll see.’
‘Well, that wouldn't trouble me, my dear.
I know I could still step into Rankins.
He's a Rotarian, you know, the boss down there.
We're not supposed to help each other in a business way, are we?’— he pulled a face at her —‘But I know he would welcome me into his band.
So, whatever Mr Jones has up his sleeve, he'll let it slide out one of these days and it won't make the slightest difference to me.’
‘You're wonderful.
Do you know that?’
‘Look out!
Look out! the puppets will be dancing on the floor in a moment.’
He pushed the box further back on the table, then put his arm about her and gazing into her face, said, ‘I worry about nothing, not a thing.
I have you and that's all that matters.
You brought me happiness that I never thought I would know again in this world, and you've added to it every day.’
She put her fingers to the top of his brow and traced a three inch scar downwards to the back of his ear, thinking as she did so, and not for the first time, that he had nearly paid dearly for his happiness.
He still paid with violent headaches, but it could have been so much worse.
Following the first operation, two others had kept him in hospital for two months.
It had been four months altogether before he returned to the Works, by which time Andrew Jones had been installed in the showrooms as assistant salesman.
What was more, his posters were displayed on every available space on the walls, and on fancy artists' easels here and there between the cars.
He was also allowed a car for his own use.
In the house he now wined and dined in a style that not even Grandfather Funnell had ever done, but all paid for by Grandfather Funnell's wife, who seemed to have become rejuvenated by the smart, young, fast-talking Mr Jones.
‘Well, come on, woman; are you ready?
You carry the puppets and I'll take the case.
You sure everything's in there?
Don't forget last Christmas when you forgot your mother's and we had to come dashing back for it, and it snowing like blazes.
And mind’— he turned to her —‘we're not staying long.
We've got our own Christmas tree to see to.
And I'm going to get drunk tonight.’
‘You're not.’
‘We're both going to get drunk tonight.’
‘We're not.’
‘We're not?
All right, we're not.
But we'll see.
Yes, we'll see.’…
Arrived at the house, Lizzie's criticising reaction was still with her.
‘My! my!’ she said as she opened the door, ‘No expense spared.
Look at those lights!
Every window ablaze.
And to think when Peggy was little Gran wouldn't let me switch on the tree lights until Christmas Eve.
It meant nothing, she used to say, if they were switched on earlier.
And look’ she pointed —‘that's an innovation: fairy lights on these outside trees.’
‘Come on, come on, it's Christmas; we'll pull them to bits when we get back.’
Entering the hall, they both blinked against the dazzling lights from the twelve-foot Christmas tree situated to the right of the stairs.
Then Lizzie, looking up the stairs to where Peggy was descending  with a tray of crockery in her hands, said, ‘Who's in bed?’
‘Gran.’
‘Not again!
She does this every Christmas Eve.’
‘Give me the tray, lass.’
Henry took the heavily laden tray from Peggy's hands and put it on a side-table as Lizzie said, ‘Did she have her dinner and tea all at once?’
Peggy looked at her mother, and smiling, answered, ‘Well, you should know, Mam; she always had an appetite after a fainting fit.
It was the only way she could regain her strength.
Remember?
How are you?’
Lizzie was taking off her coat and hat now and laying them on a chair as she said, ‘I'm fine, fine.
The question is, how are you?
You look drained.’
‘Well, what do you expect, Mam, it's Christmas.
Who isn't drained at Christmas?’
‘Where is Emma?’
Peggy answered Henry's enquiry by thumbing upwards, saying, ‘Having her bath.’
‘Will she be going straight to bed?’
Peggy turned to her mother, saying, ‘Yes, but not to sleep.’
‘Well, in that case we can open the presents and put them round the tree.
Before we do that, though, I'll pop up and see her.’
She turned towards the  stairs, only to have her daughter say sharply, ‘No, no!’
Then her voice changing, Peggy went on, ‘Andrew's up there seeing to her.’
‘Well’— Lizzie stopped —‘I don't suppose he'll object to me seeing my grandchild bathed.’
Peggy moved her head in a gesture that brought her mother's and Henry's full attention on her, and they waited for some seconds before Peggy, moving up the hall towards the drawing-room, explained, ‘It's…it's his particular part of the day; he…he likes to see to her himself.’
Lizzie and Henry again looked at each other as they followed her into the room, and sat on the couch.
Their minds being on Emma, they waited for Peggy to go on, but after placing a piece of wood on the fire she turned to them with a smile, saying, ‘What about a drink?’
‘Yes, that's a good idea.’
Henry grinned at her.
‘I'll have a whisky, neat, and this lady here will have a gin and lime.’
Then leaning closer towards Lizzie, he said, ‘You're sure you wouldn't like a sherry?’
This was a joke between them, and Lizzie retorted, ‘No, sir, thank you; as you said, a gin and lime.’
Straight-faced now, Peggy said, ‘Sherry is for occasions and this is no occasion, not even special company.’
‘Go on with you.’
When the door had closed on her daughter, Lizzie looked at her husband and said, ‘What do you make of it?’
‘Don't ask me; and this is not the place to discuss it.’
‘She was afraid of me going up there, wasn't she?
Why?
And this isn't the first time.’
‘Well, my dear, I don't think you can find anything sinister in the fact that a man wants to see his child bathed at night.
And we know he's crazy about her.
But then, who wouldn't be?
She's beautiful and cute and brighter than most for a five-year-old.’
‘He's ruling this house, it appears to me.’
‘Well, he has done, dear, since he first came in.
He's got the support of the owner, hasn't he?’
‘Yes; yes, you've put your finger on it, he's got the support of the owner.’
The door opened again and Peggy entered carrying a tray on which there were three drinks.
She handed the whisky to Henry, the gin and lime to her mother, then took the third herself, and her mother said, ‘What's that?
That looks a dark mixture, what is it?’
‘Brandy and port.’
‘Brandy and port ?’
Henry got this in before Lizzie got over her gasp.
When she did she repeated, ‘Brandy and port?
When did you take to this?’
‘I was told it was a very good pick-me-up, and it is.
It takes the heat out of life.’
They both stared at the young woman before them, sipping now at a brandy and port.
Her maturity seemed to have slipped from her.
To Lizzie she looked once more like the young girl who had found herself pregnant and didn't want to marry.
But the impression vanished as she repeated to herself: Takes the heat out of life.
She was looking, not at a twenty-one-year-old girl, a young and beautiful twenty-one-year-old girl, but a twenty-one-year-old girl that could be taken for thirty, and who was drinking a mixture of brandy and port to ease the strain of her life.
‘I got a Christmas Box from Great-gran.’
‘What was that?
A year's free petrol? or a box of fruits, something that you could all share?’
‘Don't be cynical, Mam.
My present is alive.’
‘Alive?
Oh, a dog?’
‘No, no.
She wouldn't have a dog about the place.’
‘A horse?’
‘No; don't be silly.’
‘Well, come on, put me out of my agony.’
‘A daily help, full-time.
Thirty pounds a week and her meals.’
‘Never !’
‘Oh yes.
I had the go-ahead last week-end and I interviewed the fourth applicant this morning.
She's a widow, twenty-nine, likes housework, so she says, can cook, and seems to have a very pleasant disposition.’
‘I can't believe it!
Wonders will never cease.
Is it because you've taken a stand since Mother's been taking to her bed?’
‘Well, perhaps.’
Peggy took another sip from her glass.
It would have been humiliating for her to say to her mother, ‘I had nothing to do with it; it was the bright boy who made the suggestion to the grand dame.’
And had she told them the reason that was at the back of the suggestion, they would not have believed that either.
On second thoughts, yes, perhaps her mother would, if she remembered her previous husband.
And had her mother ever said to him: ‘Leave me alone, I'm too tired.
You have spent most of your day sitting in your office while I, from seven o'clock this morning until ten tonight, have been at the beck and call of two old women; I have seen to the needs of my child, and in between times I have cooked the meals and done whatever I could towards keeping this mausoleum clean.’
Yes, very likely she had.
But had her husband said, ‘Very well, we'll see what some domestic help can do towards inspiring your sex urge.’
She doubted it, or else her mother would have had help.
Inspiring her sex urge.
He talked like that these days.
He had talked like that for a long time now.
Did her mother guess there was a battle going on in this house; in fact, various battles?
The battle of the bed to start with; then the battle against the combined forces of her husband and her great-grandmother — they were most certainly joined now — and the other battle, an unspoken battle as yet, but one that would soon come into the open.
It must.
Yes it must.
‘Look-’ Her mother interrupted her pondering.
‘Shall I come over first thing in the morning and give you a hand?
I can, you know; I've only got him to see to….’ and she turned and looked at Henry as though she disapproved of having to do so, while Henry smiled back at her.
But Peggy said quickly, ‘No, no!
Everything's done: turkey stuffed, the pudding has been made this past five weeks.
Gran did that, you know, as usual, and she made the cake and I've iced it.
Yesterday she made the mince pies, and today I cooked a tongue and a small ham and….’
‘Good gracious!
How many are you having tomorrow?’
‘Well, there's seven of us, then Auntie May and Frank and Charlie, so that'll be ten for dinner.
Then, in the evening Andrew has invited the showroom staff and their wives.
That will be another ten.’
‘Oh.’
Lizzie raised her eyebrows.
‘This is a new departure, isn't it, the staff and their wives being invited here?’
‘Well’ Peggy drained her glass before walking to the table and placing it in the tray, and her back to her mother, she, said, ‘When one is an executive one must act like an executive, mustn't one?’
Then looking over her shoulder, she enquired, ‘Are you coming up to see Great-gran?’ and began to walk towards the door.
Lizzie paused for a moment, then rising, said, ‘Yes; yes, of course.
You coming, Henry?’
‘Must I?’
‘No; not if you don't want to.’
‘Well, let's say I don't want to.’
This little side-play caused Peggy to stop and wonder, and it also gave Lizzie the opportunity to try to bring a smile to her daughter's face and perhaps ease the tension she saw there.
‘You know something?’ she said to Peggy.
‘He will repeat everything I say, part of it at least, and it can get on your nerves, you know.’
Peggy smiled and, looking towards her stepfather, she said, ‘Yes, I can imagine how he gets on your nerves,’ at the same time questioning why her mother should be so happy, and she a settled woman forty years old, whereas she was twenty-one and so miserable inside that there were days where she  wanted to take to her heels and run.
Run away from the two old women.
Run from the ambitious young man who was her husband and who was bringing fear into her existence, a horrible fear to which she daren't put a name and which had sprung into life a month ago.
She wished she could talk about it to her mother, but that would be fatal.
It would be equally fatal to talk about it to her Auntie May.
She could to Charlie, though.
Yet how could she bring such a subject up to Charlie?
Oh, she could talk to Charlie about anything.
Oh, Charlie.
Charlie.
She said now, ‘Have you heard about Charlie?’
‘What about Charlie?’
Mother and daughter were walking down the room together.
‘He's going to London to give a concert.
His agent phoned him last week.
He won't be on the stage all the time, he said, his will be just a little spot.
He's always playing himself down.
Auntie May, though, said there's only a quartet, and after he's done some solo pieces he's playing with them.
Mr Reynolds is going with him; if his legs will hold out, that is, Charlie said.’
‘My!
My!
He's certainly going places.
Well, May always said he would.
And of course he's slept and eaten with that guitar over the past five years.
How many hours a day has he been practising since he left school?’
‘At least six.’
‘Enough to drive anybody mad.
But then May thinks the sun shines out of him.
She must be stone deaf.
For meself, I could never see what's in guitar playing.’
‘Well, you've heard him play.’
They were going up the stairs now.
‘Yes; yes, I do grant you he can play that thing.’
They had reached the landing when the first door in the corridor opened and out stepped a man who seemed to have no connection with the boy Andrew Jones, for here was a handsome, well-built and tall man, and he was naked except for a small towel tucked round his waist.
The child in his arms.
She too was naked except for a small towel around her shoulders.
And it was she who cried, ‘Oh, Grandma.
Grandma.
It's Christmas tomorrow.’
Then, ‘Mammy, must I go to bed?’
Neither Lizzie nor Peggy spoke, for Andrew, after one glance at them, had hurried along the corridor towards the far end where the nursery was situated.
The mother and daughter walked on towards the third door on the other side of the corridor and which led into Mrs Funnell's room.
But they paused a moment outside and Lizzie said quietly, ‘Does he always take his bath with her?’
Almost in a hiss now Peggy leant toward her mother and said, ‘Yes; yes he does.
Is there anything wrong in that?
She's a baby.’
After a moment of looking back into her daughter's eyes, Lizzie said quietly, ‘She's five years old and children seem to mature quickly these days.’
Then, stepping forward, she tapped on the door, saying in a louder voice now, ‘It's me.
May I come in?’
And when the answer came, ‘Yes, yes, come in,’ she opened the door and they went in, to be greeted with, ‘And what were you standing outside whispering about?’
‘Well,’ said Lizzie, ‘it's Christmas and we wondered what to put in your stocking.’
‘Don't be funny.
It doesn't suit you.’
‘How are you?’
‘Just as you see me.
You're too satisfied with yourself and your life.
It won't last.
Nothing does.’
‘Well, Gran, as long as it lasts I'll try to enjoy it.
By, it's hot in here.’
She waved her hand before her face.
‘We are not as young as we were.
We need warmth.’
Lizzie now looked towards the three-bar electric fire.
Although it was a large fire, she had never known it have more than one bar on at a time.
And the same had applied to the other electric fires in the house.
Things had certainly changed.
Oh, she wished she was back home.
She couldn't think now that this had been her home for so long.
She could say she had even hated the house; and now she  had come to dislike her grandmother, but more so to dislike Andrew Jones.
When she thought of her son-in-law, how he had inveigled himself into this house and into this old woman's good books, she again felt a pity for Len rise in her.
All right, he was what he was: he wasn't fundamentally a nice man, yet, had he been greeted in the beginning by this old woman as Andrew Jones had, how different things might have been.
It might not have prevented her feelings for him from developing as they had, but it would certainly not have caused a change in the atmosphere in this place, and he might have remained livable with.
‘You've put yourself to bed early tonight, haven't you, Gran?’
‘Well, at my age I would have thought one could retire when one felt so inclined, without adverse comment.
Your tone, you know, not only suggested surprise to find me in bed, but also condemnation that I should be here.
Well, I am here, Lizzie, in order to prepare myself for a long day tomorrow, which I think is a wise decision, don't you?’
‘I am past thinking about anything, Gran, where you're concerned.’
Lizzie turned from the bed, and the action provoked Mrs Funnell to say to Peggy, ‘Your mother's in that kind of a mood, isn't she, Peggy?
I thought her life was now so happy and gay that she wouldn't be able to find it in herself  to be uncivil to anyone, even to her grandmother.
Hm!
You've been drinking again, Peggy,’ and she turned her head away.
‘I can smell it from you, and It isn't sherry.’
‘No, Great-gran, it isn't sherry, it's brandy and port mixed.’
‘Huh!
Go along with you.’
It was evident that Mrs Funnell could not imagine her great-granddaughter drinking brandy and port mixed.
She addressed Lizzie now, saying, ‘Have you been in to your mother?’
‘No; not yet.’
‘She's getting worse; she'll be gone long before I will.
I cannot understand where her weakness comes from.
There was no such fiddle-faddle ailments on my side, nor on your grandfather's.
But there she is, a rattling pill-box.’
‘I'll see you in the morning, Grandma,’ Lizzie was making for the door.
‘Have you brought the presents?’
‘Yes.’
Lizzie didn't turn round.
‘And I've got yours.
I spent three months knitting you a pair of bed-socks.
I hope you like them.’
Bed-socks.
She wouldn't dare.
Peggy closed the door behind them; but Lizzie held her tongue until they had moved further down the corridor, when she said, ‘She gets worse; selfish to the core,’ and Peggy reminded her, ‘Well, you  made your escape, Mam, but you left me with it.’
‘Oh no, I didn't; it was up to you.
I told you at the time to stick out and then she would have to get a housekeeper in.
But then, of course’— she pulled a face now —‘I hadn't taken your husband into account, had, I? nor his charm or his wiliness.
Anyway, don't let us get back on to that.
Now I'm not going into Mother tonight; a medical lesson would just finish me.
I'll say goodnight to the child, then we'll be off.’
One of the large bedrooms had been turned into a nursery and it seemed to hold every conceivable toy a child could have.
Dolls of all shapes and sizes were arranged on shelves, and an outsize doll's house stood in one corner of the room, a miniature swing in the other.
There were teddy bears and pandas seemingly fighting for a place in an armchair.
There was a miniature rocking chair, and against the end wall a single bed with a miniature canopy over it.
And in it now, dressed in a frilled nightie, sat the child, and by her side and combing her thick black wavy hair from her brow was her father, partly dressed in trousers now.
‘Grandma, Santa is coming tonight.
Do you know what he's bringing me?’
‘No, I don't.’
The child bent forward now, glee on her face as she said,
‘Bread and cheese
And a bottle of pop,
Two boiled eggs
And a mutton chop,
Plain cold water in a glass.
That's only if you're good, said Father Christmas.’
‘My, that's a new one.
Where did you hear that?’
‘Mammy reads it to me.
It's in Bunty Bunny's book.
And I can read it.’
Lizzie turned and in a low voice said to Peggy, ‘They get their money easy, the ones who write that stuff.’
‘You going to read me another story tonight, Mammy?’
‘Yes, dear, yes.
Now lie down, because, you know, if you don't go to sleep he won't come.’
‘I'd like to see him.
Couldn't you ask him to stay?
He could sleep next door; there's no-one there.’
‘But what about all the other children he's got to see to?
You know, you're not the only one.’
‘But she is the only one, aren't you?
Aren't you, pet?’
Andrew had his hand on her hair again stroking it back, lifting each strand separately.
The child looked up at him, smiled at him, then settled down into the bed.
And as he tucked the  clothes under her chin Peggy moved towards the door, and her mother, before following her, called to the child, ‘See you in the morning, dear.’
‘Yes, Gran.
See you in the morning, 'cos it'll be Christmas then.’
‘Yes, it'll be Christmas then.’
They were on the stairs again before Lizzie spoke, when she said, ‘He'll ruin her if you're not careful.
You want to put your foot down.
He's so possessive; it isn't right.
I'm telling you; you want to put your foot down.’
‘Mam.’
The word was ground out between Peggy's teeth.
‘He…he loves the child.
Can I stop him doing that?’
‘There is love and love, girl, and his feelings go beyond it.
It's possessiveness, pure and simple, possessiveness.
You needn't be here, as far as I can see; you didn't give her birth, you didn't carry her; she's his.
I've been wanting to say this for a long time.’
‘Well, it's a pity you said it now.
I've got my life to live and it's in this house, and I say again, you left me a legacy and I've got to manage the best way I can.
So, Mam, keep out of it, will you?
Keep out of it.’
‘Yes, dear.
I'll keep out of it.’
Lizzie marched ahead now and, on reaching the drawing-room door, she pushed it open, saying, ‘We're going.’
And within three minutes they were out of the house and into the car, and only then did Henry ask, ‘What's it all about?’
‘I've been told once more to mind my own business.
But there's a business going on there that somebody should put a spoke into, before something happens and a life is destroyed.’
‘What are you meaning?’
‘Emma, the child: she's being utterly controlled by him, in all ways.
You know why she didn't want us to go up into the bathroom?
Because he has her in the bath with him.’
‘Well, she's…she's only a child.’
‘She's five years old!
And do you think, if this has been going on all the years it must have, he's going to stop now?
I tell you I'm worried.’
‘Well, what can you do about it?
Nothing.
It's their business.
As I see it, it's up to Peggy, and knowing her I can't see that she'd let anything happen that wasn't above board.’
‘Henry, she can't stop it.
That's what's the matter with her.
I've noticed the change in her over these last two years.’
‘Come on.
Come on.
We've got to go there tomorrow, so’— he took his hand from the wheel and gave her a quick pat —‘put your neb under your wing until after the holidays and see what transpires then.’
2
Christmas Day turned out to be a success, both at dinner time and in the evening.
The credit for the laughter at the dinner table could be said to be shared between Henry and Frank Conway.
In the evening, after the first stiffness wore off and charades were introduced, the party went with a swing.
The child was not present: her father had taken what he termed a very tired little princess upstairs, given her her bath and put her to bed.
During the Christmas dinner Andrew had kept a low profile, as it were, but in the evening he had played host under the admiring gaze of Mrs Emma Funnell.
And the feeling this generated in both Lizzie and Peggy was much the same: resentment and a dull anger directed, if anything, more against the old woman than the young man.
Boxing Day, like all Boxing Days, was a day of clearing up and trying to get through left-overs.
The day following Boxing Day the new help arrived.
Her name was Mrs Rosie Milburn.
She was plump and fair, with a pleasant face.
And from the  beginning Peggy sensed her kindly disposition and felt they would get on well together.
Rosie lived with her bachelor brother at the other end of the town.
And after her first day's work, which proved her promise that she liked housework, Peggy plied her with what was left of the Christmas fare.
Her grandmother was now on her feet again; in fact, she had got on her feet on Christmas morning.
It was strange, the quick turn Victoria Pollock's illnesses conveniently took.
She too had taken to the new helper.
As for the mistress of the house, she seemed to be withholding her opinion: new brooms literally always swept clean, she warned.
Andrew's opinion of the new help was that she looked well fed, but he had then further remarked to Peggy that he hoped, now that she had help, he would benefit for, being less employed, she would be less tired.
To which and looking him straight in the face, she had answered, ‘Don't count on it, ever.’
And grimly he had retorted, ‘Well, you know what that'll drive me to.’
And she had answered, ‘The sooner the better.
I would have thought you were already known there, anyway.’
On New Year's Eve, and out of the blue, he told her he was going to a party and he didn't know what time he would be back.
They were having a cup of tea in the drawing-room.
The cup was halfway to her mouth when she said, ‘We won't be seeing the New Year in then?’
‘No; well, not here.’
‘Does Great-gran know?’
‘Yes; she knows, and she doesn't mind; she acknowledges the custom is dying out fast.
She'll be in bed, anyway; as will your gran.
So what would you have the two of us do sitting here alone and saying, ‘A Happy New Year, dear, nineteen seventy-four’?’
‘We always have May and Frank in.’
‘Oh yes, May and Frank.
And don't forget Charlie, dear Charlie, the great musician.
Look’— he got to his feet-'I've had enough of May and Frank and Charlie, all I'm going to have.
Things are going to be different, and you've only got yourself to blame for that, haven't you?’
‘I don't consider I'm to blame for anything that has happened since you came into this house.
You've manoeuvred everything very nicely.
You've hoodwinked a silly old woman into believing you are what you're not.’
‘Oh.
Is that it?
She would love to hear herself called a silly old woman.
Now let me tell you something.
Her kindness to me is because I've expanded those Works.
Profits went up by ten per cent last month and your stepfather got the credit.
But who did the groundwork?
Who suggested the alterations, and saw them through?
I'm telling you, if anybody should be running that place, it's me.’
Her cup clashed into the saucer.
She rose to her feet, and she growled at him, ‘That's your aim, is it?
Oh yes, I can see it now: right from the beginning, that's been your aim; but let me tell you, Henry is too well ensconced in that job and unless you would like to try and kill him, as my father did, you'll stay put where you are.’
He was gaping at her now, then his eyes narrowed.
‘Your father tried to kill him?’
‘Yes.
Yes; you didn't know that, did you?
But he wanted that job so badly he was willing to kill for it.
Now why don't you try the same?
You're young and strong; your swimming has put muscles on you.
Go on, knock him off.
But be clever and do it like Dad did; arrange it so it looks like a burglary.’
Quietly now, he said, ‘You've kept that close, haven't you?’
‘It was best kept close.’
‘Does Great-gran know?’
‘Yes, she knew, but she wanted things hushed up, so when Mam said she was marrying Henry she didn't protest over much, because Mam was in such a state then she would have brought the whole thing to light.
And there's one thing that Great-gran can't stand and that's adverse publicity in any way.
Remember that, Andrew, adverse publicity in any way.
And so she wouldn't like to know of your visits to a certain house in Bog's End, would she?’
The colour flooded his pale face and he barked at her, from low in his throat, ‘Who drove me there?
First, it wasn't good for the baby you were carrying; afterwards, post-natal depression.
Another excuse.
If I hadn't had my child to take my mind off things, God alone knows what I would have done to you.’
‘Your child?
Yes, you've said it,your child.
She's my child, I bore her.
Don't forget that, and don't go too far.
There's something I'm going to have out with you, but not tonight, not this night.
Perhaps we'll start the New Year with it.
Yes, yes; perhaps we'll start the New Year with it.
Now you'd better get out to where you are going before I change my mind and dash upstairs into Great-gran's room and tell her where you're going first, before you join your men pals.
And I'm quite capable of doing it.
Don't forget that.’
She watched his whole body stiffen, his fists clench at each side of his hips, then his big soft-lipped mouth, the feature that marred his otherwise handsome looks, stretch wide as he ground his teeth one set over the other.
But her eyes never left his face, and he turned from her and marched from the room.
as if she had just been in actual combat she dropped down on to the couch and sat gasping, drawing in long, shuddering breaths.
She wanted to cry.
Oh, how she wanted to cry.
But in a short while, once he was gone from the house, she'd have to go upstairs and read to her daughter and she knew that already the child was sensitive to her feelings: she would say, ‘You sad, Mammy?’ or ‘You vexed with me, Mammy?’
And she would have to smile at the first question and say, ‘Oh, no, no, of course lot.
I've got a bit of a headache, that's all.’
To the second, she would enfold her in her arms and say, No, darling, I'm not vexed with you.
I could never be vexed with you.’
And her daughter would put er arms around her neck and hug her.
But only, as the last time she had done that and had kissed the child, to be told, ‘You have a nice mouth, Mammy; Daddy's mouth is wet.’
She shuddered with the feeling that ran through her at the picture the childish words conjured up.
Something would have to be done, and soon.
But what?
What?
Whom could she talk to?
There was no-one to whom she could confide, ‘I'm afraid of my husband's affection for his daughter…my daughter.’
To whom could she say that?
She didn't know how long she lay there, but when the door opened she started, then relaxed as she saw it was her grandmother.
Victoria came up the room and seated herself on the couch, and without either greeting or preamble, she said, ‘I've had indigestion ever since Christmas Day.
I shouldn't eat that kind of food; yet other people can.
Why should I be like this?’
But when there was no retort from her granddaughter, she turned her head and looked at the young woman lying with her back against the head of the couch, her eyes closed, the muscles of her jaws showing white through the skin, and, her tone changing, she enquired, ‘What is it, dear?
What is it?’
‘Nothing, Gran, nothing.’
‘Oh, you can't hoodwink me.
Things aren't right between you and him.
He's OK again tonight, I see; tonight of all nights.
Of course, I wouldn't have stayed up.
I never do now; I hear the bells and the hooters from bed.
But that's me.
I'm no longer young.
Still, even when I was young’— she was talking as if to herself now-'I could see no reason to stay up just because a date was changing, starting all over again, one, two, three, four, five.
But then you're different, you're young.’
She was looking at Peggy again.
‘And you never seem to have any fun, do you, dear?’
She reached out and took Peggy's hand.
‘You know what I think?
I think you should never have married Andrew.
He's changed this house.
Do you know that?
Oh, Mother is over the moon with him; but I'm not, Peggy.
No; I'm not.
Between you and  me, I'm not.
I don't know, there's just something about him.
I won't say it's slyness but it's something.
And you don't get on, do you?
And then there's Emma.
He's obsessed with that child.
Do you know that?
He's obsessed with her.
It isn't right.
There's something not right about the way he goes on with her.
He's promised now to take her swimming.’
Peggy opened her eyes and turned her head sharply and looked at her grandmother.
‘When did you hear that?’ she asked.
‘Oh, I heard him talking to her.
‘I'm going to take you swimming in the baths.’
he was saying.
‘You'll like that.
You'll love that.’
That's what he said.
I'll tell you what.
You go over to May's, they always have a bit of a carry-on on New Year's Eve, and I'll keep awake and see to Emma.’
‘Thanks, Gran; but you know I never leave her alone at nights, and you're bound to drop off.’
‘I'm not bound to drop off.’
Victoria's tone altered.
‘Look, my dear, I'm not in my dotage yet, and I know I'm a grumbler and a complainer.
You could say the only form of comfort I've got are my complaints; I'm forever complaining about my complaints.
Oh, I know all about myself.
Oh yes, I do, dear.
And so, look, I tell you what.
Later on you can bring her into my bed and then go over there and see the New Year in.
Now you're not to say no.
All right, if I fall asleep she'll fall asleep, too.
And you  know, dear, I've been a mother.
I had your mother as a baby, and you know something?
She howled for the most part of her first two years.
I never knew what it was to have a decent night's rest.
Oh, your grandfather took his turn.
Give him his due, he was very good.
But you see, I was a mother, I've had a baby, I know all about it.
Even when you were small and Lizzie had a bad time of it, I saw to you.
Oh yes, I did.’
Her head was bobbing up and down now, and Peggy, smiling wanly, nodded in return, saying, ‘Well, I can't remember what you did in those early years, Gran, but I remember how you used to bounce me on your knees in time with ‘To ride a cock horse to Banbury Cross’.’
‘Yes, yes I did.
Fancy you remembering that.
And do you remember ‘Wee Willie Winkie’ and ‘There was a crooked man and he walked a crooked mile’?
Oh, and so many others.
We played games, you and I. That was when your father wasn't in.
Oh dear me.’
She now lay back on the couch and, staring towards the fire, she said, ‘Been a funny house, this, held so many lives and hardly any of them happy, except my mother's.’
Her voice took on a high, hard tone now, and again her head was nodding.
‘Oh, she was happy all right.
And she's been happy ever since, bossing everybody around, playing the queen of the castle.
Yes, yes.’
She gave a short laugh now.
‘We used to play  ‘Queen of the castle’ on Shields sands.
Do you remember?’
‘Yes, Gran, I remember.’
And Peggy now patted her grandmother's hand, saying, ‘If one could only remember the nice things, the pleasant things, and let others go by; but it's always the reverse: the unpleasant things grow like weeds and choke any nice memory you might harbour.’
‘I don't like to hear you talk like that, Peggy.
You're too young to talk like that.
On the twentieth o f next month you'll be twenty-two.
You haven't really started to live yet, and you're talking like a woman who's experienced life.’
Yes, she was talking like a woman who had experienced life, because she had experienced life.
Since she was sixteen she had experienced life, and none of it had been good, except that she had given birth to a daughter and also that she had found out what love was, but had experienced the painful futility of it.
‘There, that's settled.
You slip over now…well, as soon as you've seen Emma off to sleep, and tell May that you'll be over later.
But wrap up well before you go through that garden because it's enough to freeze you out there.
I'm sure we're going to have snow.
Later on, put your new blue frock on, the wool one; you look lovely in that.’
Victoria now pulled herself to her feet and, looking down on her granddaughter, she said, ‘And not only in that, lass, you're a lovely young woman.
There's nobody in the family had your looks.
I think Emma might take after you.
She's got his hair, but that's all.
The main thing is, she'll have your character.
You know the saying, ‘Handsome is as handsome does’; that applies to men, but ‘Beauty is as beauty does’, that applies to women.
When all's said and done it's the character that counts.’
She turned away now and walked to the fire, and there, looking at it, she stood with her hands joined below her waist like a penitent child and said, ‘I spoilt my life and those of others about me, especially my husband's.
And I blame myself.
But then, when I come to think and ask myself what made me like this, I haven't far to seek the answer.
It's sad, you know’— she turned about and looked at Peggy ‘It is sad when a mother outshines a daughter, and aims to do it to the extent of trying to fascinate her son-in-law.
So the only way I seemed to be able to keep Arthur was to become dependent on him.’
‘Oh, Gran.
Gran.’
Peggy had her arms around the elderly woman now, and they dung together tightly, and there was a break in Peggy's voice as she said, ‘Why didn't you talk about this before?
You…you could have talked to Mam.
Why didn't you?’
‘Funny that, dear, I couldn't talk to Lizzie, not to my own daughter.
I suppose it was in a way because I knew she didn't really love me.
And, too, I always felt slightly inferior to her, if you know what I mean: Lizzie was clever, bright; I never was.’
‘Gran, I love you.
I do, I do.’
And she knew she did, but it was only during this moment that it had happened, in this moment of revelation.
They were both crying now and holding each other tightly, but when they flopped down on to the couch their tears turned to laughter and Victoria, wiping her face, said, ‘Do you know something, girl?
I think this is the happiest moment of my life.’
‘Oh, Gran.
Gran.
Well, I'll tell you something, if it is, we'll have many more happy moments like it, because I feel I've just found you and I feel sorry for Mother that she never found you.’
‘No, your mother never found me, dear.
No.
It's strange when people go through life lost to each other.
They are living in the same house, eating at the same table, and, in the case of Lizzie, part of my own being.
But as you say, she never found me.
Oh, my dear Peggy, you know, I don't think I'll need any pills tonight, nor perhaps tomorrow either.’
They again fell against each other, their laughter mingling, and Victoria, her voice firm now, said, ‘He's bound to be on his way out, if he hasn't gone  already, and so go on up, do your duty and leave the rest to me.’
Instinctively, in acceptance, Peggy took her grandmother's face between her hands and gently kissed her; then they went out together.
‘May you come over here and see the New Year in?
Lass, you may bring your bag and baggage and come over here and live for good.’
‘No, she can't!
I'm not having another female in this house; we've got enough.’
And May leant forward from her chair and stroked the cat and its kitten that were lying on the rug before the blazing coal fire.
‘Come over here and live and take the whole house from me?
Huh!’
‘Well, let her come over here temporary, Mam, while I'm away.
She may have my room, and you can arrange it between you what you're going to charge her.’
‘Charge her?’
Frank Conway turned on his son.
‘Charge her!
You know, you are a mean scrub.
All you can think about is your mistress upstairs.
For two pins I'd go up and slap your ukulele in the face.’
There was a burst of laughter now and May fell against Peggy, spluttering, ‘Laugh, I nearly died.
One of the cheeky monkeys from down the road called after him’— she pointed at Charlie —‘the other day, ‘Give us a tune on your ukulele, mister.’
So that's what he's playing now, a ukulele.’
Peggy looked from one to the other.
There was so much love and companionship and understanding between these three people that she was hurt by it.
‘I won't have to stay long,’ she said, ‘because, knowing Gran, she'll likely fall asleep.’
Yet even as she spoke she knew that her grandmother would not fall asleep, not tonight she wouldn't.
Poor Gran.
At this moment she had the urge to fly back to the house, take her into her arms again and say ‘I'm going to make it up to you for all the love that I've withheld, and for all the love you've missed in your life.’
May was saying, ‘This will be the first time in years that Lucy and Jim and the bairns haven't spent New Year's Eve with us.
But she's on her time and not feeling too good.
I haven't been long back.
Good Lord!
I'll be a granny for the fifth time.
It won't be all that long before Susan marries and then I'll be a great-grandmother.
Oh, I'd hate to be a great-grandmother.’
‘You look as old as one now; and anyway, don't be daft, woman, Susan's only seven and in ten years’ time you'll be in a wheelchair.’
As Frank was talking his arm had gone round May's shoulder and he was hugging her to him, and of a sudden Peggy felt she must get away from this  family scene or she'd burst out crying.
She rose to her feet, saying, ‘Well, I'll be seeing you, that's if you're all sober enough to see me.’
‘Another cheeky monkey, suggesting we've been drinking.’
Frank stood up and, taking up an indignant posture, he placed one hand on his hip and pranced towards her, saying, ‘No alcohol ever crosses my lips, apart from cooking sherry.’
‘Get out of the way, you big goof!’
Charlie pushed his father to one side, then said, ‘Come on, Peggy; I'll see you across.’
In the hallway, as Charlie helped her into her coat, his mother's voice came to them, shouting, ‘Half past eleven the recital starts with the Spanish Fandango.’
Out on the pathway leading to the gate he took her arm, saying, ‘She gets dafter as she gets older,’ but there was such warmth in his tone that his words could have been translated as, ‘Isn't she marvellous!’
She stumbled off the edge of the concrete path, and immediately his flashlight was directed towards the ground and at the same time he pressed her arm more tightly into his side, and like this they walked on until they reached the wood, and there their steps slowed and quietly he asked, ‘Where's he gone tonight?’
It was the first time any one of them had asked her reasons for wanting to come across and see  the New Year in, and she answered, ‘Some men's do, I suppose.’
‘Yes, yes, some men's do.
He's a big noise now; at least he imagines he is.
How are things?’
‘Oh, as usual, except-’ She stopped and she turned to look at him, but she couldn't make out his face in the darkness of the wood, so it gave her the courage to say, ‘I'm worried, Charlie.
It's about the child.
He practically eats her up.
There's never a minute when he's in the house that he'll let her out of his sight.’
It was a moment before he answered, ‘Well, in a way that's understandable; she's his daughter.’
‘Yes, in a way, Charlie, but…but there are other things.’
‘What other things?’
‘Oh.’
She moved restlessly and kicked at the crisp leaves at her feet.
‘I…
I can't explain.’
But then, her voice lightening, she said, ‘There's one nice thing happened today; I mean, tonight.
Just before I came over.
Gran and I…well, Gran opened up and I know the reason for her succession of illnesses, real and imagined.
She's had a loveless life right from the beginning, a life domineered by Great-gran.
Maybe it's late, but we've come to know each other, and, you know, I don't feel lonely any more over there .’
‘Oh my God!
Oh, Peggy, to hear you say that…that you're lonely, cuts me to the bone.
I lie up  there night after night’— she felt rather than saw the motion of his head back towards his home-'but I'm with you over here.
I'm in that house, following your every move until you go to bed.
And then I'm pulling you from the bed and him.
Oh Peggy.
What am I going to do about you?
I've tried to get you out of my system.
I have.
Yes, I have.
I even went to the length of taking Kitty McKenna to the pictures last week.
But that was a mistake in more ways than one.
She sent me a Christmas present; it's a tie, one of those hand-knitted ones.’
The note of laughter in his voice matched the rising gurgle in herself and it came over in her voice as she said, ‘Kitty McKenna?
Oh, Charlie, you've done it now, because she's been after you for years.
Her mother teaches the piano, and, if I'm not mistaken, plays the fiddle.
Oh no! the violin.
She's very refeened; it would never be a fiddle, would it?
Oh, Charlie.’
She stopped; and they stood, each silent as if alone.
The wind passed over them and rustled the bare branches of the trees and they still stood.
Whose arms went out first they would never know, but suddenly they were holding each other tightly, their mouths hungry for each other.
They swayed as if they, too, had come under the pressure of the wind.
When it was over she leant against him, the side of her face pressed against his neck and she was  muttering, ‘This…it shouldn't have happened, Charlie.
I told myself it must never happen.’
‘It happened a long time ago, my dear, when we were quite small, romping in the wood.
The thing now is, what are we going to do about it?
Mainly, what are you going to do about it?
I'm ready any time.
We could go away….’
She straightened herself.
‘Charlie, Charlie, we…we could never go away; there's the child,’ she said.
‘Of course there's the child.
We could take her with us; don't be silly.’
‘He'd never let that happen, don't you see?
I've told you, he's got this mania for her: not only would he take us to court but…but I think he'd kill anybody who dared to stand between her and him.
That's…that's what I'm frightened of, this unnatural feeling.
Well, it is unnatural because he's not like an ordinary father at all.
He doesn't act like a father, not that I've got much to go on, remembering mine.
But it's as if I'd never borne her, it's as if he himself had given birth to her.
She's all his, he has said so.
Only tonight we had a row and said things.
I stand up to him but underneath I'm frightened; scared to death really.’
‘Well, if that's the case, something will have to be done.
You can't go on living like this, scared to  death.
Tell me something.
If it wasn't for her would you come away with me?’
‘Oh yes, Charlie; yes, like a shot.
Oh yes, my dear.’
She kissed him again softly, tenderly.
Then she said, ‘I'm afraid for her; in some strange way, I'm afraid for her.
But, Charlie, please don't mention this to your mother or dad, will you?’
‘No, no, I won't.
But me ma's no fool.
She took his measure years ago, as she did your great-gran's.’
‘There's another thing, Charlie: you've got your career and it's going to be wonderful; London is only the start.
And nothing must spoil that…’
‘Listen to me, Peggy.
I love my music, but I can tell you it takes second place in my life.
I think I concentrated on it only because you got married.
In fact, I'm sure I did.
Likely I would have dropped it and returned to the strumming.’
‘Never.
Never.’
‘Well, that's as may be; but no matter what line my career takes, you'll always come first.
Wherever I am, whatever I'm doing, there'll be you always in front of it.
Just remember that, will you?
I haven't got his looks or his stature.
I'm five-foot six and I'll likely run to fat later on because Ma says I'm the image of my grandfather, whom I can't remember ever having seen.
But when I think about how I feel for you, it turns me into a Hercules and I feel I can conquer the world.’
‘Oh, Charlie.’
She gave a small laugh.
‘You were always flowery; you got it from reading so much poetry.
I still have that little book of selected poems you gave me on my twelfth birthday.
Do you still read poetry?’
‘Not very often; my ukulele takes up most of my time as you know.’
‘Your ukulele?’
They laughed together now.
‘Charlie.’
‘Yes, Peggy?’
‘I'm very fond of your mother; in fact, you could say I love her.
She seems to have always been there for me to run to.
And I know she likes me, but I don't know how far her liking will stretch if she knows I'm the means of you…well, not marrying.
You mustn't let her know this has happened.
And I should say I'll forget it too, but I won't.
It's something that will help me to go on.
But Charlie, seriously, and I mean this, you've got to make your own life, and it must be a married life because I'll be stuck in that house until Emma is old enough to look after herself.
And all I can say is, God help me in the years between, because there's going to be a fight and I don't know if I shall be strong enough or clever enough to last out.
But there's one thing sure, Charlie, I'll never leave her, not in his care.’
The wind had an icy tang to it: it swirled about them right down to their feet, disturbing any loose  leaves it could find; and for a minute or two its voice was the only sound they heard, until Charlie's broke into it, saying, ‘Well, don't worry, at least about me.
I know what I'm going to do in the future.
Oh, come on, come on.
Oh Peggy, don't cry.
Please.
I can't bear it when you cry.
Look, I'll promise you one thing: I'll not marry Kitty McKenna, not even if she sends me another tie.’
‘Oh, Charlie.
Charlie.
But…but I will worry if I think you are hanging on waiting, because it's no good.
I'll be near forty by the time she's ready for marriage, and that's a lifetime away; and it's your lifetime away, too.
And you know something, I'm older than you by two and a half months.’
‘Yes, you are; and now let me tell you something: years ago I made up my mind never to marry a woman older than myself.
So you see, you have nothing to worry about.
Oh Peggy.
Peggy.’
Again they were enfolded.
But quickly now, she said, ‘I must go; but I don't regret this, Charlie.
Oh no; it'll be something to hang on to.’
She didn't add, ‘And to know you're still there waiting,’ because, knowing Charlie as she did, she knew that that was what he would do, wait, hoping against hope.
She had said he must marry only so as not to disappoint his mother; but should he come to her one day and say he was about to marry someone, that would assuredly beat her into the ground.
He was all she  had to hope for.
He didn't know it and he mustn't ‘mow it, but nevertheless it was true.
‘Happy New Year, darling.’
She had called Charlie 'darling'.
His reaction was not some other endearment but a tightening of his holding of her and saying again, ‘Oh Peggy.
Peggy;’ then, ‘A Happy New Year when it comes.’
3
Rosie Milburn was a joker; besides which, not only did she keep the house spotless but also she was a good cook.
In short, Rosie was a treasure who had brought a lightness to the house.
She hummed to herself when she was working and should you pass her when she was on her knees polishing the floor, or slapping dough on the board — she made bread for them all — she would come out with some remark that would either cause you to make a retort in similar vein or have you burst out laughing.
Altogether she was a nice woman, was Rosie Milburn.
She got on with Victoria like a house on fire; as for Mrs Funnell, she even chipped that old lady.
‘How's your old wooden legs this morning?
Mind the splinters!’ she would say to her.
Mrs Funnell had got used to this form of greeting, but it wasn't known whether she appreciated it or not.
As for the master of the house, she chipped him, too.
‘Make way for the Lord Mayor,’ she said one day on the front steps, as she moved her bucket aside, and he, bending over her, said, ‘Many a true word spoken in jest, Rosie,’to which she had reacted quickly, saying, ‘Yes, Mr Jones; but those who sit on horsehair chairs generally get their bums scratched,’bringing from him the reaction of a push on the side of her head and their laughing together.
Yes, Rosie had brought lightness into the house.
Peggy was aware that many of her sayings were threadbare, she had heard them many times before, but as the comedian said, it wasn't what as said, it was the way it was told.
And it certainly was the way Rosie said it.
Apparently, too, Rosie enjoyed herself after working hours.
Her widowhood sat lightly on her shoulders, and from what Peggy gathered from her she had a favourite pub.
As for Emma, Emma loved Rosie.
‘Rosie's being funny again, Mammy,’ she would say.
‘She said a funny poem to me about an angel spitting.’
‘Angels don't spit.’
‘Oh, Rosie's angels do.’
Yes, indeed, Rosie's angels spat.
She was a dab hand at couplets, was Rosie.
So all went well, at least in the working part of the house, for more than two years.
Then it seemed that all of a sudden Rosie wasn't so merry: her laughter was forced, and she didn't wisecrack as you were passing her, until Peggy felt she must  seek the reason.
‘Is anything the matter, Rosie?
Aren't you well?’ she asked her.
And Rosie had replied in a sort of mumble, ‘I'm all right, Mrs Jones; just a bit worried about my brother.
He's not too good lately.’
So that was it; she was worried about her brother.
Then came Monday morning.
Her grandmother, as usual, was sorting the washing in the scullery.
She herself had just returned from taking Emma to school.
That was one thing Andrew couldn't do, because he had to be at the Works by eight o'clock and Emma didn't start school until nine.
She had picked up the letters from the wire box behind the front door, dropped off her coat on her way across the hall and gone into the kitchen.
And her grandmother called from the scullery, ‘Is that you, dear?’
And when she answered, ‘Yes, it's me,’ then added, ‘Has Rosie arrived yet?’
Victoria came to the kitchen door, saying, ‘No, she hasn't.
Strange, isn't it?
You would think that when she wasn't coming she would have got some word round.’
Peggy sat down at the kitchen table and looked at the mail.
There were three letters and an electricity bill addressed to Mrs Emma Funnell, three circulars and — she picked up the last envelope — a cheap blue paper one and addressed to herself, not as Mrs  Margaret Jones, but Mrs Peggy Jones.
Who called her Peggy besides those in the household?
Charlie.
But Charlie was away and this certainly wasn't his writing: last year she had received postcards sent by him while travelling abroad with the quartet, and they were naturally never personal, just stating how the concerts were going.
She slit open the envelope, took out a single sheet of paper, and read,
‘Dear Mrs Jones,
I am sorry but I won't be in any more.
My brother is not well and I feel I must stay at home.
I am very sorry.
Believe me, I am very, very sorry, because I liked working for you.
I am very sorry.
Yours,
Rosie.’
She handed the letter to her grandmother, saying, ‘It's her brother.
He must be pretty bad if she's got to stay at home.’
‘She should have told you.
It seems so sudden.
Oh my! we're going to miss her, aren't we?’
‘Yes, we are, in all ways.
Back to square one.’
She gave a small, tight smile and her grandmother answered it with, ‘Yes, in more ways than one, we'll definitely be back to square one.
Still, you  can try for someone else, although I doubt if you'll get another Rosie.’
‘No, you're right there, Gran.
Look, I haven't put the car away, I'll slip round and see what I can do.
Perhaps I could suggest her getting someone in to look after him and she could come for half time.
I really do feel she liked working here as much as we liked having her, and not only for her work; she was such a nice person, so warm and lively.’
‘Well, I'd better get that washing on and think about a dinner,’ Victoria said; ‘but you go along and see what's happening and we'll talk about that when you come back….’
Peggy was a little surprised to find that 48, Beaconsfield Avenue was not on the council estate but was one of a terrace of small houses, with front iron-railed, enclosed gardens and all neatly kept.
After getting out of the car she bent over and pushed open the gate, then closed it behind her, walked up the short path and rang the doorbell.
Within seconds she was confronted by a tall man whom she took to be in his late forties, but who, she guessed, couldn't be quite that if he was Rosie's brother.
He coughed twice before saying, ‘Yes?’ then leaned forward and peered at her as if his sight were bad, then coughed a harsh, chest-tearing cough before asking further, ‘Yes, what d'you want?’
‘I'm Mrs Jones.
I…
I have come to see Rosie.’
‘Oh, you have, have you?
You've come to see Rosie, have you?
Well, Rosie's not here.’
‘I…
I understood that she was, well er….’
‘Come in.
Come in.’
He pulled the door wide; then before she had hardly got over the step he slammed it closed.
Preceding her now, he went across a small hall and into a sitting-room.
This, too, was small but nicely furnished and comfortable-looking.
He did not ask her to sit down but said to her straightaway, ‘What has she told you?’
‘Well, she…she told me that you weren't well and she had to stay at home.’
‘Bloody liar!
She's gone off’
‘Gone off?’
‘That's what I said, missis, gone off with a bloke.
I knew there was something in the wind, has been for weeks.
Off she's been at nights; couldn't get in quick enough and couldn't get out quick enough.
When her man died I took her in— and gave her a home.
He never did.
Come easy, go easy, God send Sunday, that was him.
I wasn't like an elder brother to her, I was more like a father.
She had a duty to me to stay by me 'cos I stuck by her.
Me with me chest like this.’
He thumped his chest with his fist now.
‘It's me lungs; coal dust on top of bronchial trouble.
And me back's gone an’ all, a roof fall in  the pit.
I deserved better treatment than that.
What d'you think, missis?’
‘I'm very surprised at Rosie.
She…she always appeared so caring, I mean.’
What she meant was she had always appeared so caring to all of them in the house.
She could, in a way, imagine what it was like caring for the man before her.
She asked tentatively now, ‘Has she gone very far?’
‘Don't ask me, missis; all I know, wherever she went on those nights, she'd leave here at half-past six and it was lucky if the clock saw her coming in that door at half-past eleven at night.’
‘Perhaps she was at the pub.
Apparently, she went to a particular pub.’
‘Pub?
The Boar's Head's never seen her for weeks.
By! when I think of it, the sly, sneaking bitch that she is.
Left me a note’— he pointed to the table ‘saying it was her life and she was entitled to a little happiness.
Well! happiness.
You know what I wish her?
I hope he's one of those blokes that'll kick her from dog to devil.’
‘Don't say that.
She…she was a nice person.’
‘Huh!
Well, I'm glad you found her so, missis.’
‘Well, I'm sure you did until recently.’
‘She was only paying me back for what I did for her, and she should have gone on paying me back.’
‘Some people expect too much.’
‘Huh!
It's well seen whose side you're on.
I bid you good day, missis.’
‘And I bid you good day, too.’
She turned from him and went out of the room, across the hall and pulled open the front door, which she didn't bother to close behind her, so angry did she feel.
The car didn't glide forward, it jumped.
No wonder Rosie had left.
That man!
But why hadn't she told her?
Why hadn't she confided in her?
She would have understood.
When she entered the house Mrs Funnell was coming down the stairs.
‘What's this I hear?’ she said.
‘Rosie's left?’
‘Yes, she's left, Great-gran.’
‘And without giving notice?’
‘She was paid weekly; she owed me nothing.’
‘That's what you think.
She owed us courtesy: she was a servant, she should have given in her notice.’
Mrs Funnell followed Peggy into the kitchen, talking all the way.
‘Things are getting worse.
People don't know their place.
What was her brother like?’
Not only was Mrs Funnell startled, but Victoria was too, and even Peggy herself as she rounded on the old woman, crying at the top of her voice now, ‘Like all men of his ilk, with a bloody big moaning  mouth, yelling off, I, I, I, all the time, his wants.
And he's not the only one.
No, he's not the only one.
And you know what I'd like to do?
Kick their bloody backsides, then rub their noses against a mirror until they could see themselves as they really are.
But let's be fair.
Oh yes, let's be fair, because they haven't got priority in selfishness, have they, Great-gran?
Have they?’
‘Peggy!
Peggy!’
Victoria was holding her now.
‘Give over.
Give over.
Come on; come on out of this.’
And Victoria now pulled her granddaughter past the indignant old lady, whose face was expressing shock.
And when they reached the drawing-room, she said, ‘Sit down there, lass, and calm yourself.’
Peggy sat down.
She was still shivering with indignation, but when she looked up at her grandmother, it was to see her shivering too, but with suppressed laughter.
And when Victoria put her hand over her mouth and almost fell down on to the couch she said, and with some indignation, ‘You find it funny, Gran?’
Victoria gulped in her throat, drew in a long sniffing breath up her nose, then said, ‘My mother's face; that was the greatest surprise of her life, I'm sure it was.
And you swearing.
I've never heard you swear in my life.
You know what?
You know what?’
She was leaning towards Peggy now and, a slow smile spreading over her face, Peggy said, ‘What, Gran?’
‘What do you bet she doesn't come marching in here and suggest that you have a strong dose of Syrup of Figs?’
It was almost at this moment, too, that the door was thrust open and the indignant lady stood within it and in a loud voice proclaimed in her most officious manner: ‘When you have come to yourself enough to apologise, Peggy, I'll see you upstairs in my room.
In the meantime, I would suggest you clean your system and your tongue with a large dose of Syrup of Figs.’
As the door banged Peggy and her grandmother threw themselves into each other 's arms, one arm only around each other for they had to suppress the laughter that was bursting to escape in loud, hilarious guffaws….
Peggy did not go up to apologise to her great-grandmother; she was too busy doing the work that had been Rosie's routine.
She did, however, slip next door to May and gave her a rough sketch of what had happened, right up to the Syrup of Figs.
And as she was about to hurry away again, she asked, ‘Have you heard from Charlie?’
May answered, ‘Yes; they should be in Milan now, but they'll be there for only two days.
They should be home towards the end of the week.’
Charlie would be home towards the end of the week.
Charlie would be home towards the end of the week….
She had to fit her own routine into the day.
She was to pick Emma up from school at half past three….
There were three or four cars lined up outside the junior school gates.
She knew all the mothers, and particularly had she come to know a Mrs White.
She would not say they had become friends, just strong acquaintances.
Emma went to Janice's parties and Janice came to Emma's parties.
Only last Friday there had been great excitement over Janice's eighth birthday party.
And it was about that that Peggy now spoke to Mrs White, saying, ‘I bet you had some clearing up after the mob on Friday night.’
‘My!
Yes.’
Mrs White was a woman in her early forties and Janice was the youngest of her four daughters, and she said again, ‘My! yes.
Especially as I found one of them had been sick in the spare room.
And there were some tears, too, when they were all getting ready to go home: someone had got someone else's paper hat; and that was somebody else's whistle; even coats got mixed up between the Pratt twins.
Oh, they are funny children, those two, aren't they?
That's the last time they'll get an invite, I can tell you.’
She was nodding at Peggy.
Then more  quietly, she said, ‘They're all such little liars, the tales they spin about what they have in the house.
And Eva, the smaller one, argued with Janice that they had two cars.
They nearly came to scratching each other because Janice says they've only got an old banger.
But there you are, children all lie.
Look at little Emma.
Telling them all that when she went swimming with her father she could do the crawl and so many other strokes.
Well, perhaps one could believe that, but not-’ Her voice dropped further now and her head came towards Peggy, saying, ‘Not that you never bathed her, never had bathed her, and that she got in the bath with her father every night.
My! my! the wrong impressions children give.
They could get you into trouble, couldn't they?
She likely said that because she's very fond of him, I suppose; and of course, her being the only one, she would want special attention.
Children always want to show off and be different.’
She now poked her finger into Peggy's arm, saying, ‘Well, there's a cure for that, you know.
Oh!
Here they come like a swarm of ants.’
She turned away, leaving Peggy standing stiff and cold, although the sun was shining and it had been in the seventies all day.
Emma came running towards her, saying, ‘Mammy, I got a prize for recitation, look!’
She held out a piece of black cardboard with a silver star stuck on it, and when her mother made no effort to take it from her  or exclaim her delight and approbation, she stared up at her and then said, ‘Mammy?’
‘Oh yes.
Yes, dear.
Oh, that was clever of you.
Get in.’
She opened the car door and when the child was seated she went round and took her place behind the wheel, then drove off.
‘What did you recite?’ she forced herself to ask.
‘The bit about Pooh Bear, and I made a sound like Eeyore and everybody laughed…
. Have you got a headache, Mammy?’
‘No.
No, dear; no, I haven't got a headache.’
She wasn't going to lie to the child but she was going to talk to her.
Once inside the house the child made for the kitchen, but Peggy stopped her, saying, ‘You won't find Rosie there.
She's gone; she won't be coming back.’
‘Rosie's gone?
Why?
Why, Mammy?’
‘She's…she's got another situation.
Look; come upstairs with me, I want to talk to you.’
But once in the bedroom and sitting on the edge of the bed, her arm around her daughter, what could she say?
Do you like being in the bath with your father?
Do you like him bathing you?
What she did say was, ‘In future there's going to be a new rule: you're going to have your bath before your daddy comes home.’
‘You'll bath me, Mammy?’
The child's face lit up and Peggy looked down at her, saying, ‘You'd like me to bath you?’
‘Oh yes, Mammy.
Oh yes.
You never bath me; but I'm big enough to bath myself now, aren't I?’
‘Yes.
Yes, you are, dear.’
‘I said that to Daddy yesterday.’
‘And what did Daddy say?’
‘He said I was still a baby.
But I'm not, am I, Mammy?
I'll soon be eight…well, not till December and I know it's only summer, but I'll be eight in December, won't I?’
‘Yes, of course you will, and…and being eight, you'll be able to have the bathroom to yourself.
But till then, I'll bath you.
And —’ She turned her daughter's face fully to her and cupped her cheek as she said, ‘You must tell Daddy that you want me to bath you.
You will, won't you?’
‘Yes.
Well, he…he might get angry.’
‘He won't get angry with you.’
‘But…but he might get angry with you, Mammy.
And I don't want him to get angry with you.’
‘Don't worry about that.
Come along then, dear.
Have your tea, then you can either go up to the nursery and play or come in the kitchen with me and help me make a pie, whichever you like.’
‘Oh, I'd like to help you make a pie, Mammy.
Rosie let me make currant men.
Why has she gone, Mammy?
I liked Rosie.’
‘I liked her, too.
But people are free to do what they like with their lives.’
What a silly thing to say: people are free to do what they like with their lives.
As she watched her daughter run before her down the stairs, she thought, As long as he lives or until she escapes she'll never be free to do what she likes.
‘You've put her up to this.
Well, don't think you've won, because she'll have another bath.
By God! she will.
She's my daughter and I'll do what I like with her.’
‘By God! you won't.
If you want to expose yourself to someone, then do it to one of your fancy women; you'll do it no longer to my daughter,my daughter .
Do you hear?’
‘You've got a filthy mind, that's what's the matter with you.
You're frustrated.
You're so frustrated you're using your imagination to satisfy yourself.
You're making something nasty out of an ordinary natural event.’
‘Natural event!
How many men do you know who insist on their daughters being in the bath with them?
When you're next at your Table meeting, ask around: ‘Do you bath with your daughter, Tom, Dick, or Harry?’’
‘If they're sensible they do and their daughters will know what it's all about and won't throw  themselves at the first lad who looks at them.
Yes, throw themselves, begging for it like you did.
Now get out of my way!
I'm going upstairs and I'm stripping her and taking her into the bath with me.’
‘Yes, you do that and I'll go and get Great-gran to come and witness her golden boy stark naked in the bath with his daughter sitting on his lap.’
‘You dirty minded bitch!
Great-gran knows that I bath her.’
‘Great-gran knows nothing of the kind; not how you bath her.
Why is it that when she's about you go into the bathroom dressed, and you come out dressed.
But when you know that she's safely tucked up in bed, you come out with a towel around you.
And when she's been confined there for days you sometimes haven't bothered with a towel.
Of course, you make sure that Gran isn't about, either: the bathroom door used to be locked until I took the key away…
. You do!
You lift your hand to me and touch me just once with it and I promise you you won't be able to walk for days, because I'll smash every movable thing in this room over you.
Now, let me tell you, and this is final, in future she will be bathed before you come in, and you attempt to take her into that bathroom once again and, boy, you won't know what's hit you.’
‘You know something?
I'll do for you.
I will, I'll do for you one of these days.
You try to separate me from her in any way and I'll do murder.
She's mine.
I've said that from the beginning.
I've thumped it into your ears that she's mine and she'll remain mine.
Do you hear?
Do what you like, but she'll remain mine, because she already knows she's mine.’
If he had turned from her and rushed from the room, banging the door after him, she would not have felt half as afraid as when he backed slowly from her, his arm bent and his forefinger wagging at her.
At the door he did not immediately turn and grab the handle but put his hand behind him and slowly opened the door and in doing so had to walk forward a step.
Then he paused before slowly going through it and closing the door quietly after him.
Peggy sank into a chair.
Her eyes were tightly closed, her mouth wide.
He was mad, mad where that child was concerned, and he meant what he said.
The feeling of danger that he had left behind him floated round her like a fog, already darkening her life ahead.
Then, as if it had become suddenly tangible she sprang from the chair and threw out her arms as if pushing it aside and, her eyes wide now, she said aloud, ‘I'll have to do something.
I'll tell Great-gran.
Yes, I will!’
She had told Great-gran and now she stood looking down on this eighty-two year old woman who was dressed as a woman of forty might have been, in a pale blue cotton dress, square-necked, which showed surprisingly firm flesh for one her age, short-sleeved, which in this case exposed her real age by the sagging flesh of the underarm.
The thick grey hair had been tinted a reddish brown, a process to which she had succumbed only for the last two years, having previously been free in expressing her opinion of those stupid women who aimed to camouflage their age by dyeing their hair.
Finally, her face, wrinkled around the eyes and mouth, but the skin held firmly in place by good bone formation.
This was her great-grandmother speaking and she couldn't believe her ears.
And the fear in her grew.
Just a short while ago she had thought that nothing could increase the feeling of dread that Andrew had left behind him in the drawing-room.
But she had been wrong, for added to it now was a feeling of utter hopelessness: she was being confronted by a combined force.
‘He loves the child, adores her, always has.
And she's still little more than a baby.
I'm surprised you should think it's anything other than natural that he should want to bath her.’
She found herself bending over the old woman and hissing at her, ‘If it's so natural, Great-gran, why did a woman approach me today, the mother of one of the little girls at school, and suggest that my daughter was fantasising about her father being in the bath with her.
The woman was definitely shocked, and by the fact that I've never bathed my child.
And I can tell you this: I'm amazed at your new modern outlook; I've always known you to be as strait-laced as a Victorian corset and sticking to the narrow principles of that time in which you were brought up.
Well, I can tell you something; I'm on my own in this house from now on and I shall see to her bathing, and should he attempt to stop me, I've told him what I'll do; I'll brain him with the first thing I get my hands on.
You can emphasise that for me, Great-gran, when you are having one of your little palavers with him.
And while I'm on, there's another thing I'll say: I regret the day I was made to marry him.
You engineered that.
If you had said the word, Mam would have gone along with you and I could have had the child and had a life of my own.
But what have I had since she was born, even before that?
Since Father died and Mam walked out I've had the running of this house on my shoulders.
I only got Rosie's help because he put it to you; of course, it would be in a very nice way, that I was too tired to give him his rights.’
‘Well, there, let me tell you, you made a big mistake.
A wife has duties and to please her husband is one of them.
You've a long way to go yet and a lot to learn.
You don't keep a man by turning your back on him in bed, nor criticising everything he does, such as the innocent act of bathing his little child.’
‘Oh, God in heaven! woman, shut up!’
Peggy stepped back from the old woman.
‘Shut up!
You know nothing about it.
Turning my back on my husband, you say; and yes, I did, because I could still smell the whores of Bog's End on him.
Is that news to you?
His evening jaunts to this meeting or that are all phoney.’
‘You're imagining things, girl.
It's right what he says: it's impossible to talk to you.’
‘Oh, does he?
So he says that?
Well, he doesn't find it impossible to talk to you, does he?
He's given you a new lease of life, hasn't he, with his flattery, his sucking-up.’
‘You'd better leave me before I lose my temper with you, girl, and say something I'll be sorry for.’
Peggy did not move, but after a moment of silence she said, ‘I can divorce him.
I can easily get proof.’
‘That would be the stupidest thing you ever did because he'll fight you for your child and he'll win.’
‘Because you'd help him win, wouldn't you?
Great-gran, you'd help him.’
‘I'd do what I think is right.
I always have.’
‘My God!
You poor, hoodwinked old woman.’
And on this Peggy turned and almost flew from the room.
In her own room she stood, her hands clenched and pressed tightly against her breast-bone as if to ease the terrible ache and fear whirling there.
She couldn't believe it.
That old woman across the landing who was judged to be clear thinking; so much so, even at her age, that she visited the factory every Friday and went over the books with Henry.
And should she at any time be incapacitated, Henry had to bring the books to her, and she would scrutinise every penny that went out or came in.
She had been mean with money all her life, using her daughter and granddaughter as servants, and even herself at times during the last seven or so years as unhired help, except for the time that Rosie was here.
She felt lost, that her youth had gone, been sucked away by that vain and stupid old woman who had become enamoured of the young boy who had turned into a smooth-talking man.
Likely it was because she had recognised in him from the first the trait matching her own: the ability to make money, for especially was she enamoured of his Sunday second-hand car-sales and of the fact that he insisted on working on that day and handling this side of the business himself.
When a tap came on the door she didn't answer, but when it came again, she called quietly, ‘Come in.’
Victoria came towards her, saying, ‘By! you've upset the apple cart today, haven't you?’
‘She's told you?
She's told you about the bathing?’
‘Yes; yes, her version of it.
But I agree with you, girl.
It's time that was stopped.
She's only a child still, but she's a very knowing child, impressionable and sensitive.
Yes, it's about time that was stopped.
But you're going to have a fight on your hands.
Have you any positive proof that he goes to Bog's End?’
‘Only that Frank has seen him a number of times coming out of a special house down there.
He told May, and she told me to be careful.
But I'd been careful for a long time before that, because I'd sensed something.
I could get him watched, and that would be evidence for a divorce.’
‘I wouldn't do that, girl; he'd fight you for the child.
He'd not get her, I know, but he would be granted some access to her.’
And her Gran was voicing her mother's own words: ‘The best thing you can do is to hang on, as grim as it will be for you, until she's able to make a choice.
And then you'll still be a young woman and Charlie will still be waiting.’
‘Oh, Gran, what d'you mean?
What d'you know about Charlie and me?’
‘Only that he loves you, always has and always will.
He's that kind of a man.
It hasn't pleased May but she's accepted it.
You're lucky in a way that he's there, and lucky, too, that he's got his music and that it's bringing him a name, for it's some sort of compensation in the meantime, helping his waiting.’
‘Oh Gran.’
She put her arms around the older woman and muttered, ‘I felt so alone, entirely on my own, a few minutes ago, but I've got you and I've got Charlie and May and Frank.
Four to two.’
‘Yes, four to two, lass.
Just hang on to that, four to two.
So come on downstairs and we'll have a sherry.
It's another occasion.
Let's look at it as refreshment before the battle.’
4
‘Yes, Daddy, I love you.
You know I love you.’
‘But do you love me more than you love your mother?’
‘I love Mammy, Daddy.
Of course I love Mammy.’
‘But do you love me more?
Say you love me more.
Go on, say it.’
‘Daddy, you're hurting my arms.’
‘Oh, pet, pet, I'm sorry.’
‘Don't Daddy, don't; you'll mess up my dress.’
‘Mess up your dress?
Why do you want to go to a party today?
You're going to have a big party tomorrow.’
‘But Gwen asked me; she's my best friend.
And there's a clown coming and her father's getting dressed up as Santa Claus, and…
Oh Daddy, don't.’
‘You used to like me kissing you.’
‘No, I didn't.
Well, I mean, Daddy, you're a wet kisser.’
The young girl laughed, then after a moment said, ‘Don't be vexed, Daddy.’
‘I'm not vexed.’
‘Yes you are.
I know when you're vexed.’
He was kneeling by the side of the bed, his arms about her waist, his head on a level with hers.
‘Say after me, I love you, Daddy, better than anyone else in the world.’
‘But…but I love Mammy, too.
Oh don't, Daddy….’
When the door burst open he sat back on his heels and almost toppled over, and the child straightened up from where she had been thrust against the bed.
Peggy had moved quickly towards her and lifted her bodily.
Then she thrust a foot against her husband's side, saying, ‘You had your answer, didn't you?’
In the corridor, hurrying towards the stairs, Peggy said, ‘Now don't cry, don't cry.
It'll be all right.
You don't want to go to the party crying, do you?’…
They were in the car when Emma said quietly, ‘You can love two people at the same time, can't you, Mammy?’
Peggy paused before answering, ‘Yes; yes, you can love two people at the same time.’
Oh yes, that was certainly true: didn't she love this child and didn't she love Charlie?
So yes, her daughter could love two people at the same time.
Nevertheless, she was already having to pay for it.
When, a few minutes later, she stopped the car  and said, ‘I'll call for you at seven.
Now have a nice time,’ Emma said, ‘You won't fight with Daddy, will you Mammy, not tonight, or tomorrow?’
Peggy leaned over and drew her daughter into her arms, saying, ‘Oh my dear, no, no.
I promise you there'll be no upheavals, not today or on your birthday.’
‘I love you, Mammy.’
‘Yes, I know you do, darling.
I know you do.’
‘If Daddy would only believe that, everything would be all right.’
‘Don't worry now, don't worry, everything will be all right.
I promise you.
Just remember this: I love you too, very, very much.’
When her daughter put her arms around her neck and hugged her tightly it was almost too much, and to prevent the tears from flowing, she said, ‘Your dress will be all crushed under your coat.’
‘Doesn't matter, Mammy; it'll soon be crushed anyway, when we start playing games.’
After leaving her daughter in the brightly lit and chatter-filled house she did not immediately drive away.
‘Don't fight with Daddy tonight or tomorrow.’
And she had promised not to.
Yet she was having to subdue the urge to dash back there and scream at him.
She had asked herself, time and again lately, what was coming over her.
She knew her character had altered completely over the last  few years.
She could admit it but couldn't control the change.
More and more she was acting like a bitch; more than once she had to restrain the urge to hit out at him, punch him in his good-looking, smarmy face, especially when she would come upon him in the drawing-room sitting holding her great-gran's hand, stroking it gently as if it were a cat, and that old woman sitting there and, like a cat, lapping it up.
Thankfully, Charlie would be home today.
Later on they might have a few minutes together and he would hold her and she would become herself again.
And she would say, ‘How long are you here for this time?’ praying it would be weeks instead of days….
Victoria met her in the hall, saying, ‘You look frozen.
Come in the kitchen; I've just mashed a pot of tea.’
‘Where is he?’
‘Oh, he went out shortly after you did, within minutes.
He took a briefcase with him, as if he were going back to the Works.
May's just phoned.
They can't come over to dinner tomorrow; they've got unexpected company.
She wants you to slip across when you can.’
‘But the turkey!
We'll never get through that.’
‘Oh yes, we will.
We'll have hash for days.’
Victoria smiled at her, then said, ‘What was all that about upstairs?’
‘Love.’
‘What d'you mean, love?’
‘He was at her, trying to make her say that she loved him better than she did me.
I was outside the door, listening.
I didn't know he was home and I was just on the point of going into her room when I heard him.’
‘Dear God!’
Victoria shook her head.
‘What'll he be at next?’
‘The question is, Gran, what has he been at already?
That's what worries me every minute.
But what can you do?
What can you say?
There's no proof, and…and she's fond of him and she wouldn't do anything to hurt him or get him into trouble.
But there's been a change in her of late.
She's refused to go to the baths since she had that cold, but I think she was clever enough to make that an excuse.
Dear God in heaven!’
She put her hand to her brow.
‘What a state of affairs.’
‘Look, lass, it's Christmas.
There's nothing you can do about it at the moment.
Go on, get yourself over to May's and meet her company, whoever they are.
She sounded very excited.’
‘Well, she expects Charlie home today.’
‘Yes, she does, but she said ‘company’, and Charlie isn't company, well, not that kind.
She would have just said Charlie's home.’
‘Will you take her tea up?’
Peggy jerked her head in the direction of the ceiling, and Victoria said on a laugh, ‘Yes, yes, I'll take her tea up.
And if she gives me any of her pernickety, finicky quips I'll throw it over her.
I've wanted to do it many a time.’
They laughed together now, but it was a gentle laugh without mirth….
Peggy heard the laughter coming from next door before she left the woodland, and it further burst on her as she opened the kitchen door.
May was at the table piling sandwiches on an already full plate, Frank was cutting into a large fruit loaf, and they both turned and hailed her brightly, saying, ‘Hello, there!’
‘What's all the noise?’
‘You may well ask.
It sounds like a tap room, doesn't it?
It's the band, the quartet.’
Frank laughed.
‘You said it; the quartet, four plus Charlie, but it sounds like a football match, doesn't it?
Go on in.’
‘Oh no!
I….’
‘Don't be silly!
Oh, and by the way, I'm sorry we can't make it tomorrow.
They're staying over the week-end.’
‘All of them?’
‘Yes, all of them.
There'll be some shakedowns to make up, but they're used to sleeping in cramped quarters.’
‘They are not going home for Christmas?’
‘Well, one lives in Scotland, one lives in Ireland, one lives in London.
Anyway’— her voice dropped —‘it's a breaking-up party.’
‘They're breaking up?’
‘Oh, my dear, he'll tell you all about it later.
Go on in.’
Reluctantly she went out of the kitchen, across the small hall and towards the sitting-room.
The door was open and she stood just outside the aperture taking in the five men.
Charlie had his back to her.
He was sitting on a pouffe to the side of the fire.
And when two of the men stopped laughing and looked over his head, he turned and sprang up and hurried towards her, saying, ‘Hello, there,’ and reached out to take her hand.
‘Hello, Charlie.’
‘I…
I was coming across but I was held up by this lot.’
He thumbed towards the men behind him, then said, ‘Come on in and meet the gang.’
He led her into the room and, looking at the four musicians, he said, ‘This is Peggy, my sparring partner ever since we both crawled on the lawn together.
And this’— he spread an arm out —‘is the amateur group I've been supporting over the past years.’
There was a great hoot of laughter and chipping and protests.
The men were standing now and Charlie, pointing to a small middle-aged man, said, ‘This is Joe, violin and much more.’
Joe shook her hand and smiled.
‘And this is Ron, viola, but he really should have been playing the cornet, he spends more time on it.’
‘How d'you do, Peggy?’
The tall man with a long face bent in the grand manner as he took her hand.
‘And this too is Ron.
The cellist.
And believe it or not we've got to put him on a high chair to enable him to manage his instrument.’
The short man's answer was lost amid laughter.
‘And finally, this is Percy.
Percy can play anything from the triangle to the tambourine.
He can also whistle.’
Percy took her hand, saying, ‘Definitely my art is diffused, but I have never stooped so low as to even touch a guitar.’
She was laughing.
They were all laughing, and she was amazed at the feeling of camaraderie among these men and particularly at Charlie's obvious standing amongst them, for all four looked to be in their mid-forties.
‘Sit down, dear.’
Charlie pressed her on to the pouffe near the fire and then he sat down on the floor beside her.
Solely for something to say to cover her embarrassment, she said, ‘When did you get back; I mean, from Spain?’
‘Oh, we landed at Newcastle airport’— Charlie turned and looked at the men —‘at three o'clock?’
They nodded, saying, ‘Yes, three o'clock.’
For the next ten minutes or so she sat listening to these mature men chipping him, and he, her quiet Charlie, giving them back as much as they sent.
This was a different Charlie.
She had never imagined him being a popular figure.
The man called Percy was now leaning forward and saying, ‘Those two old girls in the old people's home, remember?
They summed up your guitar playing as nobody else has been able to do.’
The memory caused another burst of general laughter; then Percy, addressing himself to Peggy, explained, ‘We were giving this concert in this old people's home.
Two old girls were sitting very close at the front.
One had a hearing aid and she kept fiddling with it.
His nibs here was doing his solo piece, the stage to himself and the old people were comparatively quiet, until the one with the hearing aid asked in no small voice, ‘I can't get me aid to work; what's he playin'?’
And her companion answered in an even louder voice, ‘It's one of them tinny things.
And don't bother with it, you wouldn't like it anyway, it's got no tune.’’
The room again exploded with laughter.
And still laughing, Charlie said, ‘But I did what you lot didn't do: I came back with an Irish jig, and then, ‘We'll Meet Again’ and ‘Roll Out The Barrel’.
But you stiff necks, what did you play?
Mozart's Quartet in A Flat, and half of them fell asleep.
Of course it could have been in B Minor and then they would all have been carried out.’
‘Who does he think he is?
And fancy him knowing about Mozart's Quartet in A Flat.’
‘Not only A, but B Minor.’
Charlie was about to retaliate when the door opened and May now appeared, saying, ‘Well, there it is.
If you're hungry, come and get it.
It'll fill a holey tooth until later.’
As they made their way to the dining-room Peggy went towards the kitchen, calling to the men, ‘I'll be seeing you again.’
Amid their replies Charlie said, ‘Carry on, will you?
I'll be with you in a few minutes,’ and he whipped up his coat from among a stack of luggage and instruments lying in the hall, and taking her by the arm he hurried her through the kitchen.
Out of sight and sound of the house, in the wood, he put his arms about her and kissed her hungrily; and she returned his kisses with fervour, muttering, ‘Oh Charlie.
Charlie.’
Then she asked, ‘What's afoot?
I mean, your mother said something about breaking up.’
‘Yes, this is a sort of parting party.
I'm going to miss them.
They're a fine bunch of fellas, grand, each one of them.’
‘But why?’
‘Oh, it's a long story.
Anyway, to make it brief, they've got a chance of doing a six months’ tour in America from coast to coast.
Now two of them, Percy and Joe, they are staying in America, I know that, and I think the other two could be persuaded.
It will depend on how the tour goes.
None of them has any connections here, not really; they're all bachelors; at least, in a way.
One's a widower and another's divorced, and only Joe's parents are alive, so they're free-lance in all ways.
But I couldn't see me staying away all that time…not from you, and then probably being persuaded to follow their line and make America my home.
No, I just couldn't do it.’
‘Oh, Charlie, I've spoilt that for you, too.
And Auntie May'll be so mad at me.
She'll try to hide it, I know, as she always does.’
‘Oh no, Auntie May won't, Auntie May's delighted at this arrangement.
Anyway, it's been in my mind to step out on my own for some time now.
I've enough material to give a full recital.
And what's more, I can always teach.
And there's more people taking it up seriously now, not just strumming chords.
I learnt so much from Mr Reynolds.
I do miss him when I come back.
But he was old and tired; he's had youngsters falling over themselves to be taught by him.
Knowing his methods, I feel teaching could be quite a side-line.
I won't starve.
And, darling, you wouldn't starve, either.
Can't you make up your mind?’
‘Oh, Charlie, you know my mind's been made up for years.
I could walk out this minute, this very minute, if it wasn't for Emma.
But he would and could claim her, you know he would.
And there's things going on now that frighten me.’
‘Worse?’
‘In a way, yes.’
‘He hasn't…?’
‘Not as far as I know.
But I just don't know; she's afraid of rows between us, so she's afraid naturally to say anything.’
‘And the great Mrs Funnell?’
‘Oh, as enamoured as ever.’
‘I can't believe it of that old girl, you know, I just can't.
She was such a level-headed, dynamic person; and to be taken in by a scut like him.’
‘Vanity's a strange thing.
I never realised it until lately, but looking back I can see she has always been inordinately vain.
Mother said the same.
And that's another thing.
Mother used to pop in nearly every day.
She doesn't any more.
I envy her her happiness — she can't help it shining out of her but I'm also bitter against her for saddling me with this lot, and for changing-me from what I was: she made the young girl into a woman before her time and a bitter one at that.
Charlie, I've changed.
I'm …
I'm not the person you knew years ago.
I say and do things that shock me.’
He laughed now, saying, ‘My dear, dear, Peggy, you'll always be the same to me.
You know I've loved you from the very beginning and I'll go on loving you.
And now that I'm home for good, at least my bookings abroad will be for just a week or so at a time, that's all, well…we're coming together.
Do you hear?
Really coming together.
I don't care where or when.
Oh yes, I do, as regards when, anyway, because it's got to be soon.
And you needn't have any feeling of compunction about him, for he's been at it for years on the side, and you know it.
I must get back now, if for no other reason than that the table will soon be cleared and I haven't had a bite since this morning.
Oh, love.’
He held her close again, and as they were about to part she said, ‘Charlie,’ and he said, ‘Yes?’
‘Have you never wanted anyone else; is that true?’
There was neither an immediate protestation nor confirmation from Charlie; then he said, ‘No; I have never wanted anyone else; but that's not to say I've never had needs, and they had to be met.
But over the past few years, what with one night stands and travel, there was little energy or time left except for eating and bed.’
He kissed her again, then said, ‘I'll see you later tonight.
I'm coming over with Emma's present.’
‘All right, Charlie.’
Even to herself her voice sounded flat.
She did not hurry back to the house.
That's not to say I haven't had needs, and they had to be met, she thought.
She, too, had needs that cried out to be met, but there was no way of meeting them.
But Charlie was a man.
She had to remember that: though why should she?
Yes, why should she ?
Who was to weigh the difference in the urge?
Her body was racked at times when the torment had almost driven her across the corridor into Andrew's bed.
Only shame and pride had prevented that humiliation.
Damn men!
Damn Charlie!
Oh no; never say that.
She'd have to pull herself together.
But if only he hadn't told her.
Oh, come off it.
What did she want in a man?
A plaster saint?
She should remember that she went with a man when she was sixteen.
Oh well, didn't she know that?
Dear God, didn't she?
But Charlie had been different.
PART THREE
1 9 8 3
1
‘Take her to the doctor,’ Lizzie said.
‘What can I say to the doctor, Mam?
That her teacher says she's not paying attention?
That twice this term she's had to leave the classroom because she was sick?’
‘Yes, you can say just that, especially the latter…
. She's not…?’
‘Oh, my God!
Mam, don't suggest such a thing.’
‘Well, my dear, just think back; you weren't many months older.’
‘Don't rub it in, Mam.’
‘I'm not rubbing it in, Peggy.
That's the last thing I would do, you know.
I'm just stating a fact.’
‘Well, it isn't that, it's him.
She's worried in some way about him, but I can't get anything out of her.
And if I can't make her open up, how do you expect the doctor to do so?’
‘Oh, she'll more likely do so with him than to you, knowing that it's hell let loose every time you look at each other.
So do as I say: get on to Doctor Rice and make an appointment.’
‘She tells me she's going to a disco tonight.’
‘Has she been before?’
‘Once or twice.
But he doesn't know.’
‘Well, you should tell him.
Put him in the picture.
He's bound to know when he comes and finds her gone or going.’
‘He rarely comes home early on a Tuesday night.
He has some meeting or other he goes straight to.
On a Friday, too.
So if there's anything she wants to go to on these nights, I tell her to go.’
‘What a set-up for a young lass when her father mustn't be told she goes to a dance,’ said Lizzie, which brought forth from Peggy the sharp and quizzical retort, ‘Remember, Mam, when I was fifteen I wasn't allowed out at all after six o'clock unless you were with me.’
Lizzie turned in somewhat of a huff and made for the door, saying, ‘Things were different then.
This is nineteen eighty-three.
There was a set of decent rules then; now they're changing partners every night.’
‘And having babies at fourteen.’
Lizzie turned from the doorway, saying, ‘Don't get bitter, Peggy.
What's done is done.
And it was done for the best, although I must admit it didn't turn out like that.
Anyway, you should be thankful that she's got a clean name, and so have you.’
‘Oh Mam, for God's sake! shut up, and go home before I lose my temper.
‘Clean name, and so has  she.’
With a father like Andrew Jones?
Let me tell you something, Mam: I'd have been happy to have had a bastard and to have taken my chance on never being married.
But I would have been married and happily.’
‘Oh, yes, yes, we know you would, dear, and to Charlie Conway.
But it didn't happen like that and you've got to make the best of it.’
As her mother stamped away down the drive Peggy stared after her.
Make the best of it, she had said.
She got what she wanted and left me with the rough end of the stick….
An hour later Peggy was sitting by Victoria's bed.
She was holding her grandmother's hand as she said, ‘I won't be long.
I'm just going to drop her off at the hall.
It's the only chance she has of getting out on her own.’
‘Peggy?’
‘Yes, Gran?’
‘I'm going to say something to you now and I want you to promise me something, for I'm not long for this side of the curtain.’
‘Oh, Gran; you know you've been bad so often during your life….’
‘Yes, I know that, lass; I've retreated into illness; but you know, and I know what's wrong with me now.
I'm not living on morphine for nothing, am I?
Now when I go there'll be a nice bit of money  coming to you.
She knows nothing about it.’
She thumbed towards the wall as if her mother were just beyond and not at the far end of the corridor.
‘Father left me a bit and she thinks I went through that a long time ago.
She knows I've got some, but I'd never give her the satisfaction of telling her how much.
I've always left my bank book locked away in that drawer.’
She pointed to the bureau.
Then putting her hand under the pillow, she said, ‘There's the key.
Now, a copy of my will's in there, too, and it's also with the solicitor.
Please, dear, please, dear, don't cry, don't cry.
Just listen.
Now I want you to promise, as soon as I go, when you get that money, you'll take it and the child and go off somewhere abroad for a time.
In the meantime, put in for a divorce.
You've got enough on him.
I know you want proof.
Well, engage a private detective.
He'll find out his comings and goings to his so-called meetings, twice a week at least.
Of course, you'll have to tell Charlie, but by the time you're free, Emma will be of age, such an age that he can do nothing to hold her.
Now, promise me you'll do what I ask?’
She forced herself to say, ‘Yes, Gran.
All right, yes,’ knowing that she wouldn't be able to do it; there were so many factors against it: the old woman along the corridor depending on her; Charlie, who had given up a good part of his life waiting for her.
However, she had to reassure this woman whom she had never understood but had come to love.
And so, bending over her and kissing her softly, she voiced her feelings by saying, ‘I love you, Gran.’
‘And I you, girl.
And I you, and always have.
Now go on and dry your eyes, because you don't want to put another worry on that child's shoulders.’
Peggy did not immediately go downstairs but went to her own room.
And so it was that she didn't hear Andrew come in and enter the sitting-room, there to see his daughter dressed for going out in her wide-skirted jersey dress, her black hair hanging loose about her shoulders, and wearing, of all things, green-lobed earrings.
He stood within the doorway looking at her for a moment.
She had risen from the couch and was awaiting his approach, her consternation evident as if she had been caught out in some misbehaviour.
‘And where are we going dressed up tonight?’
He was standing close to her now, not a hand's-breadth between them.
And when she replied, ‘I…
I'm going to a disco, Daddy,’ he stepped slightly back and his whole face seemed to crumble into disbelief as he said, ‘You're what!
You're not going to any disco.
By God! you're not.
Since when have you been going to discos, I ask you?
Since when?’
‘I've been to two before, Daddy.
I…
I like dancing.’
‘You like dancing?
Yes, I know you like dancing.
We've danced, haven't we?
Well, if you like dancing I'm always here.
I come home practically every night to be with you, so if you want to dance, we'll dance.’
He now thrust his arm out and pulled her tightly towards him and waltzed her round the table, saying, ‘One, two, three; one, two, three; one, two, three.
That's how I started you, that's how I taught you to dance.’
Stopping now, he held her by the shoulders and, bringing his face close to her trembling one, he said, ‘How could you!’
When she tried to shrug herself from his hold, he said, ‘Don't do that!
Don't ever do that.
Now tell me: who asked you to go to this disco?’
‘Nobody, not really.
All the girls from our class go there.’
‘It was a boy, wasn't it?’
‘Leave go of my shoulders, Daddy.
You're hurting me.’
He closed his eyes tightly; then in a much quieter voice, he said, ‘Pet, you know I wouldn't hurt you for the world, but you're hurting me.
You want to leave me on my own tonight and go to a disco and let some spotty lout put his arms about you?’
‘I'm turned fifteen, Daddy’— her voice trembling now —‘I'm not a child any longer.
I don't need…well, I've got to say it, I don't need petting.’
‘You don't need petting?
Well, well!
You don't need me to love you any more?
So you don't love me?’
‘You know I love you, Daddy, and I…
I want you to love me, but…but I've got to….’
‘Yes?
What have you got to…?’
‘Well, I've got to live.
I mean, like…like other girls do.’
‘Like your mother did, you mean?
Throw yourself into the arms of the first lad who looks at you.’
Emma's long-lashed eyelids blinked rapidly, her mouth opened and shut twice before she said, ‘Mother never did.’
‘Mother did, and at me.
She was a slut.
That's how you came about, because she chased me.
Well, I'm going to see that you don't do the same.’
‘Leave go of me, Daddy.
Leave go!’
‘I won't leave go.
You're mine, you understand?
From the minute you were born you became mine.
She didn't want you.
I did, and you will always be mine, do you hear?
I'll kill you before I let any goggle-eyed, snotty-nosed youth put a finger on you.’…
‘Let her go!’
He swung round, still with Emma in his arms, and not until he saw Peggy dash up the room and pick the long, steel poker from its rest on the brass open-work fender did he release her.
And then, his  voice falsely calm-sounding now, he said, ‘You use that, m'lady, and it'll be the finish of you.’
‘Mammy!
Mammy!’
Emma was clinging to Peggy now, her arms around her neck, crying, ‘Don't!
Don't!
Please, put it down.’
‘No, I won't put it down, dear.
But stand aside.
Go on into the hall; we're going out.’
The girl moved from her mother's side, but now looked towards her father, and he, staring at her, said, ‘If you go to that place I'll never forgive you.
Do you hear?
You go there, and I'll never forgive you.
And it'll be the finish of me.
If she comes between us —’ He now pointed towards Peggy without looking at her and repeated, ‘If she comes between us I'll finish it.
I will.’
‘Go on, dear.
Get into the car.’
When she knew her daughter was out of the room, and still with the poker in her hand, Peggy took a step towards him, saying, ‘Well, that should be enough for you, shouldn't it? enough proof.
You've lost your hold over her.
She's going to the disco and she's going to mix with young people of her own age.
And no matter how fresh the lads might get they'll have a long way to go before they reach your handling, won't they, Andrew?’
His face looked blanched.
And now he brought out the words between his dosed teeth, saying, ‘You think you've won, don't you?
But I've told her what  you were when you were her age: a slut.
And I've told her how she came about.’
The poker wavered in her hand.
She told herself not to do it, to turn away from him, to get out of the house.
When he said, ‘That's shaken you, hasn't it?
Now go and explain to her what made you ready to take your clothes off in the barn.
Go on, explain it.’
She felt the poker quivering in her hand.
Turning abruptly, she flung it with a clash into the fireplace; then she went out and got into the car.
And there she sat in silence beside her daughter for a full minute; and neither of them spoke until, in a very small voice, Emma said, ‘I…
I couldn't go to the disco, Mammy.’
As quietly, Peggy answered her, ‘Yes, you could dear; and yes, you are!
And you're going to forget, at least try to forget what's just happened.
But…but now you've made a stand’— she turned and looked at her daughter —‘keep it up.
Do you understand what I mean?’
Emma looked into her mother's face, and then making a small movement with her head before turning away and, gazing through the windscreen, she said, ‘I'm…
I'm afraid, at times, Mammy.’
‘What are you afraid of, dear?’
‘Of…of his-’ Her dark head swung now from side to side before she muttered, ‘feelings, possessiveness.
I knew a long time ago it wasn't right when he wanted to….’
The gulp she made in her throat was audible, and Peggy put in quickly, ‘Wanted to what?’
‘Nothing, nothing.
I'll go to the disco.
Come on, let's go.
Let's go.’
Peggy stretched her left arm and put it around her daughter's shoulders, saying, ‘It's all right now.
It's all right.
Don't get agitated.
We'll talk about this later.
Now you're going to the dance, and there'll be Susan and Carrie there, and you're going to smile as if nothing had happened here tonight.
That's one of the things you've got to learn in life; to smile and cover up your feelings.’
The girl raised her head and looked at her mother, saying, ‘He said awful things about…about you, Mammy.’
‘Yes, I know he did.
And when we talk later I'll explain what really happened, and it won't be in the way he put it,’ and with similar emphasis she turned the key; but then allowed the car to glide forward.
Five minutes later she dropped Emma at the hall, saying, ‘I'll pick you up at ten o'clock.
Go on now, enjoy yourself.’
Having turned the car, she wondered if she should make for the cottage to talk out with her mother what her next move should be, but thinking that  would leave her grandmother alone too long, she decided to make for home again.
Going up the lane, she saw a car stop and Frank Conway quickly get out and turn as though awaiting her.
When she, too, stopped he said, ‘I could see it was you.
Can you spare a minute to come in?
I've got something to tell you.
I think it's important.’
Her heart missed a beat.
‘About Charlie?’ she said apprehensively.
‘Has something happened?’
‘Oh no; Charlie's all right.
We had a letter this morning and one enclosed for you.
He'll be back earlier, on Tuesday.
No, it isn't about Charlie.
Yet, it could help bring his wishes closer, lass.
Come on.
The car'll be all right there.’
When they entered the kitchen May's voice came from another room, calling, ‘I'll be there in a minute, Frank.’
And when presently she appeared in the kitchen doorway she said, ‘I didn't know you were here, Peggy.’
‘Your husband's dragged me in.
There's something he wants to tell me.’
‘He's going to leave me for you?
I knew it.
I knew it.’
‘Don't talk daft, woman.
This is serious.
Is there a cup of tea ready?’
‘Yes, sir, yes; it's all ready.
In fact, the tea's all set in the dining-room as usual and has been for…let me see’— she put her head on one side —‘how many years?’
‘Go on, get in there, you idiot.’
Then he turned towards Peggy, saying, ‘Come in here a minute.’
Seated around the end of the dining-table, both Peggy and May looked at Frank and waited.
And what he said, was, ‘Well now, I'll have to start at the beginning.
It was like this.
We got a letter, passed on from the Newcastle office this morning concerning a woman who wants to sell her bungalow.
It's out Corbridge way.
They always pass out-of-the-way jobs on to us.
And this was certainly one.
I went out there and found two bungalows set in what looked like nowhere.
The lady was very talkative, and I gathered that they were on the edge of a big estate.
At one time, apparently, the area all around was to be built up with good-class bungalows, et cetera.
But something emerged from the deeds of the estate that put a stop to this development.
The two bungalows in question, though, had been standing from the year dot.
Well, they were built pre-war, and they were still in good condition and they each had half an acre of land.
Now this old girl is getting on and she wants to move into town.
She's lonely and she plied me with tea and scones and the rest, and gave me information about her neighbours, whom she seems to like quite a bit.
He's a commercial traveller and the wife's a cook  in a Newcastle hotel.
Both seem to have good cars and to be comfortably off.
However, she informed me, she doesn't see much of him, Mr Milburn.
Well, she said, you know what commercial travellers are, and laughed and winked.
Then suddenly she said,
‘Good lord!
Talk of the devil.’
And she pointed to the window, saying, ‘There she is now!
She must be seeing him off.
He doesn't usually get home in the daytime.
Well, I suppose with her being at work he doesn't think it much use.’’
Frank looked from one to the other, and then, addressing himself solely to Peggy, he said, ‘You'd better hang on to something, Peggy.
You know who Mrs Milburn is?
Rosie…
Rosie Milburn.
And who should Mr Milburn be but your dear Andrew.
Honest to God!
There they were going down to the car.
I'd seen it along the end of the track.
It was a BMW.
There's quite a few of them knocking about; I hadn't noticed the number plate; well, there was no need.’
Peggy didn't move.
She didn't take her eyes off Frank.
She heard May saying, ‘Never in the world!
Never!’
But she still made no comment.
Strangely, she found herself thinking along lines similar to those her great-grandmother would likely have thought, putting money first: where does he get the money to keep two houses?
She knew he was not actually in the red at the bank, but he was pretty  near to it at times, although he was now paid a very good salary, much more than Len would ever have been paid if he had still been alive and in the job.
Moreover, Mr Andrew Jones was a neat dresser: he spent a lot on his clothes and quite a lot on Emma, but little on herself.
It was presents from Gran that kept her attired as she was.
The next thought that entered her head was of divorce: the way was clear.
All these years he had been carrying on on the side and now here was actual proof of it.
He wouldn't be able to lay claim on Emma.
Charlie.
Charlie and her, together at last.
No more meeting secretly in the wood in the dark, always in the dark.
May's hand was on hers: ‘It's all right, it's all right , dear,’ she was saying.
‘It's a way out.
At last you've got a way out.’
Peggy's voice sounded quiet, even gentle as, looking from one to the other, she said, ‘I've been an idiot, haven't I?
All these years I've been an idiot.
When did Rosie leave?
Over seven years ago, and I never guessed.
I can't remember once seeing them talking together.
No, I can't remember once.
And Rosie, she was so nice, so jolly, so kind and helpful.’
She straightened her back and a small smile began to spread over her lips as she said, ‘I wonder what Mrs Funnell will say to this?
What will her reaction  be when she knows that her bright boy, while patting and stroking her and kissing her brow and her blue lips, must have been laughing up his sleeve at her, and thinking what a clever boy he is to be able to live in her fine house and have a big say in her business, while at the same time running a mistress on the side.’
She turned to Frank now.
‘You know, Frank,’ she said, ‘I'm going to take a great delight in telling her, much more so than facing up to the big boy himself, because she it is who has paved the way for all this.’
‘I understand what you mean, Peggy, but I can't see how she's paved his way to buy that bungalow.
Rosie…well, she hadn't any money, had she?
And even on a cook's wages she wouldn't be able to rise to that.’
‘He may have sold some cars on the side.’
Frank looked at his wife.
‘I doubt it, May,’ he said.
‘From what I understand from Henry, he'd have a job to do that; the old girl has her finger on every penny.’
The ring of the telephone brought May up from the table, saying, ‘I bet that's Charlie.’
But within a minute she came running back, saying, ‘It's Mrs Funnell.
Something's happened.
She's yelling at the top of her voice.
She's calling, ‘Bring Frank!
Bring Frank!’'
They were all on their feet now and running from the kitchen, the two women following Frank through the garden, through the woodland and so into the house.
Victoria was standing at the top of the stairs hanging on to the banister.
And when they reached her, she said, ‘He's taken an overdose.’
In the bedroom, Mrs Funnell was also supporting herself, one hand on her chest, the other on the bedrail, and at her feet lay the doubled-up figure of Andrew clad in only vest and pants.
‘Good God!’
Frank was now kneeling by Andrew's side, straightening his limbs.
He put an ear to his chest, then looked up at them, saying, ‘He's still breathing, but his heart's going twenty to the dozen.
Let's get him on his feet.
You'd better call the doctor, Peggy.’
‘No, no!’ said Mrs Funnell; ‘give him salt and water.
It'll bring it up.
He hasn't been out that long.
I…
I heard him only a short while ago coming out of the bathroom.
Get some salt and water, hot.’
Peggy had been standing near the table.
The aspirin bottle was empty, as was the silver-papered, singly wrapped, Panadol square that usually held twelve tablets, but in which she knew there had been only three, for she herself had taken two that afternoon.
As for the aspirins, there might have been a dozen in the bottle, but that would have  been all.
She had made it a habit never to leave medicines lying about since the time she found Emma sucking a Panadol, thinking it was a mint, but thankfully then having the sense to spit it out when she found it wasn't.
Yet if this had taken place in her grandmother's room, he would have found plenty of bottles there, a cupboard-full, going back for two or three years.
All in aid of her many illnesses, real and imaginary.
And such was her feeling that she might have need of them sometime, nothing was ever thrown out.
She didn't actually run from the room to get the hot water and salt; whatever he had taken was a gesture: it had been enough to knock him out, but it certainly wouldn't kill.
This was to pay Emma out, to make her feel guilty and never again to disobey him.
But even should she explain it to her as his ruse to get his own way with her, there was still the possibility that the ruse might not have come off; in anyone older than him and less strong, it could possibly have achieved its object.
When she returned to the room with the salted hot water, Frank and May between them had lifted Andrew on to the bed, and there he was propped up and breathing very heavily now.
And Mrs Funnell was talking at them all the time: ‘I'm not surprised.
I'm not surprised.
The strain he's been under with one thing and another.
But I'd like to  know what's brought this on, and I'll get to know.
Yes, I will.
I will.’
‘Get me a bowl, Peggy, will you?’
Frank turned from the bed and, taking the mug from her hand, now addressed his wife.
‘Pull his jaws apart,’ he said.
When the hot, salted water went down Andrew's throat, he gulped, and it would have all spurted out had Peggy, and none too gently, not clamped his jaws together again.
‘Get him on his feet and walk him up and down.
That's the way.
It's no good letting him lie there.
Get him on his feet.’
‘All right, Mrs Funnell.
If you'll get out of the way, we'll get him to his feet.’
Frank's voice carried the expression that was on his face, and Mrs Funnell came back at him, saying, ‘Don't you bawl at me, Frank Conway!
You forget where you are.’
‘Shut up, woman!’
This staggered Mrs Funnell into silence, and her feelings were registered on her grim face as she watched this husband and wife whom she had never liked, classing them as common, dragging the almost inert figure up and down the bedroom.
And they didn't stop until he heaved and brought up a great deal of liquid into the bowl that Peggy was reluctantly holding.
Following this, they laid him on the bed again, and when he started to groan May said, ‘He'll live,’ and turning and looking at Mrs Funnell, she added, ‘Unfortunately,’before marching out of the room.
Peggy followed her on to the landing.
‘Can't believe it, can you, that he would go to such lengths?’ she said.
‘Oh, his type will do anything.
He's a maniac.
No, not a maniac, just a devious, two-faced bugger, I would call him.
Well, anyway, you've got him where you want him.
And as for that old girl in there.
Oh, wouldn't I like to be a fly on the wall when you tell her the latest!
Anyway, give me a shout if you want me.
Frank will realise I've gone home.’
Peggy went into her grandmother's room.
Victoria was sitting on the edge of the bed, an arm hugging her waist, and she asked simply, ‘He's dead?’
‘No; far from it.
By what I've reckoned, he took enough just to knock him out.
He knew what he was doing.
This is all for Emma's benefit.’
‘It's a pity he didn't get a surprise and find himself dead.
A great pity.
Mother went on like someone demented when she found him.
It was just by coincidence that she did.
If he did as you say, he would have calculated what she would do: when he didn't go in to her and hold her hand she would go and tap on his door, because he never entered the house without visiting her, wherever she was.
I once said to him, Mother's in the lavatory but she never locks the door.’
‘Oh!
Gran.’
Peggy wanted to laugh, but she knew if she gave way to it it might turn to hysteria.
‘Get into bed, dear.’
She tucked up her grandmother; then bending over her, she smiled at her while saying, ‘I think this calls for a glass of sherry.
It's an occasion.’
‘Oh, Peggy!
Peggy!’
The bedclothes shook.
‘Don't make me laugh.
But yes, a glass of sherry.
This is an occasion.’
Within an hour Andrew Jones was aware that he was back in the land of the living but that a doctor hadn't been called.
Looking up at Frank, he said, ‘I'm sorry; a stupid thing to do.
Has the doctor gone?’
‘The doctor hasn't been,’ said Frank tersely.
‘Mrs Funnell thought it better not to call him because you'd only taken a small dose.
Did you understand that when you made the partial attempt?’
‘What…what d'you mean, partial…attempt?’
‘Just that.
You took only enough, really, to give you a twenty-four-hour, good sleep.
Well now, I'm off.
Next time, I'd do the job properly.
Take whisky with it, that helps.’
Left alone Andrew Jones closed his eyes and turned his head to the side.
He felt terrible.
He felt ill.
And what had it achieved?
Well, he would soon know when he saw her.
What time was it?
Was she home yet?
No, she'd still be in that place, being handled by those young louts.
The picture in his mind caused his teeth to clench, and he muttered, ‘Oh, Emma, Emma.
Don't leave me.
Don't leave me.’
Then, as if he was being answered, a voice in his head yelled, ‘And she'll not leave me!
I'll see to that; she's mine.
I can't help it.
I don't want to help it.
She's mine.
She always has been mine, and she knows it inside herself.
But it's her bitch of a mother.
If it wasn't for her, Emma would understand how I feel.
But I'll win, I'll beat her yet.
By God! yes, I'll beat her yet.
Oh lord!
I feel sick.
Oh Emma, Emma.
Hurry up.
Come home and see what you've done, what I've done for you.’
There was a rustle by the side of the bed and he opened his eyes to see Peggy standing there.
She was smiling and what she said almost brought him up from the bed, his fists flailing.
But the sickness caused him to drop back.
She had said, ‘Better luck next time, Andrew,’ and had turned about and walked to the door.
Further along the corridor she tapped on her great-grandmother's door and went in without waiting for permission.
‘I'd like a word with you, Great-gran.’
‘Well, I'm ready to have a word with you, too.
By! yes, I am.
This business tonight has opened my eyes.’
‘Oh, that's good.
I'm glad of that.’
‘Don't be perky, miss.
And remember who you're talking to.’
‘Yes, I am remembering; and please remember, too, Great-grandmother, that I am not a miss any more; I am a married woman who has run your house for years and has had to put up with a man of your choosing.’
‘What do you mean, a man of my choosing?
Now let me tell you’— the finger was wagging —‘Andrew has been brought to the limit of his patience by your attitude and unwifely behaviour and your lack of understanding with regard to his feelings as a father.’
‘Oh, Great-gran, I'll either have to laugh at you or yell at you.
But because you're an old-fashioned, besotted old woman I'll laugh at you while I tell you that your dear Andrew has not missed my wifely attentions at all.
Do you remember Rosie, our daily help?
Dear Rosie, cheery Rosie?
She left to go off with a fellow, you remember?
Disgraceful conduct, wasn't it?
Well, do you know who the fellow was, Great-gran?
No, you'd never guess in a thousand years.
Well’— she leant slightly forward —‘the fellow that Rosie went off with was your dear Andrew, the loving father.
And he set up house for her in a bungalow further along the river, in a nice secluded part.
And that's where he goes to his meetings on  Tuesdays and Fridays, and sometimes on a Sunday and any other time his need calls him.’
Mrs Funnell's face was twitching, each feature of it seeming to stretch away from its neighbour: the eyebrows were raised, the eyes wide, the nose was stretched downwards, her upper lip covering her top set of teeth was trying to steady them, while her drooped chin was wobbling; even her ears seemed to be twitching.
She did not come back immediately and say, ‘I don't believe this, you're lying,’ but what she said was, in a very small voice, ‘That would have to be proved.’
‘Oh, Frank will come over when you like and tell you how he found out.
He was called to the next bungalow; the woman's trying to sell it; and there he saw the happy couple saying goodbye to each other.
Rosie is a little fatter, I understand.
And did you know that your dear Andrew is a commercial traveller?
Well, like all commercial travellers, you know what they say about them, as they do about sailors: they have a wife in every port.’
‘Shut up!
Shut up!
You're taking a delight in this, aren't you?’
‘Yes, Great-gran, a great delight, because it's paved the way for my divorce; at least, my divorcing him.’
‘You won't.
You wouldn't dare.
I won't have that scandal.
He'll be brought to his senses.
And I still  feel that you're to blame for this: if you had been a wife to him he would certainly not have had to seek comfort elsewhere.
No, that's the reason, that's the reason why he's done it.
I shall talk to him, and things will be straightened out.
I'll put a stop to this.
But there'll be no talk of divorce, not in this house.’
‘You can't do anything about it, Great-gran, not a thing.’
On this she turned about and walked slowly from the room with the old woman's voice crying after her, ‘You'll see.
You'll see.
Oh, yes I can.’
All the way down the stairs she repeated to herself, ‘She can't.
She can't do a thing about it.’
Yet that dominant, ‘Yes, I can.
Yes, I can,’ penetrated her certainty.
2
Mrs Funnell was right: she could do something about it, and she did.
She informed her great-granddaughter that if she filed for a divorce she would take Andrew's side and say that what he had done in taking a mistress and in finally attempting suicide was because she had never acted as a wife to him.
Consequently all his real love had been directed towards his daughter.
And if it came to court she would make a plea that he be given the care of his daughter until she became of age.
The morning following Andrew's futile suicide attempt, Peggy had gone into his room and, looking down on to his drawn and sickly countenance, she had asked quite quietly, ‘Shall I phone Rosie and tell her that you're indisposed and are unlikely to pay your usual Friday night visit?’
She had thought for a moment that he was going to have a heart attack from shock, but, recovering himself, he had said, ‘Well, now you know, what are you going to do about it?’ to which she had answered simply, ‘Divorce,’and walked out.
When Mrs Funnell had visited him, she had upbraided him firmly for his deception and he, in his most plaintive voice, had said, ‘I'm a man, and it was either taking a decent woman or resorting to casual encounters.
I took a way out that I thought was best.’
When Mrs Funnell later relayed this conversation to her great-granddaughter, she had ended, ‘And I understood his reason perfectly.
But he has promised to end the association, so that is the end of that.’
It was when Peggy had come back firmly, stating that it wasn't, that it was only the beginning, that Mrs Funnell had told her definitely which side she was on.
But the effect of all this on Emma was more worrying to Peggy than anything else that had transpired.
And so it was that, four months later, she was sitting in the surgery with Emma, waiting their turn to see Doctor Rice.
When the nurse indicated that she should go in, she turned to Emma, saying, ‘Sit there a minute; I want to have a word with him first.’
But once inside the consulting room she stopped and looked towards the desk behind which was sitting a strange man, a young man.
And she was opening her mouth to say, ‘It's Doctor Rice I want to see,’ when he spoke.
Rising to his feet, he pointed to the chair opposite, saying, ‘Doctor Rice is indisposed this morning; I'm  taking his place.’
Then on a smile, he added, ‘Very inadequately, it seems, because I've scared half of the patients away.’
His voice was pleasant and indicated that he wasn't from this part of the country; the South, she imagined.
Slowly she walked to the chair and sat down, then said, ‘I…
I don't think you can be of much help to me, Doctor.
You see it isn't about myself I want to talk.
I've brought my daughter and…and Doctor Rice knows her.
And she's in a nervous state, and….’
‘Well, I don't suppose I'll be able to help you as much as Doctor Rice would, but if you would like to tell me what is wrong, I may be able to offer a little advice.
Has she stopped eating?’
‘Oh no, it's not like that, but she's parky, she still doesn't eat like she used to.
No; you see, it's…it's a very delicate and awkward matter.’
She stumbled over her words and turned her head away before she said, ‘It's her father.
He's…he's so possessive of her, always has been, but it's got worse of late, and…and of course it's getting on her nerves.’
‘I see.
Well, this often happens between fathers and daughters.’
‘It does?’
The words said: I don't believe it.
But he nodded at her, saying, ‘I can assure you it does.
Now would you like me to have a talk with her, or to listen?’
She stared at him, weighing him up.
He spoke with assurance; but he looked so young with his fair hair, grey eyes and slim body, he didn't appear like a doctor at all.
But she supposed they had to start sometime.
‘How old is she?’
‘Fifteen and a half; well, a little older, she'll be sixteen in December.’
‘Well now, I could see her for a moment.
I don't think that would aggravate her condition.’
Could she say: ‘No, you're too young; I'll wait until Doctor Rice comes back’?
No; that would sound rude.
‘Very well,’ she said.
He rang a bell now whilst saying to her, ‘Would you mind waiting outside?’
‘You want to see her alone?’
‘Yes, if you don't mind.
I often find that parents are inhibiting to young people.’
His words indicated that he wasn't so young as he looked, and she said, ‘Very well.’
When presently the young person came in, he was definitely surprised.
He rose from the chair and watched the girl come slowly into the room.
She was tall with dark hair and large dark eyes in a pale face.
Fifteen and a half, her mother had said.
He would have put this girl's age at seventeen, perhaps eighteen.
And she carried herself straight and with a certain assurance; or was it defiance?
‘Do sit down,’ he said, then added on a smile, ‘I know I'm not Doctor Rice.
So many patients have fled from me this morning because I am not Doctor Rice.
I am glad you have decided to see me.’
Emma stared at the man.
Her mother hadn't warned her that she wouldn't be seeing Doctor Rice.
If she had she wouldn't have come in.
Yet this stranger had a different manner altogether from the old doctor who, when he hadn't his hearing aid in place, shouted as if it were you who were deaf.
He was smiling widely at her now, saying, ‘I had to tell nurse not to say they weren't coming in to see the doctor they expected.
But even so, some of them scarpered.’
It was the word ‘scarpered’.
She wanted to smile, but she wasn't feeling like smiling, she was feeling sick, she was always feeling sick.
Deep inside her there was this constant feeling of nausea.
And when her father's hands were on her she felt at times she would vomit all over his suit.
It was getting worse.
Ever since the suicide business she had become afraid of him, really afraid, because he would do it again, he had said he would.
‘Which school do you go to?’
‘Fenton High.’
‘Oh, I understand that's a very good school.
What's your favourite subject?’
‘I don't really have one.
I'm told I'm good at English but I don't get very high marks.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because I don't work.’
‘Oh.’
He sat back in his chair.
‘Well, that's straight from the shoulder.
And I can recognise the reason….’
‘You can't!’
She almost spat the words at him.
And now he sat forward, his forearms on the desk as he said, ‘You'd be surprised, but I can.’
His tone had changed.
There was no soft persuasiveness in it now.
‘You're not the only one who's had experience or who is having experience with a possessive father; it happens to boys, too, you know.’
Her mouth was open.
She was gaping at him while telling herself that her mother would have told him the reason why she was here.
But he was going on talking.
‘It generally happens the other way round: it's the mother who's possessive of the son.
But let me tell you, it's much worse when it's the father.
So, you see, I do know the reason why.
Watching your every move.
Timing you.
You must do well at this, that, or the other.
You must take all the opportunities that he missed.
Is it like that with you?’
‘No.’
No; of course, he knew it wouldn't be.
It was far worse, more insidious, more destructive.
And so he ignored her ‘no’ and ended with, ‘So you see, I know why you don't want to work.
And I wouldn't have if it hadn't been for my mother…
. You have a nice mother; she's very pretty.’
There was a look of surprise on her face as she said, ‘You think Mother pretty?’
‘Yes, of course.
She's a very smart young woman.’
‘She's just over thirty.’
He smiled.
‘Thirty?
Does that seem very old to you?’
‘Well, it isn't young.’
His smile disappeared and his next words seemed to be fired at her.
‘What form does your father's possessiveness take?
Does he fondle you?’
Her mouth was opening and shutting; she had the urge to run from the room; but then, this man was a doctor.
He seemed to know all about such situations.
And he wasn't Doctor Rice.
Doctor Rice wouldn't have chatted with her like he was doing; he would have bawled at her and said, ‘I'll see him.
You tell him to come to me.’
Or he would have said that to her mother.
But this doctor's attitude was different; and he was young, too; well, youngish.
Her head was low as she muttered, ‘Yes.’
‘And you don't like it?’
‘No.’
‘Have…have you told him?
Made it plain to him that you don't like it?’
Her head was up now, her voice spitting out the words.
‘Yes!
Yes!
I have.
I've…
I've told him for years, but I didn't want to hurt him because I loved him.
But since he tried to com….’
She stopped and looked to the side, and when she didn't continue, he said, ‘He's tried to commit suicide?’
Still she didn't speak.
‘Has he?’
‘Yes.’
‘When was this?’
‘Some months ago.’
‘Did Doctor Rice know about it?’
She was looking at him as she said, ‘No.
No; my great-great-gran kept it hushed up.
My great-greatgran wouldn't have the publicity.’
‘What if he had died?
She would have had publicity then?’
She looked him straight in the face now as she said, ‘She doesn't take such things into account; she's a law unto herself’
He had heard about the Funnell family and the old matriarch when Doctor Rice was giving him a lightning summary of the patients.
Vain, pig-headed old  fossil, he had called her, if he remembered rightly.
‘Why didn't you talk to your mother about this earlier?’
‘Oh, she knows.
She's been at him for years.
But…but it only seems to make him worse.’
‘And you have resisted all his advances?’
It sounded such a stilted way to put it, but he couldn't find a different approach at the moment.
‘Yes; yes, I have.’
‘Always?’
She considered for a moment, then shook her head, saying, ‘Well…years ago I…well, I didn't understand…well it was Daddy and he loved me.
Oh yes, it was always that; he loved me.’
‘Has he…well, I mean…?’
‘I know what you mean, doctor, and no; no, he hasn't, but-’ She suddenly sprang to her feet and was standing rigid.
He, too, rose, saying, ‘There!
There!’
And slowly he took her hand and drew her to the window and there, pointing, said, ‘Look at that!
Isn't that a lovely garden?
You wouldn't think a man like Doctor Rice would love flowers, now would you?
Not with his bawling voice and thumping the table.
Oh, you wouldn't know anything about his thumping the table.
He does it at least three times during meals.
I'm staying with them at present, until I get a place of my own.
I didn't like this town when I first came to it, and…and I must whisper this, I didn't care much for him either, for his deaf-aid makes him believe that everybody else is deaf.’
He was smiling widely at her, then added, ‘But isn't that garden beautiful?
It was that that made me see the other side of him.
If a man could love flowers and arrange a garden like that, then he had a nice side to him.
I find that, you know, there's always a different side to everybody.
And your father must have a good side, but he must also have a bad one.
Oh yes.’
Now he was facing her squarely.
‘And you must stand out against it.
I know you are doing that, but you must put it into words.
You mustn't be too kind in a case like this.
If he wants to fondle you, you snap at his hands and say, ‘I'm having no more of it!’
Say to him, ‘If you do that again I'll go to the doctor.’
That generally scares them.
I don't know whether or not it will scare your father.
By the way, do you go out…?
I mean, play games, dance?’
‘I don't go to dances, not any more.
It was because I went to a disco that he tried to commit suicide.
Mammy said it was an attempt to frighten me.
Anyway, I don't go to dances, but I play tennis.’
‘You do?
So do I. There are two very good courts here.
The one on Mowbray Road is excellent.
One thing I did excel at was tennis.
I was no good at rugby and hopeless at cricket.
But you know  something?
His head was poked towards her.
‘You mustn't let on, because I'd be banned from every club and pub in the county, but I really do dislike cricket.
I think it's boring; so slow; hours and days to achieve…what?
Now, on a tennis court, you can hammer away.’
She was smiling at him.
She knew she was smiling at him.
He was so different from Doctor Rice.
He turned now and led her towards the door, but there he stopped and in a quiet voice said, ‘Now, do what I tell you.
Stand up to him.
Don't be afraid of hurting his feelings.
His kind of feelings are unnatural.
Remember that; so, fight them…
I don't suppose I'll see you again, because Doctor Rice will be back in a day or two.
But I'm sure he would say as I'm saying now: get out, go to the disco and-’ He paused and smiled before he ended, ‘play a lot of tennis.
There's nothing like it for pushing the world aside.’
He opened the door for her and saw her mother standing waiting, as if impatient for her return.
Peggy looked from the doctor to her daughter.
Emma was actually smiling.
It was the first time she had seen her smile in weeks.
Outside she said, ‘Well?’
‘He was nice.
Different from Doctor Rice.
But he treated me like a little girl; part of his training, I suppose.’
‘What did he say to you?’
‘That I should play a lot of tennis.’
‘What?’
‘Just that: that I should play a lot of tennis.’
And she played a lot of tennis.
3
‘Eighteen thousand pounds!
I can't believe it.
I knew she kept her statements at the bank and went and saw the bank manager now and again, but I thought it was only a few hundred.
And never to leave me a penny.’
‘Well, I didn't ask for her money.
I knew she was going to leave me something, but not all of it, and not that amount.
I tell you I knew nothing about it; I mean, how much she had.’
Lizzie walked towards the fireplace and, stretching out her arm, she gripped the mantel, saying, ‘All those years looking after her, pandering to her wants, running for prescriptions.’
‘Mam!’
Peggy's voice was stiff.
‘What you seem to forget is that it's on sixteen years since you left this house.
And who has seen to the place since?’
‘Who saw to her before?
I was thirty-five then, girl.
I had the both of them, and Len.
Oh yes, and Len.’
‘Well, I've had the both of them, Mam, and  Andrew.
Oh yes, and Andrew.
And a fight on my hands that you never experienced.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Lizzie now took a seat to the side of the fireplace, saying, ‘I feel so hurt.
Can you understand that?
She was my mother.’
‘Well, Mam, you always said you were never close.
But I can tell you this: she and I became very close over the years.
I learnt a lot about her and saw her side of why she took up illnesses as a comfort.’
‘Well, I'm glad for you.
It certainly paid off.’
‘Oh, for God's sake, Mam!’
Again Lizzie said, ‘I'm sorry.
Give me a cup of tea.’
Peggy poured out the tea and handed it to her mother; then sitting beside her, she said quietly, ‘She left me the money for a purpose.
She…she wanted to provide me with something to be able to go off with Emma where he couldn't get at her.
That was the sole purpose of her leaving it to me.’
‘Well, well.
But you needn't have waited for that, need you?
You've had it in your hands for months now.’
‘As you say, I have.
I saw my solicitor again last week.’
‘And yes, what did he say?’
‘He said it was a pity I hadn't come to him before, when the evidence was there that he was living with this woman, because now the bungalow's been sold  and she's disappeared.
Also, it is likely that although I will get custody of my daughter, he will also be given leave to see her every week, and likely for a longer period than he sees her now.
And there's another thing.
I had an ultimatum from Great-gran: if I take up proceedings for a divorce, then I go out of here, but dear Andrew stays.’
‘Never!
She wouldn't.’
‘Oh yes, she would.
Nothing that her bright boy can do is wrong.
It's all put down to nature.’
‘What's puzzling Henry,’ said Lizzie now, ‘is where he got the money to buy that bungalow?
It was in her name, too, and being so, she's likely claimed the lot.
If she was wise she did, anyway.
But where did he get the money from?
Henry's been going through the old ledgers but cannot find any sign of a fiddle.
Cash or cheques there, they are all duplicated.
And of course, as I've told you, it would take some fiddle to get past Gran's lynx's eyes.
She might be soft in the head about everything else, but never about money.
No, it's a mystery.
But as Henry says, he's got the money from somewhere and he means to find out where.
By the way, where's Emma?
I haven't seen her.’
‘She's out playing tennis.’
‘On a day like this?
It's enough to freeze you.’
‘Oh, she'd still play.
She plays two or three times a week.
And I'm glad; it gets her out and she enjoys it.
And she's holding her own these days.
She's working better at school, too.
Her last report was quite good; at least, compared with the previous ones.
I think I can date the change in her since she saw that new doctor.
I didn't have much faith in him when I first spoke to him, but apparently he told her to stand on her own two feet.
And she's done that.’
‘How's Andrew been?’
‘Oh, just the same.
It's his daughter and she'll always be his daughter, and God Almighty Himself won't dare put a spoke in between them, or else.
He's attending the parents’ meetings at school now.
I don't go when he's there; I just couldn't bear it.
The smarminess of him.
He came one night when he was supposed to be elsewhere, and there he was, smiling and chatting all round.
And Mrs Rogers came up to me and said how wonderful it must be to have a husband who takes an interest in his family; her Dan doesn't know he's got a family and cares less.
I nearly said, ‘I'll swap places with you anytime, Mrs Rogers, and gladly.’’
‘Well’— Lizzie rose —‘I must be off.
By the way, do you hear anything from his people these days?
It must be a year since she was this way.’
‘Yes, it is a year; about this time.
And look at the reception he gave her.
My dear Mr Andrew Jones has no use for the Joneses of Doncaster.
His father hasn't been here for years.
The last time he came, they had a row and the father called him a bloody upstart.
He was a little tight at the time, the father, and it upset dear Andrew.
as if he himself couldn't take it.
He swills it down at times; of course, on the quiet, after Great-gran's safely tucked up in bed.
Oh’— Peggy screwed up her face —‘there are times when I want to spit on him.
But anyway’— she nodded her head briskly now —‘it can't last for ever.
Time's running short for him.
She'll be sixteen next month.
Do you know what, Mam?’
She leant towards Lizzie now.
‘I do wish she would meet some nice fellow and run off with him.
Yes, I do.’
‘And land up in the same condition as you did?
Be quiet!’
‘Yes, but I wouldn't force her to marry him in order to keep my respectability.’
Lizzie paused on the step and looked at her daughter, and there was a sad note in her voice as she said, ‘You've changed, girl.
Oh, how you've changed.’
‘Well, I've been brought up in a good school these last few years, don't you think?
But go on, go on.
Drive carefully; the road's slippy.
It'll soon be dark.’
She watched her mother get into the car, but she remained standing by the open door until Lizzie had turned the car and then disappeared down the drive.
And after closing the door, she still stood and repeated to herself, ‘Land up in the same way as you  did.’
Did she really wish her daughter to run off?
Yes, she did, but not just to live with someone, as was the vogue.
these days; she would wish her to marry some nice boy.
No; not a boy, a man, one who would be able to stand up to her father and say, ‘It's done, she's mine.’
4
‘That will be our last game until the Spring; the courts close this week, both of them.
The hard is too slippery, and there's hardly a blade of grass left on this one.’
Richard Langton stood on the path outside the netting that surrounded the tennis court.
He did not look at the girl by his side, who was almost as tall as himself; but he went on talking as she tapped her racquet against the netting.
‘How long is it since I first saw you in the surgery?
Five months?’
‘Nearly six,’ said Emma quietly.
She, too, was looking through the netting on to the court.
‘I'm glad I'm not your doctor.’
‘Why?’
‘Because what I'm about to say would then be very much out of place and I could lose my practice.’
Emma didn't answer, but she put her hand up and pulled her scarf tightly around her throat as if it would stop the throbbing that was coming up from between her ribs and aiming to choke her.
‘I'm twenty-six, Emma; you're not even sixteen until next month.
I'm ten years older than you.
That's the first obstacle.
The second is, I have a career before me.
I had no intention of marrying early when I came to this town.
In fact, I was only going to stay a couple of years and move on, but…but I met you and I knew right from the beginning what was going to happen to me; and it's grown over these months during our supposedly accidental meetings here.
Now Emma, I know my own mind, but you're so young and you don't.’
‘I do.
I do.’
She had turned to him now and they were staring at each other.
The words had rushed out, but they were vibrant with feeling and certainty as she said, ‘I, too, knew from the first.
I'm not sixteen yet, as you say.
But that's in years…otherwise I'm eighteen, twenty.
I…
I never seem to have been young, never had the chance.
I've been tied to older people, my father…riveted to him.
My mother was married when she was sixteen.’
He took hold of her hands now and his voice was gentle as he said, ‘Yes, but by all accounts she's paid for it since with a man like your father.’
‘But you're not like my father.
You're…you're like no-one I've ever met or would hope to meet.’
‘Oh, Emma, my dear, dear Emma.
I want to take you in my arms and kiss you and —’ He looked to the side to where two people were approaching; then dropping her hands, he said on a laugh, ‘I've only to be seen doing that in public, even holding your hands, and the place would be set on fire.
Now, Emma, listen, I'm going to ask you a question.
Will you, when you're seventeen, marry me?’
Emma closed her eyes but for the moment she couldn't answer for the throbbing in her throat.
Then on a gasp, she said, ‘I'd marry you tomorrow.’
‘And I you, my dear Emma, and I you.
But that's impossible.
What kind of a reception would I get if I were to go to your mother now?
I wouldn't ask your father, but your mother would, I'm sure, be up in arms.
Anyway, let us arrange it like this: we'll keep it quiet until the beginning of the year, and then, if you haven't changed your mind’— he leant his head towards her, a soft smile on his face —‘I will ask your mother if we can become engaged, and just before you're seventeen or just after, we'll be married.’
Emma's eyes were wide and moist.
She gazed at him in silence until he said, ‘You're very beautiful, you know, and you'll grow more beautiful with the years.’
‘I love you.
I love you, Richard.
Do you know that's the first time I've said your name?
You've always called me Emma.’
‘Well, don't in future call me Richard.
I'm known as Ricky.’
She smiled softly, saying now, ‘I like that…
Ricky; it suits you.’
Richard Langton stared at the young girl before him.
He had never been able to take in the fact that she was a fifteen-year-old girl.
Right from the beginning she had never talked like a fifteen-year-old girl.
As she said, she could be twenty.
He knew what Doctor Rice would say when he told him: ‘You must be mad.’
In his delicate fashion he would likely add, ‘If you're so much in need of it, live with somebody.
There are plenty available.
They've been tripping over you ever since you came here.’
Yes, it was true he need not have wanted for female companionship over the past months.
But the only one he had found himself wanting to see was this girl.
He had tried, oh yes, he had tried to put the feeling in its place when he first recognised it.
But it had become like a hunger: his whole being seemed empty when he was out of her presence.
How often, in the beginning, had he stood where he was standing now and watched her play?
At least half a dozen times.
Then one day, just as if he had come upon her accidentally, he had said, ‘You play very well.
What about taking me on sometime?’
And so it had started; and now it had come to a head.
‘How are we going to manage…
I mean, to meet?’ he said.
‘You couldn't risk going to the theatre with me, not for a while anyway.
But look, the park doesn't close until six.
Now, should you be coming in the west side’— he pointed —‘that's a very quiet end; let's say around half past five on a Tuesday or Thursday.
I don't take surgery those nights.
Well, we might just happen to bump into each other, mightn't we?
Then what about a Saturday?
What do you do on a Saturday afternoon?’
‘The senior girls play badminton; others play hockey or netball.’
‘Well, do you think you could skip a Saturday and I could pick you up somewhere, then we could take a run out into the country, across into Northumberland, beyond Hexham way; it's wild and wonderful up there.
I'm off duty every third week.
Anyway, we'll arrange it.
Yes’— he leant towards her-'we'll arrange it, my dear.
We must.
Now you've got to go, and I've got to go…
. Are you happy?’
‘I'm…
I'm afraid to say how I feel in case it disappears.
I can't put a name to the feeling I have for you.
If you say it's happiness, then it's happiness.
I only know I'm afraid when I leave you; when you are out of sight, I feel lost, lonely.’
This wasn't an answer that a fifteen-year-old girl would give, it was a woman's reply.
Quickly he glanced up and down the path.
There was no-one in sight.
In an instant she was in his arms and he had kissed her, one short, hard kiss, and had  pushed her from him, saying, ‘Go on.
If you don't go this minute I'll go straight home with you, and that mustn't happen yet.
Go on.’
She backed three steps from him.
There was no smile on her face but her eyes were large and glistening.
Then acting like a fifteen-year-old girl now, she turned and ran along the path, around the ornamental clock, and kept running until she reached the east gate of the park.
Only then did she walk….
‘You all right?
Have you got a cold?’
‘No, no, I haven't got a cold, Mam.’
‘Your face is red.’
‘There's a frost coming up.’
‘Where've you been?’
‘Well, look at my racquet, Mam; I've been playing tennis.’
Peggy turned away, asking now, ‘Who do you play with, usually?’
‘Oh, Pamela Bright.
Sometimes a foursome.
I like singles best.’
It was no lie, for her mother hadn't specifically said today, she had said ‘usually’.
‘You'd better come and have your tea.
Your gran's been; she was disappointed at not seeing you.’
‘Well, she doesn't stay long, does she?’
‘What are you going to do tonight?’
‘I've got homework and then I must practise I suppose.
My piano lesson is on Monday, and I've hardly touched it this week.’
‘You're right there; it's a waste of money.’
‘I can easily give it up.’
‘You're not giving it up.
Five years you've been at it now; you should be a concert pianist, and you would be if you had practised.’
Emma had mounted the first step of the stairs and she was unwinding her scarf when she turned and looked down on her mother, saying, ‘I would have been many things if I had been brought up in peace.’
Peggy was speechless for a moment.
And then almost rushing to the foot of the stairs, she hissed, ‘Are you blaming me?’
But Emma didn't answer, and Peggy turned away, saying to herself, What's come over her lately?
She's changing.
She's different.
And she answered herself: She would be; she's growing up.
But then she's only fifteen…well, just on sixteen.
She went into the dining-room, where the tea was set, and she looked over the table as if there she would find something missing.
Then, turning from it, she heard her own voice speaking aloud: ‘The quicker I get her away from here the better.
And no, no, I wouldn't want her to end up the same way as I did.’
It was half past seven and she was practising Mozart's Rondo alla Turca.
She was fond of this lively piece but, on this occasion, her mind wasn't on it because her father was in the house.
He stayed in most evenings now, spending some time in his study and some time chatting to his benefactress.
Her hands stiffened on the keys as she heard the door open.
She had no need to turn her head to see who it was, for she knew his step.
The piano was situated at the far end of the drawing-room.
She continued to play until his hands came on her shoulders, and somehow she kept on playing until his hand lifted her loose hair behind the ear and his mouth came down and touched it.
At this, her hands crashed down on the keys and she jerked forward, saying, ‘Don't do that, Daddy, please.’
She was sitting on the edge of the seat, the front of her body pressed against the piano.
‘I'm trying to practise this difficult piece.’
‘All right, all right , practise.
Go on playing.’
His voice sounded calm, even playful.
‘But play something else.’
He now stood against the end of the piano, his forearms resting on the top of it.
‘Play the Skater's Waltz.
You know I like that.’
He now straightened up, took up the pose of holding a partner and went into a waltz, singing, ‘One, two, three….’
‘Don't be silly, Father.’
as if he had been struck by some unseen force into stillness, he stopped, his right arm still embracing an imaginary figure, his left arm extended.
Then slowly he turned his head and looked at her over his shoulder, saying, ‘What did you say?’
She bowed her head.
‘Well, it is silly.’
He was standing close to her now; his breath seemed to be wafting her hair.
‘Since when have you thought dancing with me silly?
Eh?
You love dancing with me.’
‘I never have.’
Her head had swung round but it was now bowed again.
Then she was being dragged up from the music stool and she was being shaken by the shoulders as he demanded, ‘What's this?
What's the matter with you?
You were never like this to me.
She's been getting at you, hasn't she?’
‘No.
No.
Nobody's been getting….’
‘Then why have you changed?’
She struggled in his hold, pressing herself from him; but he maintained his forceful hold on her and, looking into his face, she said, ‘I'm growing up.
I'm not a little girl any more.
I…
I want to do the things other girls do.’
‘You do, do you?
You want to do the things other girls do, like making yourself cheap, going to discos, letting those louts paw you?
Well, you're not going to.
You're growing up, yes, but you're  not grown-up and you won't be for some time, and in the meantime you're still my girl.
Aye.’
His voice changed and dropped to a quivering whisper as he said, ‘My baby.
Don't you understand?’
He now stepped backwards, pulling her away from the piano and into the middle of the room towards the couch, and he had almost to force her to get her stiff body to sit down on it.
His arms were about her now and there was an actual whine in his voice as he said, ‘Emma…
Emma, you're not grown-up but you're not a baby, except in my mind, so you must know how I feel about you, always have.
You are mine, do you understand? mine.
You're all I've got, all I've ever wanted.
You'll never know the torture I've gone through because I've loved you so.
Oh!
Emma.
My Emma.’
As she was pressed back on to the couch her mind raced madly in protest, but all she managed to bring out in a kind of croak was, ‘No, Daddy, no.’
Then, when her legs were lifted on to the couch, the croak turned into a stilted scream as she cried, ‘No!
Don't!
Stop it!
I'll…
.’ Her words were cut off when his mouth covered hers, but when she clawed at him, one of his hands caught her wrists and held them and in a voice such as he had never used before, a deep moaning voice, he said, ‘It'll be all right.
It'll be all right.
I love you.
You're mine.
Try to understand, I made you and I need you.
You're mine.’
‘Richard.
Richard.’
The name seemed to halt him for a moment, but when his hands were again moving over her, the scream she let out crying, ‘Mother!
Mother!’ almost lifted them both from the couch.
It certainly brought the door banging open; and she was still screaming when his body was lifted from her and she saw the poker coming down towards his head.
Only the fact that he rolled on to his side saved him from being brained.
However, the end of the poker ripped the knuckles of the hand he had thrust up to shield himself and blood was spattered on to his face.
as if from nowhere Henry, too, appeared and, crouching in the corner of the couch, Emma now watched him struggling with her mother, and when he wrenched the poker from her hand and flung it across the room, there was the sound of splintering wood, which brought about an inevitable silence, punctuated only by gasps.
But only for a moment.
‘You filthy beast!’
Peggy yelled at her husband.
‘You're rotten, unnatural…
. This is the finish!’
She was stabbing her finger at him now.
‘You'll go, not me!’
Andrew had struggled to his feet.
With one hand he was gripping the knuckles of the other and the look he was bestowing on his wife was one of concentrated hatred.
He now stumbled round the head of the couch and from there, leaning  against it for support, he growled at her, ‘If I go she comes with me.’
‘I won't!
I won't!’
Emma had sprung round from her crouching position now; her whole body was trembling, yet at the same time she looked taut.
And now she yelled, ‘I'll not go with you!
Never!
Never!
I'm…
I'm going to be married.’
Her statement startled not only him, but also Peggy, and it showed as surprise on Henry's face, and she looked from one to the other, saying, ‘Yes, yes, I am.
I'm…
I'm going to be engaged at Christmas and married next year.
And that's for all of you.
Do you hear?
For all of you.’
Andrew was the first to speak: his mouth in a wide sneer, he said, ‘That'll be over my dead body.’
‘And it could be.
Yes, it could be.’
To the surprise of them all, she was on her feet now.
Her body was still shaking but there was no tremor in her voice as she cried, ‘I'm marrying Richard…
Doctor Langton.
We arranged it just today.’
She turned now and looked at her mother, adding, ‘He…he was coming to see you at Christmas.’
Into yet another silence her father's voice growled out, ‘If he lives that long.’
Then they watched him pull himself up from the support of the couch and, keeping his eyes on Emma until he had passed her, he strode from the room.
Emma dropped down on to the couch again and Peggy beside her, and the first question Peggy asked was, ‘Is this true?’ and Emma nodded, saying, ‘Yes, yes, it's true, every word.’
Then in a louder voice she cried, ‘You took me to see him, do you remember?
And from that day it was done for both of us.’
‘You're not sixteen yet.’
‘Huh!’
On the word, Emma turned her head away, the exclamation saying it all.
Peggy could find no reply, no words with which to confront her daughter, such as: He's much too old.
You don't know your own mind.
You're at a romantic stage.
I'll have to see him and talk to him.
And as if Emma had heard her thoughts she turned to her and said, ‘You can't do anything, Mam, so don't try.
If you do I'll just go off…and with him.’
‘Have you thought what he might do, your father?’
‘Yes, I have; but when he confronts Richard he will be told that he could be taken to court; he's been at me for years.
I've had to fight him off.
Did you know that? fight him off.
Why didn't you do something years ago, Mam?
Leave him.
You knew what he was like.
You blamed Gran-gran for being selfish, but what about you?
You didn't want to leave this house, because you would be leaving Uncle Charlie.
Isn't that it?’
‘Girl! what are you saying?’
‘The truth for once, bringing it into the open; the truth.
Do you think I'm blind or stupid?
Everybody knows, at least in the family.’
Peggy's head drooped, and Henry, looking at Emma, said, ‘Well, that's your mother's business, after all.
And who's to blame her, having to put up with those two for years?’
He jerked his head towards the ceiling, then went on.
‘But from where I stand there's going to be a separation in that quarter and soon…
Peggy’— he put his hand out towards her —‘I've got him where I want him, where we all want him.
There's just one more bit of proof and that'll be in the locked drawer of his desk, because I remember you saying he was like your father in that way: he always kept part of his desk locked up.’
He leant towards her.
‘Do you think we can get the key?’
She looked at him as though in understanding, but she couldn't answer him for a moment for there were so many things whirling around in her mind: that doctor and her Emma…
Good lord! and but for his hand going up she would really have brained him this time, and then where would she have been?
And they all knew about Charlie.
Well, she had guessed they would, so why was it upsetting her?
It was the fact that Emma had accused her of not doing anything to prevent her being molested.
And she had been…yes, she had been: she had been molested, if only on the surface.