

1
The changing room smelt of stale plimsolls, young armpits and unwashed bottoms.
Even now, when the boys responsible had become young men and gone off to make their ways in the world.
The August sunlight filtered through high panes with no particular enthusiasm.
It touched upon empty lockers, unemployed clothes pegs and peely paintwork.
It didn't make much of the singular individual draped upon the low bench beneath the window.
But then why should it?
The sun had far better things to be doing and far better places to be.
As did the sitter on the bench.
His name was Cornelius Murphy.
And he was the stuff of epics.
Cornelius was a tall boy who had not as yet grown into his body.
His limbs dangled and seemed forever uncertain what they should be doing with themselves.
His dark hair, however, had made up its mind.
It chose to defy all discipline, and form precarious waves.
These broke in whatever direction the mood took them.
Cornelius had a noble brow in the making.
A fine aquiline nose, sharp grey eyes and a wide mouth, which was, like as not, to be found smiling.
It wasn't smiling now.
Cornelius turned up his wristwatch and viewed the hour.
A little after ten of the morning clock.
The world awaited him.
The tall boy rose awkwardly, stretched and put his best foot forward.
He opened the door and prepared to make good his escape.
The burly figure of the games master barred his way and shouted the words ‘Science Room!’ into his left ear.
The science-room windows were within easy reach of the school keeper's shammy.
They were clean.
The August sun entered them with gusto.
The mahogany work tables, mottled by youthful mis-experiment, shone with a rich dark patina.
The Edwardian display cases containing apparatus whereby Boyle's Law could be proven beyond all reasonable doubt, veritably twinkled.
Bunsen burners, Petri dishes, retorts and test tube holders winked enticingly.
In a drawer the litmus paper mused upon which way to turn.
At a desk before the window sat a pale man in a dark suit.
He was a man ‘driven’.
His name was Mr Yarrow and he was the youth employment officer.
To this pale and hollow man fell the enormous responsibility of placing every school-leaving boy in full-time employment before the end of his final term.
And Mr Yarrow went about this task as one possessed.
For indeed he was.
Under Mr Yarrow's guiding hand, the reputation of the school was untarnished, these five long years.
He had seen to it that each and every boy found his way into a suitable occupation.
And he did it through a method that was little less than divinely inspired.
It had come to him as a blinding revelation when he was but a small child.
He had been playing Happy Families at the time and wondering why it was that the families depicted on the cards should be so happy and his wasn't.
And then it struck him.
Bang!
Right out of the blue.
It was their names and the jobs they did.
The two were magically linked!
Mr Bun was a baker and Mr Thread a tailor.
That was it.
It was so obvious that he marvelled that none should have seen it before him.
If you wanted to be happy in life, then you had to find an occupation that began with the same letter as your surname.
It was that simple!
At first it made him somewhat sad, because he dearly wished to become a train robber.
And then it made him somewhat fearful, the thought that he alone should possess this knowledge.
But possess it he did and there was no turning back.
His future was mapped out for him.
He would become Mr Yarrow the youth employment officer and bring happiness to thousands.
And for the last five years he had been doing just that.
Certainly many parents seemed genuinely bewildered upon learning the nature of the job he had lined up for their offspring.
A few had even become downright hostile.
These spoke openly of ropes being thrown over high beams and tar and feathers brought into play.
But he had skilfully pacified even the most vociferous of dissenters.
To those who did not respond to his sad soliloquies on the terrible social stigma which must naturally fall upon the parents who forbade their own child the opportunity of gainful employment and condemned him instead to a living purgatory of dole-queue misery, there was always the wall of shame, upon which their names must be forever writ in letters big, for destroying the glorious reputation of the school.
For the most part, however, parents seemed pathetically grateful that their wretched boys had any job to go to.
Mr Yarrow turned papers upon his desk.
The papers came from a big fat file.
Upon this the name of Cornelius Murphy was writ in letters big.
Big and red.
Murphy's final year had come to an end and the loathsome boy remained without employment.
It was the now legendary Nightmare Scenario.
With the final minutes of the term ticking away Mr Yarrow had called Murphy Senior and frantic talks had taken place.
An agreement had hastily been arrived at, to the effect that Cornelius would be kept on at school for an indefinite period until matters could be expedited.
During this eleventh-hour telephonic summit, Murphy Senior had proved himself to be a tower of strength and a fortress of moral rectitude.
He could not countenance, he said, the thought that his only son should besmirch the good name of his own old Alma Mater.
But neither could his conscience allow him to enter into duplicity.
He suggested an inspired compromise.
Cornelius would remain on at school until real work could be found for him.
But during this period, in order that the school's reputation remain intact, he should be taken on in some capacity and paid a salary, that of a youth employment officer's assistant, for example.
Mr Yarrow agreed willingly.
But a month had passed since then.
A month which had seen less and less of Cornelius Murphy.
Today, however, was Murphy's fourth payday.
Mr Yarrow was determined that it should be his last.
The door opened and Cornelius Murphy was propelled into the science room.
‘Sit down.’
Mr Yarrow did not look up from his papers.
Cornelius chose a seat by the door.
‘Over here.’
A nicotined finger indicated the chair before the desk.
Cornelius shambled over and sat down noisily.
He smiled at Mr Yarrow.
Mr Yarrow did not smile back.
Three feet of desk top separated them.
And about twelve million miles.
Mr Yarrow made a purposeful face and turned foolscap pages before him.
It was a slow and deliberate process.
There was no sense of urgency about it.
Cornelius studied the youth employment officer.
He observed that his ears, made almost transparent by the sunlight, closely resembled a pair of human embryos.
That the dandruff flecks on his left shoulder formed the configuration of Ursa Major.
That the rich orange hue of the nicotined finger matched that obtained by the French painter Saint-Martin, who used ground fragments from the heart of Louis XIV to achieve the effect.
That a bead of perspiration above Mr Yarrow's left eyebrow contained a microcosm of the visible universe.
Mr Yarrow continued to turn papers.
At intervals he looked up at Cornelius and shook his head doubtfully.
Cornelius found the habit mildly annoying, but as he prided himself that he could get through any interview with Mr Yarrow without uttering a single word, he refrained from comment.
At very great length Mr Yarrow leaned back in his chair, sighed deeply and gazed upon Cornelius Murphy.
‘This is a fine pickle,’ he said.
Cornelius nodded thoughtfully.
A fine pickle and no mistake, he supposed.
‘Do you know what I think when I see a lad like you?’
Cornelius shook his head.
He didn't know.
Neither did he care.
‘I think, There but for the grace of God go I.’
Cornelius smiled warmly and rose to go with God's grace.
‘Sit down!’
Cornelius sat down.
‘I think,’ Mr Yarrow continued, squeezing his left earlobe and inflicting brain damage upon a metaphysical foetus, ‘I think, What can I do for this graceless lad?’
Cornelius yawned.
‘Sit up straight, lad.’
Cornelius made a vain attempt to do so.
His hair made an unscheduled portside call.
He forced it back to the starboard bow.
‘Your school reports.’
Mr Yarrow prodded the offenders.
‘A tale of woe.
Constant absenteeism.
No team activities.
Poor exam results.
Chances thrown away.
Advice ignored.
No attempts made to knuckle down and smarten up.
Have you filled in the application form I gave you?’
Cornelius recalled the form.
It had become a paper dart.
There had been mention of ‘machine minding’ on that form.
And machine minding's star did not burn brightly in the Murphy firmament.
‘You've lost it, I suppose.’
Cornelius nodded.
‘Speak up.’
Cornelius nodded louder.
‘How many interviews have I sent you to?’
Cornelius counted silently upon his fingers.
‘Seven, that's how many.’
Cornelius thought seven seemed about right.
He wasn't going to quibble.
Mr Yarrow read the list to himself.
Mechanic, Merchant Seaman, Minicab Driver, Monumental Mason, Motor Cycle Messenger, Marriage Counsellor, Male Model.
Any one of these was surely right up Murphy's street.
What was the matter with the boy?
Didn't he want to be helped?
Mr Yarrow shook his head.
He'd never known a boy to fail seven interviews.
But curiously, as he perused once more the reasons given for Murphy's rejection, they hardly seemed to be the tall boy's fault.
He had been considered ‘too well spoken’ to be a minicab driver.
‘Too sophisticated’ to be a marriage counsellor.
‘Too rugged’ to be a male model, yet ‘too delicate’to be a mechanic.
And so on and so forth.
‘I don't get it.’
Mr Yarrow shook his head once more.
‘I send you along to seven interviews.
Clearly you do your best, the interviewers call me, praising you as an excellent chap.
But then they abjectly apologize that due to some ludicrous technicality, they cannot employ you.
How can anyone be ‘too tall’ to be a monumental mason?’
Cornelius shrugged.
Something to do with the average height of tombstones, he supposed.
'I just don't get it,’ Mr Yarrow went on.
‘Your school work is appalling, yet you shine at interviews.
You shine at interviews, yet no-one is willing to employ you.
It's a fine pickle and no mistake about it.’
Inwardly Cornelius agreed that it probably was.
Mr Yarrow tugged a long card-index box across the desk and set about it with a bespittled finger.
Cornelius observed that the wooden bobbin dangling on a string from the window blind was the shape of an acorn.
A relic of the belief that the oak, the sacred tree of the Thunder God, could protect you from lightning.
‘Aha!’
Mr Yarrow plucked a card from the box and waved it in the air.
‘Gotcha!’
He smiled at Cornelius.
Cornelius found the experience unsettling.
'I have it.
Just the ticket.’
His eyes narrowed upon Murphy.
‘Do you know what I have here?’
Cornelius shook his head.
‘Are you sure?’
Cornelius nodded.
Mr Yarrow chuckled.
‘Are you sure you're sure?’
Cornelius nodded again.
Mr Yarrow chuckled again.
‘Sure you're sure you're sure?’
Cornelius scratched his head inciting further wavy rebellions.
‘Perfect, perfect.’
The youth employment officer took a form from a folder.
Filled it in with his fountain pen.
Blotted it.
Folded it into an envelope.
Sealed this.
Printed a name and address thereupon in big black capitals.
Blotted this and handed the whole to Cornelius Murphy.
‘There,’ he said.
‘Now be careful not to lose it.
Go straight to the address and ask for Monsieur Messidor.
And just be yourself.
Do you understand?
Don't try too hard.
Just be yourself.’
Cornelius looked bemused.
‘Perfect,’ crowed Mr Yarrow.
‘That's the stuff.
Off you go now.
I'll phone to say that you're on your way.’
Cornelius rose to his feet, knocking over his chair.
Normally this was met with a stony stare.
But not this time.
This time Mr Yarrow roared with laughter and said ‘perfect’ once again.
Cornelius paused a moment to extend his right hand.
Mr Yarrow paused a moment before placing a wage packet into it.
Cornelius nodded his thanks.
Mr Yarrow clapped his hands together.
By the time Cornelius had reached the door, the youth employment officer was already tidying his desk.
And by the time Cornelius had left the playground and taken to the street, his feet were up and the cigarettes were out.
The sun shone in at the science-room window.
Outside, on the coke heap, a retired tom-cat dreamed about Clara Bow.
The ashbowl was full and the fag packet empty when the telephone finally rang.
Monsieur Messidor spoke in a thick French accent.
He had never met such a boy, he enthused.
A boy whose future celebrity was assured by his sparkling personality, combined with a fearsome intellect.
He could not thank Mr Yarrow enough for having introduced him.
It would be a guerdon, second only to receiving the Legion d'honneur, to take and train this talented boy.
Mr Yarrow breathed a great and heartfelt sigh of relief.
‘At last!’
‘But alas,’ continued the voice of Monsieur M, ‘regretfully Master Murphy is ‘too well endowed’to be a MIME ARTISTE.’
Mr Yarrow buried his face in his hands and began to weep.
In a nearby telephone box Cornelius Murphy gently replaced the receiver.
Much as he had done seven times before.
Eight, if you counted the famous eleventh-hour summit.
‘The world awaits,’ said Mr Murphy the Mimic.
And so it did.
2
During the summer of 1967, Hugo Rune gave a series of lectures at The Rondo Hatton Memorial Hall in Brentford, West London.
These were all recorded on film, but sadly the present whereabouts of this historic footage is unknown.
Transcripts of the lectures still remain, however, and these serve as fascinating documents.
Demonstrating, as they do, not only Rune's undoubted genius, but his astonishing charisma and unfailing ability to hold an audience spellbound.
TRANSCRIPT FROM THE HUGO RUNE LECTURES.
LECTURE SEVEN.
UNIVERSAL TRUTHS: You want ‘em.
I got ‘em.
Rune enters the crowded hall more than an hour late.
He is carried slowly down the centre aisle upon a cushioned palanquin, borne upon the naked shoulders of four local May Queens.
The acolyte Rizla walks before, swinging a lighted censer.
The applause is deafening.
The palanquin is laid down before the stage.
Rune is lifted carefully from it and placed upon a mound of plumped cushions.
The crowd chants, ‘Hu-go Hu-go.’
After a five-minute standing ovation, Rune, who appears to have been asleep throughout, raises a hand to still the multitude.
The hall falls silent.
The acolyte Rizla clears his throat to deliver the lecture.
Rune snores gently.
Peoples of the world.
These are the words of Hugo Rune, delivered through the mouth of my amanuensis Rizla.
Upon this day I bestow my wisdom upon you.
That you might become as 1.
So be it.
Let it be said.
Let me begin by explaining the universe.
The universe is a very quiet, very still, light and airy kind of a place.
And in order to understand it and one's place in it, one must be as the universe.
(Much nodding of heads.)
We have all endured for far too long, the blatherings of scientific greybeards regarding ‘The Expanding Universe’.
According to these learned fellows, the universe began with a violent explosion.
A Big Bang.
Exactly who, or what, triggered this Titanic blast, or what exactly was going on half an hour before it went off, we are not told.
(Laughter.)
But such matters do not concern friend greybeard.
He has made up his mind that there was a Big Bang and that is that.
And further he asserts, not only is the universe expanding, due to being flung in all directions by this genetic detonation, but that space itself is also expanding.
(Wild laughter, hoots of derision.)
And do you know what I say to friend greybeard?
I say, Tish and Tosh, and old wet fish!
(Applause.
Cries of, ‘Bravo’.)
I say this.
If space is expanding, then atoms and molecules, which contain space, must therefore be expanding also.
Because if they didn't, then all solid matter would simply turn to vapour.
And if everything is expanding, at the same time, then relatively speaking it must remain the same size.
As there is nothing to judge the degree of its expansion against.
(Applause.)
Therefore the cosmos must be considered in a state of perpetual stasis.
The same as it has always been.
For ever and ever.
The universe is going nowhere.
It is standing still!
(Thunderous applause.
Cries of, ‘Nice one, Hugo,’ and, ‘Well spotted, that man.’)
And standing still brings me to sitting still, which, the more  observant amongst you will probably have noticed, I am doing now.
Because: In order to be at one with the Static Cosmos, one must achieve a state of supreme stillness.
This state is known as Apathy.
(Gasps.)
The word APATHY derives from the Atlantean.
A-PATH-Y.
A meaning A. PATH meaning path.
And Y being an abbreviation of WHY.
Quite literally A PATH TO THE MEANING WHY.
But it is a hard path to follow.
And few are there with courage enough to try.
The Apathe, i.e., ‘seeker after truth’, must maintain a strict regimen.
He must discipline himself to rigorously avoid any form of activity, be this mental or physical.
He must be prepared to sit, for years if needs be, until he is in tune and receives enlightenment.
Others must selflessly administer to his needs.
(Murmurs of disapproval from female members of the audience.
Male cries of, ‘Ssssh.’)
The Apathé must guard against laziness.
Laziness is a vile and shallow thing, practised by wicked individuals who refuse to administer to the needs of the Apathé.
Come down hard on laziness.
If detected in a wife or mother, the employment of a stout stick generally has the desired effect.
(Cries of, ‘Shame!’ from members of The Chiswick Townswomen's Guild.
Catcalls from the balcony.)
For one man to achieve the supreme state of Cosmic Consciousness, a state of absolute serenity, perfect peace and harmony, boundless knowledge and universal understanding, should this require the application of a thousand stout sticks, I would consider it a small price to pay.
(Screams of, ‘String him up!’
A woman's shoe is thrown.)
For such a man all things would be possible.
Having reached the state of at-oneness with the universe, his wisdom would be utterly profound, his word divine law, his authority unassailable.
So what if it calls for the stout-sticking of some idle spouse?
(Townswomen's Guild members storm the stage.
Fights break out.
The acolyte Rizla is struck down by a handbag.)
TRANSCRIPT ENDS
Invisible lines form the network of our existence.
We move along them continually.
Between home and school.
Home and workplace.
Home and social abode.
And here and there and wherever.
Some of us weave small tight webs.
Others span the world.
What it all means is anyone's guess.
Cornelius strolled along an invisible line which linked the secondary school with The Wife's Legs Cafe.
It had become, of late, a quite well-trodden little line.
The Wife's Legs Cafe served a moderate spread at an affordable price and had an obvious attraction to recommend it.
It had become the regular haunt of hearty working men with fearsome bottom cleavage, who shared an appreciation of small newspapers with big headlines, a moderate spread at an affordable price and a well-turned ankle.
In fact it had become such a moneyspinner that the proprietor, Mr Ridout the Restaurateur, had opened a small chain of similar eateries.
These included The Sister's Legs, The Sister-in-law's Legs and The Mother's Legs (a meals-on-wheels service).
Sadly this expanding empire had fallen when he foolishly overstepped the boundary of good taste and opened The Girlfriend's Legs to a waiting world.
He hadn't come out of the divorce too well.
Cornelius found much to observe in the cafe.
He had his own special seat by the window.
The ex-wife, who had taken quite a shine to him, kept it reserved.
When he returned to it from the telephone box outside, it was unoccupied.
Cornelius ordered another bacon sandwich and a cup of tea.
‘Coming right up, precious,’ crooned the wonderful woman.
Cornelius observed that a beauty spot on her right thigh resembled the Isle of Lyonesse.
He wiped a peephole from the condensation on the window and viewed the world beyond.
Something momentous was bound to happen soon.
He just knew it.
The cafe door groaned open and Tuppe waddled in.
He was carrying a brown paper bag.
Now Tuppe was squat.
Even in the company of small people he was considered diminutive.
Dwarves gazed upon Tuppe and asked, ‘Who is the short bloke?’
Tuppe turned a fair coin impersonating babies for TV commercials, but his mind was ever upon higher things.
Tuppe knew himself to be the stuff of epics.
He was Cornelius Murphy's closest friend.
Spying out  the unevenly crossed legs, he steered his tiny shoe towards Murphy's table.
The ex-wife, bearing the tall boy's second breakfast, stepped over him, scooped up a stool and tucked it in beside Cornelius.
Cornelius helped his companion on to it.
‘Good-day, Tuppe,’ said he.
‘Good-day, Cornelius,’ the other replied.
‘Is that bacon within?’
Cornelius proffered his plate.
'It is.
Eat your fill.’
Tuppe took advantage of his friend's largesse.
‘A cup that cheers would not go amiss,’ he remarked.
Cornelius ordered another tea.
‘I can promise no applause.’
‘Always the wag.’
Tuppe tucked into his brekky.
‘Might I enquire as to the contents of the enigmatic sack?’
Cornelius indicated the bag on the table top.
‘A hibemating fish.
Held under test conditions.’
Cornelius steered the conversation towards another port of call.
He had no love for fish.
‘The loon Yarrow made another attempt to have me employed today.’
‘A pox upon Yarrow and all his works.’
Tuppe strained a bacon rind through the gap in his front teeth.
‘You drew your salary of course?’
‘Of course.’
‘Then peace be unto you.’
Tuppe munched on.
Cornelius sipped his tea.
Tuppe's arrived and he did likewise.
‘Fab legs, the ex-wife,’ he remarked.
‘All the way up.’
Cornelius raised an eyebrow.
‘Sorry-pardon.
But you know how it is.’
Cornelius did.
The two understood each other.
Completely.
After a while Tuppe asked, ‘How is the daddy?’
‘Taken to his shed.’
‘And the mother?’
‘Under doctor's orders.’
‘And what of yourself?’
‘Sound in wind and limb.
But having an itch I am unable to scratch.’
‘The stuff of epics business?
I feel it also.’
‘I know that you do.’
‘I think,’ Tuppe pulled a converted shirt tail from his trouser pocket  and dabbed his mouth with it, ‘that we had best finish up here and apply ourselves to adventures elsewhere.’
And so they did.
Above and beyond the secondary school and The Wife's Legs Cafe loomed Star Hill.
Filling a substantial amount of skyline and covering six full squares of the Ordnance Survey map.
Star Hill was common land.
And so its lower acres were given over to recreational pursuits.
Footballs were kicked here, picnics and sports days held.
Litter spread.
The wooded middle ground was reserved for track biking, bird nesting and youthful fornication.
Here the men in the macs played hide and seek with the plain-clothed policewomen.
The peak, some three hundred feet above sea level, according to the bench mark, had a certain magic about it.
The local Wiccans came up here on warm nights to dance around in their bare scuddies.
Foxes fiddled in the thickets.
Rare orchids bloomed unseen and the wind came always from the east.
A concrete plinth, erected by the town council in 1935, marked the spot where the earthly remains of the Reverend Matthew Kemp had been interred exactly three hundred years before.
The Rev. had obtained the permission of the Archbishop of Canterbury to have himself buried there, at the highest point in the district, standing on his head.
His reasoning being that when the clarion call is sounded on Resurrection Day and the whole world is turned upside down, he would be the first one out and standing on his feet.
The concrete plinth was surmounted by an engraved copper map of the district.
Radiating spokes informed prospect-viewers of the distances and directions to such exotic destinations as Nepal, Tasmania, the Nile Delta, Portugal and Penge.
The copper map had evidently been fastened to the concrete plinth through the medium of some nineteen-thirties metallurgical technology which is sadly lost to us today, because it ruggedly defied even the most enterprising attempts to prise it free and bear it off to the smelting pot.
The concrete plinth exhibited similar stoicism, having withstood the best that several generations of secondary schoolboys could formulate and explode against it.
Both plinth and map remained inviolate.
Irreverent humorists chuckled in anticipation of the Reverend Kemp's unecclesiastical language when the clarion call was sounded and he tried to dig his way out.
Cornelius and Tuppe strolled up Star Hill.
The invisible lines, which traced the patterns of their existence, merged into one.
Became a geodesic spiral engirdling the hill.
Terminated at the plinth and were never mentioned again.
Tuppe had travelled the latter part of the journey on the tall boy's shoulders.
Cornelius lifted him down and set him upon the copper map.
The burnished copper shone bravely, having only the previous night survived unscathed a particularly concerted attack upon its person.
In a nearby bush a defunct oxyacetylene cutter attracted the attention of a passing stoat.
The young men of epic stuff took the air.
Cornelius worried at his top knot and Tuppe kicked his tiny bootheels against the plinth and patted his brown paper bag.
The world as they knew it was displayed around and about.
To the north, the Grand Union Canal drew the line before the industrial estate.
To the west, the commoners' fields met the highway where the buses turned around and the shops went on parade.
To the south lay a vast area of redevelopment, relieved only by the remains of a Victorian terrace.
Six houses, and one of these the Murphy residence.
To the east, well fenced and warning hung, a sheer drop of two hundred feet fell down to the golf course.
Whilst being of no particular interest right now, this cliff would, nevertheless, have an exciting part to play somewhat later.
‘How is the fish?’
Cornelius asked, for its proximity troubled him.
Tuppe peeped into the bag.
‘Ssssh,’ said he.
‘It's dead, that fish of yours, isn't it, Tuppe?’
Tuppe nodded.
‘By the look of it I would think so.’
‘Then what was all that talk of hibernation and test conditions?’
Tuppe winked.
'Did you ever hear tell of Polgar The Unprecedented?’
‘He of Polgar's Porcine Circus?’
' The very same.
My father worked the sideshow circuit with the man years back.
Polgar exhibited a number of star turns.
The  Singing Sheep of Sudbury.
Toby a Sapient Pig and The Extraordinary Exhibition of Industrious Fleas.
Apparently the latter was a thing of great wonder.
With trained insects reenacting the siege of Rorkes Drift to considerable effect.’
‘But he is best remembered for his Porcine Circus.’
‘Indeed.
He toured the rural communities with it.
The pigs were schooled to scale ladders, walk tightropes and perform feats of prestidigitation.
At each venue he inevitably sold at least one of the pigs to an eager farming type.’
‘That doesn't sound very practical.’
‘Oh it was.
The pigs were well trained.
And as Polgar left town he rang the dinner bell and the sold pig climbed out of the farmer's pen and returned to him.
It worked very well for a while.
But eventually it cost him a term at Her Majesty's pleasure.
By the time he got out, the performing pig had lost most of its charm for the paying customer.’
‘But what about the fish?’
‘Polgar's grandson is Peter Polgar.
He of Peter's Pets in the high street.’
'I know of it.’
‘And young Polgar is a gentleman of wild talent.
Much given to the creation of the chimera.’
‘I have passed his premises on many an occasion,’ said Cornelius.
‘Those beasts visible through the grimy window are all a shade too mythical for my particular taste.’
‘Quite so and your reference to the window gives you the measure of the man.’
‘He is careful with his pennies?’
‘He is a tight-fisted bas —’
‘Quite so.’
‘And this fish in a bag is his latest accomplishment.
An ungodly hybrid of squirrel and trout.
His intention is the cuddly fish that feeds on acorns and sleeps through the winter when nobody wants to go outside and look in their fishpond anyway.’
‘He is certainly a sharp one, this Polgar.
But I do detect a slight flaw or two in his reasoning.’
‘You do?’
‘I do.
For one thing, this is now high summer and not the hibernation season.’
'I did mention this to him.
But he said he'd pay me a fiver if I took  the fish out for a bit of fresh air in the hope that it might drop off to sleep.
Fish never sleep, you see, so if this one does, then that's half the battle won as far as friend Polgar is concerned.’
‘Which does rather bring me to flaw number two.
Did you care to touch upon the fact that fish rarely flourish once they are removed from water?’
‘No.
I preferred to accept the fiver.’
‘I would have done the same.
Shall we bury the fish then?’
‘What here?
Hardly sporting to the Reverend Kemp.’
Tuppe emptied the unnatural issue into his lap.
Cornelius viewed it with distaste.
‘Are those little feet?’ he asked.
‘Seems like.
And it has really horrid teeth.
Do you want to see?’
‘No thank you.’
‘As you please.’
Tuppe took the furry fish by its tail and sniffed it.
‘Would there be good eating in a fish like this, do you suppose?’
Cornelius held down his hair and shook his head.
‘Not in the squirrel parts.
Toss the thing away, Tuppe.
I have no love for fish, furred, feathered, fried or farmed.’
‘So be it.
Sorry, little fishy.’
Tuppe flung the aquatic anomaly over his shoulder, wiped his fingers on the paper bag and clambered to his feet on the copper map.
Cornelius put his arm around his friend's shoulder and the two gazed off towards the lands of the east, wondering once more what the fates held in store for them.
The sun cast their shadows behind them.
And here occurred a curiosity.
For although the two stood with their heads for once on a level pegging, the size of their shadows differed to no small degree.
That of Cornelius was its usual angular self topped off with a twirling banner.
But the shadow of Tuppe extended to nearly double the length of his companion's.
And even though the little fellow stood stock still, his shadow heaved and twisted as some living creature writhing in unimaginable torment.
And all the birds that saw it stopped singing upon the instant.
And the short hairs rose upon the neck of Cornelius Murphy and he felt suddenly afraid.
Cornelius turned with a jerk, nearly dislodging Tuppe from his precarious perch.
But there was nothing for him to see.
‘Oh ow,’ cried Tuppe, struggling to keep his balance.
‘What is happening?’
‘I don't know.’
Cornelius scratched at his chin.
It was going to need a shave in a month or two.
‘The birds…’
He put a hand to his ear.
The birds were singing once again.
Cornelius shivered, ‘Let's go down, it's turning cold.’
‘Cold?
Cornelius?’
Tuppe shinned down from the plinth.
The tall boy turned away and began to pace away down the hill.
‘Cornelius, wait for me.’
Tuppe limped off in hot pursuit.
In the long grass, where Tuppe's shadow had performed its curious gyrations, the furry fish awoke from its nap, snapped its horrid teeth and crept away in search of four-legged lunch.
3
Cornelius and Tuppe came down from the hill.
At the place where the buses turn around they parted company.
Tuppe returned to Peter's Pets, composing as he did an improbable yarn about animal rights activists and the forcible abduction of a furry fish, into a more than plausible truth.
And one which would demand compensation.
Cornelius stopped off at the telephone box to call Mr Yarrow at his home.
He spoke once more in the voice of Murphy Senior.
‘My son is heartbroken,’ he told the youth employment officer.
‘He so wanted that job as a mime artiste.
He is terribly distraught.’
‘I'm so sorry,’ replied the Yarrow, who most certainly was.
‘But be assured of this.
I will not rest until I have secured honest employment for your son.’
Cornelius feared that this would more than likely be the case.
He felt that he had seen more than enough of Mr Yarrow.
'I am sending the boy away,’ he continued.
‘A couple of weeks’ rest, that's what he needs.
Kindly have ten days' holiday money sent on.’
‘Do what?’
‘I am holding you directly responsible for the decline in his health.
The constant disappointments.
The building up and dashing down of his hopes.
He is in no fit state to attend further interviews at this time.’
‘I am sorry, but I can't sanction holiday money.’
‘Then I will speak to the headmaster directly.
We share the same lodge.
Have no fear, he will sort the matter out.’
There was a bit of a silence at Mr Yarrow's end of the line.
‘I hardly feel we need to trouble the head over such trifles.’
Mr  Yarrow's voice had that ‘lost soul’ quality about it.
‘Do you want the cheque made out for cash?’
‘That would be fine.
I'll speak to you soon then.’
‘Give Cornelius my best wishes and tell him I hope he gets well soon.’
‘I will.
Goodbye, Mr Yarrow.’
‘Goodbye, Mr Murphy.’
Cornelius replaced the receiver.
It was all too easy.
It gave him no pleasure.
But then the pointlessness of unemployment gave him no pleasure.
He was bursting with grand schemes.
Conning a few pounds from Mr Yarrow and walking the streets held little appeal.
Of course, he had no intention of becoming a nine-to-fiver.
He was the stuff of epics after all.
A young man of special gifts.
Capable of changing the world.
But the world wasn't half taking its time to find this out.
The dustbin men were picking up outside The Wife's Legs.
‘Morning, Cornelius,’ they called gaily.
‘Morning, dustbin men,’ the youth replied.
‘Don't forget to put your bin out today.’
‘I won't.’
The bins were already out by the time Cornelius reached home.
Home was number twenty-three Moby Dick Terrace.
And number twenty-three was now the first house in the street.
And number thirty-three the last.
But more of that later.
Cornelius lifted the lid from the bin which stood before his front door.
The bin was, as ever, empty.
A weekly tribute to the mother's skills in conservation and the recycling of the Murphy waste.
Whatever entered that house stayed there.
If it could not be consumed or made to serve a useful purpose, then it didn't get through the front door.
The mother was ecologically sound.
Her system was pretty straightforward.
She only purchased unpackaged products, which she bore home in her ancient shopping bag.
Fresh meat, fruit and veg.
Whatever could not be purchased unpackaged she manufactured herself.
Butter and jam and tea.
What else did you need?
The daddy's daily tabloid served as fire lighter and bottom wipe.
Junk mail was readdressed to the sender and despatched stampless.
Peelings fed the compost heap.
Discarded clothing went to good causes.
Nothing slipped through the net.
Nothing went into the dustbin.
At Christmas the dustbin men always knocked to give Mrs Murphy a box of chocolates and a bunch of flowers.
Cornelius never failed to be unimpressed by the mother's ingenuity.
He reasoned that at least half the population of the country was engaged in the production, marketing or disposal of totally useless articles.
And should everyone act like his mother, society would grind to a halt.
Cornelius envisaged massive unemployment, anarchy and chaos.
Pestilence and devastation would march across the land; and the four horsemen ride the sky.
And all those nice dustbin men would be out of a job.
Cornelius dug in his pockets.
He found the letter of introduction to Monsieur Messidor and tossed it into the dustbin.
He was doing his bit to save the world.
Cornelius turned his key in the lock and quietly entered the ancestral home.
He had not been altogether honest with the parents regarding the ‘job situation’ and considered it prudent to steal silently away to his room, rather than construct explanations for his early return from ‘work’.
As he made to sneak up the corridor to the stairs, the sounds of heated debate reached his ears, issuing from the front parlour.
Cornelius knelt and pressed an ear to the keyhole of the closed door.
‘And I still say the boy should be told,’ came the voice of the daddy.
‘And I say that he shouldn't,’ came the voice of the ecologically sound mama.
‘But the rare mutant strain in his make-up could save the world.’
‘A pension plan and prospects is all he needs.’
‘You are missing the point, woman.’
‘Don't call me woman.
You're the one wearing the wig.’
‘It's not a wig.
It's a hair-enhancement accessory.
And those aren't your own bosoms by the way.’
‘My bosoms play no part in this discussion.’
‘Nor does my bald spot.’
‘Your bald spot is indicative.’
‘Of what?’
‘Of your bald outlook on life.’
‘And who made it bald?
You with the socks stuffed up your front.’
‘They're matronly.
They project a warm and caring image.
The boy needs that.
And he needs a haircut also.’
‘He can't cut his hair.
It's big hair.
Famous people always have big hair.’
‘You don't.’
‘I'm not famous.’
‘I should never have married you.
My mother was right.’
‘You never had a mother.’
‘Of course I had a mother.
She was a pillar of the community.’
‘She was a figment of your imagination.
You never had a mother.
I never had a mother.
You know that.’
‘But what about the boy?’
‘He should be told.
‘We can't tell him.
We took the oath.
He must never be told.
He will find out for himself when the time is right.’
‘The stuff of epics,’ said the daddy.
‘About that…’
Cornelius swung open the parlour door without knocking and strode into the room.
The daddy was snoring noisily beneath the daily tabloid.
The mother was knitting something for seamen from coloured string.
‘About what, dear?’ she asked in a startled voice.
‘About…oh…’
‘You're home early.
Did you have a nice evening?’
‘Evening?’
The clock on the mantelpiece struck ten.
Cornelius noticed that the lights were on and the curtains drawn.
He glanced at his wristwatch.
It agreed with the clock.
The daddy stirred from beneath his newspaper.
‘What is it?’
‘It's Cornelius, dear.
What did you want, dear?’
‘I wanted to know…’
Cornelius could no longer remember what he wanted to know.
‘Yes, dear?’
‘Nothing, Mother.’
‘Then good night, dear.
And don't forget to put your light out.’
‘I won't.
Good night, Mother, Father.’
‘Good night.’
Cornelius Murphy awoke in a cold sweat.
It was very dark and a clock chimed three somewhere in the distance.
‘Where am I?’
Cornelius rubbed his eyes and squinted into the darkness.
The darkness seemed somehow unfamiliar.
‘What am I doing here?’
He felt around for the bedside table and the box of matches.
His hand found something warm and wet.
‘What's that?
That's not mine.’
‘What's going on?’
The voice was not his either.
‘Who's that?’
Another voice said dreamily, ‘Go back to sleep.’
‘Who said that?’
The first voice asked, ‘Who is there?’
Cornelius kept quiet.
I am not alone, he thought, where are my damn matches?
‘I haven't got them,’ said a new voice.
‘Go back to sleep, will
you.’
Cornelius began to feel the seeds of panic taking root in his stomach.
‘Help,’ cried he.
‘Let me out of here.’
‘What's going on?’ asked a voice Cornelius hadn't heard before.
The tall boy tried to rise, but something heavy was lying across his legs.
‘Who's doing that?’ asked a voice at his feet.
Cornelius wriggled free.
He stumbled across the room stepping on to grunting and squirming bodies.
‘Get off there.’
‘Who's kicking me?’
Oaths and shouts broke the temporary silences.
Cornelius found himself at a door.
He searched for the handle but found a light switch.
He pressed his thumb down hard upon
He was standing in his pyjamas in his bedroom, which was empty but for the usual furniture.
Cornelius blinked.
‘A dream.
A bad dream.’
He sighed deeply, switched off the light and returned to his bed.
‘Watch where you're walking,’ said a voice.
‘That's my face you're stepping on.’
Cornelius woke again to find the world up and waiting for him.
The sun shone in at his window.
The music of the everyday seemed louder than ever.
Milk bottles clinked in E sharp.
Women's heels played taps upon the pavement.
Heavy lorries did the big power chords and the postman whistled an old Rolling Stones number.
It had to be Tuesday.
Cornelius gathered his hair and his thoughts together.
Something very strange was going on.
Something very strange indeed.
An epic something perhaps?
He certainly hoped so.
Having assured himself that he was all alone, he climbed from his bed, entered his dressing-gown and took himself down to the kitchen for the first breakfast of the day.
The Murphy kitchen was not something to dwell on.
It was an uncompromising little den which, in keeping with the rest of the house, stoutly refused to make up for its lack of charm.
There were a couple of mismatched kitchen units, a butler's sink, an ancient gas oven of the enamel persuasion, a leaking radiator and an odd-legged table with a red formica top.
Behind the table sat a large three-piece tweed suit.
And inside the suit sat a large merry red-faced gentleman.
He sported a wig composed from shredded J-Cloths, a present from his wife.
His name was Jack Murphy and he was the daddy.
Jack had recently taken early retirement from the dole in order to spend more time with his family.
And to devote himself more fully to his hobby.
Jack's hobby was model making and he was currently engaged in a vast and ambitious project.
The construction of a model town.
At the end of the garden, in the shed of his own making, stood the fruit of his labour.
It was a Utopian vision of Moby Dick Terrace  and the surrounding area.
Crafted with loving care, and precisely detailed, the model displayed a delightful semi-rural community.
A harmonious blending of architectural styles, open spaces, shops and views and vistas.
It differed considerably from the big brash construction currently on display at the town hall, which stood beneath a sign which read
NEW TOWN DEVELOPMENT.
Of course the word NEW was now something of a misnomer.
The town hall's model was showing some signs of age and beginning to look a little dated.
Although work on the NEW DEVELOPMENT had begun several years before, with much champagne bottle breaking and blue ribbon cutting, nothing very much had happened since.
True the bulldozers had levelled the old town, but not a single foundation or main drain was, as yet, in place.
This came as a surprise to many.
But not those who knew Jack Murphy.
And the borough planning committee had come to know Jack Murphy very well indeed.
All works in progress had ceased due to complicated legal technicalities.
These centered around the discovery (by Jack Murphy) of numerous old charters, deeds, documents and papers pertaining to rights of way, common ground, bridle paths, wells, waterholes and Lord alone knows what else.
It was all going to take a good deal of sorting out.
And while it did, the diggers stood idle and the construction crews drank tea in The Wife's Legs.
And number twenty-three Moby Dick Terrace stayed exactly where it was.
Cornelius entered the kitchen, stubbing his toe on an upraised shard of lino and grazing his shin upon the door, which chose, this morning, to only open half of the way.
The daddy smiled up from his copy of MacKenzie's: Local Law and Lore 1655–1660.
‘Good-morning, revered author of my existence,’ said Cornelius.
The oldster chuckled.
‘Good — morning to you, respected seed of my loins.
Your mother's gone out, but there's tea in the pot.’
‘Glory be.’
Cornelius poured himself a cup and topped up the daddy's.
‘My thanks.
Two letters for you.’
A big hand indicated the pair of envelopes which lay on the unpolished table top.
Cornelius sat himself down and regarded the envelopes with suspicion.
One looked safe enough, bearing, as it did, Mr Yarrow's  distinctive scrawl.
Cornelius tucked this, unopened, into a dressing gown pocket.
Two weeks' holiday money, he assumed correctly.
The other envelope, however, was a different kettle of fish.
This one was big and smart and official looking.
It had the words PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL printed in the top left-hand comer.
The tall boy's name and address were typed on.
Dead centre.
Cornelius did not recognize the typeface.
It had a slightly Gothic look to it.
He picked up the envelope and gave it a bit of a shake.
Something hard inside went to and fro.
‘I did that,’ said the daddy.
‘Intriguing, isn't it?’
Cornelius replaced the envelope and sipped at his tea.
It was stone cold.
‘This tea is cold,’ he informed the daddy.
‘I thought as much.
The last cup was just the same.
Aren't you going to open your envelope?’
‘I think not.’
‘Let me do it then.’
‘Certainly not.
It says private and confidential.’
‘Only the envelope.’
The daddy finished his cold tea.
‘I much prefer this hot, you know.’
He waggled his cup at Cornelius.
‘Go on, open it up.’
‘Oh all right then.’
Cornelius picked up the envelope and tore it open.
Out fell a sheet of typed paper and a hard little something.
Cornelius picked up the something.
He had never seen a credit card, and indeed he was not looking at one now.
What he was looking at was something approximately the same size.
Cornelius turned it upon his palm.
It was fashioned from dark green plastic, wafer thin, yet of considerable weight.
A number of holes had been punched through it.
Cornelius observed that these corresponded in size to the diameter of a number thirteen knitting needle.
He turned his attention to the typed paper.
It was a letter.
It read
Dear Cornelius Murphy Arthur Kobold Publications are pleased to announce a vacancy for an ambitious and enterprising young person.
A.K.P. are currently engaged in an epic work and require the services of an independently minded school-leaver prepared to work without supervision at hours of his own choosing.
High remuneration, excellent prospects and an immediate cash  bonus await the successful applicant who will present himself at twelve noon today.
Good luck Arthur Kobold 
Cornelius read through the letter again and then whistled.
And then he glanced down at his watch.
And then he made a troubled face.
‘Why do you make a troubled face, oh son of mine?’ the daddy asked.
Cornelius handed him the letter.
The daddy read through it once.
Read through it twice.
Glanced up at the kitchen clock.
And then he too made a troubled face.
Cornelius observed that several strands of J-Cloth wig spelled out the words ‘There is no God but Allah’ in Arabic across the daddy's left temple.
‘It is nearly ten of the morning clock,’ said the elder Murphy.
‘And the letter has no address upon it,’ his son added.
‘Show me the little something.’
Cornelius passed the something to his father, who examined it with great interest.
‘What is it?’ he asked at length.
'It has more weight than seems natural.’
Cornelius retrieved both letter and card and set them down before him.
'It is clearly a test of initiative.
Locate the offices of Arthur Kobold Publications by twelve noon and win the big cash pay out.’
‘Bravo, son.
Please continue.’
‘Well.’
Cornelius scratched at his head.
The daddy watched the big hair bob perilously.
‘The card has a number of holes in it.
My guess would be that if you were to place it over the letter and shuffle it about a bit, some sort of pattern might well emerge.
Considering the limited time allowed, I doubt that a code, if such there should prove to be, would take too much cracking.
Especially for someone ambitious, enterprising, young and independently minded.’
‘Someone such as yourself, for example.’
‘Precisely.
Of course the secret might lie in the card alone.’
‘Bravo once more.
And so how will you deal with it?’
Cornelius smiled.
' In this fashion.
I shall put the letter, the envelope and the little punctured card straight into the dustbin, wash, dress and repair to The Wife's Legs for a hot cup of tea.’
‘Bravo once more,’ chuckled the daddy.
‘Exactly what I would  have done.
Put it in next door's bin though, don't want to upset your mother.’
‘Of course.’
Cornelius rose to take his leave.
‘Just one thing before you go.’
The daddy displayed another sheet of paper and handed it to him.
‘A list of modelling supplies,’ he explained.
‘Balsa, glue, brass shimmings, things of that nature.’
‘Oh yes?’
Cornelius raised an eyebrow.
‘Oh yes.
I thought you might care to treat me.’
‘You did?’
‘Out of your ‘holiday money’.’
The daddy winked.
Cornelius smiled more broadly than ever.
‘My pleasure,’ he said.
Cornelius bathed, togged up in a faded Hawaiian shirt and his favourite (only) summer suit.
Slid his unsocked feet into a pair of canvas loafers and set out to test a certain hypothesis.
He breakfasted at The Wife's Legs.
Cashed his cheque at the High Street bank.
Left the daddy's list with Mr Moore (of Moore's Models) and then went off for a bit of a stroll around.
He passed the time of day with Two Coats the tramp.
Waved to some strangers on a coach.
Stroked a tom-cat under the chin and watched a steam train go under a bridge.
His strolling took no fixed route.
On the contrary, he wandered where the spirit lead him.
As the town hall clock struck twelve he found himself in an untidy cul-de-sac beneath the railway arches.
And as the final chime rang out, before a dark green door.
Cornelius stepped sharply up and rapped upon it with his knuckle.
The door flew open and a small whiskered face peeped up at him.
‘Mr Kobold?’
Cornelius asked.
‘Mr Arthur Kobold?’
‘Cornelius Murphy,’ said Arthur Kobold.
‘I have been expecting 
5
Please be seated.’
Cornelius found himself in the uncluttered office of Mister Arthur Kobold.
It was furnished in a style which was new to the tall boy.
The furniture was of antique design and superior craftsmanship, yet appeared fresh from the showroom.
Reproduction then?
Cornelius thought not.
There was more the feeling of a museum about the place.
as if the office, its panelled walls and rich dark furnishings had been preserved from the rigours of time.
As had Mr Kobold.
He was dressed in a Victorian morning suit, high starched collar, watered-silk cravat.
A diamond tie pin glittered at his throat.
He was short and rotund, his face was broad and flat, his hair a high dark ruff.
His side whiskers were magnificent.
Cornelius seated himself in an exquisite chair before a mahogany partners' desk.
Mr Kobold seated himself behind it.
He plucked at the fob chain on his waistcoat and produced a ring of tiny brass keys.
With one of these he unlocked an ornately decorated tantalus.
‘I think this calls for a small port,’ he said merrily as he decanted rich red liquid into a pair of minuscule glasses.
‘Here you are.’
Mr Kobold passed a glass to Cornelius who raised it in salute.
‘To success,’ said Arthur Kobold.
‘To success.’
Cornelius raised his glass but did not drink from it.
‘About the cash bonus?’ he asked.
‘All in good time.’
Arthur Kobold delved into a desk drawer and produced an enormous fruit cake.
‘Would you care for a slice of this?’
‘It looks a magnificent cake, but I've just eaten.’
‘As you will.’
Arthur Kobold cut himself a generous wedge and thrust the better part of it into his mouth.
‘Have any trouble getting here?’ he enquired between munchings.
‘Apparently not.’
Cornelius had noted that famous men and women generally claimed to have fallen into their famous careers through sheer chance.
They just happened to be in the right place at the right time.
Whether this was simply false modesty on their part, or something of a more cosmic nature, Cornelius had always been eager to discover.
And so here he was.
‘Well, here I am,’ said Cornelius.
‘Indeed you are.
And you're the man for me.
Would you like to know all about the job?’
‘I would prefer first to accept the cash bonus.’
‘Have you ever heard of Hugo Rune?’
Mr Kobold brushed cakey fragments from his side whiskers.
Cornelius held his hair and nodded.
‘A local man by all accounts.
Wasn't he burned in effigy by the women of Chiswick?’
‘That's the fellow.’
‘My father has one of his books.’
‘Which one?’
Mr Kobold dug into the cake once more.
‘The Book of Ultimate Truths.
I have not read it as yet.’
‘Then you should.
Carry it with you at all times from now on.’
‘Well.
I'm reading my way through all the daddy's books.
But that one is still many shelves away.
Lodged, if I rightly recall, between volumes eighty-nine and ninety of Local County Bylaws Through The Ages.
The daddy has a great interest in that kind of thing.’
‘Well, be that as it may.
My company is seeking to republish Rune's work.
But in its entirety.
Rune was a man of erudite learning.
A genius and visionary.
The Book of Ultimate Truths was his masterwork.
But when it was published, years after his death, it was incomplete.
Whole sections had been removed.’
‘And you are seeking to recover this lost material?’
‘Exactly.
More port?’
‘I haven't finished this one yet.’
‘No you haven't.
Drink up.’
Cornelius moved the glass towards his lips.
‘And where do you suppose this lost material to be?
Have you contacted the original publishers?’
‘Good boy.’
Mr Kobold sucked his fingers.
‘Long ago gone into liquidation.
No trace.
But possibly here.’
He dug a wad of papers from another drawer and passe them across the desk to Cornelius.
'There is an auction sale tomorrow.
Amongst the lots are the personal effects of the late Victor Zenobia.’
‘Zenobia?’
Cornelius asked.
‘Wasn't she the third-century queen of Palmyra, who was captured by the Roman emperor Aurelian?’
‘That's the one.
But this Victor Zenobia was one of Rune's former acolytes.
He was Rune's secretary.
And so, amongst his personal effects are a number of papers.
They may be those that I seek, they may be not.
They may, however, furnish some clues.
I have also a list of names.
People I should like traced.
Someone has the missing papers.
Of this I am certain.’
Cornelius was currently working his way through the seedy section of the daddy's library.
He was at present enjoying Bodies On The Backlot.
A Lazlo Woodbine thriller.
‘What you need is a private detective,’ said Cornelius Murphy.
‘In as many words, or fewer, yes.’
Arthur Kobold smiled.
‘You've cake in your teeth,’ said Cornelius.
‘Might I see your list?’
Kobold dug it out and passed it over.
So much paper passing to and fro in a single day, thought the tall boy.
He examined the list.
There were five names.
Victor Zenobia's was right at the top.
It had a tick against it.
‘And the whereabouts of the other four are unknown?’
‘Unknown.
I spotted Victor's name in an obituary column.
I phoned the paper and learned about the auction.
Sheer chance.’
Sheer chance, thought Cornelius.
‘And where is the auction to be held?’
‘Edinburgh.
Tomorrow at 1 p.m.’
‘Edinburgh?’
Cornelius liked the sound of that.
‘All your expenses will be paid.
First-class travel and accommodation.’
Cornelius liked the sound of that also.
‘More port?’ asked Arthur Kobold.
‘No thank you.’
Cornelius laid down the unsipped glass.
‘I should  be happy to accept the position.
I will need an advance, however.
I am currently without funds.’
‘The cash bonus is five hundred pounds.’
Arthur Kobold rammed the last of the fruit cake into his mouth.
‘You really should try this.’
‘I think you've finished it.’
‘Oh yes, indeed.
Well.
Go to Edinburgh.
Purchase the effects of the late Victor Zenobia.
Report your findings to me.
Follow up whatever clues you can glean.
Open a bank account for yourself.
Phone in your expenses.
They will be covered without question.’
‘Without question?’
‘Naturally.
I am employing you because I believe you will do a first-class job.
If I provide you with second-class expenses you would be justified in cheating me.
If I offer you first-class treatment, what possible reason would you have to play me false?’
‘None whatever, but for basic dishonesty.’
‘And do you consider yourself basically dishonest?’
‘No.
In all honesty, I do not.’
' Neither do 1.
Then we have a deal.
Just one more thing you should know.
Time is of the essence.
I am not the only one searching for these papers, there is a rival publisher.
The stakes, as they say, are high.
If you are successful there will be much work for you in the future.’
‘Have no fear.
If the papers exist, I will find them.’
‘I am quite certain that you will.
Now, here is five hundred pounds to get you started.
Shall we say a weekly wage of five hundred also?’
‘That seems good enough to me.’
Cornelius Murphy grinned from ear to ear.
6
Cornelius returned home via Moore's Models.
The daddy had, no doubt through some oversight, neglected to mention the matter of his long overdue account with Mr Moore and the tall boy was forced to pay this before the shopkeeper would part with the goods.
‘Charge all future bills directly to me,’ Cornelius said with a smile.
The Moore came over all giddy at this and had to have a sit down.
Once back at Moby Dick Terrace, Cornelius explained matters to the parents.
Borrowed The Book of Ultimate Truths.
Had his bags packed for him, and took his leave.
He bade his farewells to Tuppe at The Wife's Legs.
His pleas to Mr Kobold for an assistant, even one paid for at his own expense, had fallen upon deaf ears.
Mr Kobold was adamant.
Cornelius must go it alone.
‘And so it is farewell, I'm afraid,’ he told the short person.
‘Send me a postcard then.’
Tuppe raised his teacup in both hands.
‘And if you could see your way clear to buy me one of those little Scottish drummer-girl dolls in the transparent plastic cartons.’
Cornelius put a thumb up.
‘Then you'd probably see your way clear to getting me a bottle of Scotch instead.’
‘I'll buy you a case.’
‘My thanks.
I see that you're all packed up.’
Tuppe indicated the suitcase and rucksack beneath the table.
‘I have to start right away.
Catch the train tonight.’
‘So what's in the rucksack?’
‘Winter woollies, a thermos of coffee and a pack of the daddy's  ex-T.A. field rations.
The parents would not let me leave home without them.’
‘Very wise.
And you'd best go to the toilet before you leave.
You don't want to get caught short.’
Tuppe grinned foolishly.
‘Too true.’
When Cornelius returned from the gents, Tuppe was nowhere to be seen.
At precisely the stroke of six the mighty Leviathan Class locomotive, gushing steam and panting dramatically, left King's Cross Station behind and set off for Scotland.
In the first-class dining-car Cornelius Murphy spooned Brown Windsor into his mouth and leafed through The Book of Ultimate Truths.
He folded back a page at random and read the chapter heading.
WONDERS OF THE ANIMAL KINGDOM
And what lay beneath it.
Throughout history many ‘learned’ men have studied the animal kingdom and spoiled countless reams of perfectly good paper with their observations.
Pliny the Elder was a great man for this kind of thing.
In his
Natural History, first published in AD77, he devotes a chapter to the humble goldfish.
Here are his ‘Seven Wondros Verities’ on the subject.
1.
The goldfish is the only creature which does not displace its own weight in water.
2.
In order to survive, the goldfish must consume at least four times its body weight every hour.
3.
Under a new moon a goldfish always points due north.
(Marco Polo is known to have carried a number of goldfish with him in case his lodestone ever broke down.
H.R.)
4.
In Upper Sumatra goldfish are used as currency.
5.
In Egypt goldfish skins are used as condoms.
6.
Powdered goldfish is a popular aphrodisiac.
7.
The goldfish is the rarely used thirteenth sign of the zodiac.
Well, we've certainly come a long way since Pliny's day.
Goldfish skins are now in common use as condoms the whole world over.
But do we really know any more about the animal kingdom now than Pliny thought he knew then?
I wonder.
Take, for example, the phenomenom of ‘fish falls’.
Rains of tiny fish cascading down on the planet.
Observed by many, disbelieved by most, understood by none.
And what about hedgehog falls?
So much solid evidence and no research carried out whatever.
Take a drive in the country during the hedgehog season and you will see the remains of thousands of them splattered across the roads.
And observe just how flat they are.
They must have fallen from a very great height to end up like that!
The popular ‘explanation’ for these pitiful remains is that the hedgehogs have been run over by motor cars.
Oh dear, oh dear.
It is quite clear to me that the hedgehog, or hedge-hopping hog, as it was originally known, is a dweller of the upper atmosphere.
It feeds upon flying insects and the tiny fish that inhabit the Aquasphere.
The Aquasphere, as all who have read my monograph Noah's Flood: Where all that water actually came from will know, is the mile-thick outer layer of water which prevents our atmosphere from drifting away into space.
Hedgehogs, which fish in this region, float about up there, remaining aloft due to the inflated sacs of natural methane which surround their bodies.
When they die, often due to punctures received during the rutting season, they deflate and plunge down to earth, exploding as they strike the Tarmac.
The fact that you never see a flat hedgehog upon a soft grassy field, bears this out and proves my point somewhat conclusively, I so believe.
Another case of popular explanation falling well wide of the mark is that of the so called‘extinct’ woolly mammoth.
During my travels across the Siberian Steppes, some years ago, I chanced upon a team of Russian palaeontologists, who were clearly in a state of heightened exuberance.
Apparently, an unseasonable deluge had washed away a section of river bank, exposing the perfectly preserved carcass of a woolly mammoth.
The beast was frozen in a running posture and looked as fresh as the proverbial daisy.
The Russian greybeards were quite beside themselves with glee, considering this to be the find of the century.
Somehow they had got it into their heads that the specimen was at least fifteen thousand years old.
I introduced myself and upon learning my identity they naturally begged me to examine their treasure and offer an authoritative opinion.
I was pleased to do so, having nothing else planned for the morning.
I perused the beast and proclaimed that it was indeed a woolly mammoth, of the genus Mammuthus primigenius.
And that it had been dead for at least half an hour!
The woolly mammoth, I explained to them, is a burrowing animal, which lives exclusively beneath the ground and is very common in these parts.
It tunnels with its enormous tusks and dies instantly upon exposure to sunlight.
‘You have a nice fresh one here,’ I told them, ‘and it would be a shame to waste it.’
Without further ado I had my servants haul the carcass back to the village where I was staying and get the fire stoked up.
The greybeards made a quite unnecessary fuss about this and I was forced to employ my stout stick.
With typical bad grace they did not attend the barbecue.
' Is sir ready to order his main course now?’
Cornelius looked up from his reading to view the spiffingly clad dining-car attendant.
‘Yes,’ said he.
‘We have fillet of goldfish, poached in white wine; chateaubriand of hedgehog, garnished with tiny fish; or entrecote of woolly mam —’
‘I'll take a salad please,’ said Cornelius Murphy.
At seven-thirty of the next morning clock the mighty Leviathan gasped its way into Edinburgh Central without any fanfare whatsoever.
Cornelius stuck his head out of the window of the first-class sleeping compartment and breathed in Scotland.
His hair took to the forming of dreadlocks.
It looked like another beautiful day out there.
The tall boy washed, cleaned his teeth, fought bravely with his comb and then dressed in a faded Hawaiian shirt and his summer suit.
He considered leaving the rucksack on the train, but as it contained several  of his favourite Fair Isle jumpers, and this was bonny Scotland after all, he thought better of it and shouldered the thing.
Then clutching his suitcase, he tottered down on to the platform.
A stranger in a strange land.
And all alone by the looks of it.
His first thought was to phone in his expenses to Arthur Kobold.
His second, to take breakfast.
His first disappointment was the lack of a porter to carry his bags.
His second came at the ticket booth, where there was no-one for him to show his first-class ticket to.
Cornelius dragged his suitcase across the deserted concourse of the grand Victorian station.
Ahead a kiosk, fashioned in the manner of a tartan fairground booth, offered up the tantalizing fragrances of fried bacon and freshly brewed coffee.
Cornelius found a spring creeping into his step.
Behind the counter a gaunt-looking woman in an apron was standing with her hands on her head.
‘Good-morning, madam.’
Cornelius lowered his suitcase, took off his rucksack and climbed on to a stool before the counter.
The gaunt woman did not return the merry smile he offered in greeting.
‘We're closed,’ she announced in a frosty tone.
Cornelius observed that a small blue vein, snaking down the bridge of her nose, reproduced the course of the Euphrates.
‘No you're not,’ said the undaunted lad.
‘You're open.
I'll take coffee and the full breakfast please.’
‘The coffee's off.’
‘No it's not.
It's bubbling away on the hob there.’
‘It's off.’
‘Might I just sample it?’
‘The coffee's off.
Sling your hook.’
‘You didn't move your lips when you said that.’
Cornelius wondered whether he had stumbled into the rehearsal for some fringe event of the now legendary Edinburgh Festival.
‘How did you do that?’ he asked.
‘I did it!’
A head rose from behind the counter.
It was a perfectly spherical head and it wore a tartan tam-o'-shanter.
It also wore a youthful face, the greater part of which lurked behind the thick pebbled spectacles of the seriously myopic.
Beneath a nubbin of a nose, a mouth, not unlike that of a goldfish, stuck out its bottom lip  in a menacing manner.
Cornelius worried most about the nose.
How could it support the weight of the spectacles?
‘Campbell,’ said Cornelius.
‘I don't know you, do I?’
The young man squinted at Cornelius and then generally about the place.
' The tartan.
On your tam.
That's the clan cloth of Callum the Great.
Dates back to the fourteenth century.’
‘Shove off,’ said the Campbell.
‘I want my breakfast.’
Cornelius rubbed his hands together.
‘Listen, friend,’ the Campbell produced a pistol and pointed it at the tall boy, ‘do you see this?’
Cornelius nodded.
‘That's an Ozi nine-millimetre machine pistol.
Fully automatic, twenty-five round clip.
Detachable stock.’
‘And it's loaded, by the way.’
‘Possibly with plasticine.
It's an Airfix kit, I've got one like it at home.
The sight on the barrel is too long.
I wrote to Airfix about that, but they never answered my letter.’
A look of horror appeared on the Campbell's clock face.
He held the gun close to his spectacles and worried at the trigger.
It came away in his hand and tinkled to the counter.
Cornelius picked it up.
'I mentioned that too.
Look out,’ he added.
But he was not quick enough.
The gaunt woman head-butted the Campbell and he vanished beneath the counter.
His howls echoed around the empty station as she began kicking him.
'I'll wait until you're done then.’
Cornelius made himself comfy on the stool and sniffed at the coffee pot.
‘And don't come back!’
The gaunt woman lifted a counter flap, swung open a section beneath it and hurled the Campbell across the concourse.
He bowled over several times before rising in a confusion of camouflage, clutching his spectacles to his face and taking to his heels.
The gaunt woman hurled his plastic pistol after him.
‘A pox on all the bloody Campbells,’ she cried, echoing the sentiments of many a fine art lover at an Andy Warhol retrospective.
‘So, what about you then?’
‘Breakfast for me,’ smiled Cornelius.
‘Eggs if you have them.’
The gaunt woman turned away.
‘And bacon.’
The gaunt woman glared round at him.
‘And?’
‘And everything you've got really.’
‘Everything I've got.’
Muttering beneath her breath she set to the preparation of the tall boy's breakfast.
Back in Moby Dick Terrace, the street's only telephone began to ring.
The daddy swayed from the kitchen, teacup in hand and picked up the receiver.
After a few moments a voice said, ‘Hello, is there anybody there?’
It was the voice of the youth employment officer.
‘What is it, Yarrow?’
The daddy raised his teacup to his lips.
‘Cold again.’
He shook his head.
‘Mr Murphy, I want to speak to your son.
It's very urgent.’
‘My son is presently in Scotland.’
‘Your son is a very wicked boy, Mr Murphy.
He has played me false.
This letter…’
‘Letter?’
The daddy finished his tea.
‘From your son.
Demanding money.’
‘Surely not.
My son would never do a thing like that.’
‘He would and he has.
He claims to have found employment for himself.’
‘That doesn't sound very demanding to me.’
‘He claims that I employed him as an assistant in order to find him a real job.’
‘Which you did.’
‘But now he claims that as he has found work independently, I can no longer employ him in this capacity.’
‘Which you can't.’
‘So he is therefore claiming that, as I have no further work for him, then I must make him redundant.’
‘Which I suppose you must.’
‘But he wants redundancy money!
A month's pay!’
‘Seems a reasonable enough request to me.’
The daddy held the receiver at arm's length, to spare his ears the inevitable assault.
‘Reasonable?’ screamed Mr Yarrow.
‘Reasonable?
It is outrageous.’
‘Well, technically speaking,’ the phone was back at Jack Murphy's ear, ‘you are no longer in a position to provide him with employment.
And, of course, you had no written contract.
I can cite several legal precedents.
Industrial relations is something of a speciality with me.
For instance, there was the case of John Vincent O'Mally versus Arthur  Doveston, Purveyor of Steam Velocipedes to the Gentry.’
‘Arthur who?’
‘Doveston.
Bankrupt now, of course.
It wasn't a particularly big case, but it attracted a lot of attention from the local Press.
You know how they like crusading for the cause of the underdog.’
‘I won't have it, Mr Murphy.
Bankrupt, case, Press, underdog?’ he continued in a lesser voice.
‘You stand your corner,’ the daddy advised.
‘Have your day in court.’
‘My day in court?’
‘I'll have to go now,’ said the daddy.
‘I think the cat wants to be let out.’
He replaced the receiver and collapsed into fits of laughter.
His wife appeared at the top of the stairs wearing a dressing-gown of many colours.
‘Who was that?’ she asked.
Her husband did his best to sober up.
‘Mr Yarrow,’ he replied between convulsions.
‘Apparently Cornelius wrote to him demanding redundancy money.’
‘Nonsense,’ said the mother.
‘My son would never do a thing like that.’
‘That's just what I said to Mr Yarrow.
My son would never do a thing like that.’
The daddy returned to the kitchen and poured himself another cup of tea.
‘That's why I did.’
He chuckled.
Quite unaware that he had a month's redundancy money coming, Cornelius finished his breakfast.
He passed a nice new five-pound note across the counter.
‘First class,’ said he.
‘Could I trouble you for a receipt?’
The gaunt woman did not reply.
As there was still no sign of a porter, or anyone else for that matter, Cornelius shouldered his rucksack, took up his case and walked.
He went in search of a taxi.
He didn't find one though.
But he did find the rank.
And sitting on the ground, with his back against the sign which told travellers which side they should be queuing on, he found the Campbell.
The erstwhile bandido wore a bloody nose which he was dabbing at with an oversized tartan handkerchief.
He gazed up at Cornelius through the unfractured lens of his spectacles.
Cornelius wondered whether the Festival might be staging a production of Lord of the Flies this year.
‘Thanks a lot,’ said the Campbell.
Cornelius shrugged.
‘You started it.
I hope you didn't pay too much for the toy gun.
The gaunt woman broke it.’
‘The bastards said it was a real one.
They'll never let me join their gang now.’
‘Bastards?’
Cornelius had heard tell of bastards and how, if you ever met any, you should be careful not to let them grind you down.
He couldn't recall actually having met any himself, as yet.
A good many fools certainly, but no real bastards.
‘Of which bastards do you speak?’ he asked the Campbell.
‘The Wild Warriors of West Lothian.
They get all the best lasses.
And have adventures and stuff.
I wanted to join their gang.’
‘And you had to rob the kiosk, is that it?’
‘Rob the kiosk and then blow it up.’
‘Blow it up?
With what?’
‘They gave me a hand grenade.’
‘You're certain it's a real hand grenade.
Not a cigarette lighter?’
The Campbell yanked a Mills bomb from a camouflaged pocket and flung it up at Cornelius.
The tall boy caught it.
It was a cigarette lighter.
He returned it to the failed initiate without comment.
A taxi was approaching.
‘You're probably not really cut out for the life of brigandry and terrorism,’ said Cornelius kindly.
‘Can I offer you a lift home?’
‘You wouldn't let me take you hostage by any chance?’ the Campbell asked hopefully.
‘They might make do with that.’
‘I really don't have the time, I'm afraid.
I have an appointment at one.
Perhaps later, if I come back this way.’
‘It wouldn't take long.
An hour maybe.
Listen, I'd really appreciate it.
They wouldn't actually want to keep you, of course.
But it would show them that I'm ambitious-enterprising, young and independently minded.’
‘I suppose it would.
Are you sure that you want to join this gang?’
‘It's either that or take the job the youth employment officer has set up for me.’
‘And what's that?’
‘Carpet salesman,’ said the Campbell in a low, doomed tone.
The taxi drove the Campbell and his hostage through the historic streets of Edinburgh.
Cornelius enjoyed every moment of it.
He kept  an eye out for fierce-looking highlanders with red beards, kilts and claymores.
But he didn't see any.
‘Where are all the sporrans and the dirks in the socks?’ he asked the Campbell.
‘Where's your bowler hat?’ the Campbell replied.
And the two sat a while in silence.
‘Here on the corner do you, Jimmy?’ the taxi driver asked.
‘Jimmy?’
Cornelius turned to his kidnapper.
‘The taxi driver knows you by name?’
‘All Scotsmen are called Jimmy.’
The Campbell straightened his tam.
‘Everyone knows that.
It's a tradition or an old charter or something.’
‘I thought all Scotsmen were called Jock.’
‘Och away.
That's Irishmen.’
‘Irishmen are called Mick and Londoners are called John.’
‘Jack,’ said the taxi driver.
‘Londoners are called Jack.
Or at least Jack London was.
Call of the Wild.’
‘Wilde was called Oscar,’ said the Campbell.
‘Jack Nicholson won an Oscar,’ said the taxi driver.
‘And he's called Jack.
But I think he's an American.
I wonder what the rest of them are called.’
‘Bastards,’ said the Campbell.
‘Well, you learn something new every day.
That'll be two pounds please, Cornelius.’
Cornelius fished out the money.
‘Could I have a receipt for that?’ he asked.
‘And I never told you my name.’
The taxi driver scribbled something indecipherable upon the back of a Woodbine packet and handed it to Cornelius.
‘Only winding you up.
I saw your picture in the paper.’
‘My what?’
The taxi driver held up a copy of the day's Edinburgh Mercury.
Its banner headline read EPIC TRAVELLER FOILS STATION KIOSK HEIST.
Beneath this was a photograph of the hero taking breakfast.
Cornelius snatched the newspaper and gawped at it in disbelief.
‘Come on,’ said Jim Campbell.
‘I thought you were in a hurry.’
7
First house along here.’
The Campbell gestured to the remains of a terraced street which rose from a wasteland of redevelopment.
‘Number twenty-three.
This rucksack is well heavy,’ he added.
‘And the handle's coming off your case.
Is it real crocodile skin, by the way?’
Cornelius was stumbling along behind, marvelling at the Edinburgh Mercury.
He shook his head in wonder and his hair went every which way.
The newspaper spoke of hidden station security cameras, faxed photographs, network identification computers, instant Press access to newsworthy material and the Edinburgh Mercury always being first with the news.
Cornelius leafed through the remaining pages.
These were singularly dry of any news.
But they were heavily bathed in advertising for first-class accommodation, eating houses, menswear salons, car rental firms, bordellos, camping equipment.
Everything, in fact, that an epic traveller might, reasonably or otherwise, require.
‘Jim?’
Cornelius caught up with the Campbell.
‘Hold on there.’
‘What's your problem?’
Jim put down the suitcase and unshouldered the rucksack.
‘You were holding up the kiosk when I got off the train, weren't you?’
‘And making a good job of it.’
‘Did anyone else get off?’
The Campbell shook his head.
Then he fumbled around on the  ground for his glasses.
Cornelius stooped and returned them to him.
' Thanks.’
‘No-one at all got off that train except me?’
‘Of course not.
The taxi driver wouldn't have turned up if he hadn't read about you in the paper.
You'd be walking if it wasn't for me.
Don't show the boys that paper by the way.’
Cornelius folded the Mercury into his pocket.
‘And I think you'd better carry your own bags from here.
It wouldn't look good if they saw me carrying them.’
Cornelius shrugged and took up his luggage.
‘Just along here, you say?’
‘Number twenty-three.
Aye.’
It looked just like home sweet home.
There was even a dustbin outside.
Cornelius chose not to lift the lid.
The potential Wild Warrior knocked upon the door.
An eye appeared at an eyehole, which was appropriate enough.
‘Identify yourself,’ said a voice.
‘Let us in, Sawney.
It's me, Jimmy, and I've busted my specs.’
‘Identify yourself and use the password.’
‘You didn't tell us a password.’
‘It's a new rule.
If you don't know the password you can't come in.
‘But I live here.
Let us in.
I've got a hostage with me and he can't stay long, he has an appointment.’
‘Does he know the password?’
The Campbell turned to his captive.
‘Do you know the password?’
‘Just say the first thing that comes into your head.’
‘Brassiere,’ said the Campbell.
‘Enter, friend.’
The door opened and Cornelius was ushered inside.
‘Oh,’ said he.
Beyond lay rubble.
The house was nothing more than a front wall.
A small campfire billowed smoke and around this crouched…
‘Yes,’ said Cornelius Murphy.
‘This is more like it.’
Around the campfire crouched three red-bearded highlanders, clad in considerable quantities of musty-looking tartan and armed to the yellow teeth.
Tall eagle feathers quivered in their war bonnets.
‘You asked about the dirks,’ said Jim.
‘And who is this?’
A fearsome warlike apparition flung a horn beaker aside and rose to his feet, making motions towards his sword belt.
‘A hostage,’ said the Campbell proudly.
‘Cornelius Murphy, this is Angus, he's the leader.
And over by the fire is Hamish, and Sawney let us in, of course.’
‘Hi there,’ said Sawney.
‘Hello,’ Cornelius waved at Sawney.
‘Hostage?’
Angus– or Black Angus as he preferred to be called, eyed Cornelius with contempt.
‘We send you out to buy sandwiches and you come back with a hostage?’
‘Buy sandwiches?’
Cornelius turned to the Campbell.
‘But you said…’
‘And where's my bloody cigarette lighter?’ roared Hamish.
‘You know I cannot abide to light my Woodbine from the campfire.’
‘Sorry.’
The Campbell dug out the bogus grenade and handed it back to its rightful owner.
‘I don't think you've been altogether honest with me.’
Cornelius made a stem face at the Campbell.
The Campbell took off his spectacles and tucked them into his pocket.
‘Shut your mouth,’ he snarled, ‘if you know what's good for you.
And sit down, Angus!’
Angus slunk back to the campfire.
Cornelius viewed the Campbell.
All trace of the short-sighted incompetent had vanished.
The clear blue eyes glittered with menace.
The face wore an undeniably evil expression.
The Campbell leered at him.
‘An overly complicated piece of subterfuge perhaps.
I am subject to whimsicality in these matters.
You are now my hostage.’
‘I'm too thin to be a hostage,’ said Cornelius.
‘What is all this about?’
‘Hand over all your money please.’
‘I certainly will not.’
‘Then it will be all the worse for you.’
The Campbell snapped his fingers.
The three warriors climbed to their feet, drawing murderous-looking blades.
'I bags his jacket,’ said Sawney.
‘And I'll take his flowery blouse, it will look well on my lassie.’
Angus ran his thumb along a knife lined with crocodile teeth.
‘What size are your boots?’
Hamish asked.
‘Eight and a half.’
‘They'll do for me right enough then.’
‘I would prefer to keep them if it's all the same with you.’
Cornelius struck out with the right one catching Hamish an agonizing blow to the sporran.
The highlander doubled up, eyes crossed and streaming.
His companions made a rush at Cornelius.
The tall and cornered boy swung his suitcase.
He managed to catch Angus a half-decent clip across the right ear, but the sinister Campbell grabbed him from behind and clung to his neck.
Cornelius elbowed him where he could, but the camouflaged figure appeared quite impervious to that kind of thing.
Sawney raised his claymore in both hands and prepared to bring down the hilt.
‘Hold it right there!’
The voice did not come from Cornelius, although those were the words he had in mind to use.
They came from a police loud hailer.
‘Lay down your weapons and let the hostage go.
‘Aye what?’
The Campbell glared about him.
He didn't loosen his grip on Cornelius though.
‘You are surrounded,’ continued the police voice.
‘Put down your swords.
And let the lad go, Campbell.’
‘Er?’ said the Campbell.
‘Best do what he says,’ said the tall boy.
‘No.
I don't see any police.
Listen!’ he shouted.
‘We've got the hostage and we're keeping him.’
‘Our marksmen have you in their sights.
Right at the big pimple on your forehead.’
‘Pimple?’
The Campbell released Cornelius and took to fingering his forehead.
‘That's a birthmark, by the way.’
‘It's a bloody big bubo,’ swore Hamish, clutching at his kilt.
‘A proper target, so you are.’
‘Where are you?’ shouted the Campbell, spinning about in small circles.
‘All around.
We've had you under surveillance since you set up camp here.
Now let the lad go or we open fire.’
Angus and Sawney flung down their weapons.
Hamish sat nursing his loins.
The Campbell clenched and unclenched his fists.
‘Well, I'll be off then.’
Cornelius backed towards the door.
‘Don't forget your luggage, you fool,’ called the police voice.
Cornelius hastily snatched up his bags.
‘Of course not.
Thank you.’
‘And come out alone.’
‘I certainly will.’
‘The rest of you back behind the campfire.’
The Wild Warriors of West Lothian made a surly and grumbling retreat.
Cornelius Murphy left the building.
He ducked out of number twenty-three and slammed shut the door.
And then he turned to thank his rescuers.
The street was deserted.
‘Well don't just stand there.
Run for your life.’
The voice came close at his ear.
Cornelius ran for his life.
He dived away at the double and took himself as far as his long legs would carry him.
When finally they would carry him no more, he ducked into a doorway and sank on to his bottom, breathing heavily.
‘Now open your rucksack.’
It was that voice again.
‘Is this God?’
Cornelius searched the heavens for shafts of golden light.
‘No.
It's me.’
The voice belonged to Tuppe.
Cornelius pulled open the rucksack.
‘Tuppe!
This is something of a surprise.’
The small fellow climbed from the rucksack and stretched what there was of himself to stretch.
‘I'll bet you're glad I hitched a ride.’
Cornelius embraced the small fellow.
‘Tuppe!’ was all that he could say.
‘That's enough hugging thank you.’
‘Sorry.
But it's so good to see you.
How…?’
‘I hitched a ride.
I could hardly let you go off on an epic journey all by yourself.
There's no telling what kind of trouble you might get yourself into.
So I climbed into the rucksack while you were taking a pee back at The Wife's Legs.
Been living on the daddy's field rations.
Can't say much for the mother's coffee though.
And I could really use the toilet about now.’
‘Well,’ said Cornelius.
‘Just fancy that.
You hitchhiking in my rucksack all the way up here without me knowing and then doing a perfect impression of a police loud hailer.’
Tuppe held his nose and barked into the empty Themmos flask.
‘Throw down your weapon and come out with your hands up, you are surrounded.’
Several nearby windows came up and a number of guns flew down into the street.
‘Don't shoot, G-man,’ called someone.
'I wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't heard it myself,’ said Cornelius.
‘Thanks very much indeed.’
‘Don't mention it.
You would have done the same for me.’
‘Naturally.
And I would have bested those blighters eventually, you know.’
‘I have absolutely no doubt of that.
I just wanted the fight to stop before you began wading in with the rucksack.’
‘Quite so.
Then, as my breath has now returned to me and I find myself in the company of my bestest friend, it is my considered opinion that we proceed together upon the epic journey and face as one whatever adventures lie before.’
‘Well said.
And wherefore art we headed?’
‘The auction room, Sheila na gigh.’
‘And how might we get there, do you think?’
Across the road a bus drew up at a stop.
It was a big bright green bus and the sign on the front read, SHEILA NA GIGH.
‘We'll take the bus,’ said Cornelius Murphy, smiling merrily.
8
His name was Felix Henderson McMurdo.
But they called him the un-canny Scot.
The old grizzled grannies cursed him as he passed them by.
Doggies bared their fangs and babbies filled their nappies.
Small boys spat down on him from the safety of high windows and their mothers clenched their buttocks and turned away their glowing cheeks.
All that knew McMurdo agreed that he'd end his days on a hangman's rope.
Felix, who always thought of himself as a bit of a lad and an all-round popular fellow, took it in good part.
‘The folk in these parts have a funny sense of humour,’ he told strangers to the parts of which he spoke.
And the strangers smiled back at him and shook their heads.
But once he was safely out of sight, these same strangers unclenched their buttocks and declared that ‘there goes a wrong'n if ever there was, who'll end in a gallows dance.’
Now, on the corner of Agamemnon Street there was a tobacconist shop owned by a Scotsman named Patel.
And outside that shop was the last outdoor cigarette machine in Scotland.
And approaching that very machine, his last pound coin clutched in his fist, was Felix Henderson McMurdo.
And just across the street was an auction room.
It was one of those memorial halls or Methodist Congregationals, or Wesleyan chapels or whatever they were.
They all look pretty much the same and you see them everywhere.
They were raised in the middle years of the last century from sturdy stocks and grey slate, with glorious tiled floors and superb vaulted ceilings.
And they are a perfect testament to the canny Victorians' sense of foresight.
Because their interiors perfectly reflect the fine reproduction pine furniture that you find for sale in them today.
There was scaffolding up outside this particular one and a pair of rugged, manly types were bolting a large sign into place.
This sign announced that The Victorian Fitted Kitchen Company would soon be opening there for business.
But today was auction day and the hall looked very well inside, stacked up with all that bygone bric-à-bracery.
Cornelius and Tuppe entered the hall.
‘Nice ceiling,’ said Cornelius.
‘Nice tiled floor,’ said Tuppe.
‘Shall we peruse Mr Kobold's intended purchase?’
‘Why don't we do that very thing.’
There were ranks of trestle tables.
And these were piled high with items which had probably been all very well in their day.
There was a good deal of ropey old furniture.
Some duff oil paintings and the inevitable far-too-good-to-be-true Cadbury's shop cabinets.
Then there were the armchairs and sofas that travel around the country from auction to auction to auction.
Why they do it and for how long they have, are anyone's guesses.
Tuppe examined a row of spittoons and an elephant's foot commode.
Above him Cornelius ran his eye over a box of ancient cane carpet beaters.
He consulted the catalogue Mr Kobold had given him.
‘Lot forty-two.
A collection of early French tennis racquets.’
That didn't bode particularly well.
‘Tell me what I'm looking for again, I've forgotten,’ said Tuppe.
‘Ye gods!’ he added hastily dropping the lid of the commode.
Cornelius read once more from the catalogue.
‘Lot one hundred.
Large green canvas portmanteau containing personal effects of the late Victor Zenobia.
Brush-and-comb set in calfskin case.
Various papers.
Duffle-coat (lacking toggles) some wear on elbows.
No reserve.’
‘And all Kobold wants is the papers?’
‘That's what he said.’
Tuppe rubbed his tiny hands together.
‘Splendid.
Then I bags the portmanteau.
It will provide spacious accommodation for the journey home and spare you the expense of my fare.’
‘What a well-considered choice.
Then I shall go for the brushand-comb set in the calfskin case.’
‘No less than you deserve.
Which leaves us with the matter of the duffle-coat.’
‘Lacking toggles.’
Cornelius made a face.
‘And some wear on the elbows.’
Tuppe made one to match.
‘We had best hold the duffle-coat in reserve.’
' Perfect.
As I notice that no reserve has been included in the lot, it should fit the bill precisely.’
Pleased with the celestial harmony thus achieved, Cornelius and Tuppe set out in earnest to locate Lot 1OO.
‘Lot one hundred?’
Cornelius asked a tall porter in a brown overall.
‘Lot one hundred?’
Tuppe asked his shorter counterpart.
‘Over there.’
The tall porter pointed.
‘Over there.’
The shorter did likewise.
Tuppe and Cornelius followed the pointing fingers and set off in different directions.
Felix Henderson McMurdo pushed his last pound coin into the cigarette machine and mused upon the pleasures of the Wild Woodbine he was shortly to enjoy.
Felix whistled ‘Cigareets and wuskey and wild wild women’ and wondered why the latter never made his acquaintance.
And then he wondered why it was that he hadn't heard that satisfying little clunk the coin usually made as it dropped inside the machine.
On a distant comer two small boys tittered into their unwashed hands and one slipped a tube of Superglue into the back pocket of his ragged pantaloons.
‘Come on now.’
Felix gave the machine a playful tap.
‘Let's be having you.’
The machine did not reply.
The hall was filling up.
The auction was set to begin at one and it was nearing that time when Cornelius finally met up once more with Tuppe.
‘Any luck?’
The small fellow pulled at the tall boy's trouser leg.
‘None whatever.
I couldn't find it.’
‘Give me a hoist up on to your shoulders then.
Maybe it's tucked away on a high shelf somewhere.’
Cornelius shouldered his companion.
‘Oh golly.
Put me down and join me there.’
‘What is this?’
‘Do as I say.
Quickly.’
Cornelius lowered Tuppe to the floor and knelt down beside him.
‘What is it?’
‘It's the Campbell and his cronies.
They're down at the front.’
‘I never saw them come in.’
‘Then let's trust that they didn't see you.
How come they're here?’
‘Coincidence?’
Cornelius suggested.
Felix Henderson McMurdo struck the machine a slightly less playful tap.
‘Pay up with my Woodies,’ he told it.
‘And sharp.’
Mr Patel issued from his shop.
‘Away from my machine, accursed one,’ he told McMurdo.
‘My coin is stuck.’
The un-canny Scot smote the machine once more.
‘I'll fetch my stout stick to you,’ warned the tobacconist.
A suave-looking gent, with a dapper moustache, tweedy cap and sheepskin car coat climbed the steps of the Gothic pulpit and addressed the congregation of bargain hunters.
‘Ladies and gentlemen…’
Feedback shrieked about the vaulting and the congregation cowered beneath it, sheltering their ears.
‘Sorry,’ came a small voice from the rear of the pulpit.
‘Try again.
’,’ said the auctioneer.
‘Once again.’
‘Ladies and gentlemen.’
‘That's it.’
‘Ladies and gentlemen.
Welcome to the weekly auction here at The Anabaptist Reform Church.
I see a lot of familiar faces, but as there are a few new ones, I'll just run through the procedures.
As there're a good many lots to get through this afternoon I'll keep it plain and simple.’
‘Good,’ said a familiar face.
‘We accept all major credit cards.
Personal cheques will also be accepted if accompanied by a valid cheque card.
No personal cheques above fifty pounds please.
Lots secured by deposits must have their balances paid off within twenty-four hours.
Items under twenty-five pounds must be paid for in cash and no deposits will be accepted on  these.
So, with that understood, let us proceed to lot number one.’
A lady in a straw hat put up her hand.
‘A little quick off the mark there, madam,’ smiled the auctioneer.
‘Please wait until I start the bidding.’
‘I wanted to ask a question,’ said the lady.
‘The toilets are by the door, madam.’
The auctioneer increased the magnitude of his smile.
‘I don't want the toilet.
I want to ask a question.’
‘Go on then.’
‘Can lots over twenty-five pounds be paid for in cash?’
‘Of course.
Now, lot number one.’
‘But not lots under twenty-five?’
‘No, madam.’
‘Well, what if I purchased two lots which added up to less than fifty pounds, could I pay for them with a personal cheque, assuming, of course, that I had a valid cheque card?’
‘Yes, madam.
If the overall figure is more than the twenty-five pounds minimum.
Now can we please get on?’
‘Well, what if I decided to put one of the lots back into the next auction, could I postpone payment on that until after it was sold?’
‘No.
Certainly not.’
The auctioneer was still smiling.
Just.
‘So I'd have to pay for both lots when I bought them, even if I put one straight back into the next auction?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, what if the lot I put back didn't reach the reserve price I decided to put on it?’
'I suppose you'd just have to take it home, madam.’
The auctioneer's smile was naught but a memory.
‘I don't want a thing like that in my house,’ said the lady.
‘What kind of a person do you take me for?’
Outside and across the street a small crowd was gathering.
‘All I want is my Woodbine,’ said McMurdo.
‘Paste me again with that stick of yours and you're a dead Scotsman, Patel.’
‘At the end of a rope, that's how he'll end,’ said an ancient granny.
‘Surely I recognize you, madam,’ said the unsmiling auctioneer.
‘Weren't you here last week?’
The lady in the straw hat nodded.
'I purchased two lots.
I've put one of them back into the sale this week.
I'm going to bid for it myself.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, I paid far too much for it the first time, so I've put a really low reserve on it now.
If I can pick it up this week it should be a real bargain.’
‘But I thought you said you wouldn't have a thing like that in your house.’
'I did, but you can't pass up a bargain, can you?
And if I get it really really cheap I might put it back into next week's auction.’
‘Oh I do hope so,’ said the auctioneer.
‘Now, lot number one.’
‘This is my lot,’ said the lady, ‘so no-one else bid.’
‘What's going on here?’
A smart young police officer pushed his way through the crowd.
‘Stop hitting that man, Patel.
Oh, it's you, is it, McMurdo?
What villainy are you up to this time?’
‘It's not my fault,’ wailed Felix, as Mr Patel struck him a blow to the shin.
‘My money's stuck in this machine, that's all.’
‘I saw everything,’ said a young mother with clenched buttocks.
‘McMurdo started it.
The fiend.’
‘I did not.
All I want is some cigarettes.’
Mr Patel took another swing at the un-canny Scot and hit the young police officer.
‘This could be a long aftemoon,’ said Tuppe.
‘Should we pop out for an hour or so and take a late breakfast?’
Cornelius shook his head and vanished under his hair.
‘Not likely.
I've seen that one before.
We slip out for five minutes and the lot will be sold before we get back.’
‘You are wise beyond your years.’
‘Don't mention it.’
‘Sold to the lady in the straw hat,’ said the auctioneer.
‘Lot ninety-seven.’
‘Told you,’ said Cornelius.
‘You've got to have your wits about you in this game.’
‘Stand back, the lot of you.’
The young police officer fished out a twenty-two-function Swiss Police knife and selected a worthy blade.
‘I'll soon deal with this.’
He worked the blade into the slot and waggled it about.
‘Don't you damage that machine,’ said Mr Patel.
‘Sir, I know what I'm doing.
We're trained to deal with situations like this.’
He gave the knife a violent twist.
The blade snapped off.
The police officer gaped at his Swiss Police knife.
Its functioning power had just been reduced by a factor of one.
‘My best knife.’
The police officer burst into a flood of tears.
‘Look what you've done now, McMurdo.’
The tobacconist raised his stout stick.
The crowd cheered him on.
‘Lot ninety-seven.
Leonardo Da Vinci's missing workbook.
Containing his designs for the perpetual-motion helicopter.
Mathematical principles appertaining to the five-sided cube and the formula for the transmutation of base metal into gold.
Who'll start me off with a fiver?’
‘Four,’ said a fellow in a green cagoule.
‘Five over here,’ said a big fat man in a shameless wig.
‘I have five,’ the auctioneer waved his gavel around.
‘Do I hear six?
I'd like to hear six.’
‘Six,’ said someone.
‘I have six,’ said the auctioneer.
‘No, you don't have six,’ said the someone.
‘You wanted to hear six.
And now you've heard it.’
‘It's you again, isn't it, madam?’
‘Only kidding,’ said the lady in the straw hat.
‘This is a very peculiar auction,’ said Tuppe.
‘My penknife,’ wailed the officer of the law.
Several young, and reasonably wild wild women stepped forward to comfort him.
A man in a uniform was a good catch in these parts.
A bus drew up at the lights and the driver, an excitable Puerto Rican, climbed down from his cab to see what all the fuss was about.
Up on the scaffolding, the two rugged manly types whistled at the womenfolk.
The lights changed to green and the traffic began to back up.
‘Six,’ said the big fat man in the shameless wig.
‘But you said five,’ said the auctioneer.
'I can change my mind if I want to.’
‘No.
That's not what I meant.’
‘I'll bid seven,’ said the cagoule.
‘Can I bid seven with a major credit card, by the way?
I'm not sure whether the lady asked about that.’
‘Eight down here,’ cried Tuppe, just for the hell of it.
‘Eight somewhere down the back,’ said the auctioneer.
‘Who said eight?’ the fat gentleman asked.
‘I'll go to nine.’
‘Who said nine?’
Tuppe asked.
‘Chap in the wig,’ said Cornelius, giving his chum a leg up.
‘Shall I bid ten?’
‘Move your bus!’ shouted a travelling salesman with places to be.
‘Your mother!’ cried the Puerto Rican, making a gesture with thumb and front teeth.
‘See you, Jimmy!’
The travelling salesman climbed from his car, rolling up his sleeves as he did so.
'It was a birthday present from my old white-haired mother,’ blubbered the officer of the law.
‘Would you like to come back to my place for some oral sex?’ a young woman asked.
‘I have ten.’
The auctioneer waved his gavel in the air.
‘Who said ten?’
Tuppe asked.
‘Chap in the cagoule.’
‘What's a cagoule?’
‘Eleven?
Do I hear eleven?
Big fat man with the shameless wig?
No?
Still with the chap in the lightweight, knee-length anorak of French origin, very popular with bearded prannies who wear ethnic shoes, get off on Olde English folk music and have girlfriends called Ros who run encounter groups where you can find your true self and be at one with the cosmos.
Eleven still with you, sir.’
' Well! ' said the chap in the cagoule.
'I don't know if I want it now.’
‘Oh go on,’ said Ros, his girlfriend.
‘Twelve,’ said a new voice.
‘Twelve.’
The auctioneer was all smiles once more.
‘Twelve I have.’
‘Who said twelve?’
Tuppe asked.
‘Who cares?’
Cornelius replied.
‘Twelve I have.
All finished at twelve then?
Twelve million once…twelve million twice…’
‘Twelve million?’
Tuppe asked.
'There's wee lads robbing your shop, ' a granny told Mr Patel.
'If you'll give us a lend of your stout stick I'll deal with McMurdo while you see to them.’
‘Thank you, madam.’
The tobacconist parted with his stick and fought his way through the noisy crowd that now spilled into the road.
‘All I want is my bloody Woodbine.’
‘I know you, McMurdo, child eater so you are.’
The granny swung the stout stick.
Peep peep peep barp barp and honk, went the traffic.
‘Who you calling a wetback, homes?’
The bus driver kicked the travelling salesman where Cornelius had kicked Hamish.
A group of shaven-headed yobbos, with tattooed cheeks and nationalistic leanings, observed this from the upper deck and came swarming down from the bus.
The rugged manly types on the scaffolding flung nuts and bolts at them.
The comforting young woman led the sniffing police officer up the stairs to her bedroom.
‘And sold to the Sultan of Brunei, for twelve million pounds.
Thank you, Your Majesty.’
‘Will you take an IOU?’ the sultan asked.
‘How much money do you have about your person?’
Tuppe asked Cornelius.
‘A little over four hundred pounds.
In cash.’
‘Lot ninety-eight.
Garish print, ‘The Crying Child’, with Artexed frame and piece of knotted string for hanging purposes to rear.
Some small area of fire damage.
What do I hear for this little beauty?
Pound anywhere?’
‘Pound over here,’ said the lady in the straw hat.
‘Could we have a window shut, do you think?
There's a terrible rumpus going on outside.’
‘Crash’ went a brick through the window of a nearby television shop and things took a new, but not entirely unexpected, turn for the worse.
A circling police traffic helicopter radioed in to base.
‘Yours for a pound then,’ said the auctioneer.
‘I'd like to put it back into the auction for next week,’ said the lady.
‘It hasn't reached the reserve price.’
‘Lot ninety-nine.
Three mulatto slaves.
One answering to the name of Henry.
Good house-boy.
City and Guilds certificates in business management, light engineering and macrame.
Enjoys windsurfing, working out at the gym and strutting his funky stuff on the dance floor.
Who'll start me off then?’
‘Twenty-five pounds,’ said the lady in the straw hat.
‘Twenty-six,’ said the Sultan of Brunei.
‘Thirty,’ said Ros.
‘Pass out those C.D. players,’ said the bus driver.
‘Load them into my cab.’
‘Uncle Wolf!’ cried Mr Patel into his telephone.
‘Big race not going on here.
Get the boys together.
Bring many guns.
Bring Clicki Ba!’
‘And sold to the young woman who runs the encounter group.’
‘Huh,’ said the chap in the cagoule, making a huffy face.
‘Lot one hundred,’ said the auctioneer.
‘We're on,’ said Tuppe.
‘Lot one hundred.
Large green canvas portmanteau containing the personal effects of the late Victor Zenobia.
Brush-and-comb set in calfskin case.
Various papers, duffle-coat (lacking toggles) some wear on elbows.
No reserve.’
‘Can you see it?’
Tuppe asked.
Cornelius craned his neck.
'It's on a table by the pulpit.
The Campbell is leaning on it.’
‘All right now, ladies and gentlemen.
Who's going to start me off on this one?
Very chic brush-and-comb set.
Tenner anyone?’
‘Ten,’ said the Campbell, glowering around the place.
Cornelius stuck his hand up, caught the eye of the auctioneer and ducked down again.
‘Eleven I have at the back there.’
‘Who said eleven?’ growled the Campbell.
‘Do I hear twelve?’
‘Twelve.’
The Campbell curled his lip.
Cornelius stuck his hand up again.
‘Thirteen at the back of the hall.’
‘Fourteen!’
The Campbell raised his voice.
Cornelius raised his hand.
The sound of an explosion issued from the street.
And the distant wail of police sirens.
‘Twenty-five pounds!’ stormed the Campbell.
‘And the devil take the man who offers more.’
‘Thirty!’
Cornelius had to shout.
There was a rat-at-tat of machinegun fire and several windows shattered.
The auctioneer took the dive for cover.
He took his microphone with him.
‘Do I hear forty?’ he called.
‘And you'll have to speak up.’
‘Forty.’
The Campbell drew out a pistol which had no hint whatsoever of the Airfix factory about it.
‘Fifty!’ called Cornelius.
‘Uh-oh.’
Tuppe spied the lower portions of Angus and Sawney approaching through the forest of legs.
‘They're on to us.’
Cornelius scooped up his chum and scrambled on to the nearest table, scattering antique French tennis racquets.
‘One hundred pounds,’ he shouted.
‘One hundred.’
The auctioneer waved his gavel above the pulpit.
‘Do I hear one-fifty?’
The Campbell rooted in his combat jacket.
'I don't know if I have that much on me,’ he said.
‘Could you just hold up the bidding while my boys settle with the opposition?’
‘Going once at one hundred,’ called the auctioneer, assuming the foetal position.
‘Look out!’
Tuppe clung to the tall boy's neck.
Cornelius leapt nimbly as crocodile teeth fanned the air beneath them.
Outside in the war-torn street, Special Forces vehicles drew up in an uncompromising line.
Steel doors rose at their rear ends and heavily ammed men dropped to the ground.
‘Have at you, spalpeen!’
Angus took another swipe.
Cornelius took another leap.
‘Gas masks on,’ ordered the commander of Special Services.
‘Fire on my command.’
The mob, now several hundred strong, and going at it hammer and tongs, took time out to boo and jeer at the military presence.
Some began to hurl stones.
Shaven-headed Nationalists rolled a car on to its side and took up positions behind it.
‘Going twice,’ said the auctioneer.
‘Twice at one hundred pounds.’
‘One hundred and five,’ called the lady in the straw hat.
‘What the heck eh?
It's only money.’
' Fire!’
Tear gas cannisters broke into the mob.
The Nationalists replied with Molotov cocktails and foul language.
Petrol from the upturned car flooded across the street and took fire beneath the bus, which erupted in a gush of flame.
‘You did that, you peeg!’
The bus driver drew out a Saturday-night special and shot the travelling salesman.
Above the war cries and the screams and the order to ‘fire at will’, came the thunder of approaching hoofbeats.
Down Agamemnon Street, leaping motor cars and fleeing rioters came a hoard of Afghani horsemen.
And to the van of them, high upon a pure-bred white Arab stallion, the Wolf of Kabul.
Mr Patel waved from his shop doorway.
‘Hi, Uncle,’ he called.
‘Two hundred pounds.’
Cornelius leapt from table to table, Tuppe held high.
‘All cash.’
‘Two hundred pounds I hear.’
The auctioneer stuck his head up above the pulpit and the Campbell took a shot at it.
‘Everybody down.’
The Campbell fired into the air, taking a chip out of the magnificent fan vaulting.
‘On your knees, heads to the floor, or you're dead.’
‘Controlled bursts.
Choose your targets.’
The Special Forces commander raised his hand.
The Wolf of Kabul bore down upon him.
The now legendary Clicki Ba whirling above his turbaned head.
‘Destroy the infidels,’ cried the Wolf of Kabul.
‘Bloody hell,’ cried the Special Forces commander.
‘Take cover.’
Firing wildly in all directions, his men did just that.
A ricocheting bullet chanced to take the front from the cigarette machine.
And Felix Henderson McMurdo, who was cowering beneath it, suddenly found Woodbine raining down upon him.
‘This must be my lucky day,’ said the un-canny Scot.
Special Forces men burst through the front door of The Anabaptist Reform Church, and gaped in horror at the unholy tableau spread out before them.
They had stumbled in upon what was quite clearly nothing less than a pagan sacrifice.
The ungodly congregation knelt with their faces bowed to the floor.
Above them, in the pulpit, a black magician in a tweed cap held his hands high in blasphemous benediction.
And before him, upon an altar table, flanked by sword bearers, stood a tall wild-eyed figure.
Surely he wore the mane of a lion upon his head and clutched in his upraised claws, the lifeless body of a small child!
‘Holy stations of the cross.’
A Special Forces man made the sign over his chest with a gun-free hand.
‘Devil worshippers.’
His comrade at arms caught sight of the Campbell, who was struggling with Hamish to shift the green canvas portmanteau.
‘I know these bastards, sarge,’ said he.
‘They're the Wild Warriors of West Lothian.
Cannibals to a man Jack of them.’
‘Jack?’ asked the sergeant.
‘As in Jack London?’
9
REGARDING AN ULTIMATE TRUTH OF NO SMALL MAGNITUDE
People often ask me, ‘Hugo, why is it that when dining with royalty, you always keep your hat on?’
I explain that this is due to an old charter, dating back to the time of Sir Hugo de Courcy Rune, third earl of Penge.
And then go on to tell this tale.
Apparently, King John and Philippe II of France were in dispute over the duchy of Normandy, and agreed to settle the matter by single combat.
Sir Hugo de Courcy Rune was King John's champion, and big with it.
And, as legend has it, no sooner had he put spur to his mount and raised his stout stick, than the French champion fled the field of honour.
King John, being rightly chuffed, asked Sir Hugo what reward he would care for.
The third earl replied, ‘Sire, I have titles, lands and wealth enough.
But I would crave a boon for myself and my successors.
To remain covered about the head regions in the presence of your highness and all future sovereigns of the sceptred isle.’
King John, knowing full well Sir Hugo's ‘thing about his bald spot’ and considering this pretty cheap at the price, gave the request the Royal thumbs up.
And so, whenever I am called to dine at the palace, I always sport an old straw boater or knitted bobble hat, to exercise my hereditary privilege.
I am born of noble stock and I am not too proud to admit it.
When it comes to deeds of great valour performed in the cause of king and country, the name of Rune is up there with the best of them.
And then some.
Which brings me to the matter of my heroic cousin, Lord Victor Rune VC, and the most singular circumstances surrounding his tragic and untimely demise.
It began in this fashion.
After several years of rank rising, deed doing and medal winning, 1945 found Cousin Vic leading an armoured battalion into Berlin.
Considering this an ideal opportunity to notch up a final few medals for the family collection (now housed in a vault beneath Windsor Castle), it was Cousin Vic's plan to round up all the Nazi war criminals and march them off to prison.
Imagine his surprise, therefore, when he discovered that not a single German he met had ever been in the Nazi Party, let alone had even heard of a concentration camp.
Cousin Vic was frankly baffled.
‘Where did all the Nazis go?’ he asked a Berliner who was waving a Union Jack.
‘What is a Nazi?’ the other replied.
And wherever he went in the city he found it to be the same.
Everyone was a civilian.
None of them had ever supported Mr Hitler and most were shocked to hear that anything like that had been going on.
‘And who's going to pay for all this damage?’ the Mayor of Berlin asked my cousin.
Vic returned to England without further medals, pondering on the mystery.
Where did the Nazis go?
One minute there had apparently been an entire nation, set upon racial purity and world domination, and then the next…
As the years passed, my cousin came to encounter this phenomenon again and again.
There were Peace Rallies in the 1960s, with stone-throwing anarchists running amok.
But, the next day in court, these same stone-throwing anarchists complained that they were nothing more than innocent bystanders, who had been brutalized by policemen and thrown into Black Marias.
And the policemen themselves, when accused of baton charging peacefully protesting women and children, denied that they had ever done any such thing.
Not us, they swore under oath.
Curiouser and curiouser.
And then there were the free pop concerts which attracted as many as a quarter of a million hippies.
They were there and then they weren't.
Where did they go to?
When did you ever see even four hippies anywhere else?
And the annual Wembley Country and Western festivals.
Thousands and thousands of fans, all wearing full western regalia.
Cousin Vic could not recall ever once having bumped into a cowboy in the street.
And those football supporters, storming the terraces.
When the football season ended, these warrior bands literally vanished.
They were never seen waving their scarves, chanting and kicking people with their Doc Martens at any other time of the year.
Where did they all come from and where did they go?
That was the question.
It was the day of the first London Marathon that Cousin Vic knocked upon my door.
He was carrying a battery-driven television set and shaking terribly.
‘Look at them, Hugo,’ he pointed to the tiny screen.
‘Where did they all come from?
If they behaved like that every day, the city would grind to a halt.
And I'll wager that if you go down there tomorrow there will be no trace of them.
What does it all mean?’
He sank into a fireside chair and I poured him a small medicinal quart of Absinthe to steady his nerves.
‘I can tell you,’ said 1.
‘But I don't know if I dare.
The truth, when it is revealed, will rock this world upon its axis.
It is better that I alone bear the burden.
In fact the secret must remain with me until the day I die.
I am sorry, Victor.’
‘Hugo,’ said Cousin Vic, ‘you have my word as an officer and a gentleman, that what ever you tell me will not go beyond the walls of this room.’
‘Cross your heart and hope to die?’
‘In a cellar full of sex-crazed Turkish truckers.’
He solemnly crossed his heart.
‘Then so be it.’
I refreshed his glass and told him the terrible truth.
‘I have studied this manifestation for many years and have devoted considerable thought to it.
I have given it a name.
Spontaneously Generated Crowd Phenomenon.
‘Have you ever wondered why it is always hot and dry in the Sahara Desert and cold and raining in Wales?’
He shook his head.
‘The alchemists believed in the principle ‘as above so below’, that everything is linked.
The Sahara is hot, dry and golden.
So it attracts the sun.
Wales is grey, dull and closed on Sundays.
Therefore, weatherwise, it gets what it jolly well deserves.
‘S.G.C.P. is a bit like that.
At a certain place, at a certain time, under certain conditions, things will occur.
‘The crowds, of which you speak, are not truly crowds at all.
They are not composed of real people.
These ‘crowds’ are vast living organisms, formed from thousands of single humanlike cells.
They flourish when the perfect conditions occur for them to do so.
Theirs is a brief Mayfly existence.
When the event, whatever it may be, finishes, the cell structure decays, the cells divide, fade away and die.
‘Certainly a few misguided humans will attend football matches and Country and Western festivals.
But one look at the uniform blankness of expression on the faces of the ‘crowd’ should tell you all you need to know.
The crowd is not human.
'I contend that these crowds spontaneously generate from microscopic spores which constantly drift about in our atmosphere, awaiting the perfect conditions in which to briefly flourish.
Your vanishing Nazis, for instance.
The climate which spawned them, what is referred to as a ‘social climate’, ceased to exist when the war ended.
Thus your Nazis simply faded away.
‘I further assert that these spores have been with us since the birth of mankind.
Ever growing in number.
And I fear that they are evolving.
Reaching sentience.
‘Victor, I have evidence to suggest that they are now actually capable of creating the conditions suitable for generation on a global scale.
If they cannot be stopped in time, mankind will surely be doomed.
‘The entire planet will eventually consist of one vast chanting inhuman crowd.’
‘By all the gods,’ cried Cousin Vic, ‘it all makes sense now.
This explains crowd mentality.
The following of false messiahs.
Why charismatic leaders come to power.
The whole shebang.
Hugo, this rewrites human history!
You must publish these facts at once.
You must warn the world.’
‘And who should I tell?’
I asked.
‘A crowd of politicians perhaps?
The assembled multitude at The United Nations?
Should I ask first for all non-humans to leave the room?
‘Victor, all about us the spores float in the air.
I picture them as neurons, part of a great mass mind.
Exchanging information, plotting the replacement of man.
Do you think they would allow me to pass on this ultimate truth?’
‘Then if you will not, I must!’ cried my noble cousin, flinging down his television set and plunging for the door.
‘No, Victor,’ I called after him.
‘You will not succeed.
You cannot.
They will not let you.’
But my words were to no avail.
I heard his footfalls upon the stairs.
The sound of the front door slamming.
Then a squeal of brakes and a deadly concussion.
Before I reached my window I knew full well the terrible sight which surely awaited me.
Victor lay dead in the middle of the road.
A crowd had already formed around him!
The Book of Ultimate Truths
Hugo Rune
There were many arrests made that day.
But there would be no successful prosecutions.
Order was restored around four o'clock in the afternoon, when the tanks encircling the town removed the covers from their guns and Mr Patel heard on his wireless set that the British prime minister had sanctioned the use of carpet bombing.
Happily there had been no actual loss of life.
The only real hospital case was a travelling salesman who had been shot through the foot.
Many upstanding townsfolk of Sheila na gigh were, however, now crowded into police cells at the Edinburgh nick, loudly protesting their innocence and awaiting the arrival of their solicitors to prepare charges of police brutality and wrongful arrest.
One married couple in particular expected to do very well out of it.
They had come home during the height of the disturbances to discover their teenage daughter being ravished by a young police officer.
Exhibit A was expected to be a twenty-one function Swiss Police knife.
Then there were the fifty-five auction bidders who were filing a mass suit for slander and defamation of character against a sergeant in the Special Forces.
The Sheila na gigh bus company was suing for the loss of its only bus and Mr Patel for his Woodbine machine.
More than one hundred smartly dressed American solicitors had already chartered a plane and were even now heading across the Atlantic.
Police Chief Sam McAggott was having a ‘rough one’.
He sat at his desk rooting through a tower of statements.
‘Do we have anyone in our cells who does not claim to be an innocent bystander?’ he asked his sergeant.
The sergeant pushed back his cap and scratched his head, the way some of them do.
‘McMurdo,’ he said.
‘McMurdo?
That name seems to ring a bell.
Does he have any ‘previous’?’
‘Well, no sir.
He doesn't actually have a record.
But he's a wrong'n right enough.
We've got him banged up in a high-security cell.
I've had him put in a strait-jacket and one of those leather masks with the little bars over the mouth hole.
He won't be biting anyone's face off while he's in our custody.
Have no fear of that, chief.’
‘I'm very glad to hear it.
And what did we arrest him for?’
The sergeant flourished McMurdo's statement.
‘He coughed up, sir.
Came clean.’
Sam read through the statement.
‘He confessed to being in illegal possession of two packets of Woodbine?
Is that it?’
‘Yes, sir.’
The sergeant winked.
‘But I can pencil in a few other little misdemeanours.
Clear up a few unsolveds, eh sir?’
‘No no no!’
McAggott ripped up McMurdo's statement and flung the pieces into the air.
‘But, sir.
I'm sure we could tie him into a couple of torso cases and a bullion robbery.
Just give us time.
I'll beat the truth out of the maniac.’
‘No,’ said McAggott.
He turned further sheets of paper.
‘What about these two tourists?
Murphy and Tuppe?
What kind of name is that, Tuppe?’
‘I believe it's Welsh, sir, or Danish.’
‘So, what about them?’
‘They're witnesses, sir.
Against the Campbell.’
‘Then why are they locked in a cell?’
‘For their own protection, sir.’
‘From who?’
‘The Campbell, sir.’
‘And where's he?’
‘Locked in the next cell, sir.’
McAggott sighed.
‘Let them out, sergeant.
Get full statements from them and send them on their way.’
‘Yes sir.’
‘Sergeant, I can't seem to find any shaven-headed Scottish Nationalists here.’
‘We didn't arrest any, sir.’
‘And what about this Wolf of Kabul fellow?’
‘Fictional character, sir.
Out of The Holspur.’
‘Out of The Hotspur.
I see.’
McAggott rose wearily from his desk and smote the sergeant a blow to the skull.
‘Put the kettle on, sergeant,’ he said.
At a little after six of the early evening clock, Cornelius and Tuppe were once more in Sheila na gigh.
A Sheila na gigh which now resembled Beirut on a bad day.
Their taxi pulled up outside The Anabaptist Reform Church and Felix Henderson McMurdo climbed out.
‘Thanks very much for the lift,’ said he.
‘And may God go with you on your epic journey.’
‘A pleasure,’ said Cornelius.
‘And good luck to you.’
Tuppe waved.
‘Be lucky,’ he called.
‘Bye.’
‘Nice chap,’ said Cornelius to Tuppe,
‘One of the best,’ said Tuppe to Cornelius.
‘He'll finish his days at the end of a rope,’ said the taxi driver, unclenching his buttocks.
‘Do you want me to wait, by the way?’
‘Oh yes.’
Cornelius climbed from the cab and stood amidst  the rubble.
‘We have to pick up some belongings and then we'd like you to drive us.’
‘Where to?’
‘The south.
A long way to the south.’
‘No problem there.
It's cash only for all trips costing less than twenty-five pounds, of course.
But I will accept personal cheques up to fifty pounds if they are accompanied by a valid cheque card.
And any major credit card…’
Cornelius left two hundred pounds in cash in an envelope pinned to the pulpit.
He also left his address, with a request that a receipt be sent on to him.
‘First class,’ said Cornelius, once the green canvas portmanteau and his personal baggage was all in the boot of the taxi.
‘South?’ asked the taxi driver.
‘South,’ said Cornelius Murphy, grinning like a good'n.
10
It was a beautiful evening.
Even out there, in the middle of nowhere, it was a beautiful evening.
The taxi rattled to the side of the road, steam issuing from its bonnet regions.
The driver got out of the car.
Lifted the bonnet.
Dropped the bonnet.
Blew on to his scalded fingers.
Cursed the bonnet.
Lifted the bonnet again with his elbows.
Peered into the engine area.
Cursed the engine area.
Kicked the radiator and screamed as the bonnet fell shut on his fingers.
He was cursing still as Cornelius bandaged him up.
‘I'm sorry we broke off the bonnet,’ the tall boy said.
‘But we got you free and that's all that really matters.
I don't think anything's broken, by the way.’
‘Apart from the bonnet, of course,’ said Tuppe.
‘And the fan belt.
You don't happen to carry a spare, I suppose.’
The driver looked him daggers.
‘No, I thought not.’
Cornelius glanced over his shoulder and then stuck his head out of the window and squinted into the distance.
The road before looked much like the road behind.
It was long and straight and surrounded by bleak-looking moor.
‘You'd better set off now before it gets dark,’ he told the driver.
‘I'd better what?’
‘Go for help.
We'll wait here for you.’
‘And if you find a cafe, could you bring back a couple of bacon sandwiches?’
Tuppe asked.
‘No no no,’ said the taxi driver.
‘One of you can go.’
Cornelius shook his head.
‘I am too frail to be a moors walker.
And I can hardly be expected to leave my three-year-old brother here in the care of a strange man.’
‘Three years old?’
The driver viewed Tuppe with suspicion.
‘Waaaaaaaah,’ went Tuppe.
‘Don't let the nasty man touch me.’
‘All right.
I'll go.
But you pay me now.
I don't want to get back here and find you've legged it.
I'm no fool you know.’
‘No, I'm sure you're not.’
Cornelius paid up.
‘I'll need a receipt for that, if you don't mind.’
The driver displayed his bandaged fingers.
‘Sorry,’ said he in a tone which suggested that he was anything but.
‘You'd better take a coat,’ said Tuppe helpfully.
‘You never know.’
The driver made a gesture with his bandaged fingers.
Gazed up at the clear evening sky and slouched away without his coat.
He was a mere dot on the horizon when the sky clouded over and the storm broke.
‘He's no fool you know, that driver,’ said Tuppe.
‘So I've heard.’
Cornelius stretched a long arm to the dashboard and unclipped the driver's radio mike.
‘Mayday Mayday,’ he called into it.
‘I wondered about that also,’ said Tuppe.
‘But as the driver was being so grumpy I decided not to mention it to him.’
Cornelius spoke to many interesting people on the radio set.
He spoke to a motor cycle messenger who had once been a roadie for King Crimson.
A trucker named Keith who was delivering coal to Newcastle.
A radio ham called Tony and an ambulance driver who had just picked up a man with bandaged fingers who was suffering from exposure.
Cornelius would have liked to have spoken more with the ambulance driver but the signal faded away.
‘I think the car battery has just gone flat,’ said Tuppe.
Cornelius replaced the radio mike.
‘I think we are well and truly marooned,’ said he.
‘I spoke to three different minicab firms, but none of them wanted to come out and fetch us.
I wonder why.’
‘I think to hear the baying of a monstrous hound,’ said Tuppe.
The storm worsened.
Lightning dipped and veered in a manner which was far too close for comfort.
The howling wind blew the broken bonnet away and rain began to flood in under the dashboard.
‘My feet are getting wet,’ said Cornelius.
‘Mine aren't,’ said Tuppe.
‘But I know what you mean.’
It was getting on for ten of the storm-lashed grim night clock when the headlights appeared.
They moved slowly and steadily towards the stranded taxi and then they stopped.
‘There,’ said Cornelius.
‘The day is yet saved.’
‘The day is yet saved!’
Tuppe sat gloomily upon the tall boy's rucksack.
His back against the portmanteau.
Cornelius had his suitcase on his lap.
He was leaning against the coffin.
‘A hearse,’ whispered Tuppe.
‘We are in the back of a hearse.
The back of a hearse which is already occupied.
We should have stuck it out in the taxi.’
Back along the road, a forked tongue of lightning struck the taxi.
The explosion was quite dramatic, but the rain eventually put out the fire.
Cornelius called forwards to the driver.
‘If you could just drop us off at the first five-star hotel you come to.’
The driver said nothing, and the hearse, one of those really spiffing nineteen-forties jobs, with the scrolled ironwork around the roof and the etched glass windows, continued soundlessly through the storm-tossed night.
And then suddenly it stopped.
‘Fan belt, do you think?’
Tuppe asked.
‘We've only travelled about half a mile.’
The driver turned to face them.
A long, pale face beneath a long, dark hat.
' The village of Milcom Moloch,’ he announced, in a funereal tone.
‘There is an inn here.
We go no further.’
He left the driving seat, went around to the rear and swung up the door.
Cornelius peered out through the rain.
Across the street warm lights showed through pebbled glass.
An inn sign swung to and fro in the wind.
Faint sounds of revelry issued into the night.
Cornelius and Tuppe dragged the luggage from the hearse and thanked the driver.
Tuppe waved.
‘Be lucky,’ he called.
‘Come on,’ said Cornelius.
‘Let's get out of this rain.’
There was a ‘Hah-up!’
A crack of a whip.
And a whinny of horses.
The epic duo turned and thought to see a Victorian high-wheeled hearse vanish into the storm.
‘Trick of the light,’ said Tuppe.
‘Undoubtedly,’ Cornelius agreed.
A dash of lightning lit up the inn sign.
The words THE HANGMAN S ARMS showed up just long enough to be read.
‘Come on.’
Cornelius dragged the portmanteau towards the inn door.
Tuppe struggled manfully with the rucksack and suitcase.
Cornelius raised the rough iron catch and the storm caught the inn door, blasting it forwards.
All sounds of revelry ceased.
Cornelius fought with his hair.
‘Good-evening,’ he called, smiling invisibly for all he was worth.
‘Bye now.’
The police sergeant waved to Mr Patel.
Mr Patel did not wave back.
The sergeant shrugged, put the bolt on the front door and returned to the office of Police Chief Sam McAggott.
‘That's about the last of them, sir,’ he said.
Sam sat with his head in his hands.
‘Ruination,’ was all he had to say.
‘Come now, sir, it's never as bad as you think.’
Behind his back the sergeant rolled the copy of tomorrow morning's Edinburgh Mercury between his hands.
The front-page banner headline read DISGRACED
POLICE CHIEF TO STAND TRIAL.
‘I know we had to let them all walk free.
But we do still have the Campbell.’
‘Ah,’ said Sam.
‘The Campbell.’
‘The Wild Warrior of West Lothian, sir.
We have him bang to rights on the kiosk heist and Special Forces caught him redhanded holding up the auction room and trying to make off with a green canvas portmanteau.’
‘A guilty man?
And actually in our custody?
Can this be right?’
‘Locked up neat and nice, sir.
Of course, we'll have to let him go in the morning.’
‘And just for why?’
‘Well, sir.
Apparently someone recorded over the station security video by mistake, the gaunt woman who runs the kiosk is not prepared to testify.
The portmanteau can't be found.
Murphy has left town.
The other auction bidders are all tied up with litigation against the Special Forces.
And the Special Forces guy's solicitor has advised him not to make any statements.’
‘So the Campbell is not bang to rights at all.’
‘But he doesn't know that, sir.
We'd get a confession out of him easy as blinking.
Possibly even tie him into a couple of torso cases and a bullion robbery.’
Sam shrugged.
‘I like the way you think, sergeant.
Pull this one off and there could be a promotion in it for you.’
‘Thanks, sir.’
The sergeant rammed the rolled copy of the Edinburgh Mercury into his back pocket and fished down the ring of cell keys from its hook by the door.
‘Shall I bring my big truncheon?’ he asked Sam.
The cells were, as they say, hewn into the living rock.
Water oozed from their ceilings and plip-plopped into rank pools.
Rats scuttled.
Strange cries echoed.
‘Here we are, sir.’
The sergeant turned a key in a cell door.
The door went EEEEEEEAAAAAAAW as he pushed it open.
‘The Campbell,’ said the sergeant.
‘Get up, Campbell,’ said Sam McAggott.
The Campbell drew a deep breath.
Then he got to his feet and glared at Sam McAggott.
‘I'll be on my way now,’ he said.
‘Not yet, my lad,’ said Sam.
‘Oh yes.’
The Campbell lifted one foot in the air.
Then he lifted the other.
He hovered a moment in complete contempt for the law of gravity and then he left the cell.
At impossible speed.
He swept past McAggott, bowling him from his feet.
Soared over the ducking head of the sergeant.
Flew along the corridor.
Burst through door after police door and was gone into the night.
McAggott climbed over the sergeant, who had assumed the foetal position, and staggered back to his office.
He picked up his telephone and dialled out a number.
Somewhere a phone began to ring.
‘Hello,’ said a voice.
‘Who is it?’
‘McAggott,’ gasped McAggott.
‘Ah.
What news?
Did all go according to plan?’
‘Yes, sir.
Well, no sir.
The one you're looking for…’
‘You caught it?’
‘It escaped, sir.
We didn't know it was…an it.
We couldn't stop it.
It moved so fast.’
‘You fool.
Did it change?
Did you see it change?’
‘No, sir.
It glared and it floated and it flew like the Devil.
But it didn't change.’
‘What about Murphy?
Is Murphy all right?’
‘He's fine, sir.
We sent him off on his way.’
‘He'd better be fine.
Now get your men out after the it.
Tell them to shoot on sight.
If it can be shot.
Who is following Murphy?’
‘No-one, sir.
I thought you…’
‘Buffoon.
You are a buffoon, McAggott.’
‘Sorry, sir.
Goodbye, sir.’
‘Goodbye.’
Arthur Kobold replaced the receiver.
‘And good luck, Murphy.
You're going to need it.’
‘Hello,’ called Cornelius Murphy.
‘Good-evening to you.’
It was a snug little bar.
Blackened beams ribbed it all around and about.
A fine log fire crackled in the inglenook.
The floor was of mellow golden stone.
The tables and benches burnished bog oak.
There were copper kettles and warming pans and horse brasses.
Very snug indeed.
‘Aiiiieeeee!’ went the patrons of this snug little bar, cowering in their seats.
‘The Lord preserve us.’
Cornelius looked at Tuppe.
Tuppe looked at Cornelius.
‘A Special Forces pub, do you think?’
Tuppe asked.
‘Away, thou spawn of the pit!’ cried the landlord, flourishing a string of garlic and making the sign of the cross.
‘Back to the depths of Hell with you.’
‘Would there be any chance of a room for the night?’
Tuppe called.
‘The Devil's familiar!’
The landlord pointed to the small fellow.
‘Back, ungodly issue!’
The cowering patrons were pulling silver crucifixes from their pockets and holding them between trembling fingers.
‘Out, demons, out…’ they began to chant.
‘Stuff this,’ said Cornelius.
‘Let's try up the road.’
‘Out, demons!’ shrieked the landlord.
‘All right.
We're going.’
The tall boy turned towards the storm.
‘Oh come on in and shut the bloody door,’ said the landlord and the bar erupted into gales of laughter.
‘Ah,’ said Cornelius, fighting down his hair, hauling in the portmanteau and forcing shut the door.
‘This would be some of that famous north-country humour I have read so much about.’
‘Lost on me I'm afraid,’ muttered Tuppe.
He and Cornelius approached the landlord, who was clutching at his mid regions and laughing like the drain of proverb.
‘Take no notice of them, lads.
They do it to everyone.’
An extremely attractive young barmaid appeared on the scene.
She was pale and willowy, with a large mouth and the most amazing violet eyes that you ever did see.
Cornelius observed that freckles on her left cheek mapped out the Tuamotu archipelago of south-west Polynesia.
She smiled upon Cornelius and Cornelius smiled mightily upon her.
‘My name is Cornelius Murphy,’ he told her.
‘And I would be honoured if you would bear my children.’
The landlord smacked the counter and fell into further hilarity.
‘Get away with you.’
The barmaid fluttered exotic eyelashes at the tall boy.
‘What'll it be?’
‘I'll take a short,’ said Tuppe.
‘The little'n'll take a short.’
The landlord sank beneath the counter and lay on his back kicking his legs in the air.
‘Smashed out of their bloody boxes as usual.’
The beautiful barmaid shook her beautiful head.
‘Scotch will it be, love?’
‘Two,’ said Cornelius.
‘No ice.’
‘I missed that,’ croaked the landlord.
‘What did he say?’
‘He said, no ice.’
The landlord thrashed about helplessly.
The barmaid drew off two measures and passed them across the counter.
Cornelius helped Tuppe on to a stool and found one for himself.
‘Would you care to join us in a drink?’ he asked the barmaid.
‘I'll take the money, if you don't mind.
Someone has to stay sober around here.’
‘As you wish.’
Cornelius handed her a five-pound note.
The barmaid rang up the drinks on the till and then pocketed all of the change.
‘Could I have a receipt for that?’
Cornelius asked.
‘What you got in this big trunk, mister?’
A big, ruddy-faced farming type tapped the portmanteau with the steely toecap of his sturdy work boot.
‘Dismembered body, is it?’
His drinking buddies cheered and hooted.
Cornelius made a distraught face and chewed upon his knuckle.
'It's my hideously deformed brother,’ he said in a hoarse whisper.
‘We are taking him back to the institution.
Don't awaken him.
If he was to get free again…’
The tall boy covered his face.
‘The blood, all the blood…all those chewed up limbs…’
The patrons collapsed into further mirth.
‘Do you have a vacant room for the night?’
Cornelius asked the barmaid.
‘There's only the one.
Your friend and you will have to share.’
The pub door swung open.
‘Aiiiieeeee!’ went the patrons.
‘Save our souls.’
‘Leave it out, you silly buggers.’
A local in a waxy anorak entered, shaking rain from his hat.
He shut the door, turned and tripped straight over the portmanteau.
The patrons rose to new heights of glee.
Laughter rattled the horse brasses and echoed in the warming pans.
The ruddy-faced fellow fingered his joke crucifix.
‘Pray that you have not awakened the mad brother,’ said he, helping the fallen anorakster to his feet.
‘Do they always carry on in this fashion?’
Cornelius asked.
The barmaid nodded.
Cornelius caught the fragrance of L'Air du Temps.
‘They didn't used to be like this.
They used to all sit glowering into their beer.
Then the mill closed down.
And the crops failed.
And the brickworks went out of business.
And the processing plant moved to Solihull.
And now they're all on the dole with no prospect of ever working again.’
‘I see,’ said Cornelius.
‘I don't,’ said Tuppe.
‘Then,’ continued the barmaid, as Cornelius sniffed on appreciatively, ‘this meteor came down in old Jack Spar's field, least as how they thought it were a meteor.
But it weren't.
It were a kind of metal cylinder.
The men dug it out of the ground where it fell and hauled it back to the village.
The old boys said it were a gift from the elder gods and they built a special shrine for it in the square.’
Cornelius looked at Tuppe.
Tuppe looked at Cornelius.
They finished their drinks.
‘Might we see our room now?’
Cornelius asked.
‘Certainly.
I'll show you the way.’
Tuppe and Cornelius hastened to collect the luggage.
The barmaid led them from the bar and up some rickety steps.
The patrons cheered their departure and raised glasses in salute.
'There were this big storm, see.
Just like tonight.
And lightning struck the shrine and the cylinder cracked open and out came this thing.’
Cornelius bumped the portmanteau up the stairs behind the barmaid.
‘White stockings,’ he sighed.
‘You'll have to duck your head here, love.’
Clunk went the head of Cornelius Murphy.
‘Ouch,’ he said.
‘Out came what thing?’ he asked.
The barmaid swung open a door and switched on the light.
It was a snug little bedroom.
Oak-framed bed.
Chintzy bed cover.
Plump goose-feather pillows.
A cozy little fire burned in the hearth.
‘Fell out.’
The barmaid turned down the chintzy bed cover.
‘It were a machine inside.
A sort of box with dials on and a little television screen.
And a microphone.’
‘Probably an interositor,’ said Tuppe, who had seen This Island Earth three times.
‘No, it weren't an interositor, them has triangular screens and positronic wave cross-band modulators which operate on the principle of ionized beta photons bombarding the nucleus of an alpha particle.
Same as a linear accelerator.’
‘Not one of those then?’
‘No.’
The barmaid tossed her head.
A swirl of soft brown hair.
‘It were a karaoke machine.’
Cornelius sighed once more.
But this time it had nothing to do with white stockings.
‘Is that it?’ he asked.
‘Or is there more?’
‘There's more.
Let me give you a hand with that suitcase, little manny.’
‘Thanks,’ said Tuppe.
The barmaid humped the suitcase on to the bed.
' Is this real crocodile skin?’ she asked.
‘No.’
Cornelius shook his head.
The barmaid tittered.
‘That time when you shook your head, your hair just stayed still.’
‘It does that.
Go on then.
The karaoke machine?’
‘Well see.
They brought it into the bar.
It were a bit charred by the lightning, but they plugged it in and music came out and the words to the music came up on the little television screen.’
‘That's what they do.’
Tuppe put down the rucksack and kicked it under the bed.
‘Or so I've been told.’
‘Well maybe they do.
But this machine played music no-one had ever heard before.
Catchy tunes, though, and everyone had a singalong.
Cheered them up no end it did.’
‘And so that's why they're all so jolly?’
‘No, that's not it at all.
Just you listen.
It were a month after they first started playing with the machine that someone hears one of the tunes they were singing on the wireless set.’
'That's what the machines do, ' Tuppe explained.
'They play popular tunes of the day.’
'No, ' said the barmaid.
'I'm not explaining myself right.
The karaoke machine had played the tune a month before the tune turned up on the wireless set.
It played music from the future.
Next month's top ten, to be precise.’
‘Next month's top ten?’
Cornelius sat down on the portmanteau.
‘You are making fun of us, surely.’
‘I am not.
The machine played music from the future.’
‘I see,’ said Cornelius, who was beginning to.
‘So the folk of the village capitalized on this gift from the gods, that had come to them in their darkest hour.
Let me guess, they placed bets with bookmakers about who would be top of the charts at Christmas.
They took out copyright on lyrics that had not even been written yet.
In short they are all now fabulously wealthy.
That's why they laugh all the time.’
The barmaid shook her head.
More brown swirlings, more L'Air du Temps.
‘No.
That's not it at all.
Though the other fellow did say all the kind of things you just did say.’
‘Other fellow.
What other fellow?’
‘He was from London.
His name was Jack, I think.
There was this storm see, just like tonight.
And he were a taxi driver and he'd got lost.
And when he come into the pub he hears the village lads singing along with the machine and he has a go himself and gets to talking with everyone.
A real friendly fellow he were by all accounts, bought 'em all drinks.’
Cornelius did not possess a machine that could predict the future, but he felt certain he knew just how this tale was going to end.
‘He took the machine away with him, didn't he?’
‘How did you guess?
That's just what he did.
He said he had connections with the music industry and how he was always having famous musicians and producers sitting in the back of his cab.
And how he could make all the village wealthy.’
‘And the villagers let a complete stranger drive off with a machine that could play music from the future…’
‘Course they didn't.
Do you think we're all daft?
No, they sent  a big strong farmer's lad down to London with this Jack, to make sure there were no funny business.’
‘I'm sure I'm missing something here.
How long ago did this happen?’
‘Oh, before my time.
About thirty years back.
And do you know what?’
‘What?’
‘They never heard from either of them again.
So…’
‘So?’
‘So, you have to laugh, don't you?’
The barmaid slapped her knees and did just that.
Cornelius set free another sigh.
‘This big farmer's lad?’
Tuppe asked.
‘I travel about a bit.
You don't happen to recall his name, by any chance?’
‘Brian.’
The barmaid dabbed at her eyes.
‘Brian somet or other.’
‘Epstein?’
Tuppe enquired.
‘That's it.
Brian Epstein.
Do you know him then?’
Tuppe shook his head.
‘Just a lucky guess,’ said he.
‘Brian Epstein!’
The barmaid had departed and Cornelius was unpacking his suitcase.
‘Brian Epstein indeed.’
Tuppe was toasting his feet by the fire.
‘I've travelled, like I say.
And I've heard that story before.’
‘Not true then?’
Cornelius unfolded his pyjamas.
Tuppe caught sight of them.
Cornelius stuffed them hastily back into the suitcase.
‘I'm not saying it's not true.
Only that I've heard it before.
Perhaps if you hear a thing told often enough, it makes it true.
What nasty pyjamas, by the way.’
‘They are rather vile, aren't they?’
Cornelius closed his suitcase.
‘I suggest we have a look in the portmanteau.
That is why we're here after all.’
‘What a good idea.’
They dragged the portmanteau into the middle of the room.
Cornelius prised open the locks and lifted the lid.
A stale musty old smell filled the air.
‘That's a dirty old duffle-coat, if ever there was one.’
Tuppe leaned into the portmanteau, scooped out the duffle-coat and tossed it into a far comer.
‘But see, here is your brush-and-comb set.’
Cornelius took it up.
‘This case is never calfskin.
Plastic.’
‘Perhaps you might put it back into next week's auction.’
‘I think not.
Now, what papers do we have?’
They didn't have many.
And what they did were mostly bills of the unpaid variety.
These covered a wide range of goods.
Expensive cigars.
Brandies and liquors.
Rare books.
Exclusive clothing.
The bills were all made out to Hugo Rune.
Demands for payment and court summonses were pinned to most of them.
‘He certainly knew how to live, this Rune.’
Tuppe flicked through the bills.
‘Big game rifles.
Hand-tailored shirts.
Imported toiletries.’
‘What is this?’
Cornelius brought to light an ancient photograph.
Curly at the edges and mottled with age.
It was a group shot of four men.
Three were young, smiling.
The fourth, who stood head and shoulders above them, was older.
He wasn't smiling.
He wore a plaid plus-fours suit over a more than ample frame.
His head was a great shaven dome.
His eyes dark and piercing.
Across the photograph was scrawled in blue ink, us WITH THE MASTER.
HIS BIRTHDAY, JULY 1936.
Beneath this was an arrow pointing down and the words, TO MOLLY.
‘I have a Molly on my list.’
Cornelius handed the photograph to Tuppe.
‘Pity she's not in the picture.’
‘Who's that fat bastard?’
Tuppe asked.
‘The lad himself, as they say.’
Cornelius took back the picture and tucked it into his top pocket.
‘Anything else?’
Tuppe climbed into the portmanteau and dug about.
‘Some letters.
No lost manuscripts though.’
‘Check to see if the trunk has a false bottom.’
Tuppe stuck his head up.
‘That's what I am doing.’
Cornelius examined the letters.
They were all from Rune, addressed to Victor Zenobia, requesting funds for one project or another.
Maps.
The purchase of a London taxi.
Ropes and climbing tackle.
Gunpowder.
‘I think we have the measure of Mr Rune.’
Cornelius tucked the letters into his pocket.
‘Barking mad and always on the ear'ole.’
‘He didn't seem to care what he spent, as long as he didn't have to pay for it.
I wonder what your Mr Kobold sees in him.’
‘Or the rival publishers.
The Campbell must surely be in their pay.’
‘You think that?’
‘What other explanation can there be?
He was waiting for me when I arrived.
He knew I was coming.
He planned to get me out of the way so he could bid for the portmanteau.
Nab the papers.’
‘All seems a bit drastic.
But it's epic stuff right enough.
Ah, what's this?
Oh, nothing, just an old paper bag.’
Tuppe screwed it up and flung it on to the carpet.
‘Oh good,’ said Cornelius.
‘A vital clue.’
‘A vital what?’
‘Clue.
Whenever a piece of paper gets screwed up and thrown away like that it's always a vital clue.’
‘Oh yes, so it is.
Quick, give it the once over.’
Cornelius picked up the old paper bag and carefully uncreased it.
‘Molly's Wholefoods.’
Cornelius read aloud.
‘Number one, Marduk Parade, High Street, Milcom Moloch.’
‘Well, how about that?’
‘How indeed.’
They had a bottle of the best port sent up.
And they sat and they plotted what they should do next.
Presently the port was gone and the fire gone and Tuppe had gone to sleep in the portmanteau.
So Cornelius crept off to the bathroom, performed fastidious ablutions, togged up in the vile pyjamas and returned to the bedroom.
He tucked the chintzy bed cover over his sleeping friend and switched off the light.
In the unfamiliar darkness he wondered over the peculiarities of the day.
But being able to make nothing of them he finally drifted off to sleep.
In the far comer of the room, the duffle-coat stirred.
A black rat crept out of the left sleeve and scuttled away in search of cheese.
11
Most of us like to celebrate our birthdays.
THE MYSTERIES OF TIME
My own, for example, is a national holiday in Tibet, a ‘Day of Gladness and Rejoicing’ in Upper Sumatra, and, no doubt , many other parts of the world.
But how many have ever stopped to consider this particular riddle?
If you are born on a Monday, then the next year your birthday will fall on a Tuesday.
The next on a Wednesday and so on and so forth.
Therefore, by the time you are seven, although your birthdate remains the same, you must actually be celebrating your birthday one week later in the year.
By the time you are thirty, an entire lunar month later.
Therefore, a man born in the spring must surely celebrate his ninetieth birthday in the middle of the summer.
This is what you call a Cosmic Mystery.
And I will return to it.
There is a great deal more to time than meets the eye, or has, in fact, ever been ‘explained’ by that unprincipled scoundrel, A. Einstein, Esq.
For instance, who amongst us has not said at one time or another:
Doesn't time fly when you're enjoying yourself?
Time really drags in this job.
Not bloody Christmas again already!
My wife says I'm a bad lover.
How can any woman tell that in thirty seconds?
Isn't that window-cleaner coming more often than he did last year?
Now, I am the last man on Earth to cry, CONSPIRACY!
But I think to detect the acrid stench of its breath in this one.
Allow me to explain.
Time, as you will agree, is the most valuable commodity that we possess.
And, as we know only too well, every really valuable commodity falls, sooner or later, into the hands of some unscrupulous individual, who then exploits it for their own ends.
It is my contention that ‘time’ is now under the control of such an individual, who manipulates it in order to do down the working man.
Allow me to explain further.
The average working man spends roughly half of his life working.
This involves a lot of clock watching.
The working part of the working man's life seems to last ‘for ever’.
Then, if he survives this and retires, one of two things happen.
Either, he finds ‘time dragging terribly’ and returns to work, or, he resists this urge, takes off to the seaside, wakes up one morning, says ‘Twenty years retired, it seems like only five minutes,’and drops dead.
There is no escape for the working man!
His ‘time’ is being controlled!
Let me cite the example of Shakespeare.
How could he have completed so many plays, as well as formulating the beer which bears his name and opening so many tea rooms?
Remember, there were no typewriters or photocopier machines in those days.
If Shakespeare wrote a play with a cast of twenty-five, then he must have had to write a separate copy for each of the cast.
I estimate that he must therefore have penned no less than five thousand words per minute, ten hours a day, for twenty years.
No mean feat!
There are two possibilities here.
Either, that time was substantially different in those days, let us say that a minute then, would be equivalent to an hour and a half now; or that somehow  Shakespeare had ‘time on his side’.
Under his control, in fact.
Oh yes?
I contend that it was all down to Shakespeare's employer.
He had control of Shakespeare's ‘time’ and was determined to milk it for every ounce of potential profit.
So, I hear you cry, tell us how it's done, Hugo.
And tell us who is doing it.
And so I shall.
THE POPE CONTROLS ‘TIME’ ON THIS PLANET!
Come come, I hear you cry.
Surely this is sour grapes, Hugo.
Because your application to become Pope has been turned down yet again.
Not so, my friends, not so.
I will now explain everything.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME by HUGO RUNE
No-one knows exactly who originally discovered the existence of time.
But it was certainly the Romans who first thought of splitting it up into units of measurement.
The Roman senate started off with seconds and decided that sixty of them should equal one minute.
Being extremely fond of naming things, especially after themselves, the sixty-man senate arrived at this particular figure without much in the way of heated debate.
And each had a second named after themselves.
They did not, however, agree upon a uniform length for the second.
And since some senators had much longer names than others, jealousies soon arose.
In no time senators were renaming themselves with longer and longer titles so that their seconds should be bigger than everyone else's.
We have the sixty-first senator to thank for the length of the second.
Arriving back, as he did from his holidays, to discover that his honourable companions hadn't given him a second to call his own, he took umbrage (somewhere near Troy)
And being a conniving little toady with an eye for the main chance, he proclaimed that the second should equal exactly the time it took to say ‘praise Caesar’.
And that they shouldn't have names at all, but simply be numbered from one to sixty.
This didn't go down very well with the rest of the senate, but found great favour with Caesar, who allowed the sixty-first senator to keep umbrage.
The Caesar in question was the almost forgotten Flavius the Noseless.
And it was he who originally decreed that all Roman sculptures should be fashioned without noses.
A fact which seems to have slipped by the greybeards of the art world.
The same greybeards, in fact, who still refer to Henry Moore as an ‘abstract’ sculptor.
I knew Moore for many years and can testify that he was a master of lifelike representation.
He just knocked around with some very funny looking women.
But I digress.
Now, the senate, having got time divided up, named and tamed, were not happy.
They had already invented The Class System (we have much to thank the Romans for).
And they were saying to themselves, ‘Why should time be the same for everyone?
Surely we, as the ruling intelligentsia, should have posher time than the slaves and plebs?’
A whole lot of serious debating went on about this.
Many suggestions were put forward.
That the plebs should have less seconds in their minutes.
That they should have the same number of seconds but be taxed for using them.
That somehow their seconds should be made longer, so that they could do more work in a day.
It was the latter suggestion, and how it was put into practice, that has enslaved the working man to this day.
Now, there was this Greek fellow called Archimedes, who had built up quite a reputation for himself.
He had invented this word called EUREKA! which, if shouted under certain conditions in the bathroom, enabled him to solve any manner of obtuse conundrums.
Flavius the Noseless had booked two weeks in Greece for his holidays, so whilst there he dropped in on Archimedes and asked if he could come up with anything.
Archimedes stroked his beard and retired to cogitate.
Eventually he emerged from his bath, somewhat prune-like about the toe regions, but with the E-word once more on his lips.
‘The answer lies in the soap,’ he told Caesar.
‘Kaendly eggsplene,’ said the noseless one.
‘Certainly.
Now the way I see it, you want more upmarket time than the plebs.
Now, I must make this quite clear to you, you can't actually mess around with time.
But, you can mess around with the perception of time.
What you need is a special drug, which, when administered to the plebs, will alter the way they perceive time.
It will make time appear to travel slower.
Thus, whilst in this state, they will get much more work done than they would normally.
Do you know anything about chemistry?’
Caesar nodded sagely.
Thought not, thought Archimedes.
‘Well, I happen to know of such a drug.
It has a very complicated chemical formula (C1lHl7NO3).
And I alone can manufacture it.
All you have to do is introduce it into the plebs’ soap.
They wash with the soap and ingest the drug.
And away they go.’
‘Bet whet abeet thee greet unweshed?’
Caesar asked.
‘Stick it in their tea.
Agreed the working masses may not bath as regularly as might be wished, but they all drink tea.
Listen, I'll distil you a batch.
You take it back to Rome.
If you're happy with the results, put in a regular order and we're in business.’
Palms were spat upon and smacked together.
And the rest, as they say, is history.
Caesar returned to Rome.
Tested the drug.
Found that it worked magically.
Rome thrived.
Caesar, being an astute businessman, if not a terribly nice person, sacked Greece, arrested Archimedes and tortured the formula out of him.
The Caesars eventually turned to Christianity and became Popes.
And the Vatican has held the secret to this very day.
Hang about, I hear you cry, doubting Toms that you are.
This doesn't ring true.
Surely we all use soap and drink tea.
We can't all be permanently drugged.
No, say 1.
Not all.
Because not all tea and soap is infected.
And, if only the Vatican were in on the conspiracy, it could never operate.
The manufacturers of tea and soap are in collusion.
The distributors are in collusion.
Higher management is in collusion.
All those who drink exotic tea and smell differently from the rest of us are probably in collusion.
It is an international conspiracy.
Huge and insidious and the Pope is behind it all.
I detect that some doubts still remain.
That you really believe that you could not possibly be a victim of this terrible conspiracy.
But consider this, ‘Time really flies when you're enjoying yourself’?
This is because alcohol negates the effects of the drug.
Ever found time flying when you're taking a bath or drinking a cup of tea?
Aha!
And let me mention this.
The drug is addictive.
Ever found yourself ‘dying for a cuppa’?
Aha!
Ever wondered why the Catholic Church was so keen to convert the natives of South America?
You know South America.
Where all that coffee comes from.
Aha!
Ever wondered why the formula for Coca-Cola is such a closely guarded secret?
Aha!
I could continue at great length.
But I will not.
I opened this piece by stating that your birthday falls upon a different day each year.
But that logically, it could not.
Ever heard the expression, ‘He's so stoned he doesn't know what day of the week it is’?
Aha!
In concluding, I would just like to say that it has been a very great honour to be invited here tonight to The William of Orange Memorial Hall, Belfast, as guest speaker at The Independent Shopkeeper of the Year Awards.
To find myself in the company of so many eminent, discerning and open-minded independent shopkeepers, affords me pleasure beyond expression.
I trust that my revelations have amused you.
I know that they will draw considerable interest from the buying public when they are revealed upon the front pages of certain newspapers this coming Sunday.
Considerable interest.
You will notice that I have before me a selection of RUNE BRAND products.
For instance, EARL RUNE.
Now, this particular tea is guaranteed one hundred per cent C11H17NO3 free.
Organically grown, packed in an ozone-friendly biodegradable carton and marketed at a price to please both shopkeeper and purchaser alike.
As with CAFE RUNE GOLDEN BLEND, HUGO-COLA and RUNELIGHT SOAP.
Now, I have to knock these out by the case, so who'll be the first one up?
You, sir?
The tall distinguished gentleman.
Twelve cases of EARL RUNE?
Certainly.
Rizla, fetch twelve down from the back of the van…
Offered as exhibit A for the prosecution in the case of Nearly Everyone versus Hugo Rune.
The smell of frying bacon awoke Cornelius Murphy from an erotic dream about a barmaid with violet eyes.
He climbed from the bed and shambled over to the dressing-table mirror.
There were no signs of a five-o'clock shadow.
His hair had formed itself into an interesting anthill kind of a shape though.
Cornelius drew the curtains and gazed out upon the day.
The village below looked pretty charming.
If you liked that sort of thing.
Cornelius wondered whether he did.
‘No I don't,’ he decided.
Tuppe awoke with a shout and leapt from the portmanteau.
‘Something wrong, Tuppe?’
Tuppe shook his head.
‘Bad dream, that's all,’ get it now and then, dream there's this big black bag full of horrible squirming things and it's tied to my heels.
I can't get away.
Horrible.’
‘Sounds it.’
‘No, horrible.
Really horrible.’
‘Horrible, yes.’
‘Your pyjamas,’ said Tuppe.
‘Really horrible.’
In the back kitchen of The Hangman's Arms, Milcom Moloch, a young man's dream stood over the frying pan.
‘Hello,’ she said, making eyes at Cornelius.
‘I thought you might have stopped by my room last night.
I were real lonely.’
Cornelius groaned and bit his lip.
‘You win some, you lose some,’ whispered Tuppe.
‘You missed all the excitement.’
‘Evidently.’
Cornelius hung his head.
His head hung its hair.
‘No.
Down in the bar.
We had a spontaneous human combustion.’
'Pooh,’ said Tuppe.
‘I've always wanted to see one of those.’
‘Third one this week.’
The barmaid broke eggs into the pan.
‘Do you have any mushrooms?’
Tuppe asked.
‘Surely do, little manny.
I'll stir them in.
Charred to a crisp he were.
Had to scrape him off the flag stones with this here spatula.’
She raised the utensil in question from the frying pan.
‘Toast and marmalade for me, I think,’ said Cornelius.
‘A light eater, me.’
An ancient black Volkswagen, covered with vicious spikes and fitted with all-black windows, slipped out from a back street lock-up in Sheila na gigh.
At the wheel sat Hamish.
In the back seats, Angus and Sawney.
In the front passenger seat, the Campbell.
The Campbell's all-black window swished down and evil Jim stuck his head out.
He sniffed the air.
‘South,’ he said.
Cornelius chewed upon cold dry toast and watched in disgust as Tuppe tucked into a fry-up of suitably epic proportion.
‘Have you got muesli?’
Cornelius asked the barmaid.
‘How dare you.’
The barmaid took a swing at him with the dreaded spatula.
‘It's a breakfast cereal,’ the tall and ducking boy explained.
‘It's full of nuts and bran and raisins and healthy things like that.’
‘Well no.’
The barmaid returned to her cooking.
‘No call for stuff like that round here.’
‘Surely there must be somewhere I could buy some.
A present for my mum.’
‘Well, there'd be Molly's.
She sells healthy things and that.’
‘Local family business?’
Cornelius chewed upon his toast.
‘No.
She's from the south.
No-one ever goes into her shop.
That fancy food.
For the swells, that is.
Tourists.’
‘And you get a lot of those?’
‘No.
None.’
The barmaid raised the spatula and brought it down upon a bluebottle.
Tuppe flinched, but continued to fill his face.
' Is Molly's far from here?’
Cornelius watched as the barmaid scooped up the bluebottle with the spatula, flipped it into the air and batted it out of the window.
‘Out the front.
Turn left and first on your left.
More bacon, little manny?’
‘Yes please,’ said Tuppe.
‘Out the front.
Turn left and first on the left.’
Cornelius gazed in through the front window of Molly's Wholefoods.
Tuppe gazed up at the crumbling façade.
‘Looks somewhat gone to seed.’
‘She must know something.
Shall we investigate?’
‘Lead on, Mr Murphy.’
Cornelius pushed open the door.
The door went creak and groan and a little cracked bell went clink.
‘It smells in here,’ Tuppe remarked.
Cornelius perused the premises.
Cobwebs clung to every comer.
Dust put the shelved stock out of focus.
What light struggled through the unwashed front window soon gave up the ghost in the air that seemed almost palpably grey.
Cornelius plucked an apple from a basket on the low counter.
He stroked the dust away with his thumb.
The apple crumbled away to dust in his hand.
‘Hello,’ called Cornelius.
‘Is there anybody there?’
Something rustled at the rear of the shop.
The sound as of dry leaves being crushed together.
A thin, reedy little voice asked, ‘Who is it?’
‘A customer,’ Cornelius replied.
‘Good-morning to you.’
‘I don't want any customers.
Bugger off.’
Cornelius peered into the gloom.
A patch of darkness in a far comer seemed somewhat darker than the less dark darkness that surrounded it.
So to speak.
‘Are you Molly Hartog?’
‘Who knows my name?’
The little dark patch of slightly darker darkness shrank back to merge quite convincingly with the less dark darkness and form an overall dark sort of an area.
All in the one place.
As it were.
‘My name is Murphy.’
‘Audie Murphy?
America's most decorated hero of the Second World War?
Star of Hell Guns of Glory Beach?’
The little dark patch sank deeper into the surrounding darkness.
Visually, the change was too subtle to attract much notice.
Or any, in fact.
‘His name is Cornelius Murphy,’ Tuppe said.
‘And he is the stuff of epics.’
The little, now indistinguishable dark patch, gave a jump and then moved slowly forward into the uncertain light.
Here it became an  uncertainly illuminated little dark patch.
A very little uncertainly illuminated little dark patch.
It reached out a tiny hand, encased in black silk.
Tuppe took the hand between his own and kissed it.
‘Little manny,’ said Molly Hartog.
‘What is Tiphareth to Kether?’
‘He is the son and not the servant.’
‘And whither comes the wind?’
‘From the east and we with all.’
‘Good good.
You may walk with me then.’
The tiny woman took Tuppe by the hand and led him into the darkness at the rear of the shop.
Cornelius stared on in wonder.
‘Don't lag,’ called Tuppe.
‘And best mind yourself.’
Clunk went the head of Cornelius Murphy.
Cornelius sat, uncomfortably doubled up, in a sitting room of meagre dimensions.
The ceiling was scarcely four feet above a floor, which was, for the most part, occupied by his legs.
The little woman was brewing tea at a toy stove by the window.
She appeared as a Victorian doll, curiously animated.
Her tiny pinched face of sculpted wax.
‘What is all this wind from the east business?’
Cornelius whispered.
‘Kin folk.’
Tuppe shushed him to silence.
‘Let me speak to her.
Give me the photograph.’
Cornelius gave Tuppe the photograph.
‘Travelling stock, your people?’
The Victorian doll filled a teapot and covered it with an egg cosy.
Tuppe nodded.
‘Before times fell away.
My grandfather was with Toomey for a spell and with Wombwell and Tom Nomman.’
‘The Silver King?
I knew them.
Knew them all.
And I'll know you too.
Let me have a squint.’
She perched a pair of ivory-framed pincenez on to her sparrow's beak of a nose and peered through them.
‘Ha ha,’ she crowed.
‘You're a Tuppe.’
‘I am that.
But I don't know the Hartog clan.’
‘But I knew your pa well enough.
Him and his porker pigs.
He skipped out when they sent old Polgar to the chokey, eh?’
‘That was him, right enough.
And that was him done with the travelling life.’
‘All gone now.’
Molly turned away to pour tea.
She stepped on to the tall boy's left ankle.
Cornelius bit his lip.
‘What do you want from me, Tuppe?’
‘Hugo Rune,’ said Tuppe.
‘You knew him.’
‘Poor dear Hugo.
I knew him well.
He reinvented the ocarina, you know.
And, oh how he hated Bud Abbott.’
‘He left some papers, I believe.’
‘Papers?
Piles and piles of them.
He was a genius, a master.
Years before his time.
Decades.
This world wasn't big enough to hold Hugo Rune.’
‘These papers?
Were they part of a manuscript?’
Tuppe accepted a tea cup the size of a shrunken thimble.
‘Thanks,’ said he.
‘Part of a book.’
Molly passed a cup to Cornelius, who perched it on the palm of his hand and gaped at it in awe.
‘The book.
The Book of Ultimate Truths.
Such knowledge the Master had.
Such wisdom.
Such genius.
Such an appetite.
Barred from every Chinese noodle parlour in West London, he was.’
‘Why was that?’
‘Due to his allergy.’
The miniature woman seated herself on Murphy's left foot.
Cornelius marvelled a new.
She was apparently without weight.
‘He was allergic to noodles?’
Tuppe sipped his tea.
‘No.
Money.
Couldn't bear to have it anywhere near him.
Broke out in a sweat at the very sight of it.
Or the mention.
So there was always trouble when someone presented him with a bill.
He offered the world his great wisdom.
All he asked in return was that the world should cover his expenses.
Meagre as they were.’
Tuppe raised an eyebrow to Cornelius, who was raising one of his own.
‘And the world wasn't keen?’
‘Conspiracies.
All around.
Petty men seeking to do him down.
To steal his knowledge and use it for their own wicked ends.’
‘About the papers.
Do you have them?’
Tuppe finished his tea.
'No.’
Molly shook her head.
Golden motes drifted from it and hung in the air.
‘Not I. Perhaps Victor.’
‘Victor Zenobia?’
‘Poor dear Victor.’
‘Victor is dead I'm afraid.’
‘Oh.’
Molly bowed her head.
‘Then there are few enough of us left to the cause.’
‘These men?’
Tuppe handed the photograph to Molly.
The little woman gazed at it through her pince-nez.
‘So long ago.
There is Victor and the Master, of course.
That silly bastard that took  the photo didn't get me in.
He made a right fuss about not getting his fee, if I recall.’
‘The others in the picture.
Who are they?’
Molly pointed.
‘That is Rizla and the other, Joseph.’
‘Might one of them have the papers?’
‘One of them must.
Victor was the Master's accountant.
Joseph, his chauffeur.
And Rizla, his magical son.’
‘Do you know where Joseph or Rizla might be now?’
‘Why do you want the Master's papers, young Tuppe?’
‘To publish them in their entirety.’
‘Publish them?’
Molly toppled from the tall boy's foot and collapsed on to the floor.
Tuppe hastened to help her up.
‘Publish them?’
Molly cackled to herself.
‘You can't publish them.
No publisher would dare to publish them.
Or even if they did…no, no.
It couldn't be done.’
‘Why not?’
‘If you had read the papers.
Then you would know.’
‘Tell me, Molly.
Joseph and Rizla.
Where are they now?’
‘Won't do you any good.
Even if they have the papers, they won't show them to you.’
‘I could at least ask them.’
‘As you will.
All right.
Perhaps and perhaps.
You have come to ask and so I must tell you.
Rizla took holy orders.
You will find him at the monastery of Saint Sacco Benedetto.’
‘And Joseph?’
‘Joseph.’
The small woman spat.
‘He's in London.
Calls himself Jack something or other.
A big noise in the record industry, whatever that
Cornelius stuffed things into his suitcase.
He and Tuppe were now back in their bedroom at The Hangman's Arms.
‘Well,’ said Tuppe.
‘What did you make of Molly?’
‘I think I'll give her muesli a miss.’
‘So,’ Tuppe sat on the portmanteau, kicking his heels.
‘What do you propose we do next?’
‘We shall visit brother Rizla at the monastery.
But before we do, I must call Mr Kobold, tell him what I have found out and have him send some more money.’
‘You nip off then.
I'll finish packing.’
‘Thank you, Tuppe.
Stick all the papers in the rucksack.
We'll leave the portmanteau behind.
I'll go downstairs and call Mr Kobold.
They're bound to have a phone in the bar.’
They didn't.
In fact they didn't have a phone anywhere in the village.
‘Never needed one,’ the beautiful barmaid explained, as Cornelius settled up for the bread and board.
Tuppe struggled down the stairs with the luggage.
‘Tell you what though,’ the barmaid went on, ‘I've been thinking about what you were saying.
And I'd quite like to bear your children.’
Cornelius looked at Tuppe.
Tuppe looked at Cornelius.
'I'll go and see if I can arrange some transport,’ said Tuppe.
'I might be some time.’
Milcom Moloch didn't boast a taxi service.
But a nice undertaker with a very smart 1950S hearse agreed to take them to the next town.
Cornelius waved through the back window.
The beautiful barmaid waved down from an upstairs window.
The hearse drove away.
‘Did you get a receipt?’
Tuppe asked.
‘Yes thank you.’
Cornelius was grinning in a manner which was quite difficult to describe.
An hour and a bit later the hearse stopped in a town called Cromcruach.
Which is just off the main Hebon under Pertunda bypass, twenty miles north of Triglaf.
‘Thanks very much.’
Cornelius waved to the departing hearse.
‘Be lucky.’
Tuppe waved also.
The hearse went back along the road for a bit, then rose into the sky and vanished into the clouds.
'There is something very suspicious about that hearse,’ said Cornelius.
‘There certainly is,’ Tuppe agreed.
‘It drove off with your suitcase.’
Cromcruach wasn't much of a town to speak about.
It lacked the bypass of Hebon under Pertunda, and Triglaf certainly had the edge on it when it came to a southerly location.
But it did have a garage and it did have a telephone box.
And both of these were to come in handy.
Cornelius took himself off to the telephone box.
Tuppe hung around the garage.
Presently Cornelius returned.
‘How did you get on?’
Tuppe asked.
‘I spoke with Mr Koboid.
He seemed very agitated.
Kept saying to be careful.’
‘And what did you tell him?’
‘What I knew.
About the papers in the portmanteau and Molly and how I'm going on to the monastery next.’
‘What about Karaoke Jack?’
‘I didn't mention him.
Anyway Mr Kobold suggested that I press on to Manchester tonight.’
‘Manchester?
Where is that, do you think?’
‘We can look it up on the map.
It's just outside Manchester, the place we want.
The Holiday Inn, North Ameshet.
First-class accommodation, I am assured.
A room will be waiting and money will be in the post, to arrive first thing tomorrow.’
‘Hats off to Arthur Kobold,’ said Tuppe, rubbing his hands together.
‘By the by, Cornelius.
Do you know how to drive a car?’
‘Of course.
The daddy taught me.’
‘But your daddy doesn't own a car.’
‘No.
Not as such.
But a great lover of the automobile, the daddy.
Every time some new one comes out on the market he always calls up the maker and tells them about the small pools win he's just had.’
‘But your daddy doesn't do the pools.’
Cornelius raised an eyebrow.
‘Quite so,’ said Tuppe.
‘So you got to try out a few of these nice new cars yourself.’
‘Exactly.
I got the hang of it in the end.’
‘And do you have a licence?’
‘Certainly.
The daddy gave me his old one.’
Cornelius delved into a pocket and pulled it out.
‘He said it would come in handy one of these days.’
‘Indeed.’
Tuppe smiled up at Cornelius.
‘I'd like you to meet my new friend Mike.
He's a mechanic.’
DA DA DA DA…
GIT YA MOTER RUNNIN…
The 1958 Cadillac Eldorado swept out from the garage and set off down the road from Cromcruach.
GIT OWT ONNA HIGHWAAAE…
‘Do you know what I'm looking for?’
Cornelius asked.
‘Adventure,’ Tuppe suggested.
‘And?’
‘Whatever comes your way, would be my guess.’
‘And what am I born to be?’
' Wild, Cornelius.
That is what you're born to be.’
‘Correct, dear friend.
Correct.
Tuppe, this a splendid car.
I can't believe that Mike just let us drive it away.’
‘I think it was you telling him about all those posh cars you test drive that really swung it.’
‘And we actually get paid for delivering it to his rich client in London.’
Cornelius stuck his elbow out of the window.
‘Imagine that.’
‘Right place at the right time.
Let's face it.
You have to have an epic car if you're going on an epic journey.’
‘You surely do.
And this is one epic car.
Electric-blue paint job.
Electric-blue upholstery.’
‘Electric windows,’ said Tuppe.
‘Electric sunroof…’
‘Electric lights,’ Cornelius suggested.
‘Electric wireless set.’
Tuppe switched it on.
‘You're a pink toothbrush, I'm a blue toothbrush,’ sang Max Bygraves.
‘Electric toothbrush?’
Tuppe asked.
The spikey black Volkswagen growled to a halt before The Hangman's Arms.
The Campbell stepped from the car and sniffed the air.
‘They've been here,’ he said.
Hamish got out and speared a map on to a couple of bonnet spikes.
‘And where is here, by the way?’
The Campbell examined the map.
‘Right here.
Milcom Moloch.’
‘Milcom Moloch?’
Hamish gazed about the place.
‘Did someone nuke it, or what?’
Little remained of Milcom Moloch.
The Hangman's Arms was naught but a roofless ruin.
The shells of shops and houses rose from scrubby grasslands.
The road was gone into pot holes.
All was desolation and decay.
‘There was a big storm,’ said the Campbell.
‘Like the one last night.
Thirty years ago.
The village was cut off by floods.
Then some  Londoner drove in here.
And they'd gone.
The village was deserted.
No trace.
Food still on the tables.
Vanished off the face of the earth.
Pop!’
The Campbell snapped his fingers.
Hamish took off his war bonnet and scratched his head.
‘I've never heard that story before.
A whole village vanishes?’
‘Pop,’ said the Campbell.
‘Gone.
Now go and search around.
See what you can find.
And you two!
Hurry up about it.’
Angus and Sawney slouched from the car.
In the ruins of The Hangman's Arms they would find a green canvas portmanteau, a brush-and-comb set in a plastic case and a duffle-coat (lacking toggles), some wear on elbows.
Hamish would take a shine to the duffle-coat.
Not half a mile along the road from the ruins of Milcom Moloch they would find the ruins of a burned-out taxi-cab.
And a man with bandaged fingers and a blue complexion weeping over it.
Hamish would take pity upon this sorry figure and give him the duffle-coat to keep himself warm.
Later in the day the taxi driver would be readmitted to the nearby hospital, this time in a state of shock and suffering from suspected rabies.
He would insist to his dying day that an arctic wolf had savaged him.
He would also give up taxi driving and become a monk.
‘I wouldn't fancy being a monk.’
Tuppe put his hands behind his head and smiled up at the passing sky.
‘You go bald too quickly.’
Cornelius smiled and drummed his fingers on the steering wheel.
‘They shave their heads.
It's called a tonsure.
From the latin tonsura: a shaving.’
‘Why?’
Tuppe made the electric window go up and down.
‘Why do they do that?’
‘To signify their renunciation of the world and all its vanities.
Do leave the window alone, Tuppe.’
Tuppe left the window alone.
His hand strayed to the cigarette lighter.
‘Speak to me of tonsures,’ he said.
‘Certainly.
There are three types.
Firstly there's the ‘tonsure of St Paul’.
That's the entire head.
Mostly practised by the eastern church…
Then there's the ‘tonsure of St Peter’.
That's the most common one.
A circular patch on the crown of the head.
And  finally, there's the ‘tonsure of St John’.
The front of the head is shaved on a line drawn from ear to ear.
That was the ancient Celtic method.
So it's sometimes called the Scottish or Irish tonsure.
Do leave the cigarette lighter alone, Tuppe.’
Tuppe left the lighter alone.
‘I wonder which method they favour at Saint Sacco Benedetto's?’ he wondered.
‘Eyebrows and all, I expect.
I understand that it is considered the most austere order in the country.
Really medieval.’
Tuppe twiddled the wireless dial.
‘Fings ain't what they used to be,’ sang Max Bygraves.
The electric-blue motor car, with the high fins and the open top, sailed over the crest of a hill and down the other side.
The driver's hair followed close behind.
The sun shone brightly down upon the epic travellers.
Tuppe found a pair of really spiffing sun-glasses in the glove compartment and Cornelius put them on.
And at precisely twelve o'clock the fan belt broke.
And at precisely five minutes past twelve, they were on their way again.
‘Large kudos to you, dear friend,’ Cornelius told Tuppe.
'To have Mike the mechanic pack three spare fan belts, that is foresight indeed.’
‘Once bitten and things of that nature,’ smiled Tuppe.
Cornelius slipped one of the spare fan belts on as a headband.
‘I'll be able to see where I'm going a lot better now,’ he said.
‘Much of it has been guesswork up ‘til now.’
‘What?’
At a little after one of the sunny afternoon clock they stopped at a vast motorway services area thingy.
Here Cornelius fed the motor car with the best petrol that money could buy and then took himself up to the restaurant to join Tuppe.
The restaurant was a great long refectory of a place.
A wall of windows overlooked the motorway.
Ranks of fomaica-topped tables were besieged by steel chairs, which did not encourage a long stay.
Tuppe sat dejectedly at a table by the door.
No food lay spread before him.
‘Whither lunch?’
Cornelius asked.
‘It's a self service.
I can't reach.’
‘How thoughtless of me.
My apologies.’
Cornelius got in double rations.
And much ice-cream.
Tuppe set about the meal.
‘You know,’ said he, between great chewings, ‘I've never been in one of these places before.
But I've seen them on the pictures.
There's usually a heavy-metal band sitting in one comer, their van's broken down, you see, and they're on their way to an important gig.
And there's also this couple, deeply in love, well, she is, he's going to go back to his wife…’
‘Cad!’ said Cornelius.
‘Quite so.
And there's a spy.
He often gets shot dead in the toilet.’
‘What, he gets shot dead more than once?’
Tuppe scooped beans into his mouth.
‘Sorry,’ said Cornelius.
‘Anyone else?’
‘There's us, of course.
Two young heroes on an epic journey.’
‘Anyone else?’
Tuppe glanced about the place.
Apart from the two young heroes, the remaining cast of Vast Motoryway Services Area: The Movie had yet to turn up.
Tuppe did, however, spy out a lone figure at a distant table.
'There's him, ' said Tuppe, pointing past the tall boy's elbow.
Cornelius turned and squinted.
The sun blazed in and lit upon a large, broad-shouldered, shaven-headed man.
He wore a plaid plus-fours suit and a silk cravat.
Whilst his companion's back was turned, Tuppe swiped one of his sausages and thrust it into his mouth.
Cornelius turned back.
‘He looks familiar.
Perhaps he's the spy.
Where's my sausage gone?’
Tuppe suddenly spat stolen sausage all over Cornelius.
‘Steady on!’
Cornelius flapped at himself.
‘No need for that.
It's only a sausage.
I don't mind.’
‘No, no.’
Tuppe was coughing away like a good'n.
‘It's him.
It's him.’
‘Who him?’
‘In the photo.
Get out the photo.’
Cornelius pulled the late Victor Zenobia's snapshot from his top pocket.
‘What?’
He made to have another look at the distant diner.
‘It can't be.’
‘Don't look.
Let me see the photo.’
Cornelius turned it to Tuppe.
Tuppe gave it a squint and then took a peep past the tall boy's elbow.
‘It is him,’ he whispered.
‘Cornelius, it's Hugo Rune.’
‘The bloke you're talking about,’ said Mike the mechanic, ‘long tall bloke?
Hair all over the place?’
He was speaking to a bald-headed man.
A bald-headed man who favoured a camouflaged combat jacket to a plus-fours suit.
‘What do you want with him then?’
‘It's a private matter,’ said the Campbell.
‘None of my business then.’
Mike turned away, wiping his hands on an oily rag, the way only a real mechanic can.
‘I could make it your business.’
The Campbell's hand fell upon Mike's left shoulder.
It was a heavy hand, with a good firm grip.
‘Oh yes?’
Mike turned and looked the Campbell up and down.
He didn't very much like what he saw.
And as for the three highlanders lounging around the spikey Volkswagen.
He prised away the hand, which still gripped his shoulder.
‘I need to know where he's travelling to.
It's very important.’
‘He didn't say.’
Mike shrugged easily, but his right hand crept around to the rear pocket of his overall, where he kept the big Stilson spanner.
‘Sorry I can't help you.’
‘I really must insist.’
The Campbell removed his broken spectacles and slipped them into his pocket.
‘Look, piss off, will you?’
The spanner was out.
The Campbell smiled at it.
Then he smiled at Mike and stared deeply into his eyes.
Then he leaned forward and whispered something into his left ear.
The colour drained from the mechanic's face.
His body began to tremble.
The big spanner fell from his hand.
‘Where?’ asked the Campbell.
‘London,’ answered Mike, in a cold dead voice.
‘Somewhere else on the way, I think.’
‘He bought a map from me…’
‘And?’
‘A monastery.
Saint sack of Benny Detours.’
‘Saint Sacco Benedetto's.
There, that was easy, wasn't it?
I generally take pleasure in a more subtle approach.
But I really don't have the time right now.
Thank you so much for your co-operation.
You've  been such a help.’
The Campbell leaned forwards once again and kissed Mike deeply upon the mouth.
The mechanic wet his pants.
Cornelius shuddered.
‘Are you all right?’
Tuppe asked.
‘You were miles away.
You're white as death.’
‘Something just happened.
Not here.
Somewhere.
Something bad.’
‘This is very often the case.
But what about him?’
Tuppe made furtive pointings.
‘It is him.
Just like the photograph.’
‘It can't be.’
Cornelius gulped his coffee.
‘That picture was taken more than half a century ago.’
‘Same suit,’ said Tuppe.
‘Same man, I'm telling you.
Take a look.
Go on.’
‘You leave my last sausage alone then.’
‘I swear.’
Tuppe crossed his heart.
Cornelius turned and took a good long look.
The bald-headed man caught his stare and waggled his fingers in a friendly fashion.
Cornelius smiled and turned back to Tuppe.
Tuppe held up the photograph.
He didn't speak.
His mouth was full of stolen egg.
The tall boy's head sank deeply into his chest.
' Tuppe,’ he whispered through clenched teeth.
‘It's Hugo Rune.
What are we going to do?’
‘We?’
Tuppe swallowed.
‘You'd best go over and pass the time of day.
Ask him where he left his papers.
I'll mind your lunch.’
‘Oh no.
We go together.
You're in this epic too.’
‘Oke doke.’
Tuppe shinned down from his chair.
Cornelius rose from his.
‘Come on then.’
The bald-headed man stared placidly towards them as they approached.
And as he drew nearer, Cornelius became painfully aware of a curious buzzing sound in his ears.
And of the fact that Hugo Rune appeared a mite indistinct about the edges.
His great be-ringed fingers seemed to waver sometimes above and sometimes into the tabletop.
There was something altogether untoward about the reinventor of the ocarina.
Suddenly there was a whole lot of noise, commotion and hubbub.
And a number of long-haired young men, with leather jackets, tight  trousers and snakeskin boots, bustled into the restaurant.
One of them carried a guitar case.
Behind these came a weeping woman and a comforting man.
And behind them, a furtive-looking fellow with a briefcase.
And suddenly Tuppe and Cornelius were in the thick of them.
And when they no longer were, Hugo Rune had gone.
12
They didn't speak much during the afternoon drive.
And they didn't stop to pick up any hitchers either.
So all the exciting young women, serial killers and wild-eyed prophets of doom, who raised their hopeful thumbs to the passing Cadillac, had to walk.
And they didn't even switch off Max Bygraves when he sung about the need for hands.
Cornelius and Tuppe were troubled.
They perked up a bit when they finally reached the car park before the North Ameshet Holiday Inn though.
‘My, my.’
Tuppe craned up his head to the mighty hotel.
‘And isn't that tall?’
‘Even from where I'm sitting.’
Cornelius observed that of the twenty-seven windows on the first floor, eight were open, with their blinds up, eight were closed with their blinds down, nine were closed, with their blinds up, one was open with its blind down and one was closed, had its blind halfway up and the light on.
Two eights, one nine and two ones.
Or, a pair of eights, a nine and a pair of aces.
The last poker hand dealt to Wild Bill Hickok, just before he was shot in the back by Jack McCall in Deadwood City, South Dakota.
‘Now in a place like this,’ Tuppe began, ‘there's bound to be a heavy-metal band breaking up the room.
Two lovers rooming under the name of Smith, a spy with a roll of microfilm in —’
‘Let's book in,’ said Cornelius.
‘Can we use false names?
I've always wanted to do that.’
‘You can.
I have to use my own.
Mr Kobold's money in the morning, remember?’
‘Quite so.’
Cornelius parked the car.
And let Tuppe make the roof go up, down and up again several times.
‘Thanks,’ said Tuppe.
‘I did enjoy that.’
There is something strangely comforting about a Holiday Inn.
No matter which part of the world you might be travelling in, if you enter a Holiday Inn, you can always be assured of two things.
One, that it will be exactly the same as every other.
And two, that Status Quo have stayed in it.
Coincidentally, Status Quo were just leaving this one as Tuppe and Cornelius entered it.
‘Hi, Tuppe,’ called the drummer.
‘How's it going?’
‘Fine.
Anniversary tour?’
‘As ever.’
Status Quo left the building.
‘You actually know The Quo?’
Cornelius was impressed.
‘Of course.
I've travelled.
I told you.’
‘What's the drummer's name then?’
‘Search me,’ said Tuppe.
Cornelius announced himself to a desk clerk who wore a badge saying, ‘Hello my name is Danny’.
Danny confirmed that a room had already been booked and soon a porter, who wore a badge saying, ‘Hello my name is Peter’ conveyed the rucksack of Mr Cornelius Murphy and his companion, Mr Howard Hughes, up to their room.
Cornelius tipped the porter.
‘Could I have a receipt for that please, Peter?’ he asked.
Peter did not reply.
Now, a Holiday Inn room is a Holiday Inn room.
It is always very clean.
It has twin beds.
A little writing table and chair.
A television set with all kinds of channels and a Bible written by someone called Gideon.
It also has an ensuite bathroom facility, with all sorts of things in little sealed packets for you to take home for your children.
And, of course, it has a telephone, on which you can make a right nuisance of yourself.
Especially if you're not paying the bill.
‘Can I call room service?’
Tuppe asked.
‘Have them send something up?’
‘Absolutely.
I shall make much of unpacking my rucksack.
As I no longer possess a suitcase.’
Tuppe climbed on to the bed by the window.
‘Bags this one's mine.’
He picked up the telephone.
‘Yo, room service,’ said he.
Cornelius unzipped his rucksack.
‘Please can you send up a bottle of Jim Beam, two glasses, a plate of steak sandwiches…’
Cornelius shook out his rucksack.
‘Bags of crisps, assorted…twenty small cigars…’
‘Where have my pyjamas gone?
I know I packed them in here.’
‘And a pair of pyjamas, size large, pattern plain.
Thank you.’
‘Another spot of Jim?’
Tuppe lounged upon his bed.
A small cigar in his mouth.
The bottle at his elbow.
Cornelius made a bitter face over his steak sandwich.
‘You might have had the decency to order us some drink that wasn't called Jim.’
‘Jim?
Oh, I see.
Sorry, my friend.’
‘Never mind.
Pass the bottle.’
Tuppe passed the bottle.
‘So what are we going to do tonight, Cornelius?
Take in the night spots?
Bop till we drop?
Things of that nature?
Pass the crisps.’
Cornelius passed the crisps.
‘I am going to sit here, on my bed, clad in these very large pyjamas, study the daddy's copy of Rune.
Sift through the letters and bills and whatnot and see if I can make any sense of it all.’
‘Sounds rather dull.’
‘Tuppe, please help yourself to what cash you think you'll need.
Go forth and bop till you drop.
But…’
Cornelius held up a cautionary finger.
‘Do not return here at three in the morning with a bunch of new-found friends who are looking to ‘party’.’
‘What if there're only two new-found friends and they are both young and female?’
‘Then phone up from reception and give me time to comb my hair and hide my pyjamas.’
Cornelius waved off his companion.
Put the DO NOT DISTURB sign on the door.
Made a vain attempt to tidy up the room, which was already looking like a heavy-metal combat zone, and took himself off for a shower.
Later, he donned the vast pyjamas, switched on the television for a bit of background and settled down on the bed with the half-bottle of Jim Beam and The Book of Ultimate Truths.
I have penned many profound words upon the subject of ‘inanimate objects’.
A good many of these have been produced with the aid of a Biro.
During the course of a single year I will use upwards of one thousand Biros, yet I have never actually worn one out.
Why should this be?
My studies lead me to the conclusion that the Biro, as with many other forms of ‘inanimate object’, hates its role in life.
The Biro is by nature a celibate creature which resents spilling its vinle essence upon paper.
I do not arrive at this conclusion lightly, but through years of painstaking research and at no small cost to my health.
My findings may be summed up thus:
1.
The Biro does not serve man willingly.
2.
The Biro is a wily beast, which, if given the least opportunity to make good its escape, will do so.
1.
Purchase fifteen Biros.
Hold them tightly all the way home to prevent escape.
Place five in the pencil pot in the kitchen.
Five in the decorative mug next to the telephone in the hall.
Five in a jar on your writing desk.
Pointedly ignore the Biros and allow one week to pass.
Try and find a Biro.
2.
Bend down and tie your shoelace.
Try and find a Biro.
TWO SIMPLE EXPERIMENTS WITH BIROS
SUICIDAL TENDENCIES AMONGST BONDAGE BIROS
Many attempts have been made to tame the Biro, or at least bring it to heel.
All have been doomed to failure.
One inspired notion was the creation of a Biro which was worn on a thong about the neck clipped into a plastic harness.
This unnatural practice is rarely seen today.
The severe psychological damage inflicted upon the captive Biros led them to tear themselves from their shackles and plunge into toilet bowls, become suicidally entangled about gear sticks or wrap themselves around handlebars.
It is also understood that these Biros were capable of telepathically transmitting their cries for freedom to companions of their tormentors, with the result that these would remark, for no logical reason, ‘You look a right prat with that thing hanging round your neck, throw it away.’
PARKER?
GORN, M'LADY!
There exists a school of thought, that an expensive Biro, wrought from gold or silver and branded with the potential owner's name, will become a chenshed possession.
Perhaps the principle is that if the owner loves the Biro, the Biro will return the affection and become a loyal companion.
Sadly no.
In fact, due to the precious metals employed in the manufacture of these items, they are truly a cut above the average when it comes to evasiveness.
These Biros are most popularly given as Christmas presents.
But exalted be the man who can use such a creation to pen a thankyou note come Boxing Day.
Most potential owners will spend the morning emptying dustbins and uncrumpling wrapping paper in the vain hope of unearthing the cherished-possession-to-be.
I contend that such Biros employ an advanced form of camouflage.
Also that they are capable of dematerialization.
It is to be observed that many such Biros arrive in hermetically sealed gift boxes which are a right bugger to get open.
These boxes insure that the Biros remain safely entrapped whilst at the shop.
But caveat emptor, once you're home, you're on your own.
The Irish maintain that there exists, somewhere upon the planet, a treasure trove of Croesusian magnitude, where these gold and silver fellows hobnob with single earrings beyond number and a million gemstones from engagement rings.
It is situated at the end of a rainbow.
Or so I have been led to understand.
HOMICIDAL BIROS
Man has never been slow to mould the world to his whim.
But in doing so he has conceived many a dangerous folly.
Nuclear Power, CFCs (Chelsea Football Club supporters), toxic  chemicals and Bud Abbott.
But none more potentially disastrous than the Whimsical Novelty Biro, or W.N.B.
This is, to all intents and purposes, a normal Biro, but affixed to it is the head of some currently marketable ‘character’.
Snoopy, Garfield, Bart Simpson, Barry The Sprout, or what-have-you.
It is to be noticed that such ‘characters’ generally emanate from America.
Home of the Serial Killer.
The victim-to-be purchases, or is given, the W.N.B. and places it unsuspectingly in the top pocket of his or her jacket, with the humorous head protruding.
Then at some time during the day, he or she has cause to turn their head sharply to the left, or attempt to take off the jacket.
Either way the result is inevitably the same.
A severed jugular!
And does the Government insist that health warnings be printed upon W.N.B.s?
Does it ‘eck as like!
The needless slaughter has been going on for more than a century.
But the conspiracy of silence prevails to this day.
Note this: it is a significant fact that all the victims of the so called Jack The Ripper murders died within walking distance of The East London Patent Pen Works.
This factory specialized in the manufacture of dip pens capped with silver facsimiles of Queen Victoria's crowned head.
Only one such pen survives.
It is kept under lock and key in Scotland Yard's Black Museum.
It was found at the bedside of Mary Kelly, the last of Jack's victims!
Before concluding this section it is worth drawing the reader's attention to the so-called suicide, by hara-kiri, of the Japanese writer, Yukio Mishima.
He wrote with a Biro.
He that liveth by the sword shall perish by the sword.
The pen is mightier than the sword.
Nuff said.
THE MYSTERY BIRO
I must, before concluding this erudite monograph, dwell upon a curious anomaly.
The black sheep of Birodom.
THE MYSTERY BIRO.
This, unlike the rest of the species, craves the company of man.
It will appear suddenly in the pocket of a jacket you haven't  worn since it came back from the cleaners.
In the glove compartment or boot of the car.
At the bottom of a handbag or raffia shopper.
In the kitchen drawer or tool chest.
And once it has found you, it is yours for life.
It is, inevitably, a shoddy, plastic, giveaway affair, with a spring arrangement housed within, purportedly to bring down the ballpoint.
It can be instantly recognized by its bright plumage.
Bold primary colours and embossed lines of print, which spell out things like: NICKED FROM THE ARCHDUKE FERDINAND AERATED BREAD CO., or WANDERING BISHOPS WORLD CON 79.
Of course it doesn't actually work.
But it's always there when you need it.
And just you try and get rid of it.
Leave it where you will.
Folk will pursue you down the street crying, ‘You forgot your Biro.’
THE MYSTERY BIRO has come to stay.
As to its origins.
These remain shrouded in mystery also.
Often a telephone number will be printed upon the Biro.
But spare yourself a florin.
Either the number has been discontinued, or the premises named upon it simply do not, and have never, existed.
The employment of a stout stick is recommended.
Followed by the incineration of the pieces.
ANOTHER MYSTERY SOLVED
I am often asked how, with Biros vanishing as often as they do, is it possible for some writers to get so much down on paper in a single lifetime?
Shakespeare, for example.
Shakespeare wrote 100,000,000 words in twenty years.
No small feat.
I am happy to reveal here a little known fact about the ‘Immortal Bard’.
Shakespeare was, in fact, a retired pirate, who, after losing his right hand to a round of chain-shot on the Spanish Main, gave up the life of brigandry on the high seas and took up writing as a hobby to pass the time.
Intimates knew him as Stumpy Will and remarked upon the craftsmanship and lifelike nature of his carved elm prosthesis.
The forefinger of this was capped with a golden nib!
It is said that the impossibly prolific Master of Macabrery, Stephen King, has a Biro surgically grafted to his right hand.
The Book of Ultimate Truths
Hugo Rune
Cornelius closed the book without comment.
The television was going hiss and the tall boy looked at his watch.
Nearly three in the morning.
That seemed a bit sudden.
He took up the remote controller and did the ever-popular ‘Channel Hop’.
‘Don't mess with this guy,’ said an on-screen extra.
‘He knows karate.’
‘Goes with the sickle,’ replied Mr Elvis Presley.
‘Seen it,’ said Cornelius.
‘Twenty-three times.’
Hop
‘…furry, but with the head of a fish,’ said a man in an anorak.
‘Up on the hill.
And it ate my dog, Prince.’
Hop
‘In answer to your question,’ said the large American author to the late-night chat-show host, ‘the Biro is surgically implanted into the forefinger of my right hand.’
Hop
‘The Sasquianna Hat Company,’ said Lou Costello, in black and white.
‘Hold on,’ said Cornelius Murphy.
Hop back
The imaginative chat-show host was now asking the large American author where he got his ideas from.
The author seemed somewhat stumped for a reply to such an unusual question and stared into the camera, as if in search of inspiration.
And then a huge smile formed on his face.
As Cornelius looked on, the author's features appeared to swim.
The hair faded.
Heavy jowls formed and blue, piercing eyes glittered beneath a great beetling brow.
The eyes gazed out from the screen.
‘Any other questions?’ asked Hugo Rune.
There was silence.
On screen and off.
Cornelius caught his breath.
‘What about you, Mr Murphy?’ asked Hugo Rune.
‘Nothing you'd like to ask?’
Cornelius clutched at his hair.
‘What?’ went he.
‘Good question.’
Rune nodded his shaven dome of a head.
‘If you  knew the what, then you would learn the why.
And if you knew the why you should soon know the who.’
The bedside telephone began to ring.
Cornelius snatched it up.
‘Who…?’
' Tuppe, ' answered Tuppe.
'I've got a pair of new-found friends with me.
Female ones.
I don't like the look of your one much though.’
Cornelius slammed down the phone.
‘Mr Rune?
Mr Hugo Rune?’
The big face filled the screen.
‘Find the papers.
Find the map.
Find me’
‘Who has the papers?
Do you know?’
The phone began to ring again.
Cornelius snatched it up again.
‘Not now!’ he shouted.
‘I was only joking about yours.
She's a real cracker.’
‘Tuppe, not now.’
Interference crackled across the screen.
Rune's face began to fade.
‘No, wait.’
Cornelius fought with the remote controller, but the picture was breaking up.
Static fizzed and popped.
For a fleeting moment the Master reappeared.
He was playing an ocarina.
And then he was gone.
‘Hey, Abbott,’ said Lou Costello, in black and white.
‘Who's on first?’
13
His name was still Felix Henderson McMurdo.
But now he was Scot (un-canny) many leagues from home.
He'd never hankered after the travelling life.
In fact it had always been the last thing on his mind.
Him having so many dear friends and everything.
But circumstances had pressed, of late, most sorely upon him.
It was, he'd considered, the product of sheer happy chance, that his house alone in the street had escaped the conflagration during what the Press were now calling THE BLOODBATH OF SHEILA NA GIGH.
And he was toasting this self-same happy chance in home-made elderflower wine when he first heard the chanting.
And, turning back the net curtain in his wee front parlour, caught sight of what he took to be a torchlight procession.
McMurdo was touched to the very soul.
That the people of Sheila na gigh could rise from the ashes of their homes and join together in a celebration, a unity in the face of such adversity, made him proud to be a Celt.
And so he slipped on his anorak and scurried outside, bottle in hand to join in the festivities.
It was only once he got outside that he became aware of what the good people were chanting.
They were actually chanting his name.
It was with tears of joy in his eyes, that Felix went forward to meet the torchbearers, who by their chants were evidently proclaiming him the hero of the hour.
Much of what happened next was still hazy to him.
He remembered shouts, ‘There's the bastard now,’ was one, and, ‘He's carrying a  Molotov cocktail,’was another.
Then there was much scuffling and grabbing and a lot of talk regarding which lamppost the rope should be thrown over.
And there was the strong smell of hot tar.
He could smell that even now.
And all those feathers.
And there was being thrown from the railway bridge and landing on top of the moving carriage.
Then some hours later there was falling off the carriage into the cow field.
Then it all went black for quite a while.
The next thing he recalled after that was waking up in hospital and this man with bandaged fingers in the next bed rambling on about a duffle-coat and how he'd been bitten by a wolf.
They'd all been kind enough to Felix in the hospital.
Well, as kind as they had time to be.
Doctors and nurses, he supposed, were very busy people.
And hospital beds, precious things.
He was heaved out of his almost as soon as he regained consciousness.
The doctor said he had a cousin in Sheila na gigh.
Felix said he'd pass on his best wishes.
It seemed a little drastic the way they frog-marched him through Casualty and tossed him into the street.
But it was very kind of the fellow in the next bed to give him a duffle-coat for a present.
From then on it had been a funny old kind of a day.
He'd hitched a ride from a 1950s hearse.
This had dropped him at a garage in Cromcruach and had then mysteriously vanished before he could offer his thanks.
At Cromcruach he'd met a mechanic named Mike, who seemed in a terrible state.
He kept mumbling that he'd met ‘the very Devil himself’ and was shivering terribly.
Felix wrapped him up in the duffle-coat.
And then Mike ran off screaming about snakes.
With the coat still on.
Felix was forced to conclude that the English were a very eccentric people.
Friendly though.
The heavy-metal band that picked him up were very friendly.
They were on their way to a really important gig.
And the driver wanted to get even more friendly with some exciting young women they'd picked up earlier.
And so Felix offered to take over the wheel and drive for a while.
And it wasn't really his fault.
All those cars bumping into one another.
He'd been adjusting the driving mirror and he'd only taken his eyes off the road for a moment.
It was lucky that the twenty-seven-car pile up occurred within walking distance of one of those vast motorway service areas.
He'd had to walk on for quite a bit after that and it was quite late in the day when it occurred to him that the villagers had probably been just having a joke with him and that they would no doubt be feeling anxious by then and starting to worry.
And he was just crossing over the dual carriageway to reach the northbound lane when the Status Quo tour bus ran over him.
He'd only sustained minor injuries and the drummer had patched him up and given him a pair of free tickets for an anniversary concert in Tierra del Fuego.
After that things became hazy once more.
He thought he must have passed out on the grass verge.
And the next thing he remembered was the minibus stopping and the monks helping him into it.
Then it all went black again.
They sat over breakfast.
They weren't smiling.
‘It was Rune.’
Cornelius poured milk over his cornflakes.
‘Real crackers,’ muttered Tuppe.
‘Except for yours, that is.
Locking us out of the room like that.
Poor show, Cornelius.
I had to make love to both of them in the lift.
It was the least I could do.’
‘Tuppe, I saw him on the television set.
He spoke to me.
He's still alive.
He needs our help.’
‘You were drunk.
You finished that bottle of J…
Mr Beam.’
‘I finished that later.
And I came out to look for you.’
‘I kipped down in the broom cupboard.
I don't think they should charge you full-board for me.’
‘Mr Kobold's money arrived.’
Cornelius patted a bulging envelope.
‘Another five hundred pounds.’
‘Then you can make it up by purchasing me a change of clothes.’
Tuppe hailed a passing waitress.
‘We'll go on to the full first-class breakfast now please, miss.’
The waitress smiled, winked and wiggled away.
‘Fine-looking woman,’ said Cornelius, admiringly.
Tuppe shrugged.
‘She was your one,’ he said.
The summer sun shone warmly on the Cadillac Eldorado.
It was drifting through the suburbs of outer Manchester.
They went every which way and there seemed no end to them.
Max Bygraves was singing ‘The Diabolical Twist’.
Tuppe was wearing a very smart tartan shirt and a pair of Osh Kosh  dungarees.
Several carrier bags with the Mothercare logo upon them lay on the back seat.
‘So,’ said Tuppe.
‘How do you intend to deal with this monastery business?’
‘I have given the matter much thought.
It is not the easiest thing in the world to enter a closed order and have a chit-chat with a monk, who has most probably taken a vow of silence.’
‘So?’
‘So, I propose first to employ implicit honesty.
And if that fails to resort to other means.’
‘Which would be?’
‘Low cunning,’ said Cornelius Murphy.
‘Oh good.
Low cunning has always been a favourite with me.
Anything low, in fact.’
‘Do turn off Max Bygraves.
The man fair gives me gip.’
There were all sorts of busy monkish things going on in the courtyard of the monastery of Saint Sacco Benedetto.
But upstairs, in the guest cell, Felix Henderson McMurdo slept on right through them.
'How far now?’
Cornelius asked.
It was now mid morning and Manchester was far behind.
Tuppe consulted the map.
‘It's sort of in North Wales.
Almost.
A bit on yet, I feel.’
‘Sing us a song then.
Just to pass the time.’
‘I don't do songs.’
Tuppe didn't do songs.
‘I'll give you a poem, if you want.’
‘Oh yes please.’
‘Which one would you like then?’
Cornelius almost scratched his head.
But, as today he had taken the precaution of restraining his crowning glory within a Mothercare bag, he scratched his nose instead.
‘Give me ‘Billy O'Rourke’.
That's my favourite.’
Billy O'Rourke’ it is then.’
Tuppe did little coughings and clearings of the throat.
The way one does.
And began his recitation.
‘The Ballad of Billy O'Rourke’
‘There used to be totters,’ said Billy O'Rourke, With big smelly horses and that  And my dad knew gypsies who smile when they talk And live by the tip of the hat.’
But nobody cared for the stones he told And he sat all alone of a night Until one day a traveller came in from the cold A sorry and miserable sight.
To the traveller, said Bill, ‘It would give you a thrill To hear all the tales of my youth Of days dead and gone But the memory lives on And I swear every word is the truth.’
Well the traveller grinned And Billy beginned To tell the most marvellous tales Of earthquakes and crimes And fabulous times And whole families swallowed by whales.
And he spoke for three hours About ivory towers And warlords in armoury suit And the traveller sat And stared into his hat Because he was a deaf and dumb mute.
Thank you.’
‘Bravo.’
Cornelius made cheering noises and drummed his hands on the steering wheel.
‘Care for another?’
Tuppe asked.
‘I don't think so.
One poem is pushing things.
Even on an epic journey.
Two would be nothing short of gratuitous.’
‘Quite so.
Shall we have Max on again?’
‘Why not.’
They followed the map.
Presently it led them from the main highway  to minor roads and country lanes.
Hedges rose to either side and the Cadillac's wing mirrors clipped against them.
The trees locked hands overhead.
And eventually Cornelius had to put the headlights on.
The wireless set hissed and crackled and Max Bygraves faded all away.
Tuppe fiddled with the knobs.
‘White noise,’ he exclaimed.
‘It shouldn't be making that.’
‘Hills all around, do you think?’
Cornelius switched on the windscreen wipers.
The screen was starting to fog up.
‘Hills wouldn't do that.’
Tuppe shivered.
‘Could we have the roof back on?
It's growing a smidgen chilly.’
Cornelius flicked the switch.
But nothing happened.
‘Now, that's odd.
It was working perfectly back in Manchester, when you had it going up and down at the traffic lights to impress those schoolgirls.’
He flicked the switch up and down a few more times.
‘Dead.
Are you sure we're going the right way?’
‘Best check at the next crossroads.
See a signpost or something.’
‘Or something.’
Cornelius drove slowly on.
Branches clattered against the car.
‘This isn't going to do the paint job any good.
Oh damn.’
A branch whipped across the screen and tore off one of the wipers.
‘Oh dear,’ sighed Tuppe.
‘Do you think we'd better back up?’
‘Back up, or walk.’
‘We can't leave the car blocking this lane, can we?’
‘No.’
Cornelius put the Cadillac into reverse.
The gearbox made terrible cries of complaint.
Cornelius tried again, but to no avail.
‘We seem to be right out of reverse gears at the present,’ he said, in a gloomy sort of a voice.
‘Shall we press on then?’
Tuppe looked up at Cornelius.
‘Press on.’
They pressed on.
And on.
Tuppe donned two nice new jumpers, but was still cold.
Cornelius switched on the heater.
The heater did not work.
‘Cornelius,’ Tuppe hugged his elbows.
‘Cornelius, I am growing afraid.’
'Fear not, little friend.’
The tall boy patted his small chum on the shoulder.
‘We'll soon be out of here.’
But they weren't.
The headlights cut into the growing murk.
The car bumped in and out of potholes.
Both their watches stopped.
And  suddenly Cornelius stopped the car.
Tuppe tumbled forwards from his seat.
‘What is happening?’ he asked.
‘Up ahead.
In the road.’
‘What?
What?’
‘We didn't pass any turnings, did we?’
‘Not a one.
What do you see?’
‘Wait here.’
Cornelius climbed over the windscreen.
Across the bonnet.
And dropped down in front of the car.
He walked on for a few yards, stooped and picked something up.
‘What do you have there?’ called Tuppe.
‘Oh dear.
Oh dear,’ said Cornelius.
‘What is it?’
Cornelius held up the object.
It sparkled in the headlight's beam.
‘Our windscreen wiper,’ said Cornelius Murphy.
‘It isn't very good in the dark, dark wood.’
Tuppe's teeth were chattering.
‘We definitely didn't pass a turning, did we?’
Tuppe shook his shaking head.
‘And I don't see how we could have just driven around in a circle.
I've hardly turned the wheel.
So, where does that leave us?’
‘It leaves me in a state of considerable nervousness.
Let's walk back.
If we're no further on than we were half an hour ago.
Then we'll have no further to walk back.’
‘There is wisdom in your words.
But I don't think we should leave the car.
Although,’ he tapped at the dashboard, ‘it would appear that we are almost out of petrol.’
‘How about if we ran back?’
Tuppe suggested.
‘No.
That is not what we will do.
Put your safety-belt on, Tuppe.’
Tuppe clipped himself up.
‘I'm not going to like this, am I?’
Cornelius revved the engine.
‘Probably not.
Perhaps you should close your eyes.’
‘Why is that?’
‘Because I am going to close mine.’
Cornelius gave the accelerator pedal full wellie and slammed the car into gear.
He let out the clutch.
The wheels span.
The engine screamed and the car shot forwards.
Cornelius gripped the steering wheel with both hands and kept his head well down.
Branches snapped and crackled.
The windscreen  shattered.
The headlights did likewise.
Cornelius kept his foot right down on the floor.
‘Ooooooooooooooooh!’ shrieked Tuppe.
‘Hold tight!’
Cornelius swung the steering wheel hard to the right.
The Cadillac swerved.
Tore into the hedge.
Crashed through it.
There was a great fireball of light.
The car seemed to hang a moment in space.
And then it plunged down and down and down.
Cornelius held his breath.
Tuppe held his breath.
Crash, bang and wallop, went the Cadillac and finally…
Tuppe's eyes remained tightly shut.
‘Cornelius,’ he whispered.
‘Cornelius, are you there?’
‘I'm somewhere.’
The tall boy had his hands over his head.
‘What do you see?’
‘I don't see anything.
I'm not looking.’
Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm.
Clunk.
‘What was that?’
‘I think it was the roof closing.
Do you smell something, Tuppe?’
Tuppe sniffed.
‘I smell flowers.
Oh Cornelius, I smell flowers.’
‘I smell flowers too.’
‘Cornelius.
I think we're dead.’
‘Then we've gone to the good place.
Flowers have to be the good place.’
‘…
Tulips from Amsterdam,’ sang Max Bygraves, all of a sudden.
‘Or possibly not,’ groaned Cornelius Murphy.
‘Oooh and ouch!’
Cornelius Murphy's trousers began to burn.
‘We've gone to hell.’
‘I don't think so.’
Tuppe floundered about blindly and turned off the heater.
Cornelius fanned at his trouser bottoms and slowly drew himself back into the vertical plane.
‘Gosh,’ said he.
‘Would you look at that?’
Tuppe crept up beside him and took a peep.
‘Ooh,’ went Tuppe.
The Cadillac was standing in the middle of a small grassy field.
Not twenty yards from the open gateway it had apparently just driven through.
On the road beyond cars went by.
Birds twittered.
Flowers bloomed.
The sun shone.
Cornelius stood up, drew back his hair and scanned the horizon.
No  hedgerows.
No overhanging trees.
He climbed from the car and examined it with interest.
The windscreen was intact.
Both wipers were there.
The headlights were on.
The paintwork was immaculate.
Tuppe scrambled out to join him.
‘Not a scratch.
Nothing.
What happened?
Were we dreaming?’
‘Not dreaming.
Come on.
Help me search the car.’
‘For what?’
‘I'll know when we find it.’
They searched the car.
They were very thorough.
Tuppe found a pair of knickers down behind the back seat.
Cornelius rummaged through the contents of the boot and found them to be very oily indeed.
Suddenly Tuppe said, ‘What's this?’
‘What do you have there?’
Cornelius slammed shut the boot.
‘A little black package, sealed with wax.
It was under the driving seat.
It feels very cold.’
Cornelius came around the car and took it from him.
He weighed the thing on his palm and turned it with his thumb.
‘Would you care to hazard a guess at the contents?’
‘I don't think it's a bar of chocolate.
It's not a bomb, is it?’
Tuppe ducked back into the car.
‘Not a bomb.
I would suspect that it's a model car.
Probably a Cadillac Eldorado, with the windscreen painted black.’
Cornelius tore open the little package.
It was a model car.
It was a Cadialac Eldorado.
A piece of black gaffer tape had been secured across the windscreen.
Tuppe looked at Cornelius.
Cornelius looked at Tuppe.
‘Lucky guess?’
Tuppe asked.
The Cadillac was now parked in a lay-by.
Tuppe sat in the front passenger seat brrrming the toy car up and down the dashboard.
Cornelius was in a telephone box.
Tuppe couldn't hear what he was saying.
But he could understand his friend's body language.
Things weren't going well.
Cornelius slammed down the receiver and stalked back to the car.
He flung himself into the driving seat.
Tuppe thought it best not to ask.
‘I'm sacked.’
Cornelius threw up his hands and brought them down amidst a torrent of hair.
‘Sacked.’
‘Why?’
Tuppe asked.
‘For my own safety.
Mr Kobold says I am in grave danger.
He says I should forget about the monastery.
Come back home at once.’
‘What did you tell him?’
‘I told him no.’
Cornelius fought to free his fingers from his hair.
‘Good for you.
No, what am I saying?
We're out of our league here.’
Tuppe waggled the toy car beneath the tall boy's nose.
‘This is witchcraft.
We were hexed, or hoodooed, or something.
We can't mess around with stuff like this.’
‘I'm not quitting.’
Cornelius folded his arms.
‘I'm not.’
‘I understood that you'd been sacked.’
‘Tuppe, whatever we've got ourselves into is something really big.
The epic something.
We can't quit now.
Not at least until we know exactly what we have got ourselves into.’
‘Could we quit then?’
Tuppe made a hopeful face.
‘You can quit now if you want to.
I'm going on to the monastery.
And I'm going to find the papers.
What do you say?’
Tuppe stroked his pointed chin.
‘They would seem to be most valuable papers.
And as you are now unemployed, I see no reason why you shouldn't search for them in a freelance capacity.
And then perhaps, sell them to the highest bidder.’
‘These thoughts have crossed my mind.
So, will you join me, or should I drop you off at the nearest station?’
Tuppe gave his chin another little stroke.
‘As you may have noticed, Cornelius, I am only a small person.
And I greatly fear magic.
Especially magic that actually works.
I feel that I might prove a hindrance rather than a help.’
Cornelius nodded carefully.
‘I understand.
I'll drop you off at the first station we come to.’
‘You must be joking.
I wouldn't miss this for the world.’
‘Then you'll stay?’
‘Of course I'll stay.’
Tuppe tinkered with the wireless.
‘Born to be wild,’ sang Steppenwolf.
‘That's more like it,’ cried Tuppe.
‘Let's Rock and Roll.’
‘Let's do that very thing,’ Cornelius agreed.
And the big grin was back with a vengeance.