

Nuclear DNA content of isolated crypts of background colonic mucosa from patients with familial adenomatous polyposis and sporadic colorectal cancer
Abstract
The DNA content of the upper one third of the crypt epithelium was compared with that of the lower two thirds in the background colorectal mucosa of eight cases of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and eight control cases of sporadic colorectal cancer (SCRC).
Intact crypts were isolated by incubating fresh lesion free colorectal mucosa in calcium and magnesium free Hanks' balanced salt solution (CMFH) containing 30 mM EDTA for 30 minutes at 37°C and then agitating in CMFH.
The crypts were then separated from the lamina propria, fixed in 70% ethanol and under a dissecting microscope divided manually into upper and lower portions.
Each portion was digested with pepsin to obtain a suspension of single nuclei, and smears of the nuclei were stained with 4',6, -diamindino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI).
Nuclear DNA was determined using a cytophotometric microscope.
Results showed that the DNA content of the epithelium of the upper one third of crypts was diploid in both FAP and SCRC cases, and that proliferative fractions with diploid peaks were present in the lower two thirds of the crypts in both groups.
These results support our previous finding that the proliferative compartment of background crypts is confined to the lower two thirds and does not extend to the upper parts of the crypts.
Lipkin proposed that upward expansion of the proliferative compartment of the crypts of the large intestine occurs before adenoma development.
In both familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) cases and sporadic colorectal cancer (SCRC) cases, morphologically normal epithelial cells with abnormal DNA synthesis are reported to be present in upper parts of crypts.
In previous studies on the morphogenesis of colonic adenomas in FAP cases using a complete serial sectioning technique, we found that adenomas begin to develop in the proliferative compartment of the lower crypts in the form of atypical epithelial clusters, ‘buds of ademoa’.
We did not, however, detect any upward expansion of the proliferative compartment in the background crypts.
We also examined whether upward expansion actually occurred in the background colonic mucosa by ex vivo autoradiography.
Our results confirmed that the distribution of labelled cells in FAP cases was exactly the same as that in SCRC cases: the proliferative compartment was located in the lower two thirds of the crypts and no abnormality of cell kinetics was seen in either FAP or SCRC cases.
There are many reports of studies on the phase of DNA synthesis in normal colonic crypts, but none on the DNA distribution in epithelial cells in colonic crypts.
In this study we examined the distribution of nuclear DNA in crypts of background mucosa from FAP and SCRC cases by cytophotometry.
Methods
CASES STUDIED
Studies were made on eight cases of FAP and eight control cases, seven with SCRC and one with multiple colonic ademonas.
Tables I and II show the clinicopathological findings in these eight FAP cases and eight SCRC cases, respectively.
CRYPT ISOLATION
The method of Arai and Kino was used for crypt isolation.
Specimens of the colorectal mucosa were obtained just after their surgical excision.
Normal mucosa at least 5 cm from carcinomas in SCRC cases and apparently normal mucosa between multiple adenomas in FAP cases were separated from the submucosa with scissors.
The mucosa was cut into 2 mm squares with a razor, incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes in calcium and magnesium free Hanks' balanced salt solution (CMFH) containing 30 mM EDTA and then stirred in CMFH.
The crypts separated from the lamina propria mucosa within about 30 minutes and were promptly fixed in 70% ethanol.
DIVISION OF CRYPTS
Straight, intact crypts were divided at the junction of the upper one third and lower two thirds under a dissecting microscope, as follows.
Isolated crypts were put on cover glasses.
These were placed on microscopic slides under which copper grids (as used for electron microscopy) had been mounted.
The grids were used for assessing the position most appropriate for bisection of the crypts (Fig 1).
Fine needles used by ophthalmologists for surgical suture (Davis and Geck Ins, USA) with wooden stems were used to manipulate and divide the isolated crypts under a dissecting microscope.
Fifty to 60 crypts from each case were divided into upper and lower portions.
PROCESSING FOR CYTOPHOTOMETRY
Each upper one third and lower two third portion was incubated with 0.05% pepsin (Sigma, USA) adjusted to pH 2.0, for five minutes at 37°C, washed twice with 0.2 M TRIS chloride buffered saline, and aspirated and ejected several times through a disposable syringe (1 ml, Nipro, Tokyo) with a 27 gauge needle.
The single nuclei separated in this way were filtered through 37 µm nylon mesh (Tokyo Screen, Tokyo) and smeared on microscope slides using a Cytospin 3 (Shandon Inc, England).
The nuclei on the slides were stained with 1 µg/ml of 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI)(Sigma, USA) in 0.2 M TRIS chloride buffered saline for one hour at room temperature in the dark.
Stained nuclei were examined in a fluorescence cytophotometric microscope (OSP-1, Olympus, Tokyo).
For each of the 16 pairs of histograms shown, 200–212 nuclei were examined.
Results
Colonic crypts were easily separated from lamina propria mucosa by agitating fragments of mucosa obtained by incubation with EDTA.
In the FAP cases, minute adenomas and single gland adenomas, which could not be detected by naked eye, were easily recognised under the dissecting microscope (Fig 2).
We confirmed that these crypts were adenomatous in paraffin sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin (Fig 3).
Even in FAP cases normal crypts could be selected for study under a dissecting microscope.
The DAPI stained nuclei on smear slides were round or oval with a uniform size and shape.
Nuclei that overlapped each other were not used for DNA measurements (Fig 4).
Figure 5 shows eight pairs of DNA histograms of crypt epithelia of FAP cases.
The numbers of the histograms correspond with those of the cases shown in Table I. Each top half of a pair shows the DNA distribution in the upper one third, and the bottom half shows that in the lower two thirds.
The abscissa represents the amount of DNA and the ordinate shows the number of nuclei.
In all eight cases, the lower two third portion shows a distinct diploid peak, which corresponds to the G or G 1 phase in the cell cycle and small peaks between the diploid and tetraploid fractions, which correspond to S and G 2 M phases in the cell cycle.
These histograms show a proliferating compartment in the lower two thirds of the crypts in FAP cases.
On the other hand, in the upper one third portion of the crypts, shown in the top half of each pair, there is only a diploid peak: there was no S, G 2 or M fraction, and only a non-diploid cell was seen between diploid and tetraploid fractions in the second case.
Figure 6 shows the pairs of DNA histograms in the eight SCRC cases.
As seen in the FAP cases, a proliferating compartment was seen in the lower two third portion of the crypts (lower histogram).
The upper one third portion of the crypts showed a distinct diploid peak (upper histogram).
A few non-diploid cells between diploid and tetraploid fractions were seen in cases 3, 4, 5, and 8.
Discussion
According to Lipkin, during the development of colonic adenomas, several stages of abnormalities in cell kinetics are seen between normal and adenomatous crypts while maintaining a normal cellular morphology.
In the first stage, crypt cells that can synthesise DNA spread beyond the normal proliferative compartment into the upper part of the gland.
Next, these abnormally proliferating cells accumulate in the surface epitheliam of the mucosa, and finally adenomas appear in the upper part of the mucosa.
Studies by in vitro autoradiography showed that in both FAP cases and SCRC cases, cells with abnormal DNA synthesis actually spread in the upper part and surface of the crypts of the background mucosa.
We have studied the morphogenesis of minute adenomas in FAP cases by complete serial sectioning of apparently normal colonic mucosa and have found that adenomas developed in the middle part of normal crypts, sprouting into lamina propria mucosa as ‘buds of adenomas’.
We propose that a transformed cell develops in the proliferative compartment of the lower part of the crypt, divides several times, and moves upwards with migration of the normal crypt epithelium.
In the middle part of the crypt, a cluster of transformed cells breaks through the crypt basement membrane and is identified as an adenoma bud.
The upwards shift of the proliferating compartment is not necessary for the development of adenomas buds, even in FAP cases.
To discover if an upward shift of the proliferative compartment actually takes place, we examined the distribution of labelled cells and the labelling index of the background colonic mucosa in FAP and SCRC cases by ex vivo autoradiography.
Results showed that the distributions of labelled cells and the labelling indices were exactly the same in FAP and SCRC cases.
Well oriented crypts cut longitudinally along their entire length in histological sections are necessary to evaluate the position of the labelled cells accurately by autoradiography.
Specimens obtained by endoscopy and treated in vitro with arginine must be less than 1 mm thick and 5 mm wide to obtain a reliable labelling index, and are usually composed obliquely cut crypts in histological sections.
To avoid these limitations of size and orientation, we used ex vivo autoradiography, which allowed us to select well oriented crypts in the large histological sections (20×40 mm).
We found that differences in the methods used for analyses of cell kinetics are major causes of differences in results on whether the proliferative compartment is normal.
By isolating the crypts from lamina propria, exact measurements of the DNA content of the crypts was possible.
Intact and straight crypts fixed in 70% ethanol were easily selected under a dissecting microscope.
It is possible that a few cells or nuclei were damaged at the site of crypt bisection and damaged nuclei would not have been measured.
As there would have been equal numbers of damaged nuclei, however, in both groups (upper one third and lower two thirds) of crypt fractions we feel that this is not likely to be a significant distoring factor in the analysis.
Aberrant crypts that were abnormally large or showed branching, which are considered to be minute adenomas or hyperplastic crypts, could be omitted in this experiment.
No cells synthesising DNA are present in the upper one third and surface epithelium of normal colonic crypts.
There is no other report, however, of comparisons of the DNA contents of the upper one third and lower two thirds of crypt epithelium.
This study showed that all nuclei in the upper one third of crypts have a diploid DNA content in both FAP cases and SCRC cases.
This study thus confirmed our theory that the proliferating compartment of the background colonic crypts is confined to the normal position, even when the crypts affect the initial stage of development of adenomas.
Efficacy of the heater probe in peptic ulcer with a non-bleeding visible vessel.
A controlled, randomised study
Abstract
A controlled, randomised study was performed to evaluate the efficacy of treatment with heater probe in the prevention of rebleeding from peptic ulcer with a non-bleeding visible vessel.
One hundred and one patients were randomised into two groups: patients to be treated by heater probe (n=50).
In the heater probe group rebleeding occurred in five patients (10%)v 13 (26%) in the control group (p=0.03), with a comparative risk of 0.38 in favour of the heater probe group.
The difference in proportions of successful treatment for each group was 16.2% in favour of the heater probe (95% CI=2 to 31%).
Haemorrhage directly related to heater probe treatment occurred in four patients.
In three bleeding was easily controlled by further heater probe pulses.
There were no other complications and no death in the heater probe group.
One patient in the control group died of pulmonary embolism.
No significant differences in the length of stay in hospital, blood transfusions, surgical rates, or death were found; the design of the study, however, precluded an adequate assessment of these variables, because the heater probe was an optional rescue treatment when high surgical risk patients rebled.
These results suggest that the heater probe is an effective and safe procedure in the prevention of recurrent haemorrhage in peptic ulcer with a non-bleeding visible vessel.
Bleeding from peptic ulcer persists or recurs early in 25% of cases, which carries a high death rate related to the severity of bleeding or the need for surgical treatment.
Endoscopic stigmata of recent haemorrhage allow the identification of lesions with a high risk of rebleeding.
A non-bleeding visible vessel located in the crater of the ulcer has a 30–50% probability of recurrence.
Therapeutic endoscopy with electrocoagulation, photocoagulation, or injection of sclerosant or vasoactive substances, has been effective in:(a) stopping active haemorrhage,(b) diminishing the rebleeding rate,(c) reducing the need of surgery, and (d) decreasing the death rate.
These results, however, are not uniform.
Heater probe treatment of bleeding ulcer may be better than sclerosis with alcohol for stopping acute haemorrhage.
Heater probe may be less effective, however, than epinephrine injection in the initial control of active haemorrhage.
Heater probe is not superior to YAG leser or biopolar electrocoagulation in the immediate control of bleeding, decreasing the rebleeding rate, the need for surgery, or the death rate.
Therefore, it remains to be proved whether the use of heater probe is better than no active treatment and a close observation of the patient.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of the heater probe in preventing recurrence of haemorrhage from peptic ulcer with a non-bleeding visible vessel.
A control group without active treatment allowed us to compare the results.
Methods
PATIENTS
Between November 1988 and December 1991 all consecutive patients who were bleeding and admitted to the gastroenterology unit were considered for this study.
Patients were included if a gastric or duodenal peptic ulcer with a non-bleeding visible vessel was identified.
The criteria for exclusion were:(a) active bleeding from the ulcer;(b) other coexistent lesions that could be the cause of bleeding;(c) malignant ulcers, and (d) patient refusal to heater probe treatment.
Patients were separated according to ulcer location (gastric or duodenal) and then randomised into control and treatment groups.
Randomisation was done with a table of random numbers, the allocation codes were introduced in two series of sealed envelopes according to stratification class.
Patients were randomised at the time of endoscopy or within 12 hours after fulfilling the inclusion criteria.
This study was approved by the ethical committee of the hospital.
DIAGNOSIS
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding was diagnosed only if haematemesis or melaenas, or both were confirmed by the hospital staff.
The cause of bleeding was established by endoscopy within 12 hours of admission.
To obtain a correct view of the ulcer and stigmata of recent bleeding, the lesions were gently washed to remove blood that had not adhered to the lesions.
TREATMENT
All patients in the study received the following treatment: ranitidine 50 mg intraveneously three times per day, volume replacement with intravenous fluids, and blood to maintain packed cell volume above 28%.
The control group did not receive endoscopy treatment and was studied closely.
Patients in the heater probe group were treated according to the endoscopic procedure.
Endoscopic treatment — an Olympus HPU heater probe device with 3.2 mm and, occasionally, a 2.3 mm probe was used.
The energy applied in each pulse was 25–30 joules.
Pulses were given until the vessel had been flattened and turned dark.
The treatment was only given by one of the two physicians participating in the study (JLJ and CG), both with previous experience in the use of heater probe.
Coagulation was obtained by pressing in several points around and on the base of the vessel.
Rescue treatment — surgery was indicated in patients of each group if bleeding recurred.
Surgical risk was evaluated on admission.
Patients over 65 years suffering from a severe systemic condition were considered as high risk cases.
In patients with severe haemorrhage and low surgical risk, surgical intervention was carried out immediately.
Surgery was performed within 24 hours if the relapse was mild.
High surgical risk patients without haemodynamic changes, had heater probe treatment and, if bleeding persisted or recurred, the patient was operated on.
MONITORING
Monitoring of the patients included recording of blood pressure, heart rate, and urine output and, in haemodynamically unstable patients, measurement of central venous pressure.
Values of packed cell count, haemoglobin, urea, glucose, creatinine, and electrolytes were obtained at admission.
These tests were repeated 12 hours after admission and every 24 hours thereafter.
Packed cell volume and haemoglobin were also measured after each bleeding episode.
Characteristics and quantity of vomit, gastric aspirate, and stools were recorded.
A soapy enema was given daily to avoid accumulation of faeces.
END POINTS
Rebleeding, or if absent, discharge, or death were considered the end points of the study.
DEFINITIONS
Visible vessel — a raised red or black spot protruding on the ulcer crater that does not disappear with washing.
Limited haemorrhage — the presence of unchanged packed cell volume, haemodynamic stability, lack of haematemesis, no evidence of blood in the gastric aspirate, and normal stools or only traces of melaena.
Continued haemorrhage —(a) if the volume of intravenous fluids required to restore or maintain haemodynamic stability was greater than 1000 ml/hour or 3000 ml/12 hours,(b) fresh haematemesis and,(c) haematemesis or melaenas in association with a fall in packed cell volume greater than 5% in a 24 hour period, two days after admission.
Rebleeding — bloody gastric aspirate, haematemesis or melaenas while in the hospital, after initial control of bleeding, and the stools had become normal.
Haemodynamic stability — presence of all of the following,(a) systolic blood pressure greater than 100 mm Hg,(b) heart rate less than 100 beats/min,(c) urine output greater than 35 ml/ hour and,(d) no signs or symptoms of impaired systemic perfusion.
ASSESSMENT
The efficacy of the heater probe was assessed with the results obtained at the first attempt.
Data recording and assessment of results were carried out by a member of the unit who did not participate in endoscopic treatment or looked after the patients.
The proportion of rebleeding in the heater group was compared with that in the control group.
An intention to treat analysis was carried out.
STATISTICS
Sample size was calculated assuming 30% and 10% rebleeding rate in the control and treated groups, respectively, and by giving values of 0.05 to an α error and 0.2 to Β error.
After calculation the number obtained was 48 in each group and 5% was added to compensate for non-evaluable patients.
Thus, the total number including both groups was 101.
Fisher's exact test or χ 2 test with Yates's correction were used, where appropriate, to compare proportions and Student's t test was used for continuous variables.
Confidence intervals and relative risk were also calculated.
Results
One hundred and one patients were included in the study.
Thirty five had bleeding gastric ulcer and sixty six a duodenal ulcer.
After randomisation 51 patients were included in the heater probe group and 50 in the control group.
Table I shows the clinical data on admission.
In the heater probe group, coagulation was achieved in 49 patients.
The two patients in whom coagulation was not achieved had ulcers located in the inferior and posterior wall of the duodenal bulb, respectively.
The approach to the visible vessel was difficult in 10 patients.
The probe was applied from the front in 32 and laterally in 17 cases.
A mean of 8.4 pulses and 211 joules, were used in each patient, with the 2.3 mm probe in four cases and 3.2 mm probe in the remainder.
Four patients bled during the procedure.
In three of them, bleeding was finally controlled during the same session.
The fourth patient required local epinephrine injection in addition to repeated heater probe pulses and was considered a failure in the final statistical analysis.
In four additional patients bleeding recurred after heater probe treatment and in one of them, with high surgical risk, successful control of haemorrhage was obtained in a second thermocoagulation session.
The remaining three patients required operations.
In one of these three patients the bleeding started in another ulcer not seen during the first endoscopy and therefore not treated with heater probe.
Thus, the number of rebleeding cases in the group with heater probe treatment was five (9.8%), two from gastric and three from duodenal ulcers.
Patients received a mean of 1.2 U of packed red blood cells (SD=2) and they were in hospital during a mean period of 7.4 days (SD=3.6)(Tables II and III).
There were no deaths in this group.
In the control group, bleeding recurred in 13 patients (26%), six with gastric ulcers and seven with ulcer located in the duodenum.
Five were poor subjects for operation, so that endoscopic treatment by heater probe was performed.
Two patients required operation because of further recurrence after heater probe treatment and difficulties in reaching the lesion, respectively.
In the other five rebleeding patients an operation was performed successfully.
Medical treatment was considered only for the remaining three patients.
Two had a mild haemorrhage and the third patient refused both operation and heater probe treatment.
This patient required six packed red cells before the bleeding stopped.
One patient died because of pulmonary embolism during the postoperative period.
An average of 2 (SD=2.5) U of packed red cells were transfused in each patient and required 7.7 (SD=4.4) days stay in hospital (Tables II and III).
The incidence of rebleeding was lower in the heater probe treated patients than in the control group (Fisher's exact test p=0.03) with a comparative risk of 0.38 (95% CI 0.14 to 0.98).
The difference in proportions of successful treatment in each group was 16.2% in favour of heater probe, with a 95% CI ranging from 2% to 31%.
There were no significant differences between both groups in death, transfusion requirements, and days needed in hospital.
When the adherence to treatment is considered, the data analysis results are very similar to those seen in the intention to treat analysis (10.2% and 26% of recurrences in heater probe and in control group respectively; Fisher's exact test p=0.04).
Analysis of results according to location of the ulcer showed a tendency in favour of the heater probe in both gastric and duodenal sites, but statistical significance was not reached because of the small size of subgroups.
Discussion
This study shows that treatment of bleeding ulcers with heater probe reduces the rebleeding rate compared with medical conservative management.
The heater probe reached a visible vessel in 90% of the patients.
The two patients in whom the lesion was not reached had ulcers located in the inferior and posterior wall of duodenal bulb.
The treatment was satisfactorily performed in all patients despite some difficulties in reaching the lesion in 20% of them.
In the group of patients treated with the heater probe the incidence of rebleeding was about one third of that in the control group.
There was no death in the endoscopy treated group.
The only complication in this group was an uncontrolled haemorrage induced by probe manipulation.
The blood transfusion requirements were similar in both groups.
Differences in days spent in hospital, however, amount of blood transfused, and operations required, are difficult to analyse because heater probe was an option for rescue treatment in the control group.
Endoscopic treatment has been shown to be beneficial in bleeding patients.
Thus heater probe treatment was considered an option for rescue treatment in high risk patients.
This decision was made based on ethical consideration despite the fact that the use of the heater probe as a rescue treatment would be a confounding variable in the assessment of the subsequent outcome (operation or death).
Nevertheless this strategy did not affect the results at the end point established in the methods (rebleeding).
It should be pointed out that in our control group, the incidence of rebleeding was 26%, which is less than the 30 to 50% seen by others.
Our definition of visible vessel is widely accepted.
The endoscopic concept of visible vessel includes several stages of the same lesion and even various types of lesions.
It is interesting also that slight changes in the colour of the so called visible vessel are associated with a different risk of rebleeding ranging from 18 to 50%.
In uncontrolled studies, the use of heater probe in active bleeding ulcers or in ulcers with stigmata of recent haemorrhage, achieves haemostasis in 75 to 100% of cases, and in 69 to 86% of patients the control of bleeding is definitive.
Randomised controlled trials have shown similar results.
Compared with other endoscopic treatment used to stop bleeding, the heater probe seems better than pure alcohol sclerosis but less effective than epinephrine injections.
No significant difference was seen when compared with laser YAG or bipolar electrocoagulation.
With the heater probe the complication rate was less than 5%.
Difficulties in reaching the bleeding point have been reported in 20% of cases.
Thus, because of inaccessibility two to nine per cent of ulcers were excluded from randomisation.
Ulcers located in the posterior or lower walls of the duodenal bulb and in the upper portion of the lesser curvature of the stomach are the most difficult to reach.
Problems in gaining access to lesion must be taken into account in the final evaluation of any of the endoscopic types of treatment.
The current data are insufficient to establish the suitability of the heater probe compared with other types of endoscopic treatment.
Previous studies have not shown that the heater probe is less effective than other types of endoscopic treatment, whose efficacy is already proved.
Although the benefit of the heater probe v medical treatment alone has not been established, it seems more effective.
There are only two studies published in complete form in which the results showed statistical difference.
Fullarton et al obtained definitive haemostasis in 20 (100%) of the treated patients v 22% failures in the control group (p=0.05).
Lin et al , after one or two sessions of thermocoagulation, achieved a significant lower rate of rebleeding, emergency operation, death, and days in hospital compared with control patients.
In a third study in ulcers with a non-bleeding visible vessel, heater probe treatment did not improve significantly the rebleeding or death rates compared with controls.
Finally, the results of Matthewson et al suggest that the heater probe has some advantages over conservative treatment in preventing rebleeding and decreasing the number of operations.
The analysis of the results, however, did not show a statistical difference.
Nevertheless, these two last studies cannot exclude a real benefit for the heater probe.
In the Matthewson trial with a comparative risk or rebleeding of 0.82 in treated v control patients the Β error probability was 0.54.
In the report by Lin et al , the comparative risk was 0.56 and the Β-error 0.29.
In these two studies the statistical power is lower than the conventional 80% required to reject a true effectiveness with statistical confidence.
In addition, the results of two different studies have been published in abstract form, one of these claiming a therapeutic benefit for heater probe.
This study, including estimation of sample size and the methods used, was aimed at avoiding problems with statistical evaluation of the results.
The inaccessible lesions were included in the final analysis as the aim was to evaluate this procedure according to the intention to treat.
Only the results from the first treatment with the heater probe were included in the statistical analysis although a definitive control of the bleeding was achieved sometimes after additional sessions.
Finally, rebleeding from a previously missed and non-treated ulcer was considered a failure.
A meta analysis including our data and data obtained from previous publications was performed to further evaluate the effectiveness of the heater probe, according to the DerSimonian-Laird method in rates differences estimation and the Mantel-Haenszel-Peto method by odds ratio.
The results of the meta analysis suggest that the heater probe is useful in the treatment of bleeding ulcers.
The combined total number of patients included in the above mentioned studies is 428, 220 treated and 208 in the control group.
The mean rate of recurrent or continued bleeding in control groups was 37%.
In the heater probe group the incidence of bleeding was lowered to 14% (pooled rate difference (95% CI) =-0.23 (0.08)) and the typical odds ratio of uncontrolled haemorrhage was 0.29 (95% CI=0.19 to 0.45) favouring the heater probe.
In ulcers with a non-bleeding visible vessel, the mean rate of rebleeding was 33% in control groups, the reduction as a result of treatment 19% (pooled rate difference (95% CI) =0.19 (0.09)) and the odds ratio 0.37 (95% CI=0.21 to 0.65).
In summary, this study shows that compared with medical treatment the heater probe reduces the rebleeding rate in a non-bleeding visible vessel by 62%, there was no death, and complications were minimal.
Our results suggest that heater probe is an effective and safe procedure in the prevention of recurrent haemorrhage in peptic ulcer with a non-bleeding visible vessel.
Acid clearance and oesophageal sensitivity in patients with progressive systemic sclerosis
Abstract
This study examined the hypothesis that impaired oesophageal peristalsis was associated with delayed oesophageal clearance of acid in patients with progressive systemic sclerosis (PSS), some of whom are thought to have impaired oesophageal sensitivity to acid.
Sixteen patients with PSS had:(a) oesophageal manometry and endoscopy;(b) acid perfusion of the oesophagus with simultaneous measurement of intraoesophageal pH during perfusion and for the next 10 minutes;(c) 22 hour monitoring of intraoesophageal pH; and (d) an evaluation of reflux symptoms during and after perfusion and during overnight pH monitoring.
By oesophageal manometry, eight patients had normal peristalsis and eight patients had impaired peristalsis.
Oesophageal endoscopy was unremarkable in patients with normal peristalsis, whereas all patients with impaired peristalsis had oesophagitis.
The time needed to clear the oesophagus of perfused acid was shorter (p<0.01) in patients with normal peristalsis and acid clearance time was significantly correlated (p<0.01) with acid exposure time during overnight pH monitoring.
During and after oesophageal perfusion, the nature, duration, and severity of symptoms did not differ between the groups, but overnight symptoms lasted longer (p<0.05) in patients with impaired peristalsis.
It is concluded that in PSS:(1) Impaired oesophageal motility delayed the clearance of acid and increased the exposure time to acid.
(2) Acid clearance time is a useful parameter of impaired oesophageal motor function.
The assessment of acid clearance time can be used as an alternative to overnight pH monitoring, to assess the impairment of oesophageal acid clearance.
(3) Oesophageal sensitivity to acid was preserved in patients with impaired peristalsis and oesophagitis. (4) Reflux symptoms lasted longer in patients with prolonged oesophageal acid exposure but were still reported for a small fraction of the total acid exposure time.
Thus, reflux symptoms reflect poorly prolonged exposure of the oesophagus to acid and are not a reliable guide to acid injury of the oesophagus in PSS.
In progressive systemic sclerosis (PSS), oesophageal peristalsis may be impaired, oesophageal acid exposure time prolonged, oesophageal transit of a radiolabelled liquid meal delayed, and oesophagitis is common.
In addition, the duration of acid reflux is longer in PSS patients wth oesophagitis than in patients with a similar degree of oesophagitis but with no connective tissue disease.
Moreover, lower oesophageal sphincter pressure is often severely reduced in PSS and gastric emptying delayed, both these phenomena could aggravate gastro-oesophageal reflux.
The prolonged duration of reflux seen during pH monitoring or after a meal in PSS could thus be related to defective clearance or to a greater quantity of reflux.
No data are available, however, in PSS on the time taken by the weakened oesophagus to clear itself of a known amount of acid.
We proposed that acid clearance time would be delayed in patients with impaired peristalsis and that the delay in clearance would be correlated with acid exposure time.
Although heartburn is the most common oesophageal symptom in patients with PSS, a reduced sensitivity to acid, related to the destruction fo oesophageal sensory pathways, has been suggested.
This hypothesis was based on the finding of only a 30% positive response to acid perfusion in a series of 53 PSS patients.
Peripheral neuropathy has also been seen in some patients with PSS and neuropathy has been implicated in the initial changes in oesophageal motility.
We speculated therefore that oesophageal sensitivity to acid would be reduced in PSS patients with impaired oesophageal peristalsis.
Our aims in this study were to assess in PSS patients, with or without impaired oesophageal peristalsis, acid clearance by the oesophagus and oesophageal sensitivity to acid.
Patients and methods
We studied 16 unselected patients with PSS (mean age 47 years, range 26–62, 15 women, one man) referred to our gastroenterology unit in the period from September 1991 to April 1992 for the assessing of oesophageal involvement.
The diagnosis of PSS was based on the preliminary criteria of the American Rheumatism Association.
One major or two minor criteria were required for the diagnosis; the major criterion was scleroderma affecting the digits, forearms or face (15 patients); minor criteria were sclerodactyly alone (10 patients), distal pitting scars of finger tips (10 patients), loss of substance of the distal finger pads (nine patients) and bilateral pulmonary fibrosis (seven patients).
Raynaud's phenomenon was reported by all patients, for a mean (range) time of 10.5 years (1 to 23).
Patients completed a standard questionnaire for the presence or absence during the preceding month of dysphagia, heartburn, regurgitation, nausea, or vomiting.
All had endoscopy to determine the presence or absence of macroscopic oesophagitis (grade 1: erythema or linear erosions; grade 2: confluent erosions or ulcerations; grade 3: circumferential erosions or ulcerations; strictures).
Oesophageal manometry and acid perfusion tests were performed in the morning, with the fasting patient in the left lateral position.
For 24 hours all abstained from drugs that could interfere with oesophagogastric function.
Oesophageal manometry was performed as described by Richter et al .
An 8 lumen polyvinyl catheter (outer diameter 4.5 mm; inside diameter of each lumen 0.8 mm; Arndorfer Specialties Inc, Greendale, USA) was passed through the nose or mouth and continuously perfused using a low compliance pneumohydraulic capillary perfusion system (Arndorfer Specialities Inc, Greendale, USA) at a rate of 0.5 ml/minute.
Pressures were transmitted to external pressure transducers and recorded on a polygraph.
With the distal four openings spaced 1 cm apart at 90 degrees, lower oesophageal sphincter pressure was recorded once by station pull through (0.5 cm increments/30 seconds) and twice by rapid (1 cm/1 second) pull through.
The mean station pull through pressure was calculated as the average of four separate pressure values measured from the gastric baseline to the midpoint of respiratory variations.
Mean rapid pull through pressure was calculated as the average of eight separate pressure values measured from the gastric baseline to the peak of the pressure rise.
The catheter was then positioned to record motility 3, 8, 13, and 18 cm above the upper border of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
Ten wet (5 ml of water) swallows were performed at intervals of at least 60 seconds.
Amplitude and duration of contractions at each recording site were calculated as the average of 10 swallows.
Amplitude was measured from the intraoesophageal baseline to the peak of the pressure wave; duration was measured from the point where the upstroke of the contraction left the baseline to the point wherethe downstroke of the contractions returned to baseline.
The individual values for the recording sites 3 and 8 cm above the lower oesophageal spincter were combined and designated as distal oesophageal contractile amplitude and duration.
Peristalsis was defined as impaired when the distal oesophageal contractile amplitude was <20 mm Hg.
After oesophageal manometry, with the manometric catheter still in place, an antimony electrode mounted on a polyvinyl catheter (outer diameter 2.1 mm; Monocristant 0011, Synectics Medical, Stockholm) was passed through the nose and positioned in the oesophagus 5 cm above the upper border of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
A reference electrode was applied on the skin of the abdomen.
Both electrodes were connected to a pH recorder that stored data every four seconds.
A constant perfusion (8 ml/ minute) of saline (five minutes) followed by HCl 0.1 N (10 minutes) was given by an infusion pump (Watson and Marlow Ltd) through the manometry catheter, with an o-en tip placed 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter.
The time needed to empty the dead space of the infusion was set (mean (SEM) of six replications) at 95 (4) seconds.
Patients were allowed to swallow during and after perfusion.
Intraoesophageal pH, and the intensity and duration of symptoms (heartburn, acid regurgitation) were recorded during infusions and for the next 10 minutes.
Acid clearance time was defined as the interval between the end of acid infusion and the time at which the intraluminal pH first rose above four.
After 10 minutes of infusion, the manometric catheter was removed, two sips of tap water were given to clear acid from the oesophagus, and 22 hours of pH monitoring were started.
Patients reported the intensity and duration of symptoms with a diary card and the onset of symptoms with an event market on the pH recording.
Patients were also instructd to eat at 1 pm and 8 pm and to remain upright during the day and to be supine from 10 pm to 8 am.
At the end of the recording, pH data were transferred to a computer for analysis.
Acid gasto-oesophageal reflux was defined as a fall in pH<4 for at least five seconds from a pH>5.
The percentage of time at pH<4, the minutes at pH<4, the number of episodes of reflux, those lasting longer than five minutes, and the duration of the longest period of reflux were calculated with Esophogram 9802 Version 5.10 (Synectics Medical, Stockholm).
Hourly frequency and mean duration of reflux episodes in the upright and supine period were also calculated in each patient.
Symptoms (heartburn, acid regurgitation) were defined as being related to reflux if they started within five minutes of a fall in intraoesophageal pH.
The symptom index was calculated as the number of times the symptom occurred when the pH was below four, divided by the total number of times the symptom was reported; this quotient was then multiplied by 100 to give the percentage of symptoms associated with reflux.
Intensity of symptoms was scored from mild=1 to severe=3 throughout the study; the duration of symptoms was evaluated at one minute intervals.
Comparisons between groups were performed with the Wilcoxon test for unpaired data and the Fisher test.
Correlation were assessed with Spearman's rank correlation test.
Results
GRADING OF PATIENTS
Two groups of patients were identified by oesophageal manometry.
Those with normal peristalsis (group I: n=8; mean age (SEM) 47 (3) years) were all women.
Those with impaired peristalsis (group II: n=8; mean age (SEM) 48 (4) years; seven women, one man) had extremely low pressures in the oesophageal body and hypotonic lower oesophageal sphincter (Table I).
Endoscopy was normal in patients of group I, whereas all patients with impaired peristalsis had oesophagitis (grade 1, 2, or 3 in four, two, and two patients respectively).
The severity of reflux symptoms were not statistically different between groups I and II (Table I), but heartburn, dysphagia, and regurgitation were more common in patients with impaired peristalsis and oesophagitis.
ACID PERFUSION TEST
The intraoesophageal pH was not different in groups I and II during saline and acid perfusion.
After perfusion, the acid clearance time (mean (SEM)) was significantly shorter (p<0.01) in patients with normal peristalsis (173 (28) seconds) than in those with impaired peristalsis (445 (48) seconds)(Fig 1).
The number of swallows in the 10 minutes during and after acid infusion, calculated from the number of detectable oesophageal contractions in the most cranial recording channel, did not differ significantly in group I (20 (3); 20 (4)) or group II (18 (5); 18 (6)).
OVERNIGHT pH MONITORING
Overnight exposure of the oesophagus to acid, the number of reflux episodes longer than five minutes, and the duration of the longest period of reflux were significantly greater in patients with impaired peritalsis.
The total number of reflux episodes, however, did not differ significantly between the groups (Table II).
Frequency of reflux episodes did not differ between the groups in the upright and supine period, whereas the length of reflux was significantly longer in the supine period in patients with impaired peristalsis (Fig 2).
Figure 3 shows the relation between acid clearance time after acid perfusion and overnight exposure to acid.
Acid clearance time was significantly correlated to acid exposure time (Spearman's r =0.82; p<0.01).
Cut off values for acid clearance times of 290 seconds and for the percentage of time at pH<4 of 11.5% discriminated in all but one patient between groups I and II.
ACID SENSITIVITY
Only three of 16 patients did not report a history of heartburn or acid regurgitation or during the study period; all three had normal peristalsis and no oesophagitis.
Two patients with impaired peristalsis and oesophagitis reported a history of symptoms but not during the study period.
Heartburn or acid regurgitation were reported only when the oesophageal pH was less than four — that is, the symptom index was always 100% and was independent of endoscopic changes in the oesophageal mucosa and oesophageal function.
The nature, duration, and severity of symptoms did not differ between groups I and II during and after perfusion (Table III); the difference in the duration of symptoms, however, during the 10 minutes after perfusion almost reached conventional significance (p<0.10).
Symptoms during overnight pH monitoring lasted significantly longer (p<0.05) in patients with impaired peristalsis and oesophagitis than in patients with normal peristalsis and no oesophagitis (Table III).
Discussion
These studies were performed in an unselected group of patients with PSS referred to our gastroenterology unit for the assessing of oesophageal involvement.
Oesophagitis was seen only in the group with impaired peristalsis, confirming the close association between a change in oesophageal motility and injury of oesophageal mucosa.
We measured the ability of the oesophagus to clear a given amount of acid; patients were allowed to swallow during and after acid perfusion.
As expected, the acid clearance time was shorter in patients with normal peristalsis.
Our experimental approach did not evaluate the effect of swallowing on the clearance of acid, but clearance was measured under conditions similar to those found during spontaneous reflux.
Previous studies have recorded in normal volunteers and in patients with PSS the number of swallows at specific intervals that were needed to clear a given amount of acid placed in the oesophagus.
We preferred to evaluate overall clearance of the oesophagus rather than the specific effects of swallowing because the amplitude of contractions after swallowing in patients with abnormal peristalsis is below the minimum effective strength for clearance.
In any event, the number of swallows did not differ in patients with or without peristalsis.
Further studies will be needed to establish the relative roles of gravity, residual motility, and saliva as determinants of oesophageal clearance in PSS.
In our experimental conditions, acid clearance time discriminated between patients with normal and impaired peristalsis; moreover acid clearance time was correlated with the overnight acid exposure time.
These results are consistent with scintigraphic evidence of a delay in oesophageal transit of a radiolabelled liquid meal in PSS patients with impaired peristalsis and of fewer but more prolonged episodes of postprandial reflux when PSS patients were compared with those with normal peristalsis and equally severe oesophagitis.
Thus, acid clearance times can be used to assess the impairment of the oesophageal motor function in PSS.
We also studied oesophageal sensitivity to acid during acid perfusion test and overnight pH monitoring.
Our hypothesis was that the oesophageal sensitivity to acid would be reduced in PSS with aperistalsis on the basis of changed oesophageal sensory pathways.
Patients were rather specific in their reporting of symptoms as they complained of heartburn or acid regurgitation only when the intraoesophageal pH was less than four.
A substantial percentage of patients, greater than that previously reported in PSS, complained of heartburn or acid regurgitation during acid perfusion.
Moreover, the nature, duration, and severity of symptoms during acid perfusion were similar in patients with or without impaired peristalsis.
Thus, oesophageal sensitivity to acid was preserved in our patients.
Symptoms during overnight pH monitoring lasted longer in patients with prolonged oesophageal acid exposure.
This is consistent with the positive correlation between the frequency and duration of gastro-oesophageal reflux symptoms and oesophageal acid exposure in dyspeptic patients with or without oesophagitis.
Our PSS patients rported reflux symptoms, however, only during a small fraction of the acid exposure time, as previously seen in patients with chest pain or gastro-oesophageal reflux.
Symptoms of reflux therefore reflected poorly acid exposure times in patients with PSS as they do in patients with reflux and no connective tissue diseases.
The discrepancy between the exposure time to acid and the extent of symptoms was striking in PSS, perhaps because of the prolonged oesophageal acid exposure in these patients, particularly during the supine period.
In summary, our studies of unselected patients with PSS show that impaired oesophageal peristalsis delays the clearance of acid and increases the exposure time to acid.
Acid clearance time is a useful index of impaired oesophageal motor function.
The assessment of the acid clearance time could be a useful alternative to the more time consuming and uncomfortable overnight evaluation of pH.
Despite the reliable reporting of symptoms and conserved sensitivity to acid, reflux symptoms reflected poorly the prolonged oesophageal acid exposure and do not seem to be a reliable guide to the severity of oesophageal involvement in PSS.
Xenobiotic metabolising enzyme expression in colonic neoplasia
Abstract
The cytochrome P450, epoxide hydrolase, and gluthathione S-transferase enzyme families play an important part in the metabolism of many carcinogens and anti-cancer drugs.
The expression of two forms of cytochrome P450 (P450 1A and P450 3A), epoxide hydrolase and of the α, β and γ forms of glutathione S-transferase in normal colon, colonic adenomas, and adenocarcinoma of the colon were studied by immunohistochemistry.
This allowed the precise cellular site and distribution of each enzyme to be determined.
Expression of all the xenobiotic metabolising enzymes studied was almost wholly confined to the epithelial cells, whether in normal, adenoma or carcinoma samples, except that cytochrome P450 3A was also identified in mast cells and glutathione S-transferase γ was also present in chronic inflammatory cells.
Cytochrome P450 was present in only a small proportion of normal colon samples, whereas epoxide hydrolase and glutathione S-transferase β were identified in about half, and glutathione S-transferase α and γ in most normal samples.
By contrast all the enzyme forms studied were expressed in virtually all adenomas and in over half the carcinomas.
These results suggest that cytochrome P450 1A and cytochrome P450 3A are more specific markers of colonic neoplasia than epoxide hydrolase or glutathione S-transferases α, β, and γ.
Colon cancer is the most common malignant tumour of the gastrointestinal tract and is one of the commonest causes of death from cancer.
Colinic carcinomas are often intrinsically resistant to anti-cancer drugs, and these tumours respond poorly to anti-cancer drugs.
Recent evidence has shown that the expression of enzymes participating in biotransformation may play a part in tumour drug-resistance.
Moreover, the same group of xenobiotic metabolising enzymes are probably involved in the development of colonic carcinoma.
The colonic epithelium is in continuous contact with potentially carcinogenic compounds, which enter the body usually as part of the diet.
These xenobiotics may be activated or detoxified by phase I and phase II biotransformation enzymes including cytochromes P450, epoxide hydrolases, and glutathione S-transferases.
Metabolism may occur in the gastrointestinal tract, including the colon or in the liver, or both.
Cytochromes P450 are a multi-gene superfamily of haem containing enzymes that catalyse the oxidative metabolism of many compounds.
Their substrates are endogenous compounds such as steroids and prostaglandins as well as many xenobiotics such as carcinogens, mutagens, and drugs including anti-cancer drugs.
Cytochrome P450 metabolism of compounds may result in either activation or detoxification.
The main cytochromes P450 participating in the metabolism of xenobiotics are families 1, 2, and 3, which are promarily located within the liver, although specific forms of cytochrome P450 are expressed in particular extrahepatic tissues.
For example, members of the cytochrome P450 family 3 are present in high concentration in small intestinal epithelium and it has been suggested that they protect the small intestine from carcinoma.
Indeed, it has recently been suggested that an absence from the colon of certain of these enzymes, especially specific forms of cytochrome P450, may be involved in the comparatively high incidence rate of carcinogenesis in this organ.
One type of product of cytochrome P450 mediated metabolism are potentially toxic epoxids.
These can be converted to comparatively less toxic trans-dihydrodiols by a group of enzymes known as epoxide hydrolases, although subsequent oxidation can lead to the formation of diol epoxide derivatives, which are more toxic than their parent compounds.
Epoxide hydrolases are mainly located within the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (microsomal fraction of subcellular homogenate).
Toxic electrophilic compounds produced by both cytochromes P450 and microsomal epoxide hydrolases can be eliminated from the body by conjugation with glutathione.
This conjugation reaction is catalysed by another complex gene family, the glutathione S-transferases.
The three main groups of glutathione S-transferases are α (basic), µ (neutral), and π (acidic), mainly present in the liver, but also present in various extrahepatic tissues including intestinal epithelium.
Recent studies have suggested an increased activity of expression of glutathione S-transferases in colonic tumour cells compared with normal non-neoplastic mucosa.
As the expression of different xenobiotic metabolising enzymes may take part in both the development of colonic neoplasia and drug resistance of established colonic carcinomas we have investigated the expression of cytochromes P450 1A and 3A, epoxide hydrolase, and glutathione S-transferases α, µ, and π in normal colon, colonic adenomas, and adenocarcinoma of the colon.
Methods
ANTIBODIES
Cytochrome P450 1A was identified using a murine monoclonal antibody (RM3) as described previously.
Cytochrome P450 3A was also identified using a monoclonal antibody (HL3), which has been raised and characterised in our laboratories.
Microsomal epoxide hydrolase was recognised using a rabbit polyclonal antibody raised in our laboratories against a purified preparation of human hepatic microsomal epoxide hydrolase.
Cytoplasmic forms of glutathione S-transferases α, µ, and π were recognised using rabbit polyclonal antibodies purchased from Novacastra Laboratories, Newcastle upon Tyne.
All the antibodies used in this study recognise epitopes that are resistant to formalin fixation and wax embedding.
TISSUE
Specimens of normal colon, colonic adenoma, and colon carcinoma were obtained from biopsies and resected specimens submitted to the Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen, for diagnostic purposes.
Biopsy specimens of normal colon were obtained from patients without any evidence of colonic neoplasia.
All the tissue samples had been fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 hours at room temperature and then routinely processed to paraffin wax.
The colonic carcinomas were staged using Dukes's classification.
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
Formalin fixed wax embedded sections (4 cm) of the colonic tissues were dewaxed in xylene, rehydrated in alcohol and spirit (95% alcohol), each step being carried out for five minutes at room temperature, then washed in cold water.
Before applying any immunochemicals, the sections were washed with 0.05 M TRIS-HCl (pH 7.6) containing 0.15 M sodium chloride (TBS) for two successive five minute periods.
Both negative and positive controls were incorporated in the immunohistochemical procedure.
Negative controls used in place of the primary antibody were either TBS (control for monoclonal antibodies), or normal rabbit immunoglobulins (control for polyclonal antibodies).
Positive controls were sections of normal formalin fixed wax embedded human liver as liver is known to express all the enzymes being studied.
The slides were examined using transmitted light microscopy to assess qualitatively the presence or absence of immunostaining, and its distribution.
Correlations between the expression of the different enzymes with tumour grade (Dukes's stages A, B, C) were measured by the χ 2 test with Yates's correction.
CYTOCHROME P450 1A AND CYTOCHROME P450 3A
Rehydrated tissue sections were incubated for one hour at room temperature with each of the monoclonal antibodies at the following dilutions: anti-cytochrome P450 1A, 1/20 dilution in TBS of a 50% ammonium sulphate precipitate of hybridoma culture supernatant, and anti-cytochrome P450 3A as undiluted hybridoma culture supernatant.
Sites of antibody binding were shown with an alkaline phosphatase anti-alkaline phosphatase (APAAP) technique.
This procedure entails the sequential incubation of rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin (1/100 containing 5% normal human serum, Dako Ltd, High Wycombe, Bucks) and monoclonal APAAP (1/100, Dako) for 30 minutes each at room temperatire.
The sections were washed with TBS for two successive five minute periods after each incubation to remove unbound antibody.
Sites of bound alkaline phosphatase were shown with a solution containing 3 mg bromo-chloro-indolyl phosphate (Sigma Chemical Co Ltd, Poole, Dorset), 10 mg nitro blue tetrazolium (Sigma), 6 mg sodium azide, and 4 mg levamisole (Sigma) in 10 ml 0.05 M TRIS-HCl buffer (pH 9.0) containing 0.2% magnesium chloride.
After incubating for 30 minutes at room temperature, the reaction was stopped by washing the sections in cold water.
The slides were then air dried and mounted in glycerine jelly.
Epoxide hydrolase and glutathione S-transferases
Polyclonal anti-epoxide hydrolase antibody was applied to tissue sections at a dilution of 1/50 of a stock 20 mg/ml solution, prepared from the lyophilate of a 50% ammonium sulphate precipitate of immunised rabbit serum.
Polyclonal antibodies to the three clases of glutathione S-transferase were applied at the following dilutions of a stock solution (protein concentration 1 mg/ml): glutathione S-transferase α 1/100; glutathione S-transferase µ 1/50; glutathione S-transferase π 1/200.
Each of the antibodies were applied to tissue sections for one hour at room temperature, and the sites of bound antibody shown by the APAAP technique.
After removal of unbound primary antibody, the sections were incubated with monoclonal mouse anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (1/100, Dako) for 30 minutes at room temperature before the application of rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin and APAAP complex.
The sites of bound alkaline phosphatase were then shown as above.
Results
NORMAL COLON
In all thirteen normal human colon biopsy specimens that were examined, immunoreactivity for each enzyme seemed to be patchy and focal on the surface of the colonic epithelium, with no immunostaining present in crypt epithelium.
None of the biopsy specimens displayed positive immunoreactivity for cytochrome P450 1A and only two (15%) of the samples displayed positive epithelial immunoreactivity for cytochrome P450 3A.
In addition, mast cells in normal colon, adenoma, or carcinoma samples consistently showed strong positive staining for cytochrome P450 3A.
Six (46%) of the biopsy specimens were found to show immunostaining for epoxide hydrolase in colonic epithelium.
Immunoreactivity for glutathione S-transferases α and π was present in 10 (77%) of the samples, with glutathione S-transferase µ expressed in six (46%, Table I).
Glutathione S-transferase π immunoreactivity was also identified in chronic inflammatory cells present in normal colon, adenoma, or carcinoma samples.
Negative controls did not show any immunostaining and the positive controls always showed positive and appropriate immunoreactivity with all the enzymes.
COLONIC ADENOMAS
Twelve colonic adenoma biopsy specimens were examined, of which six were tubular adenomas, three were villous adenomas, and three were tubulovillous adenomas.
All 12 (100%) were found to show positive immunostaining for both forms of cytochrome P450, cytochrome P450 1A, and cytochrome P450 3A.
This was also the case for three other enzymes, epoxide hydrolase, glutathione S-transferase α, and glutathione S-transferase π, where all the tumours showed positive immunoreactivity.
Glutathione S-transferase µ, however, was expressed in 10 (83%) of the tumours (Tables I and II).
For each enzyme, immunoreactivity was present in the cytoplasm of tumour cells (Fig 1).
In areas of villous adenoma some of the tumour cells also showed nuclear immunoreactivity (Fig 2).
Mucus secretory cells did not show any immunoreactivity.
COLONIC CARCINOMAS
Twenty eight colonic carcinoma tumours were examined, all of which were moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas.
There were three Dukes's grade A carcinomas, 13 Dukes's grade B tumours, and 12 Dukes's grade C adenocarcinomas.
Based on immunoreactivity, all the carcinomas expressed at least one enzyme, and six tumours expressed all six enzymes (Table II).
Twenty one (75%) of the carcinomas showed positive immunostaining for cytochrome P450 1A, with 17 (61%) showing positive immunostaining for cytochrome P450 3A.
Epoxide hydrolase immunoreactivity was present in 25 (89%) of the tumours, 20 (71%) showed positive immunostaining for glutathione S-transferase α, whereas both glutathione S-transferases µ and π were detected in 17 (61%) of the tumours (Table II).
Immunostaining for each enzyme was present in the cytoplasm of tumour cells (Fig 3 and 4), although in a few cases nuclear staining was also seen for the glutathione S-transferases.
The immunoreactivity for each enzyme seemed to be homogeneously distributed throughout each tumour.
There were no significant correlations between enzyme expression and Dukes's grade.
Discussion
The development of carcinoma of the colon is dependent on both genetic and environmental factors and its is generally accepted that the development of colonic carcinoma follows the adenoma-carcinoma sequence.
The presence in the diet of carcinogens or pro-carcinogens is probably one important environmental factor and these carcinogens and pro-carcinogens can be either activated or deactivated by xenobiotic metabolising enzymes present in the colon.
Some of these compounds may already have had metabolism in the liver or small intestine, or both, before reaching the colon by biliary excretion.
We have studied the localisation by immunohistochemistry of different forms of the drug metabolising enzymes, cytochrome P450, epoxide hydrolase, and glutathione S-transferase in normal colon, and benign and malignant epithelial tumours of the colon.
Although there have been several biochemical investigations of cytochrome P450 and glutathione S-transferase in human colonic carcinomas, it is difficult to compare directly biochemical and immunohistochemical studies of enzymes, and both approaches have advantages and limitations.
Biochemistry can be quantitative but immunohistochemistry is qualitative.
Whereas biochemical studies can measure enzyme activities, immunohistochemistry can only provide information on enzyme protein, some of which may be inactive.
Immunohistochemistry cannot distinguish between different immunologically cross reactive proteins, but biochemically these can often be differentiated according to molecular weight using immunoblotting.
The overriding advantage of immunohistochemistry, however, is its ability to localise enzymes to individual cells in heterogeneous samples.
This is crucial, as tumour samples are almost invariably mixtures of tumour cells, non-tumour epithelium, connective tissue, and inflammatory cells, the proportions of which vary from one sample to a nother.
Biochemical studies can provide only average values for enzymes activities amongst all the different cells in the tumour sample and, most importantly, cannot show whether an enzyme is present specifically in tumour cells.
Several biochemical studies of xenobiotic metabolising enzymes in colon have made comparisons between samples of normal and tumour tissue, but are of limited value as they take no account of the varying proportions of different types of enzyme expressing and non-expressing cells in the samples.
Biochemical studies of normal colonic epithelium have shown that several different xenobiotic metabolising enzymes have a low activity in colonic epithelium.
It should be noted, however, that several of these studies used non-tumour epithelium adjacent to colonic carcinomas and this epithelium may not be functioning normal.
de Waziers et al reported the presence of a small amount of cytochrome P450 3A in normal colon samples with a western blot procedure, and we have found immunohistochemically the presence of a member of the cytochrome P450 3A family in normal colonic epithelium while neither de Waziers nor ourselves detected any cytochrome P450 1A.
There has only been on eprevious report of the presence of epoxide hydrolase in normal colonic tissue.
We found that all three glutathione S-transferases tested were present in colonic epithelium and this is consistent with the findings of Howie et al ; it contrasts, however, with the results of Hayes et al , who identified glutathione S-transferase π and µ and did not detect glutathione S-transferase α in normal colon using an immunoperoxidase staining procedure.
We used an alkaline phosphatase anti-alkaline phosphatase staining method, which is generally more sensitive than immunoperoxidase methods.
Peters et al also reported that glutathione S-transferase π is the most frequently identified form of glutathione S-transferase in normal colon.
Generally those xenobiotic enzymes that are expressed in normal colon are present in small quantities (our finding of patchy focal staining of surface epithelium would support this) and it has been suggested that the low level of expression of biotransformation enzymes in normal colon could result in a critically low detoxification value, and hence increase the chances of carcinogenesis taking place in this tissue.
There have been no extensive studies of xenobiotic metabolising enzyme expression in colonic adenomas.
We found frequent expression of all the xenobiotic metabolising enzymes studied in colonic adenomas showing that an increase in the expression of these enzymes is a comparatively early molecular event during the development of colonic neoplasia and suggests that their expression may be important at the adenoma stage of colonic neoplasia.
Although there have been no previously reported immunohistochemical studies of cytochrome P450 or epoxide hydrolase in colonic carcinomas, there have been several biochemical studies of xenobiotic metabolising enzymes in colonic carcinomas.
Western blot analysis by de Waziers et al failed to detect the presence of cytochromes P450 1A1, 1A2, 2C8–10, and 2E1.
In contrast, we were able to show the presence of a member of the cytochrome P450 1A family in 75% of colon carcinomas studied.
Moreover, cytochrome P450 1A1 associated mon-oxygenase activity (ethoxyresorufin 0-deethylase) has been found in a small group of colon carcinomas.
Cytochrome P450 3A was detected by de Waziers, and our own findings, that 61% of colon carcinomas express this family of cytochrome P450, are in agreement.
There has been only one report that has identified epoxide hydrolase in colonic carcinomas, by western blot analysis.
The high frequency of expression of epoxide hydrolase seems to be a fairly general phenomenon of carcinomas as we have also identified frequent expression of epoxide hydrolase in carcinomas of the breast and liver.
The expression in colonic carcinomas of different forms of glutathione S-transferase has been investigated in several biochemical studies.
All reports using 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene as a substrate for total glutathione S-transferase activity have pointed to the presence of glutathione S-transferase activity in homogenates of colonic carcinomas.
Western blots have shown glutathione S-transferase π to be the form most frequently present.
This finding is supported by the results of Howie et al , who used a radioimmunoassay to measure the activity of glutathione S-transferase π expression.
These data must be interpreted cautiously, however, in view of our findings that glutathione S-transferase π is present in normal colonic epithelium and also in chronic inflammatory cells, which are often found as part of colonic carcinomas.
We, however, found glutathione S-transferase α to be the most frequently expressed form of glutathione S-transferase in colon carcinomas.
This is in contrast with Moorglen et al , who reported the presence of glutathione S-transferase π in 100% of samples, and glutathione S-transferase α in only 10% of tumour samples, by immunohistochemistry with an immunoperoxidase staining method.
As shown above, direct comparison between the different types of investigation used is not possible and ony immunohistochemical techniques provide direct demonstration that the tumour cells do indeed contain xenobiotic metabolising enzymes.
In conclusion, we found normal colonic mucosa to be characterised by a low frequency of expression of various xenobiotic metabolising enzymes, with cytochrome P450 1A being undetectable.
In contrast, colonic adenomas were found to exhibit a very high frequency of expression of specific forms of cytochrome P450, epoxide hydrolase, and glutathione S-transferase.
The overall phenotypic expression of different xenobiotic metabolising enzymes in colonic carcinomas is complex.
The frequent expression of the various xenobiotic metabolising enzymes may contribute to the anti-cancer drug resistance that is characteristic of carcinoma of the colon, and also to chemical carcinogenesis in the colon as these enzymes can metabolise both exogenous and endogenous compounds, which are implicated in the development of colon cancer.
NSAID and the duodenum
Abstract
Duodenitis and gastric metaplasia, which is often colonised by Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ), are increasingly recognised for their importance in the pathogenesis of duodenal ulcers.
The situation is not clear in patients receiving non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), who have a higher risk of peptic ulceration.
The aim of this study was to identify the duodenal histological abnormalities in the presence or absence of HSAID,H pylori , and duodenal ulceration.
Endoscopic duodenal biopsy specimens were taken from healthy looking mucosa of 172 patients (74 took NSAIDs, and 98 did not).
Duodenitis was graded according to the degree of neutrophilic and plasma cell infiltration, villus height, Brunner's gland prolapse, and gastric metaplasia.
The activity of duodenitis was dependent on the neutrophilic infiltration.
A global score covering all the above factors was constructed, and H pylori in both the stomach and duodenum, was also assessed.
The results showed that duodenitis with varying degrees of neutrophilic infiltration and gastric metaplasia was found in 20 patients (27%) taking NSAIDs, compared with 56 patients (57%) not taking NSAIDs (x=16.24, p<0.001).
This degree of duodenitis was also found in 20 of 25 patients (80%) with duodenal ulcers, regardless of NSAID intake (x=15.38, p<0.001).
Gastric metaplasia was identified in 20 patients (27%) receiving NSAIDs and 38 (39%) not receiving NSAIDs.
Duodenal H pylori was only seen in patients with gastric metaplasia (10 (50%) receiving NSAIDs, and 34 (89%) not receiving NSAID).
H pylori positive gastritis, and the combination of active duodenitis and gastric metaplasia were independent predictors of duodenal ulceration.
It is concluded that active duodenitis is less common in patients taking NSAIDs, but is strongly associated with gastric metaplasia,H pylori positive gastritis, and duodenal ulceration.
These findings are relevant to the pathogenesis and treatment of duodenal ulcers in patient taking NSAIDs.
Gastritis and duodenitis have, for a long time, been thought to play a part in the pathogenesis of peptic ulcer disease, and this concept has been further consolidated by the recognition of Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ).
Subsequently, it has been suggested that gastric metaplasia in the duodenum and H pylori associated gastritis might be synergistic in the pathogenesis of duodenitis, with the metaplastic gastric epithelium allowing H pylori to colonise the duodenal mucosa, where it produces an acute inflammatory response.
Most studies in this field have been carried out in patients not taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and the role of duodenitis and gastric metaplasia in mediating NSAID related damage has, therefore, remained unclear.
We aimed at studying the histology of the duodenal mucosa in the presence or absence of chronic NSAID intake,H pylori , and duodenal ulcers.
Patients and methods
Patients, aged 18 years or over, were recruited from the Rheumatology and the Gastroenterology outpatient clinics, provided they had no malignancy or previous history of gastric or duodenal surgery.
NSAIDs had to be taken for a minimum of four weeks before endoscopy.
Patients were excluded if they had taken ulcer healing agents, antibiotics, or cytotoxic drugs within one week of endoscopy.
Informed consent was obtained, and endoscopy performed using 3–7 mg midazolam intravenously for sedation.
At endoscopy, an average of two biopsy specimens were taken from the anterior and posterior walls of the first part of the duodenum, and immediately fixed in a solution of 10% formalin/ saline.
The duodenal histological findings were reported as follows:
Normal — with villus to crypt ratio greater than 2:1, in the presence or absence of Brunner's glands above the muscularis mucosa, but without any increase in the numbers of inflammatory cells.
Chronic duodenitis — in the presence of mucosal mononuclear cell infiltration and epithelial damage.
Active chronic duodenitis — this was diagnosed whenever intramucosal neutrophils were seen, in the presence or absence of gastric metaplasia, and especially in the background of mononuclear cell infiltration.
The severity of the above findings (duodenitis, villus height, and Brunner's gland prolapse) was graded on a 0–3 scale: 0, normal; 1, mild; 2, moderate; and 3, severe.
The extent of gastric metaplasia was assessed as follows: 0, absent; 1, present but consisting of less than five consecutive cells; 2, five consecutive cells; and 3, greater than five consecutive cells, seen in 1–3 sections cut at three levels in each biopsy specimen.
A global score covering the overall totals of the scores of all the above assessments was constructed: in the absence of neutrophils, patients scoring four or less were considered normal; those scoring five or more were considered to have chronic duodenitis, in the absence of neutrophils.
Chronic active duodenitis was diagnosed when intramucosal neutrophils were seen in patients scoring four or more.
The presence of absence of H pylori in the duodenal mucosa was also assessed using cresyl violet stain, and by culture of single duodenal biopsy specimens.
Detection of H pylori by either histology or culture was considered as indicative of active infection in the duodenum.
Gastric antral biopsy specimens were also taken to check for the presence of H pylori by histology (2 specimens) and culture (1 specimen), as previously described.
Gastritis was classified according to the Sydney System, which also covers chemical and lymphocytic gastritis.
Statistical analyses included the χ 2 test, analysis of variance, multiple and logistic regression where appropriate.
All specimens carried code numbers, and the endoscopist and pathologists were not aware of any treatment being received by patients.
The histological scoring was performed by the two pathologists separately in order to assess reproducibility.
Results
A total of 172 patients were studied: 74 were receiving NSAIDs, and 98 were not.
Table I shows the demographic data of the patients.
Patients of both groups were comparable in their ages and in their smoking and drinking habits.
Patients treated with NSAIDs had more gastric but a similar number of duodenal ulcers as those not taking NSAIDs.
None of the study subjects received any drug prohibited by the study protocol within six months of endoscopy, apart from four patients (not on NSAIDs), who took antibiotics for chest infection, two to three months before recruitment.
Also, abdominal complaints in most of the symptomatic patients not taking NSAIDs have settled once their endoscopy was reported normal: irritable bowel (or stomach) syndrome, or non-ulcer dyspepsia cannot be excluded in these patients.
The Figure shows the duodenal global histological scores.
The histological scores of one pathologist were reproduced by his other fellow pathologist in more than 90% of specimens, regardless of NSAID intake.
Patients in the NSAID group had fewer cases of active chronic duodenitis.
There was no significant difference in the number of patients with chronic duodenitis (11 receiving NSAIDs and 10 not receiving NSAIDs).
Table II describes the patients with active chronic duodenitis.
The two groups were similar with respect to the number of smokers, patients with gastric H pylori , gastric metaplasia, and duodenal ulcers.
Grade 3 (heavy) neutrophilic and plasma cell infiltration, however, was more prevalent in the absence of NSAIDs.
It is also worth noting that patients with active chronic duodenitis in both groups had a total of 20 of 25 duodenal ulcers (80%) diagnosed in all patients (χ 2 =15.38, p<0.001 v patients without active duodenitis).
Duodenal H pylori was found in only 50% of patients taking NSAIDs with active duodenitis, and 61% of their counterparts not taking NSAIDs; all cases of duodenal H pylori coexisted with gastric metaplasia.
Table III shows the characteristics of patients with gastric metaplasia; although there were relatively fewer cases of metaplasia in patients taking NSAIDs, the differences were not statistically significant.
Also, patients not treated with NSAIDs were more likely to have heavy neutrophilic and mononuclear cell infiltration.
The two groups were almost identical, however, in the extent of metaplasia, the number of smokers, patients with gastric H pylori , and duodenal ulcers.
Similar to patients with active chronic duodenitis, most of the patients with duodenal ulcers (16/25, 64%) were also found to have gastric metaplasia (χ 2 =14.00, p<0.001).
Table IV shows the prevalence of active duodenitis and gastric metaplasia in the presence of absence of the various types of gastritis.
Most cases were found in association with H pylori positive gastritis, regardless of NSAID intake, although H pylori was less common in patients receiving NSAID.
Active duodenitis was uncommon in patients with normal gastric histology: its prevalence varied between 20% (on NSAIDs) and 24% (not on NSAIDs).
It is also worth noting that 24 of 25 duodenal ulcers (96%), found in all patients, were associated with active antral gastritis, and that gastric H pylori was identified in 23 of duodenal ulcer patients (92%).
Logistic regression showed that gastric H pylori and the combination of active duodenitis and gastric metaplasia were independent predictors of duodenal ulceration.
On the other hand, only 11 (nine on NSAIDs) of 16 gastric ulcers (69%) had H pylori related gastritis; the remaining five gastric ulcers were found in association with chemical gastritis, which was found only in patients taking NSAIDs.
Table V shows the distribution of NSAIDs, with or without second line drugs in patients with active duodenitis and gastric metaplasia.
The median duration of NSAID intake was three years, and second line drugs two years.
Indomethacin, naproxen, and diclofenac were the most widely used NSAIDs.
Patients taking diclofenac, ketoprofen or nabumetone were less likely to have active duodenitis and gastric metaplasia than other NSAIDs but the differences were not statistically significant.
Also, the intake of second line drugs did not seem to influence the development of active duodentitis and gastric metaplasia, although such histological abnormalities, as well as gastric H pylori , were less common in patients treated with gold injections.
Discussion
This study shows that active chronic duodenitis is less common in patients treated with NSAIDs, and that the prevalence of gastric metaplasia in the duodenum is not significantly reduced by chronic NSAID use.
The study also shows a strong association between duodenal ulcers, active duodenitis, gastric metaplasia, and H pylori related gastritis regardless of NSAID intake.
Active chronic duodenitis in patients not taking NSAIDs was more commonly diagnosed in our study than in that reported by some workers, who studied this abnormality in patients with non-ulcer dyspepsia.
This can be explained by the absence of ulcers in their study, and by the nature of our scoring system.
Such differences could not have influenced the interpretation of our findings with respect to the effect of NSAID on duodenal histology, because of two main reasons.
Firstly, the same global score was applied to biopsy specimens taken from all our patients, regardless of NSAID intake, under blinded conditions.
Secondly, and allowing for the possibility that our global score might have detected minor increases in the mucosal neutrophils in some cases of mild active duodenitis, the number of patients with heavy neutrophilic infiltration (severe active duodenitis) was also greater in the absence of NSAIDs.
Gastric metaplasia tended to occur less frequently in our patients receiving NSAIDs, but the differences did not reach statistical significance.
This, together with its close association with active duodenitis, is in agreement with the findings of two other studies.
High acidity of the duodenal contents has for a long time been found to be associated with gastric metaplasia, both in humans and in laboratory animals.
Acute exposure to NSAIDs is also known to stimulate gastric acid secretion, which, at least in theory, should increase the prevalence of gastric metaplasia.
The second, however, has not been seen in our study or in others and could be related to the possibility that gastric acid secretion might not necessarily be raised when NSAIDs are taken on longterm basis, three years in this study.
Active chronic duodenitis was also less common in our patients taking NSAIDs.
The reason for this is not clear but it could be explained by the finding of a lower prevalence of H pylori in NSAID patients, and by the tendency of NSAID related damage to be maximal in the gastric antrum.
Although no specific histological picture could be shown in the duodenal mucosa of NSAID patients, the relative lack of heavy neutrophilic and plasma cell infiltration in the duodenum is reminiscent of some aspects of chemical gastritis.
In the absence of gastroduodenal surgery, the last is mostly found in chronic NSAID users, as shown in this study and others.
Patients with active duodenitis had comparable proportions of cases with gastric H pylori , regardless of NSAID intake, and despite the differences in the overall prevalence of H pylori in the presence or absence of NSAID.
This emphasises the role of H pylori in the pathogenesis of active duodenitis.
It is worth noting that in the presence of gastric metaplasia H pylori was almost as reliably isolated from the duodenum as from the gastric mucosa and this reflects the natural history of this infection, being dependent on the presence of gastric type epithelium.
Patients receiving NSAIDs had eight duodenal ulcers 8/74 (11%) compared with 14/98 (14%) in those not receiving NSAIDs.
Similar numbers of duodenal ulcers (25–30%) were also seen in patients with active duodenitis or gastric metaplasia, or both, regardless of NSAID intake.
Most patients with duodenal ulcers, however, in the presence or absence of NSAIDs, were found to have active duodenitis (80%) and gastric metaplasia (64%).
The strong association between such histological and endoscopic entities is in agreement with the suggestion that duodenitis and duodenal ulceration might represent different points in a disease spectrum with a common underlying pathogenesis.
There was also a strong association between active duodenitis and H pylori positive gastritis, which in turn highlights the potential benefits of eradicating H pylori in minimising duodenal damage in NSAID patients.
The same would apply to gastric ulcers, eight of which (8/14, 57%) were positive for H pylori .
The relative rarity of active duodenitis in the NSAID group might explain, at least in part, why duodenal ulcers occur less commonly than gastric ulcers in such patients.
On the other hand, duodenal ulcers were still seen in comparable proportions in the presence or absence of NSAIDs, which could be because of other mechanisms of NSAID toxicity such as suppression of mucosal prostaglandins.
The prevalence of gastric H pylori , active duodenitis, and gastric metaplasia was similar in patients taking the various NSAIDs with the exception of diclofenac and ketoprofen.
The prevalence of such findings tended to be lower in patients treated with gold injections than in those receiving sulphasalazine and NSAIDs.
A firm statement could not, however, be made because of the relatively small numbers of patients taking the individual NSAID with or without second line drugs in this study.
In conclusion, despite the relative lack of active duodenitis in NSAID patients, a strong association exists between duodenal ulcers, active duodenitis, gastric metaplasia, and H pylori positive gastritis regardless of NSAID intake.
This might be relevant to the understanding of the pathogenesis and the treatment of duodenal ulcers in chronic NSAID users.
The potential benefits of eradicating H pylori in such patients are, however, still speculative, and their value remains to be proved.
Outcome of restorative proctocolectomy when the diagnosis is suggestive of Crohn's disease
Abstract
Twenty of 81 patients treated by restorative proctocolectom for presumed ulcerative colitis had some features of Crohn's disease: 10 were classified as definite Crohn's disease and 10 as indeterminate colitis.
These pathological features were first apparent during synchronous colectomy and pouch construction in 10 of 11 cases.
In the remainder, histological features of possible Crohn's disease were first identified during rectal excision (n=6), preliminary subtotal colectomy (n=2), and after pouch excision (=2).
Complications were marginally more common in patients with features of possible Crohn's disease: pelvic sepsis 30% (Crohn's disease 30%, indeterminate colitis 30%)v 20%, fistulas 45% (Crohn's disease 30%, indeterminate colitis 60%)v 16%;, ileal stenosis 40% (Crohn's disease 40%, indeterminate colitis 40%)v 21%, pouchitis 50% (Crohn's disease 50%, indeterminate colitis 50%)v 26%, and small bowel obstruction 25% (Crohn's disease 30%, indeterminate colitis 30%)v 13%.
Pouch excision or a persistent proximal stoma has been necessary in six patients with possible Crohn's disease (30%)(Crohn's disease 3 cases 30%, indeterminate colitis 3 cases 30%) compared with nine (15%) of the remainder.
Median hospital stay, however, was the same and stool frequency in those with a functioning pouch were comparable.
These results show that there is a higher complication rate if there are features of Crohn's disease but that the medium term functional results are acceptable if the pouch can be retained.
Restorative protocolectomy with construction of an ileal pouch-anal anastomosis has an established role in the surgical management of ulcerative colitis.
On the other hand, patients with Crohn's disease are generally regarded as unsuitable candidates for reservoir procedures because of the risk of recurrent ileal or anal disease, a higher incidence of postoperative fistula, poor functional results, and increased morbidity.
A confident distinction between ulcerative colitis and Crohn's colitis is not possible in all patients despite adequate clinical and pathological evaluation and many are classified as having indeterminate colitis.
The outcome of these patients is uncertain and the advisability of restorative proctocolectomy is, therefore, controversial.
This study, based in one centre, has monitored the outcome of patients with various features of Crohn's disease who have had restorative proctocolectomy.
Patients and methods
Eighty one consecutive patients have had restorative proctocolectomy for imflammatory bowel disease between January 1983 and October 1990 under the care of one surgeon.
All have been followed up for at least two years.
Before operation all patients were regarded as having ulcerative colitis based on a combination of clinical, radiological, endoscopic, and pathological findings.
At laparotomy none of the patients had macroscopic evidence of small bowel or perianal disease, and the colectomy specimens all showed macroscopic features of continuous colitis.
All the available pathological material on these 81 patients was reviewed by one person with an international reputation in the pathology of inflammatory bowel disease who did not know the outcome of the operation.
Originally only four patients were classified as having definite Crohn's disease and 15 as indeterminate colitis leaving 62 with ulcerative colitis.
After the material had been reviewed the final diagnosis was changed in 20 (25%).
All patients attend a regular follow up clinic, none have been lost to follow up but seven patients are contacted through local gastroenterologists either because they find travel to the centre difficult or because they now live abroad.
This histopathological review divided patients into three groups:(a) definite Crohn's colitis (n=10) because of the presence of non-causating epithelioid granulomas and microgranulomas;(b) indeterminate colitis (n=10) because of features suggestive of Crohn's disease, but not sufficient to substantiate a firm diagnosis, such as transmural, focal or discontinuous disease, fissure ulcers, mural fibrosis or retention of goblet cell population;(c) definite ulcerative colitis (n=61) with diffuse mucosal inflammation without granulomas affecting the rectum and some or all of the colon in continuity with the rectum.
The clinical and functional outcome in the 20 patients with some features of Crohn's disease (definite Crohn's disease n=10; indeterminate colitis n=10) was compared with the remaining 61 patients with ‘typical’ ulcerative colitis.
Statistical analysis
Comparisons of proportions were made by χ 2 (with Yates's correction for small numbers) or Fisher's exact tests, and Wilcoxon's rank sum tests were used to examine differences in continuous variables such as age, follow up, and function.
A probability of <0.05 was considered significant; 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated where appropriate.
Results
Patients in each of the three groups were comparable with respect to age and length of follow up.
There were more men in the definite Crohn's group and women predominated in the indeterminate group (Table I).
A preliminary colectomy was undertaken in nine of 20 patients with some features of Crohn's disease (45%)(three in definite Crohn's disease; six in indeterminate colitis) compared with 59% with ulcerative colitis.
The different techniques of pouch construction reflect the surgical developments on the unit with the totally stapled J-pouch-anal anastomosis being favoured in the latter part of the survey.
A covering loop ileostomy was eelectively omitted in low risk cases until September 1988, since then a clinical trial has been in progress in which patients were randomised to receive either an ileostomy or no ileostomy.
TIMING OF THE DIAGNOSIS
Crohn's disease — three of 10 patients regarded as having definite Crohn's disease on histopathological review had had subtotal colectomy before restorative proctocolectomy (Table II).
Two were for fulminant colitis, in one case Crohn's disease was subsequently identified in the proctectomy specimen and in the other Crohn's was recognised only in the ileal reservoir after excision.
In the third colectomy specimen, there were some features of possible Crohn's disease but the balance of evidence favoured ulcerative colitis; the subsequent proctectomy specimen confirmed the presence of granulomata and the diagnosis was changed to Crohn's disease.
In the remaining seven patients the diagnosis was made after colectomy and synchronous pouch formation despite preoperative endoscopic biopsies suggesting ulcerative colitis.
Indeterminate colitis — six patients had a subtotal colectomy before diagnosis, three having had an ileorectal anastomosis and three an ileostomy with a retained rectal stump.
In three, the diagnosis of indeterminate colitis was made from the colectomy specimen, whereas in the other three the diagnosis was only made after examination of the excised rectum (two after ileorectal anastomosis).
Four patients with indeterminate colitis had a one stage restorative proctocolectomy; in three the diagnosis was made from the proctocolectomy specimen, but the other was only identified after pouch excision for refractory pouchitis.
COMPLICATIONS (TABLE III)
In patients with ‘typical’ ulcerative colitis — pelvic sepsis occurred in 20% and postoperative fistulas in 16%.
These complications all occurred within three months of operation and all were considered to be technical in nature.
Most complications (n=7) occurred in the first third of the series and may partly be ascribed to a ‘learning process’ with the operation.
Three exceptions to this pattern were low pouch vaginal or pouch perineal fistulas that developed 4–6 months after restorative proctocolectomy.
In the 10 patients with definite Crohn's colitis — pelvic sepsis developed postoperatively in three patients and all three developed postoperative pouch related fistulas.
One patient with pelvic sepsis developed a pouch-vaginal fistula and ileoanal stenosis culminating in pouch excision.
Another patient with pelvic sepsis developed a pouch cutaneous fistula and was converted to a Kock continent reservoir but developed multiple, recurrent small bowel Crohn's fistulas and eventually required pouch excision.
A third patient with pelvic sepsis had a particl dehiscence of the ileoanal anastomosis and a pouch vaginal fistula and was managed by diverting ileostomy.
The pouch has now been excised.
The initiating event in these three cases may have been technical, but the persistent fistulas are probably related to underlying Crohn's disease.
Of the 10 patients with indeterminate colitis — three developed pelvic sepsis one because of a leak from the pouch and six have developed some form of pouch related fistula (p=0.01 v ulcerative colitis group).
A single early pouch cutaneous fistula was the result of a partial ileoanal anastomotic dehiscence and pelvic sepsis; her postoperative treatment required multiple admissions for recurrent fistulation and bowel obstruction, but the fistula has been excised and she now has goo pouch function.
Five low pouch vaginal fistulas presented ata median of 24 months (range 6–48 months) after restorative proctocolectomy.
Three pouch vaginal fistulas have been resolved by seton fistulotomy.
Another patient with a low fistula has had her pouch excised and has been successfully converted to a Kock ileostomy because of severe ileoanal stenosis requiring pouch intubation that became socially unacceptable.
The fifth patient with a pouch vaginal fistula also had repeated episodes of pouchitis unresponsive to metronidazole and steroids, and developed multiple superficial pouch perineal and pouch vaginal fistulas, which were managed by laying them open and a proximal diverting ileostomy; her ileostomy has now been closed and she has a good functional result.
Ileoanal stenosis occurred in four patients with definite Crohn's disease (40%) compared with four with indeterminate colitis (40%), and 13 with ulcerative colitis (21%); these differences were not statistically significant.
Intestinal obstruction — episodes of small bowel obstruction occurred in two patients with definite Crohn's disease (20%), in three with indeterminate colitis (30%), and in eight (13%) with ulcerative colitis.
Pouchitis developed in five (50%) of the patients with definite Crohn's disease and in five (50%) of those with indeterminate colitis compared with only 16 (26%) in the ulcerative colitis group.
Recurrent pouchitis or persistent pouchitis unresponsive to the customary course of metronidazole, occurred in three of five Crohn's patients and in two of five with indeterminate colitis compared with only two of 16 with ulcerative colitis.
Of the three cases of Crohn's disease with recurrent pouchitis, one remains on longterm low dose maintenance metronidazole and two have required temporary pouch defunctioning by loop ileostomy but have now been closed.
Of the two patients with recurrent pouchitis who have indeterminate colitis, one remains on lowdose maintenance metronidazole and one has had his pouch excised because of unacceptable functional results.
Of the two patients with recurrent pouchitis who have ulcerative colitis both have had pouch excision because of poor functional results.
HOSPITAL STAY
Despite the higher complication and reoperation rates in the definite Crohn's and indeterminate groups, the total hospital stay did not differ significantly between the groups (Table IV).
FAILURES
Restorative proctocolectomy was considered to have failed if the pouch had been excised or an ileostomy had not been not closed.
There were three failures (30%) in the Crohn's group (all three were for pelvic sepsis and fistula) and a further three failures (30%) in the indeterminate colitis group (one for fistula, one for recurrent pouchitis, and one because of incapacitating diarrhoea) compared with nine failures (15%) in the ulcerative colitis patients (six for ischaemia, two for recurrent pouchitis, and one for poor functional results)(relative risk 2.03 (96% CI 0.81 to 5.10)).
POUCH FUNCTION (TABLE V)
The median follow up after ileostomy closure was comparable in the three groups.
Seven patients with definite Crohn's disease, seven with indeterminate colitis and 52 with typical ulcerative colitis have a functioning pouch.
High stool frequency, imperfect continence or the use of anti-diarrhoeal drugs was similar in all three groups.
In particular the median frequency of defecation did not differ between the groups.
Discussion
The histopathological features that distinguish Crohn's disease from ulcerative colitis are well described.
Nevertheless, the two diseases share many common histopathological features and the discriminating characteristics may be ill defined.
A confident distinction between the two disorders remains a taxonomic problem in 8–20% of specimens.
Typical radiological, endoscopic, and histological features of ulcerative colitis were present in 11 of 36 patients treated by synchronous colectomy in our series who eventually were found to have evidence of definite Crohn's disease (n=7) or indeterminate colitis (n=4).
Although a staged procedure — that is, preliminary colectomy, may have reduced the risk of performing a restorative proctocolectomy on unidentified Crohn's disease patients, this policy was also unreliable as nine of 45 patients who had a previous colectomy eventually turned out to have definite Crohn's disease (n=3) or indeterminate colitis (n=6) despite careful review of the colectomy specimens.
The defunctioned rectum is a further source of diagnostic confusion as mucosal granulomas and transmural inflammation are common findings particularly if the rectum has been defunctioned.
In our series two cases of Crohn's disease (one with prior fulminant colitis) and three indeterminate colitis were diagnosed solely on the proctectomy specimen.
Fulminant colitis is a common cause of confusion, even in colectomy specimens, because of discontinuous and transmural inflammation.
The term indeterminate colitis was originally proposed as a temporary histopathological category for such unclassified cases in fulminant disease but has recently been used clinically for patients with inflammatory bowel disease in whom the nature of the underlying disease cannot be firmly established.
In this report we have studied the natural history of 20 patients having restorative proctocolectomy where the possibility of Crohn's disease was considered.
All our patients were regarded as having ulcerative colitis before pouch surgery, based on all available clinical, endoscopic, radiological, and pathological information and at laparotomy based on absence of anal and ileal disease and from the macroscopic appearances of the resected bowel.
The high rate of diagnostic revision (25%) based on this independent, blind histopathological review may have overdiagnosed definite Crohn's disease but in many the final diagnosis was uncertain and labelled as indeterminate colitis.
Most of the revisions were based, however, on resection specimens rather than from postoperative pouch biopsies, which may be difficult to interpret in patients with chronic pouchitis.
Furthermore half of the patients with some features of Crohn's disease have been labelled as indeterminate colitis because the pathological features were not entirely diagnostic.
Despite careful selection, many centres with a large experience of restorative proctocolectomy now report a small number of patients who turn out to have Crohn's disease.
The results of restorative proctocolectomy have generally been unfavourable if Crohn's disease is diagnosed as there is a high incidence of complications and the failure rate is unacceptable.
Despite a relatively shortterm median follow up(5.7 years) only three of 10 patients (30%) with definite Crohn's colitis have so far had their pouch excised, admittedly all were for fistulas, while the remaining seven have satisfactory function despite episodes of recurrent pouchitis in three.
This compares with a small bowel resection rate of only 4% at five years among 116 patients having a proctocolectomy for Crohn's colitis in this unit.
It may be very difficult to distinguish Crohn's disease from recurrent pouchitis, nevertheless typical small bowel recurrence has become apparent in all three patients who have had their pouch excised and in one other case in this series.
Longterm studies of the natural history of indeterminate colitis have suggested that most of these cases behave more like ulcerative colitis than Crohn's disease.
In the study reported by Pezim and others, 5% of patients having a pouch procedure were identified as having indeterminant colitis.
There was no significant increased complication rate or disturbed pouch function in those with indeterminate colitis.
On the contrary, Koltun et al concluded that a diagnosis of indeterminate colitis predisposed patients having restorative proctocolectomy to an increased risk of perineal complications and pouch failure.
Our study also found that pouch vaginal fistulas and pouchitis were common in this group.
Nevertheless, the pouch operation failed in only three patients, the other seven having satisfactory functional results.
We believe that restorative proctocolectomy should not be advised for Crohn's disease and that if there are features suspicious of the disease, a preliminary colectomy should be advised.
Patients should be warned, however, that a preliminary colectomy does not absolutely exclude the fact that they could eventually prove to have Crohn's disease.
Inevitably patients with Crohn's disease or indeterminate colitis will from time to time have restorative proctocolectomy.
Although some patients may develop serious complications such as fistulas, pelvic sepsis, pouchitis, and strictures the outcome in these patients is not necessarily a catastrophe and some enjoy remarkably satisfactory pouch function at least in the medium term.
Why measure C reactive protein?
Some of the most important questions clinicians ask can be phrased in very simple terms:
Is this patient getting better?
Is he or she getting worse?
Are complications arising?
And even
Is there anything wrong with this person?
Measurement of circulating levels of C reactive protein (CRP) has emerged as a robust and useful tool that can help answer these questions.
A raised serum CRP concentration is one measure of the combination of events known as the ‘acute phase response’.
In its fully developed form, the acute phase response is illness — fever, malaise, anorexia, leukocytosis, negative nitrogen balance — which forms a cardinal response of the body to infection and trauma, and may be the result of many immunological reactions and inflammatory processes.
The acute phase response also involves changes in the plasma concentrations of a number of liver synthesised proteins.
These range from small increases in weak acute phase proteins such as C3 complement, and a two to fourfold rise in proteins such as α 1 -acid glycoprotein (serum orosomucoid for the traditionalist), fibrinogen, and α 1 -antitrypsin, to spectacular rises in a few proteins such as CRP and amyloid A-associated protein.
The levels of these may be increased up to a thousandfold over basal.
The increases in these acute phase proteins are accompanied by transient, modest reductions in the concentrations of the negative acute phase proteins, of which albumin and transferrin are typical examples.
Measurement of the existence of these changes in the plasma profile, of course, underlies one of the traditional approaches to quantifying the acute phase response, measuring the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).
The ESR reflects these changes in the various acute phase proteins, but it is affected by factors such as anaemia and hyperglobulinaemia, which may be irrelevant to the acute phase response in some prople.
As the ESR reflects changes in many serum proteins, some of which have long half lives, it is often slow to alter when there are major clinical changes.
In safety and cost conscious laboratories, the manipulations of the blood sample involved in measurement of this non-specific test may outweight the apparent simplicity of the technique.
The alternative approach of accurately quantitating a single rapidly responding acute phase protein such as CRP has much to commend it.
CRP, so called because of the proteinic nature of the C-reactive substance was first discovered when a precipitate was formed where pneumococcal C-polysaccharide was added to the sera of ill patients.
It is about 105000 in molecular weight, coded on chromosome 1 with an intriguing pentagonal shape.
The functions now being attributed to it are appropriate to a non-specific defence protein generated during inflammation and truma.
CRP accumulates at sites of cell injury, and is selectively deposited on necrotic cells and have exposed damaged membrane phospholipid: CRP can also complex with free DNA released from lysed cells.
There is evidence of a variety of other functions, as the protein can bind to platelets, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and macrophages, and can modulate some lymphocyte functions.
CRP is synthesised in the liver, and during the onset of an inflammatory response a progressively greater number of hepatocytes are recruited to its synthesis.
This recruitment has been shown in experimental systems to be extremely rapid, the early increase in mRNA in the liver translates into raised circulating levels of the protein approximately six hours after tissue injury.
Within 24–48 hours the increase may be a thousandfold.
The reduction in the plasma CRP concentration as the acute phase response subsides may be similarly rapid, with a fall from peak with a half time of 48 hours, as hepatocyte production of CRP rapidly decreases.
The biological half life of the circulating protein itself is 19 hours.
The liver is stimulated to produce CRP by soluble cytokines, produced notably by cells of the macrophage series, but also by other leukocytes and other tissues such as endothelium.
The cytokines IL (interleukin) -1, IL-6, and IL-11; tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α); and transforming growth factor-Β (TGF-Β) all have a role in stimulating transcription of the genes controlling hepatic acute phase production.
The generation of these cytokines by macrophages is an extremely early event in the response to infection or traums — for example one of the strongest stimuli to macrophage production is bacterial lipopolysaccharide.
By measuring CRP in the plasma, the clinician has access to direct evidence that the body has started to mobilise its non-specific defences.
Where is this useful to the gastroenterologist?
Recent publications indicate a variety of settings — the assessment of inflammatory bowel disease, detection of sepsis, and prognosis of acute pancreatitis being the most prominent.
Inflammatory bowel disease
The assessment of patients with inflammatory bowel disease is often complex, requiring a combination of clinical, laboratory, and endoscopic, radiological, or scanning techniques.
This is particularly so in Crohn's disease, which lacks the relatively uniform symptoms, and direct access to rectal inflammation, characteristic of ulcerative colitis.
In clinical trials of Crohn's disease, objective criteria of gut inflammation are desirable, particularly if quantifiable.
In the individual patient, separating symptoms attributable to an active inflammatory process from those of chronic fibrotic strictures may determine whether surgery is appropriate.
The CRP value is particularly helpful in Crohn's disease, both in trials and in individual patient management.
Pepys pointed out that, while the CRP concentration rises both in active ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, for comparable degrees of severity the increases in CRP are much greater in Crohn's disease.
Recent work has suggested a greater production of CRP stimulating cytokines from mononuclear leukocytes in Crohn's disease patient.
There is a good overall correlation between the clinical symptoms in Crohn's disease (the ‘activity indices’) and the circulating CRP concentration; but the important fact is that the correlation is not perfect.
If it were, why bother the laboratory?
Consider a patient with pain, diarrhoea, and malaise — raised CRP is a clear indication that there is active inflammation present that may reflect the intrinsic inflammatory processes of Crohn's disease; a low CRP implies the absence of an active inflammatory process.
CRP estimation is thus an objective guide to assessing the potential value of corticosteroid or other anti-inflammatory regimens.
It is also a useful parameter with which to monitor the success of treatment; the CRP value falls rapidly as inflammation comes under control.
An high serum CRP value can, of course, occur in a patient with Crohn's disease for easons other than active Crohn's disease, but this too can be clinically helpful.
Crohn's disease complicated by an indolent abscess may have its presence heralded by a high CRP value.
In the initial outpatient assessment of patients with abdominal discomfort or diarrhoea, a normal CRP estimation is helpful in supporting a diagnosis of irritable rather than inflammatory bowel disease.
Detection of sepsis
A CRP response also occurs with other intra-abdominal pathology.
CRP is a rapid and sensitive aid to the diagnosis of appendicitis.
The increase in CRP is related to the time elapsed since the onset of symptoms, and is dependent on the amount of appendicular infiltration and inflammation present.
Its idagnostic efficiency in acute appendicitis is higher than the ESR.
The CRP concentration is also a better indicator of acute appendicitis than the white blood cell count.
When both of these parameters and the number of segmented leukocytes are within the normal range the diagnosis of acute appendicitis is highly unlikely.
After surgery
Surgical procedures may trigger a transient rise in serum CRP as a response to cytokines which are secreted in response to trauma.
Serum CRP showed no detectable increase after minor surgery for example, lumpectomy.
In patients who underwent uncomplicated major surgery, however, CRP rose above baseline eight to 12 hours after incision, and reached a maximum in 48 to 72 hours, before levelling off towards normal over five to 14 days.
Interruption of the rapid decline in CRP by a second rise or persisting elevation is therefore a helpful clue to postoperative infection or another complication.
Acute pancreatitis
In the management of acute pancreatitis it is important to distinguish between interstitial oedematous pancreatitis and necrotising pancreatitis.
While contrast enhanced computed tomography has an established role, measurement of markers such as CRP, polymorphonuclear elastase (PMN elastase), and antiproteases are useful in detecting pancreatic necrosis.
A raised serum CRP has been explored as a prognostic index to define high risk patients and predict the course of the disease.
These studies now suggest that CRP is the best single serum parameter for distinguishing between mild and severe acute pancreatitis.
Büchler reported that CRP showed an overall accuracy of 93% in the detection of pancreatic necrosis; a serum CRP concentration of > or <100 mg/l distinguished between patients with a better or worse prognosis with 100% sensitivity and 86% specificity.
Severe complications of acute pancreatitis and duration of ileus were also related to the CRP.
Since CRP is induced in response to cytokines, it is not surprising that estimations of cytokines themselves may provide an even earlier clue to detecting and measuring the acute phase response.
Recently interleukin-6 was suggested as an even better early parameter for the assessment of the severity of acute pancreatitis than CRP.
However, CRP is now available as a standard laboratory assay, whereas cytokine assays are largely confined to research laboratories and it will probably be sometime before the even earlier warnings provided by cytokine estimations become generally available.
Liver diseases
Patients with alcoholic liver disease exhibit many biochemical abnormalities and clinical complications that may be cytokine mediated such as fever, neutrophilia, hypergammaglobulinaemia, and increased production of acute phase reactants including CRP.
However, in acute viral hepatitis, in spite of the presence of inflammatory changes in the liver, there is no accompanying systemic acute phase response, and only small changes in serum CRP concentrations occur.
Similarly, there are mild disturbances only of acute phase reactants in chronic viral hepatitis.
One recent report suggests that hepatocellular carcinoma may be associated with increased CRP, noted in 78% of 104 patients with this disorder.
Other diseases
Some predominantly immune-driven diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, and vasculitides such as Behet's or Wegener's granulomatosis also show high serum CRP values, and as with Crohn's disease these may be used to monitor the response to treatment.
Some neoplasms of the reticuloendothelial system, including lymphoma and Castleman's disease, may also be associated with high CRP values reflecting cytokine release either from neoplastic tissue or in response to the presence of neoplasia.
CRP assays
Several quantitative immunoassays for monitoring changes in CRP are currently available.
The assay technology has reached an advanced state of development and rapid analysis can be provided using automated analysers which are also efficient and cost effective in handling large number of samples.
The cost of performing a screening test for CRP in the UK is currently £0.50–0.60 per test.
Automated methods include immunoturbidimetric assays based on the reaction between an antibody and sample CRP in a dilute solution.
This method is capable of quantitative measurements between 2.0–200.0 mg/l (Beecham J, personal communication).
Values less than 6.0 mg/l are considered normal and those exceeding 6.0 mg/l are regarded as evidence of a raised CRP in serum.
Rocket immunoelectrophoresis and radial immunodiffusion procedures, although time consuming and requiring expertise, may be required for analysing samples which contain interfering material such as lipaemic and icteric samples.
Conclusion
In requesting an estimate of the circulating CRP concentration, the clinician is seeking objective evidence that the body has initiated an acute phase response.
The CRP value is a surrogate for direct assessment of cytokine generation, and is valuable in confirming the presence of inflammation, assessing its severity, and monitoring the response to treatment and the development of complications.
Location of tumour necrosis factor α by immunohistochemistry in chronic inflammatory bowel disease
Abstract
This study determined the location and tissue density of cells immunoreactive for tumour necrosis factor α (TNF α) in intestinal specimens from 24 patients with chronic inflammatory bowel disease (15 with Crohn's disease, nine with ulcerative colitis) and 11 controls.
There was significantly increased density of TNF α immunoreactive cells in the lamina propria of both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease specimens, although the distribution of these cells differed in the two conditions.
In ulcerative colitis most of the TNF α immunoreactivity was seen in the subepithelial macrophages, with comparatively less in the deep lamina preopria, while in Crohn's disease immunoreactive cells were distributed evenly throughout the lamina propria.
Increased submucosal immunoreactivity was found only in Crohn's disease, in whch TNF α positive macrophages tended to cluster around arterioles and venules, often infiltrating and disrupting vascular endothelium.
It is suggested that this degree of TNF α production probably contributes significantly to the pathogenesis of both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, by impairing the integrity of epithelial and endothelial membranes, increasing inflammatory cell recruitment, and by prothrombotic effects on the vascular endothelium.
Activated macrophages are prominent in the inflammatory infiltrate in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
There is known to be local production of the macrophage derived cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumour necrosis factor α (TNF α), in inflammatory bowel disease, and these may be detected at raised concentrations in the serum in active disease.
Serum concentration of interleukin-6 are also raised in active Crohn's disease but surprisingly not in ulcerative colitis.
The importance of macrophage products as agents of intestinal inflammation has been shown in animal studies by the induction of intestinal necrosis by TNF α and platelet activating factor and the protctive effect of IL-1 blockade in immune complex colitis.
In previous studies of the possible role of TNF α in inflammatory bowel disease we have shown that much higher concentrations are found in the stools during relapse (up to 5–10 µg TNF α/g); than in serum, thus implying high concentrations in inflamed mucosa.
If such high concentration mucosal production does occur, it is probable that specific treatment to reduce TNF α production will be of clinical benefit, and it is therefore important that the extent of local production is assessed more directly.
In this study we have used immunohistochemistry to determine the distribution and density of TNF α containing cells, in the mucosa and submucosa of patients with chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
Methods
PATIENTS
Fifteen surgically resected specimens from patients with Crohn's disease were studied.
Four specimens were from the jejunum and 11 from terminal ileum or ascending colon.
Twelve of these patients were receiving corticosteroid treatment and three elemental diet at the time of surgery.
Nine further specimens, including two colonoscopic biopsy specimens, were obtained from patients with ulcerative colitis, all of whom were receiving steroid treatment.
The diagnosis of Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis had previously been made on the basis of repeated colonoscopy, histological tests, and contrast radiography, and all specimens showed histological evidence of inflammation.
The Table gives the clinical details of these patients and treatments received.
Six of 11 control specimens were resected from adults (aged 18–64), whose indications for surgery included polyposis, chronic constipation, and carcinoma (two specimens were of terminal ileum, the rest colonic; all were histologically normal).
The other five were histologically normal colonoscopic biopsy specimens taken from children investigated for abdominal pain.
All biopsy specimens include muscularis mucosae; however only one contained sufficient submucosa for analysis of submucosal staining.
Specimens were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70°C until analysis, when sections cut at 7 µm were applied to poly-l-lysine coated microscope slides and fixed in acetone before immunostaining.
ANTIBODIES USED
CB0006, an IgG1 purified mouse monoclonal antibody to human TNF α (a kind gift from Celltech Ltd, UK) was used throughout (dilution 1/100).
This antibody, which neutralises TNF α cytotoxicity on L929 cells and blocks TNF α induced MHC class I expression has been given therapeutically to humans suffering from septic shock, and is used to assay TNF α by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
It displays no cross reactivity with TNF Β, interleukin-1 or interleukin-6 in ELISA or cold competition assay.
Monoclonal antibodies to HLA-DR (1/100, Dako Ltd, Slough), CD25 (1/100 Dako), and CD3 (UCHT1, an undiluted supernatant) were used to stain serial sections.
Control slides were stained with either TRIS buffered saline or an isotype matched monoclonal antibody (anti-cytokeratin, 1/100, Dako).
After incubation with primary antibody for one hour at room temperature, staining was developed using the alkaline phosphatase anti-alkaline phosphatase (APAAP) technique with fast red substrate, as previously described.
QUANTITATION
The density of TNF α+; cells within lamina propria and submucosa was determined with a point counting technique, using a Lennox graticule over at least five randomly chosen high power fields within each region and counting as positive graticule points overlying positively stained cells.
As many specimens showed heterogeneous mucosal staining, with predominant subepithelial immunoreactivity, we subdivided the lamina propria arbitrarily into subepithelial (within one high power field of the epithelium) and deep (within one high power field of the muscularis mucosa).
We excluded graticule points overlying the crypts from the initial count and subtracted the density of endogenously positive cells found in the matched control slides (median 29 cells/mm (range 4–78) in disease specimens; median 3.5 cells/mm (range 0–18) in controls).
Reproducibility of counts on blinded testing was within 10%.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
As the resultant percentages within groups were not always normally distributed, group medians were calculated with 95% confidence intervals (derived by the Wilcoxon method) and comparison was made between groups using the two tailed Mann-Whitney U test.
Results
LAMINA PROPRIA
TNF α+; cells were present in the lamina propria of six of the 11 normal controls, but these were few in number and largely confined to the subepithelial zone (median density 5.5 cells/ mm, 95% confidence intervals 1.6 to 20.9).
Subepithelial TNF α+; cell density was significantly increased compared with controls in both ulcerative colitis (145.0 cells/mm, 110.3 to 184.5, p<0.0001) and Crohn's disease (148.0 cells/mm, 118.9 to 162, p<0.0001)(see Figs 1A, 2).
These large cells had the phenotypic appearance of macrophages, often showing extending processes (Fig 2), and similar cells on serial sections stained HLA-DR+, CD25+, CD3-.
In addition the monoclonal antibody showed weak cross reactivity with epithelium.
The pattern of staining differed in the deep lamina propria, where the density of TNF α+; cells was significantly greater in Crohn's disease (118.2 cells/mm, 85.1 to 159) than in ulcerative colitis (28.8 cells/mm, 10.9 to 64.3, p<0.0005) or controls (1.9 cells/mm, 0 to 3.8, p<0.0001 — Fig 1B).
TNF α+; cells were still however higher in ulcerative colitis than controls (p<0.005).
The morphology of TNF α+; cells was more variable within the deeper lamina propria, particularly in Crohn's tissue (Fig 2).
In addition to those with macrophage morphology, a population of smaller and more densely stained cells, could be identified.
These cells were probably lymphocytes, as similar cells in serial sections were found to be CD3+, CD25+.
In addition smaller numbers of TNF α+; cells were identified on morphological grounds as polymorphonuclear leucocytes.
TNF α+; cells were also seen in Crohn's granulomas and in the germinal centres of lymphoid follicles: the second were large CD3- cells and were presumably tingible body macrophages.
No evidence of TNF α immunoreactivity was found elsewhere within the follicles.
SUBMUCOSA
Increased submucosal TNF α immunoreactivity was found in Crohn's disease but not in ulcerative colitis.
TNF α+; cell density was significantly increased in Crohn's tissue (median density 137.0 cells/mm, 95% confidence intervals 94.6 to 190.2) compared with both controls (2.30 cells/mm, 0 to 15.5, p<0.0002) and ulcerative colitis specimens (7.0 cells/mm, 2.1 to 14.7, p<0.0002)(Figs 1C, 2).
All of the Crohn's disease specimens showed evidence of transmural TNF α immunoreactivity, with increased numbers of TNF α+; macrophages also found in muscularis externa and serosa.
There was evidence in all Crohn's specimens of accumulation of TNF α+; cells, predominantly CD3- cells with macrophage morphology, around submucosal and serosal blood vessels (Fig 2).
This perivascular TNF α+; acxcumulation was frequently associated with disruption of vascular smooth muscle and endothelium, and thrombosed or recanalised arteries were seen in eight of 15 specimens.
Such perivascular concentration of TNF α+; cells was not seen in ulcerative colitis or in Crohn's lamina propria.
Discussion
We have found TNF α immunoreactive cells at high density within the lamina propria in both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis and also within Crohn's submucosa.
The extent of this TNF α immunoreactivity confirms that the very high concentrations we have detected in stools during relapse of inflammatory bowel disease give a more accurate estimate of local inflammation than does the modest increase in serum TNF α.
Although the difficulty of obtaining true serial sections in frozen tissue prevents formal confirmation of the lineage of these TNF α+; cells, we have found similar patterns of immunoreactivity in preliminary work with a second monoclonal antibody 52 B 83 (also from Celltech), and have confirmed, with a reverse haemolytic plaque assay, that most mucosal TNF α secreting cells are macrophages (E J Breese, T T MacDoland, submitted data).
We suggest that, whatever the lineage of the TNF α producing cells, the effects of such high local concentrations are likely to be adverse.
TNF α produced by subepithelial cells probably impairs epithelial integrity, particularly in the presence of interferon γ.
Interferon γ may also synergise with TNF α in several proinflammatory ways, increasing expression of adhesion molecules and MHC class I and II, and upregulating macrophage free radical production.
There is clearly the potential within the intestine for direct activation of subepithelial macrophages by lipopolysaccharides from the luminal flora, particularly after any breach of epithelial integrity.
In Crohn's disease epithelial permeability is increased, and it is noteworthy that faecal diversion may be protective.
The subepithelial predominance of TNF α immunoreactivity in ulcerative colitis is additionally concordant with findings of epithelial deposition of immunoglobulin and complement, now know to be related to expression of the 40 kD putative autoantigen (T Halstensen, personal communication), as well as the subepithelial localisation of procollagen RNA production.
The perivascular production of TNF α in Crohn's disease, also concordant with known patterns of complement deposition, is likely to be particularly damaging.
It binds to high affinity endothelial cell surface receptors, and acts to increase inflammatory cell recruitment by upregulating expression of both adhesion molecules and the chemotactic cytokine interleukin-8.
The vascular effects of TNF α include increase in permeability and powerful promotion of thrombosis by reduction of anti-coagulant and activation of procoagulant mechanisms.
It reduces the production of thrombomodulin, a natural anti-coagulant, which inactivates factor Va and increases synthesis of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.
TNF α additionally induces expression of the powerfully procoagulant tissue factor, released only at sites of endothelial damage where it activates the extrinsic limb of the coagulation cascade.
Although TNF α infusion causes general activation of procoagulant pathways, its action seems preferentially targeted towards dividing endothelial cells — that is, at sites of injury, where much lower concentrations will induce this spectrum of prothrombotic change.
There is now substantial evidence that vascular disruption and focal thrombosis, related to macrophage infiltration, occurs in Crohn's disease.
The production of both the procoagulant TNF α and the potent vasoconstrictor endothelin-1 by perivascular macrophages will contribute powerfully towards thrombosis in this situation.
In view of the high density of TNF α producing cells in active inflammatory bowel disease, and the well characterised effects of this cytokine, it is probable that TNF α makes an independent contribution to inflammatory tissue damage.
If this can be confirmed in animal models of intestinal inflammation, clinical use of anti-TNF α monoclonal antibodies or therapeutic inhibition of its production by agents such as transforming growth factor Β, interleukin-10 or thalidomide may provide potent and selective alternatives to current immunosuppressive treatment.
Iron deficiency anaemia — how far to investigate?
Abstract
Since 1980 investgations, by this group, of patients with iron deficiency anaemia and no obvious cause, have been limited to upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, with small bowel biopsy, and barium enema.
This study attempted to follow up 93 consecutive patients whose anaemia remained obscure after these investigations to determine the outcome and assess the safety of this limited approach.
In 1991/92 questionnaires were sent to the general practitioners.
Eighty three completed questionnaires were received.
Ten patients had died all unrelated to the iron deficiency anaemia.
The mean follow up of the 73 living patients was six years (range 4–12).
Sixty five (89%) had a normal haemoglobin concentration and only 15 were still taking oral iron.
Possible causes for the anaemia were found in 17 — non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use in 10, menstruation in two, gastrectomy in three, poor nutrition in two.
No other cause emerged.
It is concluded that this limited investigative approach is safe.
Iron deficiency anaemia is a very common condition in general medical practice.
There are many possible causes and often the likely cause is suggested from the routine history and examination of the patient (for example, menorrhagia, poor diet, malabsorption, inflammatory bowel disease, rectal bleeding).
There is a substantial group of patients, however, in which the cause is not obvious and it is difficult to know how far to investigate.
Even after extensive investigation the cause may remain elusive.
It has been our policy for the past 12 years to limit investigation of such patients to upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, with endoscopic small bowel biopsy, and barium enema.
Sigmoidoscopy was not considered a necessary part of the investigation in the absence of a recent change in bowel habit, observed rectal bleeding, or an abnormality on digital rectal examination.
Faecal occult blood testing was not done.
We know the yield of routine investigations in iron deficiency anaemia but do not know the outcome in those with no detected cause.
To determine the outcome and to assess how safe this approach is we have followed up 93 consecutive patients presenting between 1980 and 1988 with iron deficiency anaemia in whom the above investigations were negative.
Method
PATIENTS
Records were kept from 1980 of all patients, referred to one physician, with iron deficiency anaemia, in whom a cause was not established after upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, small bowel biopsy, and barium enema.
Mild diverticular disease seen on barium enema was not considered a cause of anaemia nor was a hiatus hernia, minimal oesophagitis or Barrett's oesophagus without oesophagitis.
Iron deficiency anaemia was defined as a haemoglobin concentration below 11.5 g/dl for women and 13.8 g/dl for men, a mean corpuscular volume below 80 fl and, where available, a ferritin less than 13 ng/l.
Ninety three consecutive patients presenting between 1980 and 1988 whose notes were still available were followed up.
Details of the haemoglobin concentration, red cell counts, and ferritin were recorded at presentation, together with details of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use and other medical problems.
Questionnaires were sent to the general practitioners of all these patients in 1991/1992.
Enquiry was made about the patient's current health, whether a cause for the anaemia had emerged, the most recent haemoglobin concentration, and the continued need for iron treatment.
This information was supplemented by examination of the hospital case notes.
In cases of death the cause was established either from the case notes or from the Registrar of Births and Deaths.
Results
There were 31 men and 62 women.
The mean age ws 61 years (range 21 to 85).
The mean haemoglobin concentration was 7.0 g/dl (range 2.5 to 12.0 g/dl).
From the 93 questionnaires, answers were received from 89 (96%).
In six cases the patients had moved away and no recent information was available.
Of the 83 on whom follow up information was available, 10 had died.
The Table shows the causes of death.
In none was the cause thought to be related to iron deficiency.
The mean follow up interval of the remaining 73 (25 men; 48 women) was 6.1 years (range 4 to 12).
One had minor lower oesophagitis, one had a Barrett's oesophagus without oesophagitis.
Several had minor diverticular disease of the colon.
A possible cause for the anaemia was found in 17 patients.
Ten patients (nine women) had been taking NSAIDS — in two this consisted of just occasional aspirin and five took an NSAID regularly for rheumatoid arthritis.
In two patients the cause of anaemia may have been menstrual loss because they both settled after menstruation had stopped.
In three men gastrectomy may have been the cause and in two poor nutrition may have been responsible.
In no other patient did a cause emerge.
Of 73 patients still alive 15 (all women) were still taking oral iron.
They had all had a normal haemoglobin concentration.
Of the remaining 58 who were not receiving iron all except eight (one woman; seven men) had a normal haemoglobin concentrations.
These low haemoglobin concentrations ranged from 11.2 to 13.4 g/dl.
Discussion
This study suggests that extensive investigation to establish a precise cause for obscure iron deficiency anaemia is not necessary if upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, small bowel biopsy, and barium enema are normal.
It is known that such patients may have one of a variety of conditions such as arteriovenous malformations in the small intestine or colon (including angiodysplasia and telangiectasia), Meckel's diverticulum, Crohn's disease, and small bowel smooth muscle tumours.
It is doubtful, however, whether these conditions require treatment in the absence of symptoms and complications as long as the haemoglobin can be maintained with oral iron treatment.
Moreover, complete investigation may require invasive angiography and laparotmy, which are not without risk.
The most important condition to exclude is colonic carcinoma.
A barium enema detects most carcinomas and colonscopy would be even more reliable and might be preferred to barium enema if the resources were available.
In this series we feel that no carcinoma was missed by barium enema in view of the follow up exceeding four years.
The need for sigmoidoscopy in patients with obscure iron deficiency anaemia is contentious.
We have yet to see a patient whose iron deficiency arose from a problem in the rectum or lower sigmoid in the absence of observed rectal bleeding, a change of bowel habit, or abnormality on digital examination.
For that reason we have not considered sigmoidoscopy an essential part of the investigation, but would do it if the patient was an unreliable historian.
This study helps justify that confidence.
Many departments of radiology require a sigmoidoscopy before a barium enema, but this seems to be an unnecessary constraint when the indication for the barium enema is simply iron deficiency and when there are no symptoms of rectal disease.
Of course, if colonoscopy is used instead of barium enema there would be no need for a separate sigmoidoscopy.
The need for routine small bowel biopsy might be questioned but during this study two to three cases of coeliac disease were diagnosed each year among the patients investigated for iron deficiency anaemia.
One surprising finding emerging from this study is the existence of a common but unrecognised entity — transient cryptogenic iron deficiency anaemia.
Of those patients still alive at follow up between four and 12 years later, 89% had a normal haemoglobin concentration, and only 23% of these were still receiving iron treatment.
Only one patient who had been receiving NSAIDs was still anaemic and that was a man with rheumatoid arthritis whose haemoglobin concentration was 12.7 g/dl.
Women are more likely to achieve a normal haemoglobin concentration — in fact only one of 48 women was anaemic at follow up compared with seven of 25 men.
Appreciation of this should be very helpful in the management, including reassurance, of such patients.
Another surprise is the apparent reluctance of men (or their general practitioners) to continue iron treatment.
The supervision of iron treatment was usually left to the general practitioners and was variable.
Despite seven men still being anaemic not one man was still taking iron; whereas 15 women were still taking iron although none was anaemic.
It is difficult to give precise guidelines but it is now our practice to recommend that oral iron be given until the haemoglobion concentrations and red cell counts are normal, and that these are remeasured at about three monthly intervals for a year and further iron given as necessary.
If the haemoglobin remains normal after a year it should then be checked after a further year or sooner if the patient becomes symptomatic.
Anaemic developing after that should probably be reinvestigated.
Unnecessarily long courses of oral iron should be avoided because of the risks of iron overload.
If anaemia cannot be controlled with oral iron more, detailed detailed investigation should be considered including colonoscopy, small bowel radiology, small bowel enteroscopy, and gut arteriography.
If these are negative and frequent blood transfusions are required, laparotomy with synchronous whole gut endoscopy and external inspection of the transilluminated gut should be considered.
Non-penetrance and late appearance of polyps in families with familial adenomatous polyposis
Abstract
One case of non-penetrance of the familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) gene at 59 years of age and late onset of polyps on endoscopy and biopsy in this and two other families is described.
Screening protocols should include dental screening as well as direct ophthalmoscopy and endoscopy to detect minimal manifestations of the gene.
In the absence of a specific DNA predictive test, bowel screening should continue well beyond 30 years of age.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) has only recently been shown by clinical and molecular studies to encompass the two conditions formerly known as Gardner syndrome and polyposis coli.
It has been generally accepted that adenomatous polyps develop in the second and third decade with most affected untreated subjects developing a colorectal carcinoma by the age of 40 years.
Indeed a recent assessment of 137 at risk subjects using sigmoidoscopy predicted that all those affected would develop rectal polyps by 34 years of age.
Our experience with over 30 families in the North West of England has led us to doubt these assessments for expression of both polyps and carcinoma.
We present three families with late onset of polyps and an apparently non-penetrant individual aged 59 years.
Case reports
FAMILY 1 FIGURE 1 REPRESENTS THIS FAMILY.
Patient 101 — presented at the age of 66 years with intermittent diarrhoea.
Barium enema showed multiple polyps in the rectum and he had total panproctocolectomy with ileostomy.
There were over 100 adenomatous polyps present throughout the specimen, but only two showed in situ foci and there was no evidence of invasive carcinoma.
The patient was noted to have multiple skin cysts (histology showed an epidermoid origin) and osteomata of the skull.
He died at the age of 69 of an unrelated squamous cell carcinoma of the bronchus.
Patient 202 — presented aged 41 years with a rectal adenocarcinoma associated with over 100 adenomatous polyps.
He had a proctectomy and partial colectomy, but unfortunately died aged 50 years from multiple new carcinomata in the retained ascending colon.
He was also noted to have cysts and skull osteomata.
Patient 201 — submitted to screening aged 34 years in view of familial history.
Barium enema suggested the presence of polyps, but sigmoidoscopy to 22 cm was normal.
An incidental asymptomatic breast adenocarcinoma was discovered and she had a right simple mastectomy.
The patient was lost to follow up two years later until her daughter (301) presented to the oral medicine department.
Patient 201 is now 54 years of age and has had epidermoid cysts removed as well as having a large jaw osteoma.
She remains asymptomatic from her bowel and a recent colonoscopy showed only four small polyps in the rectosigmoid region, with no further polyps to the caecum.
Patient 301 — presented to the oral medicine department aged 32 years.
Noted to have typical jaw features of Gardner syndrome, with skin cysts and in view of family history was referred for colonoscopy.
Examination round to the caecum showed no abnormality and biopsy specimens showed normal colonic mucosa.
Patient 302 — only two small polyps, in the rectum but hundreds of adenomatous polyps >0.5 cm diameter from the rectum to caecum on colonoscopy aged 32 years.
Also has multiple osteomata and skin cysts.
Patient 405 — large jaw osteoma noted at 15 years with colonoscopy showing areas of microadenomata on biopsy.
FAMILY 2 FIGURE 2 SHOWS THIS FAMILY.
Patients 101 and 102 died at the ages of 72 and 70 years with no known features of FAP and no cancer.
Patient 202 — no problems until presented aged 69 years with rectal bleeding.
Colonoscopy showed over 100 adenomatous polyps, but no carcinoma was found on removal of the colon and rectum.
Patient 203 — currently 59 years.
Caecum normal on colonoscopy examination at 58 years with two biopsies showing normal mucosa.
No skin cysts or jaw osteomata on orthopantograms.
In the six months before the recent normal colonoscopy, she had a series of investigations including barium enemas, sigmiodoscopy, and colonoscopy with results which were to some degree conflicting.
This was partly influenced by the recognition that she must be an obligate gene carrier as her brother (202), daughter (301), and son (304) were all known to be affected.
Patient 204 — normal sigmoidoscopy aged 60 years.
No cysts, osteomata, or retinal pigmentary change.
Patient 301 — presented with bloody diarrhoea aged 30 years.
Ileorectal anastamosis for multiple polyps.
Patient 302 — normal colonoscopy and several random biopsies showing normal histology aged 34 years, but orthopantograms highly suggestive of FAP with multiple osteomata.
Patient 304 — over 100 adenomatous polyps present on first screen aged 35 years.
Awaiting surgery.
FAMILY 3 FIGURE 3 SHOWS THIS FAMILY.
Patients 102, 205, 206, 304, and 305 died from bowel cancer associated with multiple polyps.
Patients 302 and 303 died from myocardial infarctions but were also known to be affected with polyps found on screening in their late 30s andboth having later bowel resections.
Patient 201 — died aged 74 years from a cerebrovascular accident.
No known bowel symptoms, but was never investigated.
Patient 301 — barium enema and sigmoidoscopy were normal at 35 years.
She did not return for screening until developed bowel symptoms aged 53 years.
Colonoscopy showed over 100 adenomatous polyps and she had a colectomy and ileorectal anastamosis.
No carcinoma was found in the specimen.
She was also seen to have multiple areas of retinal pigmentary change.
Patient 402 — adenomatous polyps found on the first screening aged 21 years.
Colectomy and ileorectal anastamosis in the same year.
MOLECULAR ANALYSIS
Blood samples were collected from all available family members and DNA extracted from the leucocytes using an Applied Biosystems Model 340 DNA Extractor.
Aliquots (equivalent to 10 ug) of DNA were digested with the appropriate restriction endonuclease according to manufacturers instructions.
Samples were electrophoresed on 0.8% agarose gels and the size fractionated products transferred to nylon membranes using standard procedures.
Nylon membranes were hybridised to the appropriate P-dCTP labelled probes (YN5.48 and π227).
After hybridisation, filters were washed to 0.2×SSC and autoradiography carried out at -70°C for two to five days.
Genomic DNA was amplified using the polymerase chain reaction with primers to detect intragenic RsaI and SspI restriction enzyme polymorphic sites and a CA repeat found 30–70 Kb downstream from the DP2.5 APC gene.
The products of the polynerase chain reaction were loaded on 2% agarose gels in tuberculon bacillin emulsion in the case of the restriction enzyme polymorphism and on 8% non-denaturing polyacrylamide for the CA repeat.
Figure 2 shows the results of this analysis.
Affected patients 301 and 304 have inherited the same intragenic alleles from their mother, but different ones from their father.
In addition, patient 202 has a consistent allelotype with patient 203 and patient 302 who was affected on orthopantograms also seems to have inherited the high risk alleles.
POLYPOSIS REGISTER DATA
The North Western Regional polyposis register is currently aware of 33 families with proved FAP.
These pedigrees contain 123 cases known to have been affected, with 76 currently alive.
Thirty four cases have been diagnosed with asymptomatic polyps at an average age of 21.2 years (range 9–42).
Fourteen cases presented symptomatically with polyps at an average of 38.3 years (range 13–69).
Seven known affected cases have had a sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy showing no polyps after 30 years of age (32, 32, 34, 35, 39, 40, and 58 years).
Two obligate gene carriers have died in their 70s without a bowel cancer or even bowel symptoms and a further case aged 55 years.
Seven untreated patients were shown on colonoscopy or colectomy to have no carcinoma after 40 years and two in their late 60s (43, 45, 52, 53, 54, 66, 69 years).
Therefore at least 9%120 (8%) patients known to carry the FAP gene did not have a symptomatic bowel cancer after the age of 50 years.
Conversely 35 cases have died from bowel cancer at an average of 43.5 years (range 26–69 years).
Other related deaths were two from duodenal cancer (43 and 48 years), one from a hepatoblastoma (assumed case as offspring of known FAP case aged two years), and a squamous cell carcinoma of the jaw aged 50 years.
One further case died from cancer of the bronchus aged 69 years and there were seven other unrelated deaths over the age of 50 years.
The earliest presentation with cancer of the bowel in this series was 21 years.
Discussion
Recent advances in molecular genetics have culminated in the cloning of the APC gene known to cause FAP on chromosome 5.
Screening of at risk patients with a combination of genetic markers, ophthalmic screening for congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium and a negative bowel investigation may reduce an initial risk of 50% to well below 1%.
Using the incidence curve previously published, at risk patients with no retinal features of FAP and a negative sigmoidoscopy screen at 34 years would be considered at no risk of having FAP and developing multiple polyps.
Clearly although this sample studied 137 patients who had repeated screening, later onset of polyps is likely to occur in some individuals.
From our study we have been able to show that at least 5% (6/122) of patients will not have polyps at 30 years of age on sigmoidoscopy and, as only 36/ 123 in our series were shown to definitely have polyps under 30 years, the real figure may be somewhat higher.
It is now generally accepted that FAP is fully penetrant (polyps are present) if the bowel is examined endoscopically.
What is not clear is the age at which full penetrance occurs.
We have shown that at least one patient is non-penetrant at 59 years of age.
Although there have been attempts to assess penetrance in the two phenotypes of Gardner and simple polyposis that have shown low penetrance, these have relied on the expression of cancer or the extraintestinal features.
From the time when endoscopic examination was started, 100% penetrance has been the rule.
Another recent attempt to produce an incidence curve using 126 patients who were screen positive for polyps, determined that 10% were detected after 40 years of age.
There is inherent bias in this study, however, as these cases were not shown to be screen negative, and the age at which polyps were found merely reflects the age at which they were called up for screening.
Nevertheless the true incidence curve probably lies somewhere between that of the two studies.
An oft quoted tenet that it is inevitable that someone with FAP will develop a bowel cancer, is also disproved by this study.
The clearest example of this is patient 203 from family 2 who has been shown by molecular studies to possess the faulty APC gene.
We are not aware of any previously reported case of non-penetrance of any features of FAP at as late an age as 58 years.
One would expect there to be at least some degree of microadenoma formation but so far she has only had two areas biopsied.
Unfortunately we have not been able to persuade her to have ophthalmic screening, so the presence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium is not known.
We have been able to show in this population based study that at least 10% (12/123) of subjects over 40 years did not have a bowel cancer, including two cases who were found to have multiple polyps at 66 and 69 years of age, but no carcinoma.
Although our study in the North Western Region is by no means complete any bias is likely to be towards finding families with a more severe clinical course.
COUNSELLING ISSUES
Our experience has shown that non-penetrance of the FAP gene and late onset of polyps can have considerable psychosocial implications for the particular patient concerned and for their relatives.
There can also be a significant impact on family dynamics.
These issues need to be borne in mind when counselling such families.
Family 1
Patient 301 was the first person in this family to be referred for genetic counselling.
Subsequently her sister and three of her brothers were seen.
The brothers were interested in being screened if we could offer a predictive test based on DNA studies, rather than having bowel examinations while at 50% risk.
This necessitated approaching their parents to ask them to donate blood for DNA extraction.
Their mother was known to be at high risk herself given the family history, and we were keen to offer her both counselling and screening for her own benefit.
She was very reluctant to take part in any way.
This created conflict within the family.
Although her children could appreciate her anxieties, they realised the importance of her participation.
She did in fact attend clinic eventually, and this allowed a full discussion of the situation.
It became clear that her reasons for not wanting to come forward were based largely on feeling guilty about her children being affected or at risk.
This was compounded by her belief that her normal examination (aged 34) meant that neither she nor her children were at risk, and she had never discussed the family history with them.
Family 2
When patient 301 was diagnosed as being affected by FAP, her specialist offered screening to family members identified as being at high risk.
Her brother (patient 304) was found to be affected, but neither of their parents had any definite signs of the condition.
It then became known that their maternal uncle (patient 202) was also affected.
This highlighted their mother as an obligate gene carrier, and she then had the series of investigations outlined earlier.
She subsequently attended the genetic counselling clinic, and was very anxious about the situation.
She cannot really accept that she ‘has the gene’ and yet is unaffected.
Her experience and state has also caused concern for her children who have had negative bowel examinations and who are awaiting their DNA results.
While other factors may have influenced how these particular families have reacted, it is clear that the unusual genetic picture has caused them problems.
This is likely to be the case for other families with a similar pattern of inheritance.
HETEROGENEITY IN FAP
There is clearly variation in expression of the APC gene within families as can be seen from the three families we have presented in detail.
This may, at least in part be because of dietary factors such as non-starch polysaccharides or ‘fibre’.
There does, however, seem to be a more considerable variation between families.
This may be due to different mutations within the APC gene causing variations from a total absence of gene product through to protein only partially reduced in function.
Our study lends credence to the recent report of a family with many affected family members with only two to 40 colonic polyps, who were shown to be linked to the APC locus and are therefore likely to be carrying a mutation of this gene.
Studies to detect the exact mutation or deletion in the APC gene are needed in this and other atypical families before conclusive evidence that it is this locus and not another locus close by such as the MCC gene that is affected.
Although previous reports have suggested, however, a far more virulent course with the Gardner phyenotype, family 1, which clearly shows this phenotype, has individuals with none and four polyps only at 32 and 54 years respectively.
Currently it is not possible to give 100% reassurance that an at risk individual has not inherited the faulty APC gene, unless they are shown not to have the family mutation.
Mutation studies have until very recently only detected a few defects.
Although a new report has been able to identify the gene defect (mutation, deletion, or insertion) in 53/79 cases, these tests are unlikely to be widely available for some years and are very labour intensive.
This is because there is no real hot spot for mutation, for even though 36/ 79 (45%) had detectable defects in exon 15 of the APC gene, this represents one third of the entire gene.
Therefore in the families with only one known affected subject, where samples cannot be obtained from enough family members for linkage studies, or in the 20% or so that remain uninformative with the current probes, no predictive DNA tests are available.
This means that well over 50% of at risk subjects cannot benefit from this technology at present.
As the DNA predictive test is the most accurate predictor of not inheriting the gene, screening beyond 30 years will probably be necessaryin about 50% of subjects, especially if there is late onset in the family.
Screening may not be necessary annually, but at least one colonoscopy to the caecum should be performed as polyps may only be present more proximally.
Multiple biopsies may be another way to show evidence of FAP (microadenomata), but this will add to the risk of the procedure and a negative result may still not allow total reassurance.
We would certainly recommend ophthalmic and dental screening as in our experience over 80% of affected patients manifest retinal changes and or dental features.
It is important for current risk estimation with a negative bowel test that a more accurate incidence curve is compiled.
This may mean combining data from many centres of subjects who are shown on at least one occasion at the start of regular screening not to have polyps.
In the meantime more prolonged screening beyond 30 years will be required in a number of at risk individuals.
Effect of a satiating meal on the concentrations of procolipase propeptide in the serum and urine of normal and morbidly obese subjects
Abstract
The effect of a satiating meal on the serum and urinary concentrations of procolipase propeptide (ala-Pro-Gly-Pro-Arg, APGPR) immunoreactivity, as measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) specific for free APGPR, has been studied in normal and morbidly obese human subjects.
The normal subjects displayed a biphasic response with coordinate increases in both serum and urine APGPR immunoeactivity both occurring within the first two hours after the meal.
In two of three of the morbidly obese subjects, this early rise in APGPR concentration in urine was not seen but was followed by a slow rise in urinary APGPR immunoreactivity at four to six hours.
In both the normal and obese groups, the urinary immunoreactive signal was found to coelute with synthetic APGPR on gel chromatography.
In rats, procolipase propeptide (val-Pro-Asp-Pro-Arg, VPDPR) specifically inhibits fat intake early in the postprandial period when given peripherally or centrally.
This study suggests that in humans APGPR reaches the circulation shortly after feeding and is excreted in the urine.
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that human procolipase propeptide may also act as a satiety signal.
In addition the late appearance of the peptide in some of the morbidly obese subjects could be associated with perturbation of appetite control in these subjects.
Intestinal fat digestion occurs as a result of the combined action of lpase and colipase.
Colipase is a heat stable, water soluble, non-enzymatic protein of molecular weight of about 10 kilo Daltons (kDa).
This cofactor is required for lipase activity in the presence of bile salts above the critical micelle concentration and acts by anchoring lipase in a one to one molar ratio to the bile salt emulsified triglyceride substrate.
Colipase is secreted by the exocrine pancreas as the precursor, procolipase and its activation involves the tryptic cleavage of the Arg 5 -Gly 6 bond releasing an N terminal pentapeptide.
This procolipase propeptide has an amino acid sequence that seems to be highly conserved in nature with the sequence val-Pro-Asp-Pro-Arg (VPDPR) in pig, ox, rat, and horse and ala-Pro-Gly-Pro-Arg (APGPR) in man and chicken.
The sequence VPGPR has also been identified in the rat.
This homology along with the finding that the genetically obese Zucker rat (fa/fa), in which obesity is characterised by profound hyperphagia, have a 60% reduction in their fasting pancreatic procolipase content compared with normal rats lead to the suggestion that the peptide might have a possible physiological role in appetite regulation.
Further studies in Sprague-Dawley rats showed that intraperitoneal or intravenous injection of VPDPR changed the pattern but not the overall consumption of food with a reduced intake at the beginning and increased intake at the end of a four hour test period.
This early ‘satiating effect’ was dose dependent and most marked at a dose of 40 µg per animal; about equimolar to procolipase secretion during maximal stimulation with secretin and cholecystokinin (CCK).
Addition of purified porcine procolipase, corresponding to 2 µg/g VPDPR after tryptic proteolysis, to the feed pellets of these rats lead to the loss of normal weight gain and maintenance of body weight.
Once the normal diet was resumed, pellet consumption increased and weight gain returned to normal.
Further studies showed that this effect on anomal weight and pellet consumption was not seen with the addition of porcine colipase alone and that there was a significant reduction in total weight of food consumed at six hours when 10 µg synthetic VPDPR was given intraperitoneally.
This second finding was confirmed by Shargill et al although total consumption at 24 hours was unchanged with an intraperitoneal dose of 19.6 µg.
Infusion of synthetic VPDPR (16.5–500 ng) into the third ventricle of conscious Sprague-Dawley rats over five minutes significantly reduced food intake from 30 minutes to six hours.
At an effective dose of 16.5 ng (33 pM), VPDPR is one of the more potent agents to inhibit food intake after injection into the third ventricle.
A significant dose dependent reduction in fat consumption after intraperitoneal VPDPR administration was shown in Osborne-Mendel rats, a species susceptible to obesity on high fat diets but not low fat high carbohydrate diets.
This effect lasted up to four hours with a dose of 20 µg per animal but was prolonged for up to six hours with a dosage of 40–80 µg per animal.
A compensatory increase in fat intake was seen after six hours and at 12 hours the total fat intake was the same as in the control group.
A significant dose dependent reduction in fat intake was also shown with infusion of 100–400 ng into the right lateral ventricle of Sprague-Dawley rats.
The hypothetical action of VPDPR is that it is released from procolipase in the duodenum during digestion, is actively or passively absorbed, passes through the circulation to act on a receptor site in the central nervous system, and so inhibits, in the short term, further consumption of food, specifically that food which contains fat.
At present, free VPDPR has not yet been shown to be absorbed into the circulation nor specific receptors in the central nervous system identified.
The effect of APGPR on satiation is more difficult to study in humans and has not so far been investigated.
It is known, however, that synthetic PGPR has a very short half life (<5 minutes) in human serum in vitro but persists for up to four hours in human urine in vitro.
This loss of immunoreactivity in serum and urine can be prevented by the addition of 20 mM zinc acetate or by boiling for 10 minutes.
This study was performed in an attempt to identify APGPR in blood after a satiating meal and to investigate the hypothesis that APGPR is absorbed into the circulation postprandially and may appear in urine.
In addition, morbidly obese patients were studied to identify if there was any difference in the concentrations of the APGPR peptide in these subjects as this would be consistent with a pathophysiological role for APGPR in this group of disorders.
Materials and methods
SUBJECTS
This study was approved by the ethical committee of St George's Hospital Medical School and informed consent was obtained from all subjects.
All chemical and biochemical reagents were obtained from Sigma (Poole, Dorset) or BDH (Dagenham, Essex) and were of analytical grade or of the highest purity available.
Six healthy volunteers,(three men and three women), aged 27–38 years (mean 33.2) not known to have any pancreatic or other gastrointestinal diseases were studied.
Their body mass index (BMI) was in the normal healthy range of 20–25 (mean 22.3).
The subjects completed written questionnaires: the Bulimia Investigatatory Test Edinburgh (BITE) and Eating Attitude Test (EAT) for anorexia nervosa scoring within the normal range <19 BITE symptoms (mean 2.33), < BITE severity (mean 1.33), <30 EAT (mean 2.5).
Similarly threemorbidly obese female patients defined by having a BMI >40, aged 17 (MO1), 52 (MO2), and 70 (MO3) years, also not known to have any pancreatic or other gastrointestinal diseases were studied whose BMI were 41.4, 53.4, and 58.1.
The subjects completed the BITE and EAT questionnaires with scores of 3, 23, and 30 (mean 18.7) for EAT, of 2, 22, and 24 (mean 17.7) for BITE symptoms and of 5, 6, and 4 (mean 5) for BITE severity.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
The subjects were fasted over night having abstained from diuretic drugs — that is, alcohol and caffeine, the evening before.
Two hours before a standard meal at 10 am, 500 ml of water was drunk.
No further food or fluid was consumed, except for the standard meal until the last urine specimen had been collected.
The meal consisted of 300 g ‘Special Recipe’ Muesli (W Jordan Ltd, Biggleswade, UK) and 300 g fresh pasteurised whole cows milk, the whole meal containing a total of 1191 kcal, 43.3 g protein, 170.4 g carbohydrate, 41.7 g fat, 39 g fibre, and 305 g water.
The meal was consumed as rapidly as was comfortable within 15 minutes or stopped when satiation occurred.
The mean mass of meal consumed was 557 g for the normal and 308 g for the morbidly obese subjects.
At 30 and 0 minutes before and at 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 120, 180, 240, 300, 360, and 420 minutes after the onset of the meal, the subjects emptied their bladders, the volume of urine voided was recorded and 10 ml urine immediately made 20 mM with zinc acetate.
To minimise loss of APGPR immunoreactivity on storage, each urine sample was centrifuged at 3000 g for 20 minutes, the supernatant suspended in a boiling bath for 10 minutes, centrifuged for five minutes at 10000 g , and the supernatant aliquoted and stored at -20°C until assayed.
Each subject had 5 ml of blood sampled from a forearm vein immediately before and every 10 minutes for two hours after the onset of the meal.
Each blood sample was immediately made 20 mM with zinc acetate, allowed to clot, and within 2.5 hours of collection, centrifuged at 3000 g for 20 minutes, the separated serum mixed with an equal volume of ELISA immunoassay buffer containing 50 mM TRIS/HCL, 0.05% (wt/vol) casein, 3.1 mM NaN 3 , 10 mM ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid, 0.05% (wt/vol) Tween 20 at pH 7.2–7.4, and suspended in a boiling bath for 10 minutes.
Each sample was then centrifuged for five minutes at 10000 g and the supernatant labelled and stored at -20°C until assayed.
The stored aliquots of urine and serum were later thawed at room temperature, thoroughly whirlmixed, centrifuged for five minutes at 10000 g , and the supernatant assayed until the APGPR ELISA for free APGPR that we have previously described.
All samples were assayed at a 50% dilution in immunoassay buffer and corrected for dilution after subtraction of the assay detection limit.
Urinary APGPR excretion was calculated as a product of the urinary concentration for a given sample and the volume/ hour of urine output over that sampling period.
Two 7.5 ml urine samples from one male subject at 75 and 90 minutes after the onset of the meal, collected and stored as previously described, were thawed at room temperature, pooled, lyophilised, and then reconstituted by mixing with 6 ml distilled water.
This pooled concentrated urine was then centrifuged at 10000 g for five minutes and 1 ml of supernatant chromatographed on a Sephadex G-25 column (0.9×43 cm) in TRIS buffered saline (TBS) containing 50 mM TRIS/HCl, 0.15 M NaCl, 3.1 mM NaN 3 at pH 7.3 at a flow rate of 39.5 ml/ hour and 1.056 ml fractions collected and assayed using the APGPR ELISA.
Similarly, three 8 ml urine samples collected at 240, 300, and 360 minutes after the onset of the meal from the third morbidly obese subject were pooled, lyophilised, and reconstituted as before with 6 ml distilled water.
The resultant pooled concentrated urine was centrifuged and 1 ml chromatographed and assayed as before.
The chromatography column was calibrated using synthetic APGRP in 50 mM TRIS buffered saline and the fractions assayed for APGPR.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The results of sequential APGPR propeptide assay of urine and serum were analysed using the Wilcoxon matched pairs signed ranks test and the urinary APGPR concentrations and excretion from normal and morbidly obese groups analysed using the Kruskal-Wallis one way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Results
APGPR CONCENTRATION IN SERUM
In the normal subjects the fasted mean serum APGPR concentration was at the detection limit of the assay but postprandially two peaks of APGPR immunoreactivity were seen in the first and second hours after the start of the meal (Fig 1).
Only the peak at 90 minutes, however, achieved a significant difference (p<0.05) from the premeal value.
No APGPR was detected in any of the serum samples from the three morbidly obese patients while fasted or after the test meal.
APGPR CONCENTRATION AND EXCRETION IN URINE
In the normal subjects (Fig 2A), the APGPR concentrations in urine increased after the test meal and again two peak mean values of APGPR immunoreactivity were seen in the first and second hours at 45 and 75 minutes after the start of the meal corresponding in time with the peaks of serum APGPR found in the normal subjects.
These peaks were both significantly different from the premeal values (p<0.05).
In the obese subjects (Fig 2B) there was no significant overall increase in urinary APGPR concentration after the meal and there was no significant difference between the urinary APGPR concentration at any given time postprandially between the morbidly obese and normal groups.
In the first and third obese subjects (MO1 and MO3), however, the total urinary APGPR concentration slowly increased towards the end of the sampling period, four to six hours after the onset of the meal.
Urinary APGPR excretion (Fig 3A) in the normal group increased to a peak mean value at 82.5 minutes after the start of the meal and was significantly increased at 7.5, 67.5, and 82.5 minutes compared with the fasted values.
In the obese subjects the total urinary APGPR excretion showed no significant overall increase (Fig 3B) although in the second obese subject (MO2) the APGPR excretion in urine was similar to that seen in normal subjects — that is, an early peak within the first two hours after the onset of the meal.
Again there was no significant difference between the morbidly obese and normal group's urinary APGPR excretion at any given time postprandially.
Figure 4 shows a comparison of the APGPR urine concentrations between the normal subjects and MO1 and MO3 emphasising the differing appearance of the immunoreactive signal between these two groups.
The significant difference at 45 and 360 minutes postprandially between the results in the normal and these two morbidly obese subjects cannot be accounted for by a difference in the urine output (one way ANOVA, p>0.05).
A similar difference in urinary APGPR excretion postprandially was seen between the normal subjects and MO1 and MO3 and was significant at 15, 30, and 45 minutes after the start of the meal (data not shown).
CHROMATOGRAPHY OF URINARY APGPR
Assay of fractions of pooled and lyophilised urine from the second APGPR immunoreactivity peak from one of the normal male subjects clearly showed that the immunoreactive signal coeluted with synthetic APGPR suggesting that the immunoreactive peak was principally a result of the native peptide (Fig 5A).
Finally chromatography and assay of the lyophilised late pooled urine APGPR peak in the third morbidly obese subject again confirmed that the main immunoreactive signal comigrated with APGPR (Fig 5B).
Discussion
The N terminal pentapeptide of pancreatic procolipase is highly conserved in nature with only three forms found to occur in the higher vertebrates, VPDPR, VPGPR, and the APGPR form found in humans and chickens.
This homology is not confined only to the kinking proline residues and the long basic side chain of arginine but also includes the hydrophobic amino terminal valine or alanine.
VPDPR has been whosn to have two possible physiological functions besides its role as a propeptide.
Firstly it has been shown to act specifically to inhibit dietary fat consumption over a period of four to six hours after experimental administration without changing total 24 hour intake.
Secondly this peptide has been recently shown significantly to inhibit pancreatic protein secretion after intraduodenal infusion in pigs.
If this peptide plays a significant part in regulating fat consumption, it is interesting to note that dietary fat has a role in colipase regulation with an adaptive response to dietary lipids having been shown with at least a twofold increase in pancreatic procolipase in rats fed a 25–30% lipid containing diet.
This may form the basis of a negative feed back loop with increased fat intake leading to increased procolipase secretion, increased VPDPR release during digestion culminating in early satiety for dietary fat and a reduction in its consumption.
This study shows that in humans APGPR rapidly appears in the circulation in response to a satiating meal and does so in a biphasic manner.
Transmucosal transport of the intact oligopeptide may be by the paracellular pathway associated with changes in tight junction structure that accompany Na + glucose activatd absorption.
The reason for the biphasic peaks of APGPR in serum is not clear but may come about as a result of two phases of pancreatic procolipase secretion corresponding to early, cephalic, vagally mediated pancreatic secretion of low volume but rich in pancreatic enzymes followed by a duodenal phase in response to CCK and secretin as acidified, partially digested food enters the duodenum.
In addition to, the appearance of APGPR in serum was mirrored by its detection in urine suggesting not only that the peptide can survive immunoreactively intact in the circulation for a suficient time to allow systemic dispersal but also is rapidly excreted by the kidney.
It was not possible to confirmthat the immunoreactive signal in serum was due to APGPR but the immunoreactive signal in urine coeluted with synthetic APGPR.
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that human APGPR might act, similarly to VPDPR, as a satiety signal.
In two of the three morbidly obese subjects, there was an absence of the early urinary APGPR immunoreactivity peaks in concentration and excretion and only a slow rise in urinary APGPR concentration at four to six hours.
If APGPR were a satiety signal and the urine concentrations mirrored circulating blood concentrations, then the late appearance of APGPR in the circulation could explain the loss of appetite control in these morbidly obese patients.
Whether this abnormal response to the meal in these morbidly obese subjects is as a result of an intrinsic abnormality or is a consequence of pancreatic hypofunction seen in the morbidly obese is unclear.
Larger numbers of subjects need to be studied to determine the significance of these preliminary findings.
Intestinal pseudo-obstruction in patients with amyloidosis: clinicopathologic differences between chemical types of amyloid protein
Abstract
A clinicopathologic study was made of 16 patients with amyloidosis and with clinical signs of intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
Amyloid deposits in the small intestine were proved in all cases by endoscopic or intraoperative biopses, and immunohistochemical study identified the chemical types of amyloid protein: amyloid A protein (AA) in 13 cases, light chain protein (AL) in two, and β> 2 -microglobulin (AH) in one.
Clinically, an acute self limiting obstructive condition was evident in 13 cases with AA, and 12 of them returned to normal bowel function after receiving total parenteral nutrition.
Two cases with AL and one was AH presented with chronic, intermittent, obstructive symptoms, and medical treatment, including total parenteral nutrition, was ineffective with no recovery of intestinal propulsion.
Pathological examination of the necropsy specimens in seven cases showed considerable differences in the preferential sites of gastrointestinal deposits between the chemical types of amyloid; extensive infiltration and replacement of the muscularis propria by amyloid deposits throughout the gastrointestinal tract, especially the small intestine, were found in the AL and the AH cases, while amyload deposits in the myenteric plexus without appreciable muscle infiltration were shown in the AA cases.
These results show that intestinal pseudo-obstruction in patients with amyloidosis is caused by either myopathy or neuropathy, and that chemical types of amyloid may determine which of the two factors has the dominant affect on the bowel function.
Intestinal pseudo-obstruction is a clinical syndrome characterised by symptoms and signs of intestinal obstruction despite the absence of mechanical blockage of the intestinal lumen.
Systemic amyloidosis often affects the gastrointestinal tract and may result in this condition.
It is unclear, however, whether the impaired gastrointestinal motility is secondary to the effects of amyloid on the smooth muscle or on the autonomic nervous system, because there have been few reports assessing the clinicopathologic features in a considerable number of amyloidosis patients with intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
Recently, biochemical analyses have shown that several different types of amyloid fibril protein exist in systemic amyloidosis.
Light chain protein (AL) amyloid, which is of immunoglobulin origin, is found in primary or myeloma-associated amyloidosis.
Secondary amyloidosis associated with chronic inflammatory diseases consists of amyloid A (AA) protein.
AH amyloid consisting of Β 2 -microglobulin is found in patients receiving longterm haemodialysis.
It is now widely recognised that amyloidosis, rather than being a single disease entity, represents a group of diseases that have in common characteristic microscopic staining properties and electron microscopic fibrillar configuration.
Correlations between the chemical types, however, of amyloid and histological or clinical features in amyloidosis patients with intestinal pseudo-obstruction have never been determined.
The aims of this study were:(a) to explore the distinguishing clinical characteristics between the patients with three types of amyloidosis who presented with clinical signs of intestinal pseudo-obstruction, and (b) to examine the relations between the clinical features and pathological findings.
Methods
PATIENTS
Between 1978 and 1992, we saw 17 patients with amyloidosis who presented with clinical signs of intestinal obstruction.
Of these, 11 patients initially came to the hospital complaining of abdominal distension, cramping, anorexia, vomiting, constipation or diarrhoea, and we found six in whom such clinical signs developed during the follow up of illness.
The abdominal plain films of these patients showed abnormal accumulation of gastrointestinal gas, dilated loops of the small and large bowel, with occasional air-fluid values.
Two patients had emergency laparotomy and no mechanical obstruction was found.
In the other 14 patients, barium studies of the small and large intestine did not show any mechanical obstruction.
The remaining patient showed a large mass in the jejunum, which was histopathologically diagnosed as an amyloid tumor.
Excluding this exceptional case, we examined 16 patients showing clinical signs of intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
IDENTIFICATION OF AMYLOID PROTEIN
One patient had primary amyloidosis, two had myeloma associated amyloidosis, one had haemodialysis associated amyloidosis, and 12 had secondary amyloidosis (rheumatoid arthritis in eight, ankylosing spondylitis in one, adult Still's disease in one, polymyosites in one, and Crohn's disease in one).
Using a long duodenofibrescope, endoscopic biopsy specimens of the jejunum showed amyloid deposits in 15 patients.
In the remaining patient, amyloid deposits of the jejunum were confirmed by intraoperative biopsy specimens.
Using these specimens, chemical types of amyloid protein were identified by the avidin-biotin complex (ABC) method using anti-AA and anti-Β 2 -microglobulin (1:500, Dako), and anti-prealbumin (1:500, Dako) antibodies.
For a comparative evaluation of amyload protein, potassium permanganate (KMnO 4 ) treatment was performed before staining with Congo red.
AA protein was identified by positive staining with anti-AA antibody and sensitivity to KMnO 4 reaction, while AL protein failed to stain with anti-AA, anti-Β 2 -microglobulin, and anti-prealbumin antibodies, and was resistant to KMnO 4 reaction.
AH protein was shown by positive staining with anti-Β 2 -microglobulin antibody and by negative staining with other antibodies.
NECROPSY EXAMINATION
Of the 16 patients, three died at the time of their first hospital admission and five died subsequently.
Postmortem examination was carried out in seven patients, and the gastrointestinal tract was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin.
From each of the oesophagus (lower third), stomach (fundus and antrum), duodenum (second portion), jejunum (within 50 cm form the Treitz ligament), ileum (within 50 cm from the ileocaecal valve), colon (mid-transverse), and rectum (lower part), three specimens, measuring 3 or 4 cm long and 0.5 cm wide and including all the layers of the wall, were obtained and embedded in paraffin wax.
Sections of 5 µm thickness were stained with haematoxylin and eosin, Congo red, and azan stain.
Immunohistochemical studies were performed by the ABC method using S-100 protein, anti-AA, and anti-Β -microglobulin antibodies.
The extent of amyloid deposits in the muscularis propria, myenteric plexuses, and blood vessels was graded from -to +++:-, absent; +, mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe.
The smooth muscle replacement and degeneration or reduction of the myenteric plexuses were also graded from — to +++.
Results
CHEMICAL TYPES OF AMYLOID PROTEIN
According to the results of immunohistochemistry and sensitivity to KMnO 4 reaction, there were 13 patients with AA amyloidosis, two with AL, and one with AH.
Good correlation was noted between clinical classification and the expected amyload type in 15 of 16 patients; the 12 patients with secondary amyloidosis had AA, two with multiple myeloma had AL, one with longterm haemodialysis had AH.
An exceptional case, who was clinically classified as primary amyloidosis because no predisposing disease could be recognised, showed deposits of AA protein as evidenced by a positive stain for anti-AA antibody, which was sensitive to KMnO 4 reaction.
CLINICAL FEATURES
All 16 patients suffered from similar symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, and pain.
The patients had either diarrhoea or constipation.
Malnutrition was evident in all patients whose laboratory data showed hypoalbuminaemia (mean (SD) was 2.6 (0.6) mg/dl, ranging from 1.0 to 3.5 mg/dl).
The duration of obstructive symptoms varied widely with a range from a few weeks to several years.
Thirteen had an acute or subacute self limiting condition, but the remaining three had several years history of recurrent obstructive symptoms.
Table I summarises the clinical features and chemical types of amyloid protein.
We found differences in the clinical signs between amyloid types.
The patients with AL and AH presented with chronic, intermittent, obstructive symptoms, which developed into a severe form that required admission to hospital.
The patients with AA had no chronic obstructive symptoms until they developed an acute condition with apparent intestinal obstruction.
In all patients, plain films of the abdomen showed abnormal gastrointestinal gas.
Considerable gaseous dilatation of the small and large bowel was consistently seen in the AL and the AH patients during their hospital stay (Fig 1), whereas the abnormal gas disappeared after treatment in 12 of 13 patients with AA (Fig 2).
All patients received total parenteral nutrition treatment.
The daily maintenance dose of calories was 2000 to 2400 kcal (40–60 kcal/kg body weight).
The average period of treatment was 10.3 (6.7) weeks, ranging from 2 to 28 weeks.
One patient with AA died shortly after the start of total parenteral nutrition because of renal failure and sepsis.
In 12 patients, all of whom were AA, total parenteral nutrition was effective in improving symptoms and signs, and thereafter, made it possible to maintain adequate oral intake again.
In these AA patients, there was no recurrence of paralytic ileus or severe obstructive symptoms during the follow up ranging from 1.9 to 10.6 years (average 5.1 years), although minor symptoms occasionally occurred.
In the remaining three patients (AL in two and AH in one), however, the obstructive symptoms were persistent and quite resistant to total parenteral nutrition treatment.
Medical treatments such as cholinergic agents, metoclopramide, and cisapride were also ineffective.
All of them eventually died of cardiac failure without the return to normal bowel function.
NECROPSY FINDINGS
In all seven necropsy cases, amyloid was found in every site of the gastrointestinal tract including the oesophagus, stomach, small, and large intestines.
Table II shows the degree of amyloid deposition and destruction of organic structures in the muscularis propria, myenteric plexuses, and blood vessels of the small intestine.
In comparing the AA, AL, and AH cases, we found an appreciable difference in the degree of amyloid deposits in the muscularis propria.
By contrast with negative or slight smoth muscle infiltration in the AA cases, the muscularis was quite extensively affected the AL (Fig 3) and the AH cases (Fig 4).
In cases with massive deposits, there were degenerative changes in muscle fibres, with muscle tissue being replaced by amyloid.
Amyloid was found in the myenteric plexuses in the AA cases (Fig 5).
The degree of amyloid deposition in the myenteric plexuses varied widely; some were free of amyloid in certain areas, while massive amyloid deposits were evident in others.
In plexuses with amyloid deposits, some residual ganglion cells showed degenerative changes.
In the AL and AH cases, we could not find any amyloid in the myenteric plexuses.
Many Auerbach's plexuses were compressed, however, by the surrounding abundant amyloid deposits, with a diminution in their number and the presence of degenerative ganglion cells.
In all cases, vascular deposits of amyloid were found most commonly in the submucosa.
Massive vascular deposits were found in the AA cases, while the degree was moderate in the AL and slight in the AH.
These histological findings were similar in all parts of the gastrointestinal tract.
The degree of amyloid deposition, however, was greatest in the small intestine.
Discussion
The main finding of this study is that if intestinal pseudo-obstruction develops in patients with amyloidosis, the clinical features are considerably different according to the chemical types of amyloid protein.
Acute or subacute self limiting intestinal pseudo-obstruction (so called paralytic ileus) occurred in patients with AA amyloidosis and bowel function was usually restored by conservative treatment.
Conversely, chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction, which is manifested clinically by recurrent attacks of obstructive conditions, occurred in the patients with AL and AH amyloidosis, with failure of intestinal propulsion to return.
Abnormalities of gastrointestinal motility may occur in all forms of amyloidosis and intestinal pseudo-obstruction has been reported in secondary or primary amyloidosis, including amyloidosis associated with multiple myeloma.
Although the mechanisms of impaired motility have not been fully defined, infiltration of intestinal smooth muscle and gastrointestinal neuropathy with amyloid involvement of the autonomic nerves have been reported.
It has not be concluded, however, which of the two factors dominantly affects the bowel motor function, and the relation between motility disorders and chemical types of amyloid has not been examined.
In this study, the most striking histological finding was the presence of extensive amyloid infiltration of the smooth muscle in the AL and the AH cases, but such amyloid deposits were not seen in the AA cases.
If the amyloid almost totally replaces smooth muscle, intestinal propulsive activity disappears.
Once massive amyloid dposits occur in the muscularis propria, this myopathy is thought to be an irreversible change because of the difficulty of elimination of this insoluble protein.
This may also explain the finding that the AL and the AH cases in this study did not respond to any treatment and had a poor prognosis when they presented with severe intestinal obstruction.
The possibility exists, however, that some treatments may be effective when the smooth muscle amyloid infiltration is not so extensive, as shown in a case of Fraser et al , which was responsive to cisapride.
Gilat et al studied 68 cases of systemic amyloidosis affecting the gastrointestinal tract, and showed that parenchymal deposition predominated in the muscularis propria in primary or myeloma associated amyloidosis, while in secondary amyloidosis it was mainly distributed in the lamina propria mucosa.
In reviewing reports on amyloidosis patients with intestinal pseudo-obstruction, the patients with multiple myeloma tend to have extensive smooth muscle infiltration.
These studies support our findings that clinically significant amyloid deposits in the muscularis propria are more likely in AL amyloidosis than in AA.
Recently, a new form of amyloid protein associated with longterm haemodialysis has been identified as Β 2 -microglobulin.
Gastrointestinal involvement by amyloid has been reported in dialysis patients, and there have been cases of intestinal infarction associated with massive amyloid deposits in the muscle layers of the bowel.
Although only a few cases have been studied, it seems probable that extensive infiltration and smooth muscle replacement by amyloid deposits occur in patients with AH amyloidosis, as shown in our case.
Myenteric plexuses often participate in familial amyloid polyneuropathy and in a few cases with AL and AA.
In this study, pathological examination of the necropsy specimens showed that amyloid deposits in the myenteric plexuses were seen only in the AA cases.
Interestingly, 12 of our 13 patients with AA showed a remarkable improvement in bowel function after receiving total parenteral nutrition treatment.
Although total parenteral nutrition does nothing to treat the primary disease directly, it helps the patient receive enough nutrition until bowel functions return to normal again.
Our clinical findings suggest that the neuronal disorder may be compensated to some degree because the intestines are richly innervated.
If the muscularis propria escapes extensive damage, we assume that the impaired bowel propulsion is allowed to recover to some extent.
On the other hand, vascular insufficiency might also have contributed to the impaired peristalsis, because appreciable vascular deposits were seen in our AA cases.
Further examinations are required, however, to know the exact correlation between them.
In this study, differences in the histological sites of amyloid deposits between the chemical types of amyloid affected the clinical signs of intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
Our findings suggest that this disease usually runs a more serious course in AL and AH than in AA.
Recent reports show that clinical and histological differences in the preferential sites of amyloid deposition between the chemical types of amyloid exist in the heart, kidney, and spleen.
In the heart, clinically significant cardiac amyloid with congestive heart failure is more likely in AL than in AA, because extensive amyloid interstitial infiltration in the myocardium is more often seen in AL than in AA.
In patients with amyloidosis, therefore, we believe that chemical typing of the amyloid protein is very important in predicting the clinical characteristics, course, and prognosis of the disease.
Ileal and colonic epithelial metabolism in quiescent ulcerative colitis: increased glutanime metabolism in distal colon but no defect in butyrate metabolism
Abstract
Previous studies have shown that butyrate is an important energy source for the distal colon, and that its metabolism may be defective in ulcerative colitis (UC).
A similar metabolic defect in the ileum might account for the occurrence of ‘pouchitis’ in UC patients after colectomy.
A method has been developed that allows the measurement of metabolism in ileocolonoscopic biopsy specimens, and this has been used to assess butyrate and glutamine metabolism in quiescent UC and controls.
Preliminary experiments showed optimal metabolism of butyrate at 1 mmol/l.
In controls glutamine metabolism was greater in the ascending (mean (SD))(4.9 (3.2) nmol/h/µg protein) than in the descending colon (1.4 (0.7))(p<0.05, Mann-Whitney U test), but butyrate metabolism was similar in the two regions (ascending 62.6 (44.2), descending 51.5 (32.0)).
Consequently ratios of butyrate/ glutamine metabolism were higher in the descending colon (20.6 (14.3)) than in the ascending colon (14.3 (9.6))(p<0.05).
In UC, rates of butyrate metabolism were similar in the ascending (92.5 (58.3) nmol/h-µg protein) and descending (93.3 (115)) colon, and these were not significantly different from controls.
In UC, glutamine metabolism was similar in the ascending (6.2 (7.7) nmol/h/µg protein) and descending colon (7.8 (7.9)); the metabolism in the descending colon was significantly greater than in controls (p<0.01).
Butyrate (135 (56) nmol/h/µg protein) and glutamine (24.1 (16.2)) metabolism in the ileum in UC, were not significantly different from control values (butyrate 111 (57), glutamine 15.5 (15.6)).
These results confirm that there is regional variation of nutrient utilisation throughout the colon, but they do not support the hypothesis that UC is caused by a deficiency of butyrate metabolism.
There is strong evidence that colitis can result from impaired mucosal metabolism.
It has been shown that the colonic epithelium obtains much of its energy supply from fatty acids, particularly butyrate, which are present in the colonic lumen as a result of fermentation of carbohydrates by bacteria.
Colitis occurs in the defunctioned colon after diversion of the faecal flow and subsides when the faecal flow is replaced.
The occurrence of colitis in animals that are vitamin deficient or that are treated with inhibitors of fatty acid metabolism support the theory that fatty acid metabolism is vital to the well being of the colonic epithelium.
Colitis, which is histologically similar to ulcerative colitis, has also been described in association with pellagra.
How the various forms of nutritional colitis relate to ulcerative colitis (UC) is uncertain, but studies have suggested that metabolism of the short chain fatty acid butyrate is impaired in UC.
In these studies, in common with many others, it has not been possible to discover if the change was a primary defect or merely a secondary effect of the disease process.
The frequency of ‘pouchitis’ in ulcerative colitis patients who have colectomy and pouch construction contrasts with the apparent rarity of pouchitis in patients who have the same operation for familial polyposis.
This implies a potential abnormality of the ileal mucosa in ulcerative colitis that is not evident when the ileum and colon are in normal continuity, with the possible exception of ‘backwash ileitis’.
In view of this it seems appropriate to study mucosal metabolism in ileal as well as colonic mucosa in UC patients and controls in the expectation that any abnormalities that could be detected in the histologically normal ileum of ulcerative colitis patients would be unlikely to be secondary phenomena.
A further problem with the interpretation of some previous studies of mucosal metabolism has been concern that the procedure used for isolating a pure epithelial cell population from resected bowel specimens may itself have introduced artefacts, and that these artefactual changes might well have been different in the inflamed colitic tissue from those in the histologically normal colon.
This paper describes a technique that allows metabolism of nutrients to be assessed in whole epithelial biopsy specimens, and this technique has been used to assess the metabolism of butyrate and glutamine by ileal and colonic biopsy specimens from patients with idiopathic ulcerative colitis and controls.
Methods
MUCOSAL BIOPSY SPECIMENS
All specimens were taken using Olympus FB 13U colonscopy forceps at routine colonoscopy, except in two patients in whol ileal specimens were obtained through an ileostomy with the same forceps.
Bowel preparation in all colonoscopy patients was similar, consisting of Picolax, two sachets on the day before colonoscopy and a clear fluids for 48 hours.
All patients gave written informed consent, and the studies were approved by the ethical committee of the Royal Liverpool University Hospital.
SUBJECTS
Colonic studies
Ascending and descending colonic biopsy specimens were taken from 12 patients with longstanding quiescent ulcerative colitis who were being examined as part of a programme to screen for dysplasia/malignancy, and from 12 patients who acted as controls, who did not have ulcerative colitis.
The final diagnosis of the control patients was sporadic colonic polyps (n=4), diverticular disease (3), haemorrhoids (2), unexplained anaemia (1), carcinoma (1), and irritable bowel syndrome (1).
All specimens in these control patients were taken from a site at least 5 cm from any macroscopic abnormality, and adjacent mucosal specimens, which were normal on histological examination were obtained in all.
The mean duration of colitis was 12 years (range 6–18).
The median age of UC patients was 43 (28–65), which was not significantly different from the control median 48 (18–68)(p=0.21, Mann-Whitney U test).
Sex ratios were similar, but none of the UC patients smoked whereas six controls were current smokers.
All the UC patients were taking regular 5-amino salicylic acid preparations, but none was taking any form of corticosteroid.
Ileal studies
Terminal ileal biopsy specimens were taken at ileocolonoscopy (four patients) for patients with longstanding quiescent ulcerative colitis and by the ileostomy of two patients who had a colectomy for UC (histological reports state that 2 and 4 cm of ileum had been resected with the colectomy).
Ileal specimens were taken from eight patients who did not have UC and who acted as controls.
One of the UC patients who had had an ileostomy had mild non-specific inflammatory changes histologically (but no symptoms), but the ileal mucosa was histologically normal in all other cases.
The mean duration of ulcerative colitis was 14 years, and these patients were having colonoscopy to exclude dysplasia/malignancy, except the patients with ileostomies who gave informed consent for ileoscopy specifically for this study.
The median ages were similar (UC patients 48, controls 51).
The final diagnosis in control patients was diverticular disease (n=3), colonic cancer (1), unexplained anaemia (1), and irritable bowel syndrome (3).
Three controls smoked, none of the UC patients did so, and all UC patients except the two with ileostomies were taking regulat 5-amino salicylic acid preparations.
MUCOSAL METABOLISM
The method that Veerkamp et al devised to study fatty acid metabolism in skeletal muscle was adpted to study intestinal mucosal metabolism.
After removal, mucosal biopsy specimens were placed in ice cold pregassed Krebs-Henseleit buffer containing 11 mM glucose, and transported within 10 minutes to the laboratory.
Each specimen was divided by scalpel into approximately 10 pieces per specimen (each piece approximately 1 mg), and then placed in a glass scintillation vial in 1 ml Krebs-Henseleit containing 11 mM glucose to which had been added either 1 µCi sodium [1- 1 4 C]butyrate and 1 mM sodium butyrate, or 1 µCi L [1 4 C(U)]glutamine and 1 mM glutamine.
An Eppendorf reaction tube was suspended above the culture medium, the vial was gassed with 95% O 2 /5% CO 2 and closed with a rubber seal (see Fig 1).
The vials were cultured for two hours at 37°C in a shaking water bath (Grant Instruments, Cambridge, UK) set at 120 oscillations per minute.
At the end of the culture period 0.25 ml 10% perchloric acid was injected into the culture medium to stop the reaction, and 0.5 ml of a solution of 66% ethane 1,2 diol/33% ethanolamine was injected into the Eppendorf tube to absorb 1 4 CO 2 .
The vials were kept at 4°C for 90 minutes to allow equilibration, after which the Eppendorf reaction tubes were removed and placed in 10 ml scintillant, which was a mixture of 4 g/l Omnifluor in 2:1 toluene/methanol.
After vigorous shaking, these were then counted in a Beckman scintillation counter.
All counts were corrected by subtraction of counts for 1 4 C liberated in control vials without specimens.
Total biopsy specimens protein content was estimated at the end of the incubation period using a Lowry method 1 2 after ultrasonication (4×15 second bursts with an MSE (MSE Instuments, Crawley, UK) ultrasonicator at maximum power setting).
Results were expressed as nmol substrate metabolised per hour, after correcting for specific radioactivity of the substrate and number of 1 4 C atoms per molecule.
For each patient, each assay was performed in duplicate at each site studied and the mean of the results calculated.
Comparisons of the metabolism between different sites in the same patient, and the same sites in UC patients and controls were analysed using a non-parametric (Mann-Whitney U) test.
VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS
Small pieces (about 3×2 cm) of resected colon were obtained within 30 minutes of removal from patients having colectomy for cancer or diverticular disease, and placed in ice cold Krebs-Henseleit buffer at pH 7.4 (Sigma Chemical Co, Poole, UK) containing 11.1 mM glucose, gentamicin 100 µg/ml and nystatin 60 µ/ml,; which was pregassed with 95% O 2 /5% CO 2 .
The tissue studied was taken at least 5 cm distant from any macroscopic disease.
The mucosal surface was then pinned out and biopsied with colonoscopy biopsy forceps.
The specimens were than analysed using the method described previously for mucosal metabolism.
A series of experiments was performed to detect the optimal concentration of butyrate in the culture system.
For these experiments specimens were cultured in the same concentration of radiolabelled sodium butyrate but with different concentrations of unlabelled sodium butyrate.
To assess the potential contribution of lamina propria lymphocytes to measured metabolism we obtained peripheral blood lymphocytes from the heparinised blood of a patient having colonoscopy for polyp surveillance with centrifugation in Lymphoprep (Flow Laboratories, Rickmansworth, UK).
Lymphocytes (12.8×10 6 ) were prepared from 10 ml heparinised blood.
Viability was measured using trypan blue exclusion and was found to be >95% both before and after two hours culture.
Five 200 µl aliquots representing 2.56×10 6 lymphocytes were each placed in Krebs-Henseleit with a colonoscopic biopsy specimen taken from the same patient and metabolism measured as below for mucosal biopsy specimens.
The results were compared with those obtained when culturing colonic specimens in the absence of the lymphocyte preparation.
Attempts were made to measure the relative contribution to the overall metabolism of mucosa, lamina propria, and muscularis layers.
By gently scraping the mucosa and lamina propria from a small piece of resected colon with a scalpel blade and biopsying the tissue below, it was possible to compare metabolism of mucosal biopsy specimens with that of submucosal specimens (histologically shown to contain connective tissue and muscularis).
A further series of experiments was performed to assess whether colonic bacteria could contribute to measured metabolism.
This was necessary in case there were different adherent bacteria on the mucosal surface in disease and controls, and for these experiments faecal fluid was aspirated at colonoscopy and added in 100 µl aliquots to a specimen in the culture system.
Control experiments were performed adding 100 µl Krebs-Henseleit.
In addition, experiments were conducted with, and without 100 µg/ml gentamicin and 60 µg/ml nystatin in the Krebs-Henseleit.
Results
VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS
The rates of metabolism of butyrate (Fig 2) and of glutamine were found to be roughly linear for at least three hours.
For butyrate oxidation the rate in the first hour was (mean (SD)) 110.8 (16.5) nmol/µg protein, over two hours 85.8 (11.1) nmol/h/µg protein, and over three hours 90.3 (8.8)(p<0.0001 for linearity test using grouped regression analysis (Arcus Pro-II).
For glutamine the rate of metabolism in the first hour was 5.1 (1.1) nmol/µg protein, 4.6 (2.2) nmol/h/ µg protein over two hours, and 4.3 (1.0) over three hours (p<0.0001 for linearity test).
Metabolism of butyrate was optimal at 1 mM (Fig 3) and for this reason we decided to use 1 mM butyrate for the remainder of the study.
Reproducibility was checked with six biopsy specimens from adjacent sites in a single patient and coefficient of variation was found to be 12% for butyrate metabolism expressed per µg protein per hour and 18% for glutamine metabolism.
The mean overall coefficient of variation assessed by comparison of paried biopsy specimens was 20% for butyrate metabolism and 23% for glutamine metabolism.
Submucosal specimens metabolised comparatively little butyrate (5.6 (3.2) nmol/µg protein/h)(mean (SD), n=5) and glutamine (0.2 (0.2), n=5) compared with mucosal specimens (butyrate 66.2 (13.2), n=5, p<0.01, glutamine 4.2 (0.6), n=5, p<0.01).
The addition of peripheral blood lymphocytes had no significant effect on butyrate metabolism (biopsy specimen with lymphocytes 49.2 (12.3) nmol/µg protein/h, without lymphocytes 52.2 (10.2))(mean (SD) of five experiments)(95% CI=-22.4 to 24.6), or glutamine metabolism (biopsy specimen with lymphocytes 5.5 (2.2), without lymphocytes 4.5 (1.6))(95% CI=-2.6 to 3.2).
The addition of 100 µl faecal fluid to a biopsy specimen in culture did not significantly affect metabolism of butyrate (biopsy specimen+ faecal fluid 49.7 (10.1) nmol/µg protein/h, biopsy specimen+Krebs-Henseleit 52.2 (5.8))(mean (SD), five experiments per group)(95% CI=-18.1 to 22.5) or glutamine (biopsy specimen+faecal fluid 5.7 (1.1), biopsy specimen +Krebs-Henseleit 6.8 (2.2))(95% CI=-3.8 to 2.2).
The addition of gentamicin and nystatin to the Krebs-Henseleit buffer had no significant effect on metabolism of butyrate by colonic biopsy specimens (with antibiotics 56 (10.3), without antibiotics 53.4 (7.9))(95% CI=-16.2 to 21.2).
Incubation with sodium [1- 1 4 C]butyrate in the absence of mucosal biopsy specimens led to an increase in scintillation in the Eppendorf vial of 512 (35)(mean (SD), n=6) disintegrations per minute (DPM) above background, which may have been because of the volatility of the butyrate.
This was small (<3%) in comparison with the radioactivity produced by substrate metabolism in the presence of mucosal biopsy specimens (range 24000–115000 DPM).
Incubation with 1 4 C glutamine in the absence of mucosal biopsy specimens gave results that were less than 5% of the values obtained when a biopsy specimen was present.
COLONIC MUCOSAL METABOLISM (TABLE I) CONTROLS
No significant difference was found in the rate of metabolism of butyrate by biopsy specimens taken from the ascending and descending colon (Fig 4).
Glutamine metabolism was significantly greater in the ascending than in descending colon (p<0.05, Mann-Whitney U test)(Fig 5).
Ratios of butyrate/glutamine metabolism were significantly lower (p<0.05) in the ascending than in the descending colon (Fig 6).
Ulcerative colitis
Butyrate metabolism was similar in ascending and descending colon, and these values were not significantly different from those found in controls (Fig 4).
In ulcerative colitis glutamine metabolism was significantly greater in the descending colon than in controls (p<0.01) and there was no significant difference between glutamine metabolism in the proximal and distal colon.
The mean ratio of butyrate/glutamine metabolism in the descending colon was greater in controls than in UC, but this did not quite reach significance (p=0.09).
Ratios for the ascending colon were similar.
ILEAL MUCOSAL METABOLISM (TABLE II)
In controls the rate of butyrate metabolism in the ileum was significantly higher than in the ascending colon (p<0.05), and although the mean rate of glutamine metabolism was also higher in the ileum this did not quite achieve statistical significance (p=0.06).
The ratios of butyrate/ glutamine metabolism were similar in the two regions.
In UC the mean rate of butyrate metabolism was greater in the ileum than in the ascending colon, although the difference between the rates was not significant (p=0.09); glutamine metabolism was significantly greater in the ileum than in the ascending colon in UC (p<0.05).
No significant difference was found between the rates of metabolism of butyrate or of glutamine by ileal biopsy specimens taken from UC patients compared with controls, and the ratios of butyrate/glutamine metabolism did not differ between UC patients and controls (Figs 7, 8, and 9).
Each data point in Figs 4 to 9 represent the mean of two experiments and the results from the ascending and descending colon in corresponding patients are joined by lines in Figs 4 to 6.
Discussion
In this study mucosal metabolism of butyrate and glutamine in the terminal ileum, ascending colon, and descending colon have been measured in controls and patients with ulcerative volitis.
In controls, we found similar rates of butyrate metabolism in the ascending and descending colon, but greater rates of glutamine metabolism in the proximal colon.
Thus, although the ratio of butyrate:glutamine metabolism was greater in the normal distal colon this resulted from reduced glutamine metabolism rather than increased butyrate metabolism.
Rates of butyrate metabolism in controls and ulcerative colitis patients were similar for all three regions studied, but glutamine metabolism was significantly greater in the descending colon in ulcerative colitis.
This resulted in a ratio of butyrate/ glutamine metabolism that was slightly (but not significantly, p=0.09) lower in ulcerative colitis compared with controls.
It has been established that glutamine is an important food for many rapidly dividing cells, and the increased rate of glutamine utilisation in UC probably relates to the increased rate of proliferation seen in this condition.
The higher rate of metabolism of glutamine in the ascending than in the descending colon in controls is in agreement with the findings of Roediger and indeed close examination of his work shows that the difference in the rates of butyrate metabolism is ascending and descending colon was in fact small compared with the difference between rates of glucose metabolism and oxygen consumption.
Fleming et al have reported no difference in butyrate metabolism between caecal and colonic cells isolated from rats.
It is interesting that butyrate metabolism in controls was greater in the terminal ileum than in the ascending colon and this may suggest that the mucosa here is exposed to the products of bacterial fermentation.
The similar metabolism of butyrate in controls and in patients with ulcerative colitis, is in contrast with previous studies, where butyrate oxidation was impaired in mucosal cells isolated from quiescent and active ulcerative colitis.
This discrepancy probably results from the different techniques used to measure metabolism.
We have used a technique, whereby mucusal metabolism can be measured in mucosal biopsy specimens, and therefore patients in remission can easily be studied.
In addition, our technique avoids potential damage to cells during the cell isolation procedure by EDTA and dithiothreitol.
It also seems probable that cells from inflamed epithelium (colitis) will be more prone to toxicity from cytokines than will cells from control tissue and this may have introduced artefactual abnormalities in dispersed colitic cells.
The fact that patients with active colitis were more affected than those with quiescent disease in Roediger's studies could reflect this.
A further anxiety over the use of dispersed cells for metabolic studies comes from the finding that the metabolism of fatty acids entering intestinal mucosa from the lumen and plasma is different.
Exposure to the surrounding solution of the parts of the cell membrane that are normally in apposition might well affect the metabolism within the cell.
Two studies have reported defective butyrate metabolism in epithelial biopsy specimens (as opposed to isolated enterocytes) from patients with ulcerative colitis but these have so far been published only in abstract form.
Chapman et al used a similar technique to the one described here, and found significantly lower rates of butyrate metabolism, and non-significant reductions in glutamine and glucose metabolism in UC.
Their results on butyrate metabolism therefore concur with the findings of the dispersed cell experiments and are not in agreement with our findings.
The lower rates of metabolism of glutamine and glucose, however, found in UC in that study are not in agreement with either our or Roediger's findings, so the implications of this report remain unclear.
One possible reason for the difference between Chapman's and our results is that their experiments were all performed in the presence of 5 mM glutamine (M Chapman, personal communication) where our experiments were carried out in the absence of glutamine.
The study by Williams et al reported no metabolism of either butyrate or glutamine by biopsy specimens taken from two UC patients, although there was no report on tissue viability.
Some of the reported difference in rates of metabolism could relate to the severity of the underlying colitis.
One further possible explanation for the discrepancy between some of our and Roediger's findings could be that the method of assessing metabolism were different.
For example where he used production of ammonia, we have relied on production of CO 2 as the measurement of glutamine metabolism.
It is possible that the route of metabolism of substrates, rather than the rate of their metabolism, is different in the diseased state.
There are some potential disadvantages of using biopsy specimens as opposed to epithelial cell preparations for metabolic studies.
It could be argued that different specimens could have different proportions of actively metabolising (mucosa) and inactive (lamina propria) tissue.
For this reason we used a constant size of biopsy forceps throughout the study and reproducibility of the assays was satisfactory.
Any error as a result of variation in the proportion of active and inactive tissue between patients (such as might result if one patient's mucosa was atrophic) should be alleviated by measuring glutamine metabolism in adjacent biopsy specimens and examining the ratio of butyrate/ glutamine metabolised.
The validation experiments suggested that lymphocytes probably contribute little to overall measured metabolism.
Binder found an excess of 1000 cells/mm 2 lamina propria in mildly active UC compared with controls, and assuming specific gravity=1 and that lamina propria accounts for about half the weight of a biopsy specimen, the excess number of cells in lamina propria of a 10 mg specimen=150000.
Selby et al isolated an excess of44×10 6 mononuclear cells/g UC mucosa, or 440000 per 10 mg biopsy, so both these estimates are considerably smaller than the number of lymphocytes studied with each biopsy (2.56×10 6 ).
One further effect worth considering is the bowel preparation before harvesting of the tissue.
Ardawi and Newsholme have shown that starving reduces the rate of metabolism of glutamine, but not that of ketone bodies by colonocytes.
By avoiding variations in vowel preparation (apart from the two patients with ileostomies) any such effect due to a change in diet should be equivalent in the UC and control patients.
It was notable that butyrate metabolism was greatest at a concentration of 1 mM with a fall off in metabolism at higher concentrations.
Concentrations of 10–15 mM are present in the colonic lumen, but separated cells and biopsy specimens might well react differently from an intact mucosal surface.
Morita et al have reported toxic effects of sodium butyrate above 2 mM in a colon cancer cell line and it may be that previous studies have used concentrations of butyrate that are higher than optimal.
Studies have suggested that both diversion colitis and ulcerative colitis respond to rectally given short chain fatty acids, and recently a controlled trial of butyrate enemas in ulcerative colitis showed significant improvement in clinical and pathological parameters over placebo.
Vernia and colleagues have shown reduced concentrations of butyrate in the faecal water of patients with ulcerative colitis, but not in Crohn's colitis.
A reduced short chain fatty acid concentration has also been reported in pouch contents from patients with pouchitis compared with those without.
The response of ulcerative colitis to butyrate administration suggests that the mucosa is able to utilise butyrate adequately, and makes it more plausible that the colitis results from a deficiency of, rather than an inability to metabolise, butyrate.
These studies show that mucosal metabolism can be assessed effectively using biopsy specimens without the need for epithelial cell purification.
The increased metabolism of glutamine by the distal colon in ulcerative colitis seems probably reflects a response to inflammation and consequent hyperplasia and is in keeping with evidence that repsiratory chin enzymes are increased in ulcerative colitis.
It seems unlikely from this work that ulcerative colitis is a result of a primary defect in butyrate metabolism.
Amoxicillin plus omeprazole versus triple therapy for eradication of Helicobacter pylori in duodenal ulcer disease: A prospective, randomized, and controlled study
Abstract
Treatment with amoxicillin and omeprazole resulted in encouraging Helicobacter pylori eradication rates in pilot studies that included medium term follow up.
These results were evaluated in a prospective, randomised and controlled study.
Forty patients with active duodenal ulcer disease and H pylori colonisation of the gastric mucosa were randomly assigned to receive either omeprazole (20 mg twice daily) and amoxicillin suspension (500 mg four times daily) for two weeks (group I) or bismuth subsalicylate (600 mg three times daily), metronidazole (400 mg three times daily), tetracycline (500 mg three times daily), and raniditine (300 mg in the evening) for two weeks (group II).
Study medication was followed in both groups by a four week treatment course with 300 mg ranitidine up to the final examination.
One patient from each group was lost to follow up.
H pylori was eradicated in 78.9% of group I and 84.2% of group II (p=1.00).
All ulcers in patients on omeprazole plus amoxicillin healed but in the triple treatment group four patients had residual peptic lesions after six weeks (ulcer healing rate: 78.9%, p=0.11).
Complete pain relief occurred after a median duration of 1 day in group I and of 6 days in group II (p=0.03).
There were no major complications in either group but minor side effects were more frequently recorded in patients on triple therapy (63.2% v 15.8%, p<0.01).
In conclusion, two weeks of treatment with omeprazole plus amoxicillin is as good as triple therapy plus ranitidine in eradicating H pylori but seems better with regard to safety, pain relief, and ulcer healing.
Thus, amoxicillin plus omeprazole should be recommended as the treatment of choice in eradicating H pylori in patients with duodenal ulcer disease.
The important role of Helicobacter pylori in idiopathic duodenal ulcer disease has been widely acknowledged since the clear demonstration that ulcer relapse or remission is strongly associated with H pylori colonisation or absence from the gastric mucose.
H pylori therapy is recommended in patients with relapsing duodenal ulcer disease, but a simple and safe treatment schedule is not yet available.
Demanding oral triple therapy eradicates H pylori in up to 96% of patients treated but does have considerable side effects.
Because of this there has been scientific and practical interest in the facks that amonoantibiotic regimen comprising omeprazole and amoxicillin has been highly successful in eradicating H pylori in some pilot studies and has shown good results with regard to H pylori reinfection and the clinical course of peptic ulcer disease in the first year after treatment.
These encouraging results in pilot studies required confirmation in prospective and randomised trials.
We conducted such a study in patients with active duodenal ulcer disease.
The control group was treated with an oral triple therapy regimen which had previously been evaluated in a pilot study.
Methods
Forty patients who qualified for admission to the study (Tables I and II) were randomly assigned to receive either omeprazole (20 mg twice daily)(Antra, Astra Chemicals, Wedel/Holstein, Germany) before meals and amoxicillin suspension (500 mg four times daily)(Amoxypen suspension, Grünenthal, Stolberg, Germany) before meals and at bedtime for two weeks (group I) or bismuth subsalicylate (600 mg three times daily)(Jatrox, Röhm Pharma, Weiterstadt, Germany) before meale, metronidazole (400 mg three times daily)(Clont 400, Bayer, Leverkusen, Germany) and tetracycline (500 mg three times daily)(Hostacylkin 500, Hoechst, Frankfurt, Germany) after meals, and ranitidine (300 mg at night) for two weeks (group II).
After stopping the study medication all patients in both groups, continued treatment with 300 mg ranitidine at bedtime for four weeks up to the final follow up examination.
Before starting treatment patients were talked to and were given an information sheet on the basic concepts of the pathophysiology of H pylori infection.
They were then asked to participate after a full explanation of the aims and methods of the study, and all gave informed consent.
During treatment, patients were asked to consult their study physician if they had side effects.
In addition, complaints and side effects were recorded in a diary.
Patient compliance was checked with a diary and by counting the number of returned tablets or by calculating the quantity of amoxicillin suspension used, respectively.
Before treatment and after six weeks, patients were investigated clinically, including a symptom score (grade 0: none, grade 1: mild, grade 2: moderate, grade 3: severe complaints due to peptic ulcer disease), and endoscopically.
Four biopsy specimens of the antrum and four of the gastric body were taken and were analysed by urease test, microscopy of a methyleblue stained mucosal smear, specific culture, and histology after modified Giemsa staining as described elsewhere.
Both the microbiologist and the pathologist were blinded to the treatment by coding the samples with random numbers.
In addition, all patients were assessed fo H pylori infection by the C-urea breath test at the final examination (Prof F E Bauer, University of Göttingen, Germany).
Eradication was defined as no evidence of H pylori infection (by urease test, microscopy, culture, histology, urea breath test) four weeks after stopping the study medication.
The demographic and clinical characteristics were compared statistically by the Wilcoxon rank sum test (age, ulcer history, pain score) or Fisher's exact test (gender, smoker, alcohol use) and the results of treatment by Fischer's exact test or the log-rank test (pain relief).
All statistical analyses were two tailed.
Differences were considered significant at a 5% probability level.
Results
Forty patients entered the study.
The two groups of patients assigned to receive either amoxicillin/omeprazole (group I) or triple therapy plus ranitidine (group II) had similar demographic and clinical characteristics (Table II).
One patient in each group was lost to follow up.
Compliance was good (>95% consumption of the delivered study medication) in all group I patients and in 18 of 19 patients in group II.
One group II patient refused his morning medication (bismuth subsalicylate, metronidazole, tetracycline) in the second week because of disturbing fatigue.
Before treatment,H pylori colonisation of the gastric mucosa had been detected by urease test and histology in all patients (microscopically, after methylenblue staining in 37 and after culture in 31 patients).
Epigastric pain was the main clinical symptom of duodenal ulcer disease: this was experienced by all patients before entering the study.
Complete pan relief occurred after a median time of 1 day (25% quantile: 0.0–75% quantile: 3.0) in the amoxicillin/omperazole group and of 6 days (25% quantile: 5.0–75% quantile: 10.0) in the triple therapy group (p=0.03).
After six weeks, complete ulcer healing was observed endoscopically in all group I patients and in 15 of 19 patients (78.9%) in group II (p=0.11).
We detected residual peptic lesions in the duodenal bulb of four group II patients at the final follow up examination.
These were associated with successful H pylori eradication in three cases and with treatment failure in one patient.
The overall proportion of H pylori eradication was 78.9% after combined amoxicillin/omeprazole treatment and 84.2% after triple therapy plus ranitidine (p=1.00).
Before treatment, histology showed that all patients had chronic active gastritis, predominantely in the antral region.
Successful H pylori eradication resulted in improvement of moderate or severe gastritis in 26 of 31 patients, complete healing of moderate gastritis in one patient, unchanged histology in four patients with mild respectively moderate lymphocytic infiltration, and total disappearance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in all but one patient (Figure A, B, D, and E).
Treatment failure was accompanied by a slight improvement in gastritis in one patient, by similar histology before and after treatment in four cases, and by worsening gastric mucosal inflammation in two patients (Figure C).
In these patients, gastritis was improved in three, unchanged in three, and worse in one (Figure F).
There were no major side effects that interrupted treatment in either group.
Three patients from the amoxicillin/omeprazole group complained of side effects (15.8%; mouth burning: n=2, pruritus: n=1), whereas undesired effects were reported in 12 of 19 patients in the triple therapy group (63.2%; diarrhea: n=4, sleep disturbances: n=2, dizziness: n=2, paresthesias of the legs: n=2, anal pruritus: n=2, mouth burning: n=1, nausea: n=1, fatigue: n=1).
All side effects disappeared spontaneously after stopping the study medication.
The proportions of minor side effects experienced were significantly different in the two treatment groups (p<0.01).
Discussion
Several studies have shown that the eradication of H pylori is associated with a considerable reduction in the rate of recurrence of duodenal and gastric ulcers, but how and why this occurs is still a matter of debate.
Because bismuth and antibiotic monotherapy fail to eradicate H pylori in an appreciable proportion of patients, triple therapy (for example bismuth, metronidazole, and tetracycline or amoxicillin) has been tried and is now the treatment of choice.
Patients treated with triple therapy, however, complain of considerable side effects which endangers compliance in routine clinical practice.
In several pilot studies, we obtained H pylori eradication with a low complication rate in approximately 60–80% of patients treated with an omeprazole modified monoantibiotic therapy with amoxicillin.
Bacterial eradication resulted in a dramatic change in the natural history of duodenal and gastric ulcer disease in the first year after treatment.
These encouraging results were confirmed by Bayerdörffer et al , but other authors reported a lack of efficacy of the combined amoxicillin/omeprazole treatment, probably because of different dosage regimens, the kind of amoxicillin preparation used, or omeprazole pretreatment.
There is still no satisfactory explanation for the much greaterefficacy of a combined omeprazole/amoxicillin treatment regimen.
Omeprazole alone acts bacteriostatically on H pylori in vitro, with MIC values in the ragne of bismuth salts, but there are no data on its in vivo mechanism of action.
Omeprazole monotherapy merely suppressed bacterial colonisation, especially in the antral region, and eradicated H pylori in individual cases only.
It seems more likely that the decisive factor is the improvement in the antibacterial activity of amoxicillin after profound inhibition of acid secretion, because the MIC values of amoxicillin against H pylori are appreciably lower at neutral pH, for example, than at a pH of 5.5.
In addition, therapeutically induced anacidity may result in bacterial overgrowth of the stomach, with consecutive displacement of H pylori .
The latter hypothesis is supported by the observation that H pylori colonisation is rarely found in patients with anacidity caused by type A gastritis.
The promising possibility of omeprazole enhanced antibiotic treatment for H pylori associated diseases cannot be assumed unconditionally for antimicrobial compounds other than amoxicillin.
In small scale pilot studies omeprazole plus ciprofloxacin or cefixime failed to eradicate H pylori in the vast majority of patients.
In a recently published pilot study, however, a H pylori eradication rate of 80% was achieved after two weeks' treatment with omeprazole (40 mg) and the new macrolide antibiotic clarithromycin (500 mg three times daily).
In this study, the new treatment strategy of ‘anacidity enhanced antibiotic treatment’ was compared for the first time with a previously evaluated triple therapy regimen (H pylori eradication rate: 92%.
The results suggest that these treatment regimens are equally effective in producing H pylori eradication, but amoxicillin/ omeprazole is better with regard to side effects, pain relief, and probably ulcer healing.
There was indeed a trend towards higher eradication rates in the triple therapy group (84.2 v 78.9%), but this lacked statistical significance because of the rather small sample size.
A study with the power to chow clearly that a 5% yield difference was truely present or absent would have required a prohibitely high number of 2336 study subjects (power 80%).
Giving the drugs four times daily in the triple therapy group might have further improved the treatment results.
In our experience, however, the three times daily dosing gives eradication rates of approximately 90%, well in accordance with published figures on four times daily dosing.
The potential advantage of more frequent dosing would have been at most a rather small one therefore and would not have changed the main conclusions of this study.
In Germany, the two treatment schedules evaluated in this study are equally expensive.
It therefore seems justified to recommend amoxicillin/omeprazole as the treatment of choice to eradicate H pylori in H pylori related gastroduodenal diseases.
Triple therapy might be reserved for patients with treatment failure or with suspected penicillin hypersensitivity.
Further studies are required to establish the optimal dosages of omeprazole and amoxicillin (or other antibiotics), the frequency and the galenic formula (amoxicillin suspension or tablet?) of the constituents, as well as the relation to meals (pre- or postprandially) and the required minimal duration of treatment.
Pokymerase chain reaction detection of mycobacterium paratuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium subsp silvaticum in long term cultures from Crohn's disease and control tissues
Abstract
Thirty one cultures were established in MG3 medium from the intestinal tissues of 29 patients, including 18 with Crohn's disease, five with ulcerative colitis, and six non-inflammatory bowel disease controls.
All cultures grew either acid fast bacilli or uncharacterised spheroplasts.
Pellets from these cultures were coded and assayed blind for M paratuberculosis and M avium subsp silvaticum using IS900- and IS902-PCR (polymerase chain reaction) assays, respectively.
IS900 and IS902 are multicopy DNA insertion elements specific for these two organisms.
Six Crohn's disease cultures and a single non-inflammatory bowel disease control were positive for M paratuberculosis .
A further six cultures were positive for M avium subsp silvaticum , of which two each were from Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and non-inflammatory bowel disease controls.
The intensity of the IS900-PCR signals indicated very low numbers of M paratuberculosis organisms and bore no relation to visible spheroplastic or bacillary mycobacterial growth.
The results suggest that M paratuberculosis isolated from man exists in a form which hardly replicates if at all when cultured in MG3 medium in vitro, and are consistent with the involvement of this known animal enteric pathogen in a proportion of chronic enteritis in man.
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis is the causative agent of Johne's disease, a chronic enteritis in ruminants and in other animals.
There has been interest in the potential role of M paratuberculosis in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease since Dalziel first drew attention to the similarities between Johne's disease in cattle and granulomatous enteritis in man (Crohn's disease).
In recent years, analysis of long term cultures of Crohn's disease and other human intestinal derived tissues by several laboratories have yielded a variety of bacillary and spheroplastic forms of mycobacteria.
The mycobacterial species detected were generally those species found in apparently healthy individuals.
M paratuberculosis has been cultured from Crohn's disease tissues but only after prolonged incubation and only in a very small minority of cases.
M paratuberculosis grows only very slowly cultured in vitro and some animal isolates have been especially difficult to culture, particularly those strains isolated from sheep.
IS900 is a multicopy DNA insertion element, unique to the genome of M paratuberculosis .
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification, capable of both highly specific and sensitive detection of M paratuberculosis has been developed, based upon the DNA sequence of IS900.
IS900-PCR is capable of distinguishing M paratuberculosis from even the very closely related Mycobacterium avium sibsp silvaticum .
M avium subsp silvaticum is also known to cause chronic enteritis in animals and contains IS902, a DNA insertion element unique to this mycobacterial species.
IS902 shares homology with IS900.
In this paper we report the use of IS900-and IS902-based polymerase chain reaction for the specific detecton of M paratuberculosis and M avium subsp silvaticum in long term cultures from Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and non-inflammatory bowel disease tissues.
Methods
MYCOBACTERIAL CULTURES
Long term in vitro cultures were established in MG3 broth from resection and endoscopic biopsy samples of intestinal tissue as described previously.
Tissue samples from 18 patients with Crohn's disease, five with ulcerative colitis, and six non-inflammatory bowel disease controls were cultured at 37°C for between two and six years and yielded acid fast bacilli or spheroplasts (Table).
Also included in this study were known cultures of M avium serovar 2,M paratuberculosis strain (Linda),M fortuitum ATCC 6841,Mycobacterium kansasii ATCC 12478 and MG3 medium only.
Cultures were pelleted by centrifugation at 17000 g for 15 minutes, coded in Houston then sent to London to be assayed.
Coded samples were assayed blind.
DNA EXTRACTION AND POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION ASSAY
The coded long term culture pellets were resuspended in 100 µl of TE (10 mM Tris; 0.1 mM EDTA pH 8.8) then boiled for 20 minutes in 1.5 ml screw capped tubes to release microbial DNA.
Tubes were centrifuged at 17000 g for five minutes and the supernatants were recovered.
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION PRIMERS AND CONDITIONS
Oligonucleotide primers P90 (5'-GTTCGGGGCCGTCGCTTAGG-3') and P91 (5'-GAGGTCGATCGCCCACGTGA-3') were selected to amplify a unique 400 base-pair (bp) fragment of the 5' region of IS900 (nucleotides 22–421).
From the 5' region of IS902, primers P102 (5'-CTGATTGAGATCTGACGC-3') and P103 (5'-TTAGCAATCCGGCCGCCCT-3') were selected to amplify a 252 bp fragment (nucleotides 132–383), unique to IS902.
All primer sequences were selected on the basis of minimal 3' base mis-match, freedom from involvement in predicted secondary structure in IS900 and IS902, and specificity in relation to the known DNA sequences of other related IS elements.
The specificity of IS900 polymerase chain reaction for M paratuberculosis has already been shown.
To demonstrate the specificity of the IS902 polymerase chain reaction used for M avium subsp silvaticum , genomic DNA from 25 bacterial species including 21 mycobacteria (see legend for Figure 1) was subjected to IS902 polymerase chain reaction in accordance with the protocol described below.
For polymerase chain reaction assays, 5 µl supernatant sample was added to 45 µl reaction premix consisting of 67 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 16.6 mM NH 4 SO 4 , 3.35 mM MgCl 2 (6 mM for IS902-PCR), 1.7 mg/ml BSA, 0.2 mM of each of datp, dGTP, dCTP, dTTP, 300 ng each of primers P90 and P91 (P102 and P103 for IS902-PCR), 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM Tris; 0.1 mM EDTA and 2 units of Taq DNA polymerase (Amplitaq T M Cetus).
The reaction mixtures were overlaid with 50 µl paraffin oil, then submitted to 33 cycles of IS900-PCR amplification or 40 cycles of IS902-PCR amplification.
Amplification conditions comprised of denaturation at 94°C for one minute, annealing at 58°C for one minute and primer extension at 72°C for three minutes.
For each DNA extract, polymerase chain reaction assays were performed in triplicate.
A negative polymerase chain reaction control (buffer only) and an appropriate positive polymerase chain reaction control (10 fg M paratuberculosis DNA or M avium subsp silvaticum DNA, for IS900- and IS902-PCR, respectively) was run in parallel with each series of polymerase chain reaction triplicates.
GEL ELECTROPHORESIS AND SOUTHERN BLOT HYBRIDATION
Ten microlitre aliquots of the polymerase chain reaction mixtures were loaded onto 2% agarose gels for electrophoresis according to standard protocols, then Southern blotted onto nylon membranes (Hybond-N + , Amersham, Bucks) in 0.4 M NaOH; 0.6 M NaCl.
Membranes were hybridised at 65°C overnight with the 400 bp amplification product (pcr400) of IS900-PCR or the 252 bp amplification product (pcr252) of IS902-PCR, as appropriate.
Radiolabelled pcr400 and pcr252 products were prepared according to the protocol of Feinberg and Vogelstein.
After hybridisation, membranes were washed at 65°C in 0.1×SSC; 0.1% SDS, as described previously.
Membranes were autoradiographed with intensifying screens at -70°C overnight.
Results
Recognisable acid fast bacilli were identified microscopically in 10 of the 31 long term cultures, originating from 29 patients' tissues.
All 10 cultures were from mucosal biopsies; three cultures were from Crohn's disease tissues, four were from ulcerative colitis tissues, and three non-inflammatory bowel disease tissues.
The remaining 21 cultures produced microscopically visible but uncharacterised spheroplasts.
The specificity of primers P102 and P103 for IS902 was demonstrated (Fig 1).
DNA samples from the known isolates of M avium subsp silvaticum (lanes 7, 12, 23) were each IS902-PCR positive, showing the expected 252 bp amplification product.
M paratuberculosis , containing the closely related IS900, all other M avium species and all other mycobacterial and enteric bacterial species tested were IS902-PCR negative.
Streptomyces ceolicolor A3(2), which contains the related DNA insertion element IS110 was similarly IS902-PCR negative.
Results of the IS900- and IS902-PCR on the long term cultures are shown in the Table.
M paratuberculosis positivity is established when IS900-PCR results in the amplification of a 400 bp product.
Similarly,M avium subsp silvaticum specifically produces a 252 bp amplification product when submitted to IS902-PCR.
Cultures were considered positive when the correct polymerase chain reaction amplification product was obtained in one, two, or all three lanes of the polymerase chain reaction triplicates, after high stringency washing of the Southern blots.
Autoradiographs illustrating the results of IS900- and IS902-PCR on the long term cultures are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Seven of the 31 cultures were positive for M paratuberculosis .
Six of these positive cultures were from Crohn's disease patients, five of them originating from surgically resected tissue.
A colonic mucosal biopsy obtained at endoscopic follow up from a non-inflammatory bowel disease patient with a colonic polyp was also positive for M paratuberculosis .
Each of the six positive Crohn's disease cultures also grew spheroplasts.
The positive non-inflammatory bowel disease culture also grew acid fast bacilli which were not M paratuberculosis .
A further six cultures were positive for M avium subsp silvaticum , two each from the Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and non-inflammatory bowel disease groups.
The positive Crohn's disease cultures were both from resected tissue and also grew spheroplasts.
Both ulcerative colitis cultures were of biopsy material and also grew acid fast bacilli.
The two non-inflammatory bowel disease cultures were from mucosal biopsies, one grew spheroplasts and the other acid fast bacilli.
Throughout the study the results of IS900 and IS902 polymerase chain reaction bore no relation to spheroplasts or bacillary form acid fast bacilli visible in the cultures.
The cryptic M paratuberculosis positive control culture (sample 36) was very strongly IS900-PCR positive and was also IS902-PCR negative.
No false-positives or false-negatives were obtained with the MG3 medium only control or with the remaining three mycobacterial control cultures, with either polymerase chain reaction assay.
None of the 62 buffer only polymerase chain reaction negative controls, run with each set of polymerase chain reaction triplicates, produced false-positives.
All polymerase chain reaction positive controls (10 fg of purified genomic DNA, theoretically equivalent to two bacilli) were positive.
Discussion
In recent years there have been a number of studies reporting the isolation of mycobacteria from patients with Crohn's disease, but it has been reports of the isolation of M paratuberculosis , which have generated the greatest interest.
This pathogenic organism is the causative agent of Johne's disease, a chronic ileitis/colitis of cattle and other animals, which shares many similarities with Crohn's disease.
In the earlier studies, characterisation and identification of the mycobacterial isolates relied upon cultural and biochemical techniques.
Polymerase chain reaction, however, is a powerful technique capable of amplifying specific target DNA sequences by a factor of 10.
Moreover, the sensitivity of polymerase chain reaction is increased when DNA sequences existing as multi copies within a genome, are targeted.
Polymerase chain reaction amplification assays have been developed for the detection of a number of mycobacterial species and have proven successful in the detection of mycobacteria from a variety of clinical specimens.
We have developed polymerase chain reaction assays for the detection of M paratuberculosis and M avium subsp silvaticum , based on their respective multi copy, species specific insertion elements, IS900 and IS902.
The high specificity of IS based polymerase chain reaction tests, for the detection of M paratuberculosis and M avium subsp silvaticum permits these known chronic enteric pathogens to be identified amongst a wide variety of other environmental mycobacteria which are normal inhabitants of the alimentary tract.
Growth of these normal mycobacteria in cultures from Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and non-inflammatory bowel disease is to be expected.
In this present study undertaken blind, IS900-PCR detected M paratuberculosis in one third (six of 18) of long term broth cultures of intestinal tissue from Crohn's disease patients and in a single (one of six) non-inflammatory bowel disease control culture but in none of the ulcerative colitis cultures (nil of seven).
For the six M paratuberculosis positive Crohn's disease cultures, positive amplification signals were observed in one of three or two of three lanes of the polymerase chain reaction triplicates.
Moreover, the strength of the positive signals broadly equated to that obtained with the IS900-PCR positive control (equivalent to two M paratuberculosis genomes) and suggests that the assay was operating at or near the limit of its sensitivity.
Thus the intensity and number of polymerase chain reaction positive signals indicates the presence of only 30–200 M paratuberculosis genomes in the original MG3 broth cultures.
These results, were bore no relation to visible bacillary form mycobacteria or spheroplasts, suggest that M paratuberculosis was present in the original intestinal tissues of the Crohn's disease patients, in a form which hardly replicated in broth culture, it at all.
Difficulties in culturing M paratuberculosis from clinically affected sheep have previously been reported, therefore difficulties in the isolation and culture of M paratuberculosis from human intestinal tissue is perhaps to be expected, in the face of very low microbial abundance.
Our IS900-PCR results are broadly consistent with the results of a recent study in which IS900-PCR was used to detect M paratuberculosis directly in DNA extracts from full thickness samples of human gut wall obtained from 103 people living in southern England.
M paratuberculosis was detected in 65% of Crohn's disease tissues, 4% of ulcerative colitis tissues, and 12% of non-inflammatory bowel disease control tissues, but in a tissue abundance 10 5 to 10 7 fold lower than commonly seen in Johne's disease tissue in animals.
The presence of M paratuberculosis in a small proportion of apparently normal colons suggested a previously unexpected alimentary prevalence of this animal pathogen in the human population.
The single M paratuberculosis positive non-inflammatory bowel disease colonic mucosal culture in the present study is consistent with a similar situation in the United States, although the number of these long term cultures available for study was, of course, small.
The IS902-PCR positive cultures showed a different distribution profile to the IS900-PCR positives, being more equally spread among the Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and non-inflammatory bowel disease control cultures.
If the higher rate of detection of M paratuberculosis found in the Crohn's disease cultures were simply a consequence of the disease process itself, then it might reasonably be expected that the closely related M avium subsp silvaticum would be similarly distributed.
The IS902-PCR results may suggest that M avium subsp silvaticum is less likely to be involved in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease but may add to the significance of the IS900-PCR results.
M paratuberculosis is a slow growing intestinal pathogen, known to be able to cause chronic enteritis in a wide variety of animal species including cattle, goats, sheep, deer, horses and pigs, rabbits, and primates.
Further work is necessary to clarify the role of this environmental organism in chronic enteritis in man.
Crohn's disease with pulmonary involvement in a
Abstract
Extraintstinal or metastatic Crohn's disease is being recognised increasingly, most commonly in the skin and genitourinary system.
Only very rarely has it been reported in the lung.
A 3 year old boy who presented with swollen gums and a persistent abnormality on his chest x ray is reported.
Lung biopsy specimens showed multiple non-caseating epithelioid granulomas.
Subsequent investigation showed the presence of intestinal Crohn's disease.
The evidence for abnormal lung function in Crohn's disease and the possible pathogenesis of metastatic pulmonary Crohn's disease are discussed.
Latent pulmonary abnormalities, disclosed by pulmonary function tests and bronchoalveolar lavage, have been found in patients with Crohn's disease.
However, the finding of non-caseating granulomas in these patients is very rare.
We report a further case of extra-intestinal Crohn's disease affecting the lung, which occurred in a child who had radiological abnormalities on chest x ray at presentation.
Case history
A 3 year old boy presented to his dentist with swollen red gums which bled on brushing.
His only other symptom was perianal soreness and occasional bleeding.
His father was Indian and his mother white European.
He had two elder siblings who were both well.
There was no family history of tuberculosis or inflammatory bowel disease.
He had never been abroad.
INVESTIGATIONS
Chest x ray showed densities in the right middle and the lower lobes of the lung (Fig 1).
There was no hilar lymphadenopathy.
A small bowel enema examination was normal.
Other investigations showed mild anaemia (haemoglobin concentration 10.8 g/dl) with a raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (38 mm in the first hour).
Serum immunoglobulin values were raised — IgG 21.8 g/l (normal 3.70–15.80 g/l) and IgA 2.07 g/l (normal 0.3–1.3 g/l).
The serum angiotensin converting enzyme activity was not raised.
Repeated microbiological examination of sputum, blood, and urine proved negative.
Mantoux testing 1/1000 was negative.
Bronchoscopy failed to show an endobronchial lesion.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy were macroscopically normal and mucosal biopsy specimens were obtained.
The anal skin tag and gums were biopsied and a thoracotomy and lung biopsies were performed.
Lung tissue from the right middle and lower lobes was stained for acid and alcohol-fast bacilli but none were seen, and subsequent culture for Mycobacteria was negative.
A Kveim test was negative.
PATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS
Granulomatous inflammation was present in the buccal mucosa, right middle and lower lobes of the lung (Fig 2), and the anal skin tag.
The granulomas had a similar structure at all these sites, and were non-caseating and epethelioid.
Many were surrounded by a thin mantle of small lymphocytes.
Multinucleated giant cells of the langhan's type were present in the granulomas.
In the lungs, the granulomas were both peribronchial and perivascular in distribution.
In all of these biopsy specimens special stains for organisms (fungi, acid and alcohol-fast bacilli, etc) were negative.
Specimens taken at various levels in the colon showed a microscopic colitis that was maximal in the transverse colon.
This was characterised by moderate active chronic inflammation in the lamina propria.
There were incipient but not established crypt abscesses.
The architecture of the gland crypts was well preserved and there was mild goblet cell mucous depletion.
No granulomas were present.
Discussion
Our patient had Crohn's disease: the macroscopic and histological features of the oral and perianal lesions are typical.
He also had a microscopic colitis consistent with Crohn's disease, although no granulomas were seen.
Extraintestinal involvement in Crohn's disease has been reported increasingly and has been described in the skin, vulva, bone, and lung.
In all these organs extra-intestinal Crohn's disease is characterised by non-necrotising epithelioid granulomas.
It therefore seems that Crohn's disease should be regarded as a multisystem disorder that affects maximally the gastrointestinal tract.
Pulmonary involvment has been recognised before, after, and concurrently (as in our case) with the onset of bowel disease.
The course and severity of the pulmonary involvement does not seem to be related to the activity of the intestinal disease.
Pulmonary involvement in Crohn's disease is rare, although some studies suggest that patients with Crohn's disease may have abnormal lung function in the absence of symptoms.
Both Bonniere et al and Heatley et al have shown impaired carbon monoxide transfer factors in 25 to 40% of adult patients with Crohn's disease.
Heatley et al also found radiographic abnormalities in some of these patients that were indistinguishable from those seen in pulmonary fibrosis.
The latter is a heterogenous group of disorders that represent the end stage of a variety of disease processes, some of which can be associated with non-caseating granulomas in the lung.
Bronchoalveolar lavage has yielded alveolar lymphocytosis in up to 54% of patients with Crohn's disease and this seems to be a persistant abnormality.
Alveolar lymphocytosis is a well recognised feature of other pulmonary granulomatous processes such as sarcoidosis.
Furthermore, in both Crohn's disease and sarcoidosis the lymphocytosis seems to arise from an expansion of the T4 subset.
Sarcoidosis with intestinal involvement is the main differential diagnosis in our patient.
Sarcoidosis is very rare in children and intestinal sarcoidosis is extremely rare being reported only when there is active disseminated disease.
We have found no recorded case where intestinal sarcoidosis has been manifest as an anal skin tag associated with a microscopic colitis.
The serum angiotensin converting enzyme activity was not raised in our patient, and several groups have reported high values in sarcoidosis but low values in Crohn's disease.
The Kveim test was negative.
There are similarities between sarcoidosis and Crohn's disease; both are conditions of unknown aetiology characterised by non-caseating epithelioid granulomas and a tendency for fibrosis.
There are also similarities in the complications seen in the two diseases such as erythema nodosum, uveitis, and arthritis.
It therefore seems likely that the two conditions are not as distinct from each other as was once thought.
There are families in whom the two conditions coexist raising the possibility that they share a similar genetic predisposition and possibly a common transmissable agent such as a mycobacterium.
There are similarities between the local immune system in the gut and the lung.
Both of these organs have mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), which, in the lung, is referred to as bronchial associated lymphoid tissue (BALT).
In animal studies of MALT, B cells activated by antigenic challenge migrate via the efferent lymphatic vessels.
These cells then ‘home’ back to the mucosa from which they originated.
There is also some evidence for a homing population of mucosa associated T cells, and consequent interaction between humoral and cell mediated immunity with secretion of cytokines.
This suggests that there could be a common antigenic stimulus resulting in the pulmonary and intestinal manifestations of both Crohn's disease and sarcoidosis.
The site of the original interaction between antigen and the immune system presumably determines the distribution of the granulomatous inflammation seen.
Long term results of endoscopic dilatation for corrosive oesophageal strictures
Abstract
Although dilatation is the treatment of choice for most patients with benign oesophageal stricutres, there is little information on its efficacy and safety in corrosive oesophageal strictures.
Of 123 adults with benign oesophageal strictures treated by endoscopic dilatation, 52 (42.3%) had strictures after corrosive ingestion and 39 (31.7%) had peptic strictures.
Treatment was considered adequate if the oesophageal lumen could be dilated to 15 mm and there was complete relief of dysphagia.
If dysphagia recurred after adequate initial dilatation, the stricture was dilated again up to 15 mm.
Initial dilatation was adequate in 93.6% of patients with corrosive strictures and this success rate was comparable with that of the peptic stricture group (100%, p>0.05).
Long term success after adequate initial dilatation was studied in 36 patients with corrosive strictures (mean follow up 32.36 (17.12) months, range 6–60) and 33 patients with peptic strictures (mean follow up 36.32 (17.9) months, range 6–60).
the mean (SD) number of symptomatic recurrences per patient month during the total follow up period in the corrosive group was significantly higher than that in the peptic group (0.27 (0.04)v 0.07 (0.02), p<0.001).
The recurrence rate in the corrosive group, however, decreased over time, and after 12 months it was significantly (p<0.001) lower than the recurrence rate in the first six months.
After 36 months, the difference in the recurrence rate in the two groups was not significant (p>0.005).
Only nine oesophageal perforations occurred during a total of 1373 dilatation treatments (procedure related incidence 0.58%), and eight of these were in the corrosive stricture group.
These patients were managed conservatively and subsequently strictures were dilated adequately in all.
Endoscopic dilatation is safe and effective for short and long term relief of dysphagia in patients with corrosive oesophageal strictures.
Conservative management of benign oesophageal strictures using various dilatory devices is considered safe and effective for both short and long term relief of dysphagia.
Dilatation, rather than surgery, has therefore been suggested as the primary treatment for most of these patients.
The reported experience is mostly in patients with peptic strictures and there is little information on the efficacy and safety of this treatment in patients with corrosive oesophageal strictures.
Corrosive ingestion, especially of acids, is a very common causeof oesophageal injury and strictures in India; and was reported to be the commonest aetiology in one study.
In several large series from other countries, however, corrosive ingestion was responsible for only 1–4% of benign oesophageal strictures.
Corrosive strictures are frequently very tight, long, eccentric and multiple.
There is an undocumented belief that these patients have a very high stricture recurrence rate because of extensive oesophageal damage and fibrosis.
For these reasons, patients with corrosive strictures often undergo surgery, which carries significant morbidity and mortality.
We have reported that endoscopic dilatation is an effective and safe short term treatment for corrosive oesophageal strictures.
The natural hstory of these patients after adequate initial dilatation is not known, however; there is no information on the long term success of dilatation.
In this study, we report the long term results of dilatation in these patients.
Besides efficacy, we also wanted to determine the safety of this treatment.
Methods
PATIENTS
One hundred and twenty three adults were treated for benign oesophageal strictures over the six years, 1986–92.
All patients presented with dysphagia of varying grades.
The site, length of stricture(s), and the degree of narrowing of oesophageal lumen were assessed by radiologic and endoscopic examinations.
Where a malignant cause for the stricture was suspected, this was excluded by endoscopic biopsies and cytological examination.
DILATATION
The dilatation was done in most patients as an outpatient procedure.
Savery-Gilliard bougies or Eder-Puestow metal olives of increasing size were passed over a guide wire which had been positioned with the help of a fibreoptic endoscope.
Based on our clinical experience, we arbitrarily chose to dilate these patients at weekly intervals and one to six bougies were usually passed on each occasion, depending upon the patient's tolerance and the tightness of strictures.
In high risk patients, dilatation was initially done under fluoroscopic control, subsequently in most patients the procedure was done without the fluoroscopy.
Dilatation was considered adequate when the oesophageal lumen could be dilated up to 15 mm.
Any subsequent dilatations depended upon the recurrence of dysphagia.
Patients who had strictures caused by reflux oesophagitis were advised to use H 2 receptor antagonists or the proton pump inhibitor, omeprazole, together with other antrieflux measures such as raising the head of the bed, early dinner, and weight reduction.
Where a complication such as perforation was suspected, urgent chest x ray and oesophagogram using a water soluble contrast medium were done.
The patient was fasted until the possibility of perforation was ruled out.
If the diagnosis of perforation was confirmed, the patient was given intravenous fluids and antibiotics and was advised to take nothing by mouth.
An immediate surgical consultation was sought and the patient was managed jointly with the surgical team.
RESPONSE
The outcome of treatment was judged on the basis of improvement in dysphagia, which was graded as follows:
Grade0-taking a normal diet;
Grade1-unable to swallow certain solids;
Grade2-can swallow only semisolid soft diet;
Grade3-can swallow liquids only;
Grade4-unable to swallow even liquids in adequate amounts.
The response to dilatation was considered ‘good’ if the stricture could be dilated up to 45 FG with complete relief of symptoms (dysphagia grade 0).
When the stricture could not be adequately dilated and there was minimal or no improvement in symptoms, the response was considered ‘poor’.
FOLLOW UP
After adequate initial dilatation (15 mm), patients were instructed to attend for follow up at six to eight week intervals, or earlier in case of a recurrence of dysphagia.
Since it is not practical to assess the recurrence of strictures by repeated radiologic and endoscopic examinations, repeat dilatation up to 15 mm was done whenever dysphagia recurred (symptomatic recurrence).
During recurrence, dilatation was done without any radiological evaluation of the oesophagus.
If dysphagia persisted despite dilatation, barium swallow examination was undertaken to assess the oesophageal lumen.
STATISTICS
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
Differences between the groups were determined by Wilcoxon rank sum test (unpaired).
Differences were considered significant only when the p value was <0.05.
Results
We studied 123 adult patients (76 men and 47 women; mean age 38.7 (18.7) years), age range 18–84 years) with benign oesophageal strictures treated by dilatation over the six years 1986–92.
The aetiology of the oesophageal strictures is shown in Table I. Corrosive injury was the commonest cause, followed by peptic and sclerotherapy induced strictures.
With regard to the 52 patients in the corrosive group (30 men, 22 women; age range 18–55 years, mean (SEM) age 26.4 (9.6), the strictures were due to acid ingestion in 32 patients and alkali ingestion in 14 patients.
eighteen patients had multiple strictures and 24 had long (5–15 cm) and eccentric strictures.
ADEQUATE INITIAL DILATATION
Five of 52 patients with corrosive strictures were lost to follow up before adequate initial dilatation could be done and have therefore been excluded from the analysis.
Forty four (93.6%) of the remaining 47 patients were dilated successfully and had complete relief of dysphagia.
The success rate in the corrosive group was comparable (p>0.5) with that in the peptic stricture group (100%).
Those patients who did not respond to dilatation treatment were advised to have surgery.
Although the success rate in the two groups was similar, the number of treatments required to achieve adequate dilatation was significantly (p<0.05) higher in the corrosive (median 8, range 1–35) than the peptic stricture group (median 1, range 1–33).
LONG TERM FOLLOW UP Only those patients who completed at least six months of follow up after adequate initial dilatation are included in the analysis of the long term results.
Of 69 patients with more than six months follow up, 36 belonged to the corrosive group and 33 had a peptic stricture.
The mean (SEM) periods of follow up in the corrosive and peptic stricture groups were 32.36 (17.12) months (range 6–60 months) and 36.32 (17.9)(range 6–60 months) respectively.
The dysphagia recurrence rate during follow up was higher in the corrosive than in the peptic stricture group.
The mean (SEM) numbers of symptomatic recurrences per patient month in the corrosive and peptic stricture groups were 0.27 (0.04)(range 0–1.2) and 0.07 (0.02)(range 0–0.52) respectively (Fig 1).
The difference between the two groups was statistically significant (p<0.001).
The numbers of patients who had at least one recurrence (94.44 v 54.55%, p<0.02), five recurrences (55.56 v 18.18%, p<0.02), and 10 recurrences (33 v 9.1%, p<0.01) were significantly higher in the corrosive stricture group than in the peptic stricture group.
Although the total number of recurrences during the entire follow up period was higher in the corrosive group, there was a noticeable decrease in the recurrence rate in this group over time (Fig 2).
After 12 months, the recurrence rate was significantly (p<0.001) lower than that observed during the first six months.
After 36 months, the recurrence rate in the corrosive group was comparable with that in the peptic stricture group (p>0.05).
Table II shows the pattern of recurrence over the entire period of follow up in patients with corrosive strictures.
During the first six months, only a very small number of patients (11.11%) did not require dilatation for recurrence.
In fact, most (66.7%) underwent two or more dilatations during this period.
With increased duration of follow up, the number of patients who either did not require any dilatation or needed only one dilatation in six months, increased progressively and there was a simultaneous reduction in the number of patients requiring two or more dilatations.
COMPLICATIONS
Only nine perforations occurred during a total of 1373 dilatation sessions (procedure related incidence of perforation 0.58%) in the whole group; eight of these were in the corrosive group (total number of dilatation sessions 990, procedure related incidence of perforation 0.8%).
All perforations in the corrosive group occurred in patients with long, tight, and eccentric strictures in whom, after the first few sessions, dilatation was performed without fluoroscopic guidance.
An oesophagogram done using a water soluble contrast (Gastroconray) showed a minor leak from the oesophagus.
These patients were managed conservatively (nil orally, pharyngeal suction, intravenous fluids, and parenteral antibiotics) and all of them responded well to conservative treatment.
Dilatation was resumed after a gap of three to four weeks and the strictures were successfully dilated to 45 FG in all without further complication.
One patient in the corrosive group had a minor upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage which stopped spontaneously.
This patient did not require blood transfusion or any other active treatment.
Discussion
This study clearly shows that dilatation is successful for most patients with corrosive oesophageal strictures in providing short and long term relief of dysphagia.
The recurrence rate of dysphagia, although initially high, decreases over time.
Furthermore, dilatation is safe and the incidence of complications with repeated treatments is quite low.
Although corrosive strictures were very often multiple, long, and tight, initial adequate dilatation with complete relief of symptoms was achieved in most patients (93.6%).
This figure is comparable with the success rate in our peptic stricture patients as well as in several other reports.
It should, however, be mentioned that the number of sessions needed to achieve adequate dilatation was significantly higher in the corrosive group.
Undoubtedly, these strictures are technically more difficult to dilate and adequate dilatation takes longer, but with persistence the ultimate results are good and comparable with those in patients with peptic strictures.
On long term follow up, the mean number of symptomatic recurrences was greater in the corrosive group, but this was largely due to a very high recurrence rate during the early period of follow up .
The recurrence rate fell significantly after 12 months in the corrosive group and after 36 months, the recurrence rate was similar to that in the peptic stricture patients.
The incidence of perforation in the present study is comparable with some of the earlier reports.
Glick reported a very low complication rate of 0.18% using Eder-Puestow metal olives followed by bougienage with Maloney dilators.
The higher incidence of perforation in the present study is due to a larger number of patients with corrosive strictures which are technically more difficult to dilate.
All perforations occurred in patients with long, eccentric, and tight strictures in whom, after the first few sittings, dilatation was performed without fluoroscopic control.
It is recommended that fluoroscopy be used for dilataion of these high risk patients to ensure proper positioning of the guidewire.
Early detection is very important too, and if the leak is minor, immediate conservative treatment may mean that surgical intervention can be avoided.
No compatative study of endoscopic dilatation with surgery in the management of corrosive oesophageal strictures has been reported.
Indications for surgery are not clearly defined and there is no agreement on the ideal surgical procedure.
Reconstructive surgery using stomach, colon, or jejunum, with or without oesophagectomy, has been performed to relieve dysphagia.
The early success of endoscopic dilatation is comparable with surgery.
However, surgery is associated with a significant risk of early (anastomotic leak, bowel necrosis, pneumothorax etc) and late (anastomotic strictures requiring dilatation, colonic herniation into pleura, etc) complications.
Moreover, the immediate mortality in surgical series ranges from 5.7 to 20%, while no death has been noted with endoscopic dilatation.
In view of nil mortality, low morbidity, and the high success rate, we feel that dilatation should be the first line of treatment for these patients.
In summary, our study shows that endoscopic dilatation is an effective and safe treatment for short and long term relief of dysphagia in patients with corrosive oesophageal strictures.
Although these strictures are more difficult to dilate than other benign strictures, in experienced hands most patients can be treated successfully.
The recurrence rate is high initially but it falls over time and is similar to that in the peptic stricture group after three years of follow up.
In view of high efficacy and safety, it is recommended that patients with corrosive strictures should be considered first for endoscopic dilatation.
Surgery should be undertaken only in those who do not respond to dilatation treatment.
Multifocal osteonecrosis related to steroid treatment in a patient with ulcerative colitis
Abstract
A case of multifocal steroid related osteonecrosis in a patient with ulcerative colitis is presented.
The pathogenesis, diagnosis, natural history, and treatment of the disease is discussed briefly with emphasis on the importance of early diagnosis — preferably by magnetic resonance imaging.
Early diagnosis often depends on the gastroenterologist considering the possibility of oesteonecrosis.
Aseptic (avascular) osteonecrosis is an adverse effect of systemic steroid treatment.
Osteonecrosis has been recognised during or after steroid treatment in several conditions such as renal homotransplants, lupus erythematosus, asthma, etc whereas osteonecrosis is reported only rarely during treatment with systemic steroids in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
We wish to draw attention to this rarely diagnosed but bery serious complication to systemic steroid treatment of ulcerative colitis and the importance of magnetic resonance imaging for early recognition.
Case report
A 21 year old athletic man who was a painter and had a history of good health was admitted to hospital with suspected ulcerative colitis.
The diagnosis of ulcerative pancolitis was confirmed endoscopically with biopsy.
Treatment was started with systemic prednisolone 40 mg twice daily and mesalazine 500 mg thrice daily.
The steroid dose was soon halved, but immediately had to be increased again.
The patient complained of spontaneous pain diffusely in the right knee two months after the first bowel symptoms, 28 days after the start of prednisolone treatment, and after a cumulative dose of 2.3 g.
Colinical examination of the knee showed nothing abnormal.
The pain subsided within few days after treatment with ibuprofen and ultrasound applied locally.
Prednisolone was stopped after seven months treatment and a cumulation dose of 8.6 g, and the bowel disease stayed quiescent.
The patient complained of intermittant pain in both knees after heavy work at subsequent outpatient clinics.
Twenty two months after the first signs of bowel symptoms, 20 months after the first complaint of knee pain, and 14 months after finishing steroid treatment both knees were clinically normal.
Radiographs of the knees were erroneously interpreted as showing osteochondritis dissecans.
He developed stress induced swelling of both knees and the right elbow.
Ostenecrosis was mentioned for the first time when the patient was seen by an orthopaedic surgeon with new radiographs (see Figs 1 and 3) 30 months after the first bowel symptoms.
After advanced osteonecrosis in both knees and the right elbow had been diagnosed by pain radiographis, it was confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (see Figs 2 and 4).
The patient was recommended to give up his present job and to seek an occuption that was less demanding on his legs and arms.
Discussion
Osteonecrosis is believed to be a result of ischaemia of the juxta-articular bone for either a short or long time.
Sequestration of articular surfaces similar to oesteochondritis dissecans or collapse of subchondrla bone with chondral injury occurs afterwards.
The condition is found most commonly in the femoral head, but identical changes have been described in the proximal humerus, elbow, knee, and foot.
No dose response relation exists between steroid treatment and the risk of oesteonecrosis.
Seven days treatment with a cumulative dose of dexamethasone equivalent to 0.75 g prednisolone has been followed by osteonecrosis with the appearance of symptoms two years later, whereas most patients receiving steroids, do so for long periods and in higher doses without developing articular symptoms.
Osteonecrosis often begins insidiously and is difficult or impossible to diagnose with conventional radiography and computed tomography in the early stages.
Scintigraphy may recognise oesteonecrosis somewhat earlier, but is rather uncertain because of poor anatomic resolution, false negative examinations with bilateral disease, and because the scintigraphic activity in the infarcted bone varies with the stage of the bone disease.
Magnetic resonance imaging is a non-invasive method, which shows very early osteonecrotic changes and which is in good agreement with pathoanatomical findings.
The clinical course of osteonecrosis is unpredictable in the individual case but it often disables the patient and results in need for alloplastic joint operations.
If osteonecrosis is diagnosed early enough, collapse of the subchondral bone and progression of the disease may be averted in some patients by decreasing the stresses across the affected joint and by training mobility.
Although there is little evidence that any treatment changes the natural course of osteonecrosis, early diagnosis is important to be able to recommend the patient possible new job training, etc.
Surgically different approaches (for example, curettage, core decompression, and bone transplant) have been tried with somewhat contradictory results.
Osteotomies have been used too, but the ultimate treatment is often an alloplastic joint operation.
In conclusion osteonecrosis is rarely seen, but often becomes debilitating, and is difficult to diagnose with most imaging techniques.
We propose that inflammatory bowel disease patients who are or have been treated with systemic steroids and have articular complaints are investigated for osteonecrosis preferably by magnetic resonance scanning.
Evidence for the essential role of Helicobacter pylori in gastric ulcer disease
Abstract
Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) eradication heals chronic active type B gastritis and dramatically changes the natural history of duodenal ulcer disease.
There are few data concerning the role of anti- H pylori treatment in gastric ulcer disease.
A total of 83 patients presenting with H pylori positive active gastric ulcer disease were treated with omeprazole and antibiotics (amoxicillin, ciprofloxacin, roxithromycin) in seven different clinical protocols, each of which included the attempt to eradicate H pylori infection and to evaluate the post-therapeutic course of ulcer disease.
The overall proportion of H pylori eradication was 67.9% (53 of 78 patients available for follow up).
Best results were obtained with two week treatment regimens comprisong omeprazole 20 mg twice daily and amoxicillin 500 mg four times a day or 1000 mg twice daily (eradication >80%).
Eradication of H pylori speeds up ulcer healing, with a six week healing rate of 84.9% compared with 60% in patients with persistent H pylori infection (p=0.0148).
In a subgroup of 11 patients with refractory ulcers,H pylori eradication (n=10) was associated with ulcer healing on continued acid suppression in nine cases.
One male patient with chronic antral ulcer did not respond to treatment within the next six months (H pylori and ulcer persistence), and in one female patient a resistent body ulcer was identified as gastric lymphoma.
Fifty patients with healed ulcers were followed up for one year.
Patients with (n=32) and without (n=18) bacterial eradication had similar demographic and clinical characteristics.
H pylori eradication was associated with a statistically significant reduction of ulcer recurrences (3.1 v 55.6%, p<0.001).
This study concludes that H pylori eradication considerably changes the natural history of H pylori associated gastric ulcer disease.
In addition,H pylori eradication speeds up ulcer healing and is associated with healing of previously refractory ulcers.
Thus, treatment aimed at bacterial eradication should be considered in all patients with gastric ulcers severe enough to contemplate further treatment options.
The dramatic effect of eradicating Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) on the medium term natural course of duodenal ulcer disease is sufficiently well reported by now.
Therefore,H pylori treatment is recommended for patients with relapsing duodenal ulcer disease.
In contrast, there is still a considerable dearth of knowledge on the post-therapeutic course of gastric ulcer disease.
In 1992, a first controlled study showed that H pylori positive gastric ulcer disease will respond in exactly the same way as duodenal ulcer disease does.
To shed further light on this issue, we report our short and medium term experience in patients with H pylori associated gastric ulcers treated with omeprazole and antibiotics.
Methods
In the past three years, a total of 83 patients presenting with H pylori positive (proved by culture or histological examination, or both) active gastric ulcer disease participated in seven different, not randomised and uncontrolled clinical protocols, each of which included the attempt to eradicate H pylori .
The studies were designed to evaluate the H pylori eradication potency of the various regimens and the post-therapeutic course of ulcer disease.
A refractory ulcer was defined as an ulcer that did not heal within three months on conventional treatment with full dose H 2 blockers or 20 mg omeprazole.
Five patients missed the first follow up investigation.
The remaining 78 patients (Table I) were treated with either omeprazole (40 mg every morning) and ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily) for one week (n=11), omeprazole (40 mg every morning) and amoxicillin (500 mg four times daily) for one week (n=8), omeprazole (40 mg twice daily) and amoxicillin (500 mg four times daily) for one week (n=12), omeprazole (20 mg twice daily) and amoxicillin (500 mg four times daily) for two weeks (n=20), omeprazole (20 mg twice daily) day 1–14 and amoxicillin (500 mg four times daily) day 8–14 (n=9), omeprazole (20 mg twice daily) and amoxicillin (1 g twice daily) for two weeks (n=15) or with omeprazole (2×20 mg twice daily) and roxithromycin (300 mg twice daily) for two weeks (n=3).
After the study period of treatment had ended, patients were treated with 300 mg ranitidine in the evening (n=70) or 20 mg omeprazole (n=8) up to the six week follow up investigation.
In patients with incomplete ulcer healing at that time (n=18) treatment was continued with 20 mg omeprazole every morning until complete ulcer healing proved by endoscopy was achieved.
Patients routinely had an endoscopy before treatment and after six weeks.
Patients with incomplete ulcer healing after six weeks were reinvestigated by endoscopy at four week intervals.
During the follow up without any anti-ulcer treatment, patients were instructed to report to the study physicians with all symptoms related to their gastric ulcer disease, who suggested and performed repeat endoscopies.
All endoscopically proved ulcer relapses were then registered.
Beside these ‘on demand’ visits and endoscopies, a routine clinical examination and an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy were performed in 50 patients (Table II) after one year.
During each endoscopy, four antrum and four body biopsy specimens were taken and analysed for H pylori colonisation by an urease test, microscopy of a methylene blue stained mucosal smear, specific culture, and histological tests after modified Giemsa stain as described elsewhere.
Eradication was defined as inability to show H pylori four weeks or more after discontinuation of study treatment by all four tests.
The age distribution of the 50 patients followed up over one year was statistically compared with the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
All categorial data were statistically compared with the χ 2 test or with Fisher's exact test, when appropriate.
All statistical calculations were two tailed.
Differences were considered significant at a 5% probability value.
Results
Eighty three patients with H pylori positive gastric ulcers entered the study.
Five patients were lost to follow up.
Before treatment,H pylori colonisation of the gastric mucosa was detected by urease test in all patients, histologically in 82, microscopically after methylene blue staining in 74, and by culture in 67 patients.
The overall proportion of H pylori eradication was 67.9% (53 of 78 patients).
In patients treated with amoxicillin plus omeprazole, there was a trend (without statistical significance) towards better H pylori eradication rates after a two week antibiotic course compared with one week amoxicillin treatment (85.7 v 69%, p>0.05) and in patients with body ulcers compared with those who had antral manifestation of their ulcer disease (94.4 v 72.7%, p>0.05).
Ciprofloxacin was obviously ineffective as dual treatment with omeprazole (eradication rate 18.2% (2/11 patients)).
The group of patients treated with roxithromycin in addition to omeprazole (n=3) was too small for a meaningful subgroup analysis of the eradication potency.
Six weeks after the beginning of the study treatment, complete ulcer healing was endoscopically seen in 60 of 78 patients (76.9%).
Healing was significantly achieved more frequently in patients with successful H pylori eradication (84.9 (45/53 patients)v 60% (15/25 patients), p=0.0148, Table II) despite similar distributions of ulcer size in these two group (median ulcer size: 11.5 mm v 12 mm).
The total study group comprised 11 patients with H pylori positive refractory gastric ulcers (six men, five women, median age 53 years, median pretreatment with H 2 blockers (n=9) or omeprazole (n=2) six months (range: 3->12 months)) were treated with an omeprazole plus amoxicillin regimen.
After eradication of H pylori (n=10) from the gastric mucosa eight ulcers healed within the next six (n=6) to 10 weeks (n=2).
A giant prepyloric ulcer (diameter 5 cm) was completely epithelised after five months.
In one female patient, the body ulcer was later identified as a gastric lymphoma and surgical resection was done.
In a 40 year male patient with persistent H pylori colonisation of the gastric mucosa, a chronic antral ulcer did not heal during the follow up of six months.
We prospectively followed up 50 patients with healed ulcers for one year.
H pylori infection was eradicated in 32 patients and persisted in 18 patients.
These two groups of patients had similar demographic and clinical characteristics (Table II).
H pylori infection was a strong predictor of ulcer recurrences.
Within the follow up period 10 of 18 post-treatment H pylori positive patients (55.6%) and only one of 32 patients with H pylori eradication (3.1%) had an endoscopically proved ulcer relapse (p<0.001, Table IV).
The ulcer recurrence after bacterial eradication was associated with diclofenac treatment.
The H pylori reinfection rate in the first year after eradication was 6.25% (two of 32 patients).
Discussion
A very strong association of H pylori infection of the gastric mucosa with chronic active type B gastritis and duodenal ulcer has been clearly established by now.
The prevalence of H pylori in gastric ulcer disease varies more widely, but has most consistently been found to be around 70%.
After exclusion of patients with known causes of their ulcer disease,H pylori infection has been detected with a much higher frequency of 96% in subgroups with idiopathic gastric ulcers, which is equivalent to the H pylori prevalence in duodenal ulcer disease.
A strong association, however, is not a proof of causation.
Therefore, additional evidence clearly pointing to a causal relation between H pylori infection and gastric ulcer disease has to be provided.
A powerful argument for causation could be the effect of treatment interventions.
Thus, elimination of the putative causal agent (H pylori ) should prevent the illness (gastric ulcer).
Indeed, a truely dramatic change of the natural course of H pylori associated gastric ulcer disease after bacterial eradication was shown by our study.
In patients with H pylori eradication, the one year ulcer relapse rate was one of 32 (3.1%), while failure to eradicate H pylori resulted in an endoscopically proved ulcer recurrence rate of 10 of 18 patients (55.6%, p<0.001).
The one year re-infection rate determined by this study was 6.25%.
These findings are in accordance with those reported by Graham et al , who randomly treated 26 patients with H pylori positive gastric ulcers with either ranitidine alone or triple therapy plus ranitidine.
The only factors in Graham's and our studies associated with ulcer recurrence were H pylori infection and the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Preliminary data of the German gastric ulcer study support these findings.
Thus, in addition to duodenal ulcer disease,H pylori eradication may also cure gastric ulcer disease.
Therefore, it seems to be warranted that a treatment aimed at bacterial eradication should be considered in all patients with H pylori associated gastric ulcer disease severe enough to contemplate further treatment options (for example, frequent ulcer relapses, ulcer complications).
In addition, our data clearly suggest that — similar to duodenal ulcers — eradication of H pylori infection speeds up gastric ulcer healing, with a six week healing rate of about 85% as opposed to 60% in gastric ulcer patients with persistent H pylori colonisation.
Moreover, most of the previously refractory gastric ulcers heal within six to 10 weeks after eradicating H pylori on continued acid suppression.
Both findings lend additional support to the assumption that H pylori plays an important, probably causative part in the pathogenesis of the formerly ‘idiopathic’ gastric ulcer disease.
Up to now, the ‘how’ of anti- H pylori treatment is still a matter of debate.
Bismuth salts and treatment by a sinble antibiotic fail to eradicate H pylori in a noteworthy proportion, but combined treatment regimens comprising bismuth salts and two antibiotics (for example, metronidazole plus amoxicillin or tetracycline) eradicated H pylori in most of the treated patients and is recommended as the treatment of first choice to eradicate H pylori in duodenal ulcer disease.
Patients treated with such an elaborate regimen, however, complained of considerable side effects, clearly endangering a suficiently high compliance rate in routine clinical practice.
Recent studies have suggested that omeprazole enhanced single antibiotic (for example, amoxicillin, clarithromycin) regimens combine a sufficient simplicity and low complications with high rates of bacterial eradication.
In our hands, double dose omeprazole (20 mg twice daily) plus amoxicillin 2 g for two weeks is at least equally effective in eradicating H pylori in gastric as it is in duodenal ulcer disease.
Therefore, it seems to be justified to recommend amoxicillin/ omeprazole as the treatment of first choice to eradicate H pylori in H pylori related duodenal and gastric ulcer diseases.
Triple therapy may then be reserved as ‘second line’ therapeutic option for patients with treatment failure of omeprazole plus antibiotics or with suspected penicillin hypersensitivity.
Ultrastructural patterns of Helicobacter pylori
Abstract
Ultrastructural morphology of the bacterial bodies was studied in 40 Helicobacter pylori positive cases.
Two bacterial patterns were identified, which were associated with different modes of contact with the epithelial cells and possibly with different stages of the natural history of the infection.
We have already described three ultrastructural patterns of contact between Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) and gastric epithelium:(1)H pylori in the mucus layer resting on the short microvilli of normal looking epithelial cells;(2)H pylori at intercellular junctions;(3)H pylori adherent at specific junction zones directly or with filamentous appendages anchoring the organisms to an epithelial surface, which has fewer microvilli and mucoid granules in the absence of a mucus layer.
Our histological patterns were very similar to the ultrastructural ones: a normal epithelium colonised by an interrupted file of organisms lying on the epithelial surface; a degenerated epithelium colonised by a reduced number of bacteria that seemed adherent to the epithelial surface or at intercellular junctions.
During our ultrastructural examinations we noted that bacteria did not show a uniform morphological aspect.
Many bacterial bodies presented with intracytoplasmatic vacuole like structures and a separation between cytoplasmic content and parietal structures.
These bacterial factors seemed related to the conditions of epithelial damage.
To evaluate our first impressions we examined transmission electron microscopy findings in 40 H pylori positive cases out of 94 randomised cases.
Materials and methods
Three biopsies of the gastric antrum were taken in 94 random patients referred for routine gastroscopy.
Biopsy specimens were fixed in 2.5% phosphate buffered glutaraldehyde, and then fixed for one hour in 2% osmium tetroxide in the same buffer.
Then tissues were dehydrated with alcohol and embedded in epoxy resin.
Semi-thin sections were prepared by means of a Reichert OmU3 Ultramicrotome and stained with toluidine blue: in our experience this technique provides particularly easy to read histological pictures.
In each of the 40 H pylori positive cases an ultra-thin section of a selected area was contrasted with uranyl acetate lead citrate and studied with a Hitachi H-800 electron microscope.
The Table shows the relation of the number of micro-organisms with both bacterial morphology and their modes of contact with gastric epithelium.
Results
A wide variation in the number of bacteria was seen in ultra-thin sections (between 17 and 96, mean 47.6).
We recognised two ultrastructural bacterial patterns.
Firstly,H pylori with homogeneously distributed chromatinic and cytoplasmic content within the bacterial body (Fig 1), which was associated with all the patterns of epithelial state and was seen in all the examined ultrastructural sections; this pattern, however, was prominent in the first pattern of contact with gastric epithelium presenting normal looking epithelial cells.
Secondly,H pylori showing an evident separation between cytoplasmic and chromatinic content and parietal structures of the bacterial cells, and with the presence in many sections of a typical ring shape intrabacterial vacuolisation (Fig 2).
We now know that these spherical electron opaque ‘vacuoles’ are indeed polyphosphate structures, functionally related to an energy and phosphorus reservoir, which are utilised in the absence of an exogenous source of energy.
This second bacterial pattern was only seen associated with a degenerated epithelium presenting with few apical mucoid granules, fewer microvilli, cytoplasmic vacuolisations, and absence of mucus layer, and it was found in all the ultrastructural sections in which the second or third pattern of contact with gastric epithelium was present (sections from biopsy specimens of 31 patients).
Discussion
We proposed previously that the three patterns of physical relation between H pylori and gastric epithelium could represent stages in evolution of bacterial infection.
We now conclude that two ultrastructural bacterial patterns exist, and that these two patterns are linked to the modes of contact with gastric epithelium.
In particular, the second H pylori pattern seems only related to the second and third patterns of contact, which are characterised by evident epithelial damage.
We had supposed that the second bacterial pattern, with separation between cytoplasmic and chromatinic content and parietal structures and often of typical ring shape intrabacterial electron opaque vacuolisation, represented the morphological consequence of a H pylori linked to nutritional conditions or to an acid or cytotoxic attack in the absence of a mucus layer, or all three.
Recently Bode et al , however, showed that the ring shape intrabacterial ‘vacuoles’ seen by us are indeed polyphosphate structures with a size ranging from 0.05 to more than 0.2 µm.
Polyphosphate granules were identified by using the Neisser reagent in light microscopy and by electron spectroscopy with electron energy loss spectrometry in electron microscopy.
Polyphosphates have been identified in H pylori both in vivo and in strains cultured in liquid medium (personal unpublished findings).
Because the nutritional conditions for growth are probably more difficult in liquid than in solid media and particularly the necessary microaerophil environment is more difficult to attain in liquid medium, the presence of polyphosphate structures in liquid rather than in solid medium seems to confirm their supposed role in energetic metabolism of the micro-organisms.
Bode et al describe three different types of polyphosphate granules, but the large vacuole like granules seen by us and closely associated with specific epithelial conditions are functionally related with energy and phosphorus supply.
This reservoir may be used by the bacterial cell to inhibit the utilisation of important cellular constituents such as RNA and structural proteins.
The separation between cytoplasmic content and parietal structures may represent the metabolic end point in which structural components must also be utilised.
As similar structures have also been found in H mustelae ,H nemestrinae ,Gastrospirillum hominis , and Gastrospirillum suis , they may be essential and characteristic for the genus Helicobacter ; they accumulate under certain growth conditions.
We now conclude that the presence of a separation between cytoplasmic and parietal structures and the evidence of large polyphosphate structures may represent the morphological consequence of nutritional conditions that are more and more difficult in the natural history of H pylori infection.
We previously suffested a possible model for the natural history of H pylori infection: firstly H pylori colonise the mucous layer of a normal looking gastric type epithelium and then, probably during many years, the bacterium induces degradation of gastric mucoid granules and microvillar and cellular damage.
Our results confirm this suggestion.
The second ultrastructural pattern of H pylori , which is only associated with a damaged epithelium, seems related to the absence of a sufficient exogenous source of energy when a longstanding bacterial infection has depleted the local resources.
Crohn's disease and myasthenia gravis: a possible role for thymectomy
Abstract
A female patient with a three year history of Crohn's disease of the colon developed myasthenia gravis.
Despite diversion of the faecal stream by an ileostomy, and total colectomy, the patient had continuing problems with perineal and perianal abscesses and fistulas.
Her myasthenia gravis became unresponsive to anti-cholinergics so a thymectomy was performed.
The perineal and perianal disease improved subsequently.
This case supports the theory that functional disturbances of the thymus may have a role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease.
An association between myasthenia gravis and Crohn's disease has been reported previously in only one patient.
We describe a female patient who developed both these conditions, the treatment of which was unsatisfactory until a thymectomy was performed.
Thymectomy has previously been reported to be of benefit in ulcerative colitis, but it is possible that it may also have a beneficial effect in Crohn's disease.
Case report
The patient first attended the Royal Liverpool University Hospital in 1985 when she was 21 years old, worked as a clerk, and smoked eight cigarettes per day.
She had presented to another hospital two years previously with abdominal pain, weight loss, diarrhoea, and anaemia, when a diagnosis of Crohn's disease was made.
Despite treatment with prednisolone and sulphasalazine she continued to have diarrhoea, weight loss, and malaise, and so was referred here.
She had been amenorrhoeic for six months before her first attendance at this hospital.
On examination she was pale and unwell.
There was an ill defined mass in the right iliac fossa and multiple anal skin tags.
Investigations showed anaemia (haemoglobin 7 g/dl) and thrombocythaemia (670×10/l) with low serum iron, a raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (65 mm/hour) and hypoalbuminaemia (28 g/l).
A small bowel enema was normal, but colonoscopy showed extensive patches of severe inflammation, deep ulcers, pseudopolyps, and bleeding with sparing of the rectum, splenic and hepatic flexures, and caecum.
Biopsies showed heavy inflammation with loss of architecture and a few granulomata.
She was treated with elemental diet (E 028, Scientific Hospital Supplies, Liverpool) and blood transfusion, as well as further prednisolone and sulphasalazine.
For the next 18 months her colitis remained controlled, albeit on regular courses of prednisolone.
In late 1986, she developed diplopia and unilateral ptosis induced by fatigue; a positive tensilon test and the presence of antibodies to acetyl choline receptor (AChR) in the serum confirmed a diagnosis of myasthenia gravis.
The symptoms responded to treatment with pyridostigmine, but the side effects of pain and diarrhoea complicated her management.
At this time she also developed episcleritis and erythema nodosum.
In 1987 her colotis became poorly controlled and a subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis were performed.
Histological examination of the resected colon confirmed Crohn's colitis with patchy full thickness inflammation and multiple granulomata.
Subsequently pelvic abscesses, perineal fistulas, and persisting diarrhoea necessitated excision of the rectum and formation of a permanent ileostomy in October 1989, but the perineal problems failed to resolve.
Between October 1989 and August 1991 multiple courses of antibiotics were given, and 12 separate operations to open perineal sinuses and abscesses were performed, but improvements were short lived.
Additionally, her myasthenia became difficult to control, and in August 1991 a thymectomy was performed.
Histological examination showed (normal) atrophic thymus tissue.
He myasthenia subsequently responded and pyridostigmine was withdrawn.
One further operation was done in October 1991, at which a perineal sinus was explored and reopened.
The patient has had no further problems from perineal disease during the subsequent 17 months to date.
She continues to suffer from episcleritis and has also been found to have an ovarian cyst, but there is no clinical, radiological, or laboratory evidence of active Crohn's disease.
Discussion
Whether there is a true association between Crohn's disease and myasthenia gravis is unclear.
At the time of our patient's presentation a survey of published works did not show any cases with both conditions, but subsequently a single case has been reported, suggesting that any association is likely to be weak.
One review has addressed the coexistence of autoimmune diseases in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, but although patients with ulcerative colitis had an increased prevalence of autoimmune disorders over controls, whose with Crohn's disease did not.
Whether myasthenia gravis was specifically sought in that study is not stated, but the fact that it was not mentioned suggests that none of the patients who were reviewed suffered from it.
There is clear evidence that myasthenia gravis is an immune mediated disease.
Circulating antibodies to the AChR are found in patient with myasthenia gravis, T lymphocyte function is abnormal, and the thymus is enlarged, with prominent germinal centres and Hassall's corpuscles.
In addition, there is an established association with autoimmune thyrotoxicosis.
In inflammatory bowel disease there has been no convincing and reproducible abnormality in studies of peripheral blood counts of T anb B cells, and the ratios of CD4 + /CD8 + T cells are also normal.
However, Tsuchiya et al have described an association between thymic abnormalities and inflammatory bowel disease.
The normal age involution of the thymus does not occur in patients with myasthenia gravis or ulcerative colitis, and the T cells obtained from the thymus of patients with myasthenia gravis and ulcerative colitis have reduced ratios of suppressor (CD8 + ) to helper (CD4 + ) T cells when compared with T cells obtained from patients having elective cardiac surgery.
Only two patients with Crohn's disease were studied, however, and CD4 + /CD8 + ratios were found to be normal; similar studies of T cells from inflamed mucosa of patients with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis have not showed any significant changes from controls.
Nevertheless, available evidence suggests that the tissue damage in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease is mediated by immune mechanisms, and it is possible that our patient's perineal disease improved as a result of thymectomy.
Indeed, an uncontrolled trial of thymectomy in patients with ulcerative colitis resistant to conventional treatment has been reported to increase duration of remission.
As far as we are aware, treatment with thymectomy has not been reported in Crohn's disease, although drugs that change the immune response are the mainstay of treatment for both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.
Interestingly, James reported remission of Crohn's colitis in a patient who developed HIV associated immunodeficiency, suggesting that CD4 + T lymphocytes may be important in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
We believe that this report, considered with other evidence, suggests that the potential of thymectomy as a treatment for inflammatory bowel disease should be investigated further.
Hepatocyte-matrix interactions
The normal hepatic sinusoid consists of a fenestrated endothelial capillary, behind which, and adjacent to the border of the hepatic pallisade, is the space of Disse.
This term is in some respects a misnomer, for within it are the hepatic lipocytes (fat storing or Ito cells) and a specialised basement membrane-like matrix, which consists predominantly of type IV collagen, laminin, and proteoglycans.
Extracellular matrix is an integral part of multicellular organisms, providing structural integrity and support to cells.
Current evidence indicates that matrix is not merely a simple scaffolding but a dynamic modulator of cell phenotype and behaviour.
There is now evidence that the basement membrane-like matrix of the liver can change the phenotypic characteristics and growth of lipocytes, endothelial cells, and hepatocytes.
Recent developments in matrix biochemistry and cell biology have offered a fascinating insight into the complex interaction of hepatocytes and their surrounding matrix in both health and disease.
The importance of extracellular matrix was first appreciated in hepatocyte culture studies.
Evidence for a biological effect of extracellular matrix
When isolated mature hepatocytes are cultured on a non-physiological substratum such as tissue culture plastic, the cells attach poorly and have a limited viability.
If a simple native substrate such as type I collagen is used, cell survival can be increased but the hepatocytes rapidly lose their normal appearance, becoming flattened, and specific gene functions such as cytochrome P and albumin expression rapidly diminish.
In contrast, when hepatocytes are plated onto a model basement membrane, such as that derived from the Engelbreth Holm Swarm sarcoma (EHS), or in coculture with epithelial cells, they retain their normal cell polarity and structure, and the products of constitutively expressed genes such as albumin continue to be secreted for prolonged periods of culture.
The EHS model basementmembrane will also modulate hepatocyte growth and turnover, inhibiting cellular proliferation even in the presence of favourable growth factors.
Hepatocytes cultured on EHS also exhibit a reduction in the expression of the cMyc oncogene and reduced DNA synthesis.
In short, the EHS cell culture model provides strong evidence of a biological interaction between a normal physiological basement membrane matrix and the hepatocyte, the result of which is the maintenance of hepatocyte polarity and differentiated cell function.
Is there then a single component contained within the EHS substratum that interacts with the hepatocyte to affect specific gene expression that is missing from plastic or simple substrata?
Or is it the coordinated interaction of several matrix components (EHS contains laminin, type IV collagen, heparan-sulphate-proteoglycan, entactin, and other proteins) with the cell that effects the maintenance of a normal phenotype?
The answer at present is unclear.
First it should be noted that EHS is not a perfect model of the normal liver matrix as some dedifferentiation of hepatocytes cultured on this substratum can be detected.
Work in liver endothelial cells suggests that matrix prepared from human amnion is more effective at maintaining physiological phenotype than EHS.
Nonetheless, the EHS model has provided the means to analyse the contribution of individual matrix components.
The elegant studies undertaken by Bissell et al showed that none of the individual major matrix proteins used as a culture substratum would maintain hepatocyte function as effectively as the complete EHS gel complex.
It is also known that hepatocytes express a series of integrin and non-integrin receptors for a series of matrix constituents.
Predictably though, the hypothesis that itis simply a matrix complex which is required to maintain normal hepatocyte function in culture cannot explain all reported observations.
If instead of a native type I collagen substrate, partially denatured type I collagen (or gelatin) is used, viable hepatocytes with a differentiated phenotype that will express cytochrome P can be cultured.
Hydrating collagen substratum, in effect forming a collagen gel, is also associated with partial maintenance of albumin expression and trabecular organisation of hepatocytes.
Albumin secretion can be restored to dedifferentiated flattened cells grown on type I collagen by the addition of dilute soluble EHS or laminin.
Similar effects are seen when a collagen gel sandwich is used to culture hepatocytes.
This is associated with albumin expression for up to six weeks compared with less than one week for equivalent monolayer culture.
What then do these culture experiments using denatured single collagens or collagen sandwiches tell us of the nature of hepatocyte-matrix interaction?
A common feature of these studies is the association of a more cuboidal cell shape with differentiated cell phenotype and expression of the genes for cytochromes and albumin.
The data can be interpreted in several ways.
At the simplest level they suggest that the three dimensional structure of the matrix and availability of ligands for cell binding may be important determinants of the hepatocyte's response to matrix constituents either alone or in combination.
Research in other cell lines has suggested that the mechanical properties of the substratum are important in the maintenance of cellular differentiation.
The stimuli which the cell receives from the matrix can then initiate changes in gene expression with temporally related changes in cell structure which result directly from the same signals or are determined by concomitant but separate cell-matrix interaction.
Alternatively, it is possible that a fundamental determinant of matrix-initiated cellular differentiation is a change in cell shape and size.
This would be mediated via cytoskeletal proteins which may then influence nuclear and cytoplasmic events by as yet undetermined mechanisms such as changes in nuclear and cytoplasmic pores or direct interaction with nuclear matrix.
Recent studies have suggested that matrix stimulated activation of specific albumin regulating factors will only occur when the matrix on which the cell is grown promotes a cuboidal differentiated cell morphology.
Mechanisms of cell-matrix interaction
1
INTEGRIN AND NON-INTEGRIN RECEPTORS
How do the cells adhere to a substratum, what cellular elements interact with the matrix, and what mechanisms signal changes in the intracellular milieu?
The adhesion molecules and receptors that mediate cell-matrix binding can be divided into two groups, the integrin and the non-integrin matrix receptors.
Integrins are heterodymers that consist of non-covalently bonded α and Β chains, with the latter stabilised by interchain disulphide bonding.
The complete integrin consists of a head or ligand binding region made up of both the N terminal regions of the α and Β subunits; a body which incorporates a hydrophobic membrane spanning domain, and two cytoplasmic linked domains.
Cytosplasmic domains have been associated with cytoskeletal proteins including talin and α-actinin.
They interact with the actin based cytoskeleton, and when stimulated may cause cytoskeletal rearrangement and have been shown to activate other cytoplasmic signalling pathways, thus acting as true transmembrane receptors.
Integrins may mediate both cell-matrix and cell-cell interaction.
Changes in the α and Β subunit combinations and alternative splicing are employed to determine and establish integrins of differing ligand specificity.
Cells can influence not only integrin expression but under specific circumstances may ‘activate’ previously inactive integrins by exposing the ligand binding region through a molecular switch mechanism associated with a conformational change in the integrin molecule itself.
The precise intracellular effects of ligand-integrin interactions remain to be determined in hepatocytes, but studies using other cell lines suggest that specific recognition sequences present on the ligand (such as RGD) complement an area within the binding region of the integrin which induces a change in the cytoplasmic domain.
Phosphorylates of tyrosine and protein tyrosine kinase, related to the src oncoprotein seem to be important as links between the integrin and intracellular signalling pathways.
Tyrosine phosphate is found concentrated at points of cell-matrix and cell-cell contact in other cell lines studied.
Heparan sulphate proteoglycan, laminin, and collagen have all been shown to be linked across cell membranes to cytoskeletal elements, and cytoskeletal proteins have been demonstrated to be condensed at cell-cell and cell-matrix interfaces.
Current research suggests that integrins are similarly located and may therefore provide a physical link between matrix and the cytoskeleton.
Heparan sulphate proteoglycan linked to the cytoskeleton can be copurified with attached nuclei, providing a possible link between matrix-integrin interaction nd nuclear events.
Matrix components may also enhance cell-cell interactions.
The induction of the AP1 transcription factor, and through this mechanism stimulation of cytokine expression, has also been demonstrated from integrin-ligand interaction.
Interaction may also affect the intracellular milieu by changing the intracellular pH.
Integrins binding to fibronectin, collagens, and laminin have been described in hepatocytes.
Thus, the integrin family of molecules provides a mechanism whereby interaction with the extracellular matrix can cause rearrangement of the cellular cytoskeleton and signal changes in gene transcription through the activation of oncogenes and nuclear transcription elements.
Hepatocytes also express non-integrin, matrix binding proteins.
Rat hepatocytes express three glycoproteins which have affinity for type I collagen.
Activity of type I collagen binding by hepatocytes can be inhibited by antibodies raised against these glycoproteins.
In addition, a 32 kD laminin receptor has been described.
Molecular studies indicate that this receptor is expressed at low levels only in normal adult hepatocytes but that expression is increased in hepatoma cells for foetal hepatocytes.
This adds a further regulator to receptor-matrix interaction and implies that specific receptor expression may be influenced by nuclear events or in response to a change in matrix.
In common with many cells, hepatocyte and hepatoma cell lines have been shown to express cell/cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily and cadherins.
It is not known whether there is non-integrin/integrin interactions in hepatocytes to activate integrin receptors as has been described in other cell types such as leukocytes.
2
EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX AND CYTOKINES
A further level of complexity to hepatocyte-matrix interaction results from the propensity of the matrix to act as a reservoir and presenter of cell growth factors and cytokines.
For example, one fragment of laminin contains a structure of 25 epidermal growth factor (EGF) -like repeats.
When cleaved from laminin this protein is powerfully mitogenic and may explain the growth promoting properties that laminin has been shown to have cells expressing EGF receptors.
Similar properties have been described for thrombospondin and tenascin, two other matrix components.
That specific laminin receptors are differentially regulated in foetal, regenerating, and quiescent adult hepatocytes may not simply, therefore, be important for adhesive or structural reasons and may relate to the need for growth and development.
Other matrix components are associated with the binding and presentation of cytokines.
These include basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) which binds to heparan sulphate proteoglycan and can be released by the activity of plasmin which in turn may be activated by matrix bound tissue plasminogen activator (tPA).
The presence of matrix bound tPA is itself important because the tPA-plasmin cascade is an activator of the matrix degrading metalloproteinase enzyme family (see below).
In contrast to bFGF, binding of TGFΒ 1 to type IV collagen may result in an enhanced or prolonged activity of this cytokine, possibly because of presentation or protection of the molecule.
Other growth factors have been shown to bind to matrix components and include platelet derived growth factor (PDGF), interferon-γ (INFγ), acidic fibroblast growth factor (aFGF), and granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF).
3
MATRIX TURNOVER
A third mechanism by which hepatocyte behaviour can be regulated via interaction with the extracellular matrix is as a result of matrix turnover or modification by hepatocytes or other cells.
Hepatocytes may produce heparan sulphate proteoglycans but ‘in situ’ hybridisation studies suggest the major source of type IV collagen is lipocytes, while laminin is derived predominantly from lpocytes and endothelial cells.
Activated lipocytes (myofibroblasts) are also the major source of the interstitial collagens (type I and III) which are produced in excess during liver fibrosis and cirrhosis and replace the normal basement membrane matrix.
Lipocytes are attractive candidates to regulate matrix turnover in both health and disease.
They have been shown to express a 72 kDa type IV collagenase/gelatinase with activity against the normal liver matrix, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1), a potent inhibitor of the matrix degrading metalloproteinases and they also express interstitial collagenase, an enzyme with degradative activity against the excess interstitial collagens that characterise fibrosis.
In addition, Kupffer cells express a 95 kDa type IV collagenase/gelatinase which also degrades the normal liver matrix.
A potential mechanism by which hepatocytes may regulate metalloproteinase activity is by cleavage of tPA (see above) to activate plasmin which in turn activates latent pro-metalloproteinases secreted by lipocytes and Kupffer cells.
The interplay of these enzymes and their activators and inhibitors and the disruption of normal hepatocyte-matrix interactions is currently thought to be of major importance in the pathogenesis of liver injury.
The extracellular matrix is not uniform across the liver acinus.
There is a gradient in matrix composition from the portal traid to the central vein, with relative preponderance of type III collagen and fibronectin adjacent to the central vein compared with the predominance of type IV collagen and laminin adjacent to the portal triad.
This finding has led to the suggestion that the hepatocyte pallisade may represent a lineage system within which cells mature as they pass from a peri-bile ductular position ot mature perivenular hepatocytes.
If this hypothesis is proved it suggests that ‘physiological’ changes in matrix composition may be utilised in health to configure the developing hepatocyte either directly, or as the result of sequestration of particular growth factors and cytokines, the type of which would alter according to the specific matrix components.
During cholestasis, periportal hepatocytes have been shown to express integrins normally associated with bile duct epithelium.
Whether this is the first stage in a phenotypic response of immature hepatocytes to cholestasis remains speculative.
Changes in cell-matrix interaction during disease
How can these, largely in vitro, observations be linked to the behaviour of hepatocytes in health and disease?
A simple extrapolation from the basic hepatocyte culture expreiments suggets that matrix degradation during liver injury may be associated with a loss of specific hepatocyte gene function, and promotion of cellular proliferation.
Furthermore, during hepatic fibrosis there is replacement of the normal matrix with interstitial or fibrillar collagens (predominantly types I and III).
Deterioration in hepatocyte function might therefore result from depriving the hepatocyte of normal matrix signalling in addition to any architectural disturbance that may occur.
In progressive fibrosis there is evidence to indicate that synthetic functions of the liver are impaired proportionately to the degree of capillarisation, that is, to the accumulation of interstitial collagens within the space of Disse.
Hepatocyte function may also be affected indirectly during fibrosis; recent research has shown that changes in matrix composition may reduce the size of fenestrae in endothelial cells.
Such a change, in combination with the capillarisation of the space of Disse, might reduce macromolecular exchange between the sinusoids and the hepatocytes.
Hepatocyte injury may also influence receptor expression and activation as described above.
Activation and deactivation of integrins as a result of stimulation of other integrin and non-integrin receptors has been described in platelets and lymphocytes but has not yet been studied in hepatocytes.
Studies in which rats have been fed ethanol have suggested that there is reduced ability of hepatocytes to bind to laminin, type I collagen, and fibronectin; a possible explanation for which is that there is reduced expression or activation of specific receptors for these matrix components.
Evidence of a direct change in hepatic receptor type during disease comes from studies recently described by Volpes et al .
Using antibodies directed against specific integrins, the authors show de novo expression of specific integrin receptor patterns by hepatocytes during inflammatory liver disease and in periportal hepatocytes during cholestasis (see above).
De novo expression of specific integrins with attachment affinity for type I collagen, laminin, and fibronectin has also been documented in chronic hepatitis B in both lobular and periportal hepatocytes, particularly in those cells in close proximity to lymphocyte infiltrates.
Conclusion
There is considerable evidence in vitro that, through several mechanisms, a change in hepatocyte phenotype, polarity, proliferation, and function can be mediated via interaction with the surrounding matrix.
In vivo, disease states are associated with changes in matrix components and in the expression of matrix degrading enzymes and their inhibitors by non-parenchymal cells.
Hepatocyte function in disease may be perturbed by degradation of the normal matrix and its replacement with interstitial collagens by activated lipocytes.
Release of specific growth factors from matrix or changes in matrix presentation of cytokines may also occur as a result of matrix degradation or a change in matrix composition.
Altered integrin receptor expression by hepatocytes during disease provides a mechanism by which the cellular response to normal and abnormal matrix may be further modulated.
Further research in this field is currently aimed at elucidating the precise mechanism(s) that regulate each of these factors and at determining their influence on hepatocyte-matrix interaction and thus their importance in liver injury.
Hormone replacement therapy prevents bone loss in patients with inflammatory bowel disease
Abstract
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease have an increased prevalence of osteoporosis, and suffer high rates of spinal bone loss.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is effective in the treatment and prevention of osteoporosis but has not been studied in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
A two year prospective study of HRT in inflammatory bowel disease was performed in 47 postmenopausal women aged 44 to 67 years with ulcerative colitis (25) or Crohn's disease (22).
Patients had radial and spinal bone density measured annually by single photon absorptiometry and quantitative computed tomography respectively.
The mean (95% confidence intervals) annual change in radial bone density was 1.42%/yr (0.58 to 2.26; p<0.005) and for spinal bone 2.60%/ yr (1.06 to 4.15; p<0.005).
There was no significant correlation between rates of change of bone density at the two sites, or between the rates of change and the initial bone density either in the radius or spine.
Twelve patients were given prednisolone during the study, and their rates of change for spinal bone density were lower, but values were not statistically significantly different from those who did not receive corticosteroids.
Changes in bone density for patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease were not significantly different.
The change in bone density did not correlate with the patients' age or number of years after the menopause.
It is concluded that HRT is effective in prevention of bone loss in postmenopausal women with inflammatory bowel disease.
Osteroporosis is more common in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) compared with the normal population, and causes significant morbidity when fractures occur.
One study that identified 25% of women had a bone mineral density more than 2 standard deviations below normals.
Increased rates of spinal bone loss have been reported in some patients and the average spinal bone loss was 3%/yr.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is effective in the prevention and treatment of postmenopausal bone loss.
HRT also reduces the risk of fracture, but there have been no studies of its effect in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
We have studied postmenopausal women with inflammatory bowel disease given HRT for two years and followed changes in their bone density by annual measurements.
Patients were given a ‘standard dose’ of oral oestrogen, which has been shown to prevent bone loss in normal women.
Methods
PATIENT DETAILS
Postmenopausal women with IBD were recruited from a gastrointestinal outpatient clinic.
Patients were not included if HRT was contraindicated for medical reasons, such as the presence of an oestrogen dependent tumour or thromboembolic disease.
Forty seven postmenopausal women aged 44 to 67 years were studied.
The mean age when first measured was 54 years.
Ten had had a hysterectomy and their postmenopausal state was confirmed biochemically by measurement of serum gonadotrophins; the age of these patients at their menopause could not be estimated.
The average age of menopause in those who had not had a hysterectomy was 48 years (range 42 to 59) and they were 5 years (mean; range 1 to 18) postmenopausal at the time of the study.
Twenty five had ulcerative colitis (4 total, 3 subtotal, 16 distal, and 2 proctitis) while 22 had Crohn's disease (19 small bowel, 1 ileocolonic and 2 colonic).
Fourteen with Crohn's disease had had small bowel resections.
The average duration of their disease was 12 years (range 1 to 32).
Eight patients were current smokers.
All patients were advised to achieve a daily intake of at least 700 mg of calcium; five patients were unable to take sufficient dairy products to sustain this and were given oral calcium supplements.
Vitamin D was not prescribed.
None were receiving thyroxine, anti-convulsants, thiazide diuretics, sodium fluoride, calcitonin, or bisphosphonates.
The risks and benefits of HRT were first explained with the aims of the study.
All patients were given 0.625 mg daily of oral conjugated oestrogen (Premarin, Wyeth).
Thirty seven who had not had a hysterectomy were given cyclic progestogen with 150 micrograms of norgestrel for 12 days each month in addition to 0.625 mg of conjugated oestrogen (Prempak C 0.625, Wyeth).
This dose of oestrogen has previously been shown to be the minimum required to prevent bone loss in normal menopausal women.
Over the subsequent two years, details of corticosteroid use and surgery were recorded although biochemical parameteres were not monitored.
There were no adverse effects from the oestrogen therapy apart from breast tenderness in some patients that resolved without treatment.
Those receiving cyclic progestogen had regular withdrawal bleeds.
BONE DENSITY MEASUREMENT
Bone mineral density was measured at two sites — the left radius and the lumbar spine as described previously.
Radial bone mineral content was measured at the junction of the distal third and proximal two thirds of the left radius, a site where bone is predominantly cortical, with a single photon absorptiometer based on the design of Cameron and Sorenson.
Results were expressed as the ratio of bone mineral content to bone width in g/cm.
The longterm in vitro and in vivo precision (coefficient of variation) of the technique were estimated from repeated measurements (n=41) over five years.
In vitro precision for an aluminium/perpex phantom was 2.1% while the in vivo precision was 2.7%.
Spinal trabecular bone mineral density was measured in the anterior part of the first three lumbar vertebrae by quantitative computed tomography (Philips Tomoscan 350 CT scanner) using amodification of the method of Cann and Genant.
The bone density was calculated using a calibration phantom containing known concentrations of K 2 HPO 4 solution and expressed in grams per litre.
The precision of this technique in our hands is 2.8%.
Bone density was measured initially and then annually for two years.
The same instruments and techniques were used for all the measurements.
DATA ANALYSIS
Each value of bone mineral content/bone width was converted to a Z-score relative to age dependent norms ((patient value — mean) /standard deviation) using the reference data of Ringe.
Each value for bone mineral density was converted to a Z-score (Z-bone mineral density) using the reference data of Cann and Genant.
Each patient had three measurements of bone mineral density and rates of bone loss were estimated by linear regression for each subject.
The annual percentage changes in bone mineral content/bone width and bone mineral density were calculated by (slope/intercept) ×100.
Statistical analysis was performed using correlation coefficients,t tests, and Mann-Whitney U test.
Statistical significance was taken as p<0.05.
Results
Table I summarises the results.
The mean percentage change for bone mineral content/bone width (95% confidence intervals) was +1.42%/yr (+0.58 to +2.26) and for bone mineral density was +2.60%/yr (+1.06 to +4.15)(Table I).
Figure 1 shows the cumulative absolute changes in bone mineral content/bone width and bone mineral density after ranking each patient by age.
The increase in both forearm and spinal bone mineral density achieved statistical significance in absolute units, percentage per annum, and also in the Z-score.
Figures 2 and 3 show the percentage changes in bone mineral density.
Therewas no significant correlation between the baseline values of bone mineral content/bone width or bone mineral density and the subsequent changes in bone mineral or between the rates of change of spinal and radial bone mineral density.
There was no significant correlation between the improvements in bone mineral density and the patients age or the number of years postmenopause.
Twelve patients (seven Crohn's disease) received a mean daily dose of 3.9 mg of prednisolone (range 0.5 to 10 mg) during the two years.
The rate of change of spinal trabecular bone (bone mineral density) was lower in those given corticosteroids, but this was not statistically significant (Table II, Fig 2).
The correlations between steroid dose and the changes in bone mineral density were not statistically significant.
Three patients had surgery during the second year of the study; two with total ulcerative colitis had a colectomy, and one patient had a terminal ileal resection.
All were given prednisolone before surgery.
There was no significant difference in the response to HRT between patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, smokers and non-smokers, and those who had had a hysterectomy and those who had not.
There was no significant change in the patient's height, weight, or body mass index during the study (Table I).
Discussion
This is the first study of hormone replacement therapy in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
It shows that oral treatment with a standard dose of oestrogen not only prevents bone loss but after two years produced a significant improvement in bone density.
The improvement occurred even in women more than 10 years postmenopausal and in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
The percentage improvement in spinal bone mineral density is similar to that reported in normal women receiving this dose of oestrogen.
There are no other comparable studies in the prevention of secondary osteoporosis.
Our study did not include a control group.
There is already a large amount of data on normal women, which shows that HRT prevents bone loss after the menopause.
In addition, without treatment patients with inflammatory bowel disease lose bone at normal or increased rates.
We therefore felt it was inappropriate to withhold HRT from some of our patients so that this study was open and prospective, and depend on our previous studies of untreated patients with inflammatory bowel disease for comparison.
Our patients treated with HRT, however, show significant improvements in their own right.
A dose response to oestrogens has been shown with increasing doses having greater effects on bone density.
In this study, a standard bone sparing dose of oral oestrogen was used.
Despite HRT some patients showed a reduction in bone density (Figs 2 and 3).
In some this may be a result of an imprecision of the techniques of bone density measurement.
Even in normal women on 0.625 mg oestrogen, although overall bone density increases, some still show a reduction.
Absorption of the HRT was satisfactory as regular periods returned in those who had not had hysterectomy, menopausal symptoms resolved, and compliance with the treatment was good.
Subjects may vary in their response to oestrogens and some may need a higher dose.
Future studies should perhaps investigate the effect of increased doses of oestrogen and the value of transdermal administration.
In some patients the use of prednisolone (or the exacerbation of the inflammatory bowel disease) may have resulted in net bone loss.
Although treatment with prednisolone was associated with reduced improvement in spinal trabecular bone, this was not statistically significant and there was no correlation with the dose.
This study is comparatively insensitive, however, for an assessment of the effect of prednisolone because of the one year interval between measurements, the small number of patients given corticosteroids, and the variable dose and duration of treatment.
While corticosteroids have an adverse effect on bone mass, this may be partly counterbalanced by improvement in the inflammatory bowel disease.
Out findings of an apparently greater adverse effect on trabecular rather than cortical bone is in keeping with other publications on the effect of prednisolone.
A recent study has shown that HRT can be effective in preventing bone loss in patients receiving concurrent glucocorticosteroids.
Measurement of bone density is helpful in assessing the risk of oesteoporosis in patients and in monitoring response to treatment.
For clinicians without access to bone densitometry, these results are helpful in showing that the improvement with HRT was similar in both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis; in addition, the response to oestrogens was not related to the patients age or the number of postmenopausal years.
In view of the increased prevalence of osteoporosis and high rates of bone loss in some patients we feel that all postmenopausal women with inflammatory bowel disease should be considered for HRT, particularly in those with extensive disease of those requiring longterm corticosteroid treatment.
Corticosteroids have a deleterious effect on bone density that can be reduced by concurrent treatment with HRT.
Bone mineral measurement allows one of the important complications of corticosteroids to be monitored.
The state of a patient's bones and the effect of corticostroids can be balanced when considering surgery or continued medical treatment.
Not all patients on corticosteroids at the same time as HRT lose bone.
We have shown that not only can bone loss be prevented in inflammatory bowel disease with hormone replacement therapy but significant improvements can be achieved.
A perspective on iron deficiency anaemia
Patients with suspected iron deficiency anaemia account for some four per cent of the patients referred to our gastroenterology clinic.
The first step in the investigation of these patients is to confirm the presence of iron deficiency.
The next is to find out if the deficiency is a result of gastrointestinal blood loss or malabsorption.
Menorrhagia is the major non-gastrointestinal cause of blood loss while dietary deficiency may be the sole cause or a contributing factor to the anaemia.
Microcytosis is also seen in patients with anaemia of chronic disease, the thalassaemia syndromes and, rarely, sideroblastic anaemia.
A low serum ferritin or low serum iron with raised total iron binding capacity is usually sufficient to confirm iron deficiency.
Occasionally these may be misleading.
For example, inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease or rheumatoid arthritis may lead to a spuriously high ferritin or low total iron binding capacity even in the presence of iron deficiency.
In cases of doubt a bone marrow aspirate, which is the best guide to body iron stores, should be examined.
Colonic causes
In the Western world, the most important cause of iron deficiency anaemia secondaty to gastrointestinal blood loss is carcinima of the colon.
Dirrerent series have estimated it accounts for 4–13% of outpatients and 16% of inpatients.
It is important not to miss this diagnosis because the disease is potentially fatal but can be cured if resected at an early stage.
Most tumours presenting with iron deficiency anaemia are found on the right side of the colon.
Although carcinoma of the colon is usually considered a disease of late middle age or elderly patients, it can occur in younger patients, particularly if associated with ulcerative colitis or a polyposis syndrome.
Sporadic cases are seen in patients in their 20s or early 30s.
In an adult population it cannot be excluded on the grounds of age alone.
Bleeding adenomata can present with iron deficiency anaemia and should be resected.
Patients who are anti-coagulated and patients taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) frequently become anaemic due to increased gastrointestinal blood loss.
This anaemia is usually related to the presence of a lesion in the gastrointestinal tract, rather than to the drug itself.
These patients should, therefore, be fully investigated to exclude the possibility of colonic cancer, in addition to stopping the drugs (where possible).
Angiodysplasia is commonly found in elderly patients with chronic gastrointestinal bleeding leading to iron deficiency.
In the absence of an obvious bleeding point, it is impossible to be certain that bleeding originates from the angiodysplasia until the rest of the gastrointestinal tract has been examined.
An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy should be performed to exclude other abnormalities.
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia often presents with iron deficiency anaemia although it can be usually diagnosed on clinical examination.
Anal lesions and haemorrhoids usually cause frank bleeding rather than anaemia while bleeding from diverticulosis is usually acute and massive.
Patients with anaemia with these lesions require full investigation as they are unlikely to be the cause of the anaemia even if frank rectal bleeding is present.
Diverticulosis may complicate investigation of these patients, particularly if the colon is being assessed by barium enema examination as the diverticula may conceal the presence of adenomata or malignancy.
Crohn's disease is often associated with iron deficiency anaemia.
Ulcerative colitis may present with anaemia when bowel symptoms are mild or ignored.
Faecal occult blood studies have also uncovered previously unrecognised cases of ulcerative colitis.
Low rectal or anal malignancy may be seen.
Therefore sigmoidoscopy should be mandatory as part of the investigation of patients with iron deficiency anaemia.
Upper gastrointestinal causes
Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy in patients with amaemia often yields abnormal findings buyt it is not always clear if these abnormalities are the cause of the anaemia.
A study of elderly hospital inpatients with iron deficiency anaemia found a high incidence (16%) of dual pathology when both the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts were examined.
Although the incidence of dual pathology may be less in hospital outpatients populations (14%), it is recommended that the lower gastrointestinal tract should be examined in all patients presenting with anaemia, regardless of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy findings, except in those found to have malignancy of the upper gastrointestinal tract.
Peptic ulceration may cause chronic gastrointestinal blood loss as well as an acute bleed.
It is commonly asymptomatic in anaemic patients.
NSAIDs may unmask an ulcer by causing bleeding.
As NSAIDs may cause bleeding, however, throughout the gastrointestinal tract, unless the ulcer has stigmata of bleeding, the possibility of lesions elsewhere cannot be excluded.
Studies with radiolabelled red cells and leucocytes suggest that, in 70% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, NSAIDs are associated with inflammation and blood loss from the small intestine, especially in the region of the terminal ileum.
NSAIDs may also trigger or exacerbate bleeding from vascular lesions with the intestine as well as malignant lesions.
Antral ectasia (watermelon stomach) and carcinoma of the stomach have presented in this way.
Severe erosive oesophagitis may be a cause of iron deficiency anaemia but hiatus hernia alone seems unlikely to cause iron deficiency anaemia.
Small intestinal causes
Bleeding from the small bowel may occur either from mucosal lesions or intramural lesions.
Enteroscopy has identified three different types of mucosal lesion: red spot lesions with intact villi overlying them, erosions with damaged villi and discrete edges, and ulceration in which the thickness of the mucosa has been breached.
Mural lesions include leiomyomata, carcinomata, small bowel lymphoma, secondary tumour deposits, and lipomata.
Superior mesenteric angiography may also show these lesions and angiodysplasia.
Malabsorption
Inability to absorb iron also leads to anaemia.
Iron deficiency may thus be found in postgastrectomy patients or patients with untreated coeliac disease.
Most studies of patients presenting with anaemia find 2–3% of the population have villous atrophy.
It is important to remember that coeliac disease can present at any age and that iron deficiency anaemia may be the only presenting symptom.
Recommended plan of investigation
A recent study suggests that symptoms are an unreliable guide to the cause of anaemia in patients with gastrointestinal blood loss.
Relevant aspects of the history include drug ingestion, particularly NSAIDs or anti-coagulants, a history of previous abdominal surgery such as gastrectomy, or of radiotherapy, or a family history of bowel cancer or colonic polyps.
Dietary iron intake should be assessed.
Although this is rarely the sole cause of the iron deficiency, in one study it was found to be a contributing factor in 57% of patients.
While examining the patient, it is important to look for signs of systemic disease such as telangiectasia, signs of chronic liver disease or purpura.
All patients being investigated for iron deficiency anaemia of gastrointestinal origin should have either rigid or flexible sigmoidoscopy (with a low threshold for biopsy).
Routine blood tests of renal function and liver function and clotting studies are unhelpful in the investigation of patients with iron deficiency anaemia.
They may be appropriate, however, in patients where the history or examination points to systemic disease such as chronic liver disease.
Ideally the initial investigation should be total colonoscopy as this will not only examine for malignant lesions but offers an opportunity to assess the mucosa for angiodysplasia.
In addition lesions can be biopsied or cauterised.
At present, however, it still has limited availability so that for some patients sigmoidoscopy and barium enema examination provide an alternative.
Unless a bleeding point is seen on colonoscopy or the patient is found to have carcinoma of the colon, all patients should have upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
Variable proportions of patients with anaemia are found to have dual pathology and it is impossible to be certain which lesion is the major contributor to blood loss until the lesions have been treated.
During gastroscopy, the folds of Kerckring are assessed for any reduction and distal duodenal biopsy specimens are taken in all patients for histological examination to look for villous atrophy.
Although few patients under investigation for iron deficiency anaemia will be found to have bleeding from the small intestine, these lesions can be difficult to find and therefore a disproportionate amount of time is spent in investigating these patients.
Barium studies including small bowel enema are rarely helpful in this group of patients, although occasionally they may be useful in younger patients who are found to have Crohn's disease or a Meckel's diverticulum.
Distal small bowel lesions may also be shown by reflux at barium enema or by entering the terminal ileum at colonoscopy.
In a young patient with a negative gastroscopy and large bowel study, a small bowel enema may be useful to exclude Crohn's disease.
If there is suspicion of a Meckel's diverticulum an isotope scan may be helpful but it is important to remember that this investigation carries a significant proportion of false negatives.
In older patients the small bowel enema is rarely helpful and the next investigation should be enteroscopy or mesenteric angiography.
For patients who are bleeding acutely technetium-labelled red cell isotope scans or technetium-labelled sulphur colloid scans may provide additional information but when the rate of bleeding is slow, as in most patients with iron deficiency anaemia, these investigations are not helpful.
For a few patients who experience severe or recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding of unknown origin, diagnostic laparotomy still has a place.
The diagnostic yield at laparotomy can be improved by combining it with preoperative or peroperative angiography to identify the bleeding segment of bowel and with on table endoscopy to find the lesion.
Outcome
Initial investigations including colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy and barium enema and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with duodenal biopsy will establish a cause for the anaemia in 80% of patients.
Enteroscopy has identified small intestinal lesions in a further 30–40% of patients in whom the first line investigations were normal.
Where there is a possibility that the anaemia may be exacerbated by drugs such as NSAIDs or anti-coagulants, these should be stopped if possible.
For patients with vascular abnormalities endoscopic cautery may be appropriate.
If the lesions are restricted, however, to a small segment of bowel and the patient suffers from recurrent episodes of anaemia, then surgical resection is appropriate.
Other treatments that may be useful for patients with recurrent anaemia from vascular abnormalities include oestrogens, ethamsylate, and tranexamic acid.
For the remaining 20% of patients in whom no cause for the anaemia has been found, careful follow up with monitoring of haemoglobin and red cell indices is required.
If the anaemia persists or frank bleeding occurs, further investigation should be done (see below).
A recent follow up study by Sahay and Scott, however, suggests that in two thirds of these patients the anaemia resolves and does not recur.
The extent to which the rest of the patients should be investigated further depends on their age and general health, symptoms related to the anaemia, and the need for continuing iron treatment or blood transfusions, where antibody formation may cause major problems.
Prospects
Earlier detection of carcinoma of the bowel by the use of faecal occult blood screening tests should reduce the number of these patients presenting with iron deficiency anaemia.
A negative test in an anaemic patient cannot exclude the possibility of carcinoma of the colon and therefore patients with iron deficiency anaemia should be investigated for this regardless of the presence or absence of frank or occult faecal bleeding.
An alternative approach is to offer a single examination by flexible sigmoidoscopy to the whole population at age 55.
In high risk populations such as those with a previous adenoma, the intervals between repeat colonscopy have been extended from one to three years.
There is increasing awareness of the contributions of NSAIDs to gastrointestinal blood loss.
Nabumetone is an attempt to overcome direct contact between the drug and the small intestinal mucosa as it is ingested as a prodrug and metabolised to the active drug after absorption.
Misoprostol or H 2 receptor antagonists may represent an alternative approach as, when used in combination with NSAIDs, they provide some protection against gastric and duodenal damage.
No longterm data are available, however, as to whether this approach will reduce the incidence of gastrointestinal bleeding.
Dose dependent effects of long term ingestion of small amounts of gliadin in coeliac disease children: a clinical and jejunal morphometric study
Abstract
This study aimed to investigate the effects of chronic ingestion of small amounts of gliadin on children with coeliac disease.
A four week challenge was performed on 20 children who had been on a gluten free diet for mean (SD) 14 (3) months.
They were given a daily dose of either 100 mg (group A, n=10, mean age 4 (2) years) or 500 mg of gliadin (group B, mean age 5 (3) years).
The effects of the gliadin were monitored by morphometric study of the jejunal mucosa, intestinal permeability test with cellobiose/mannitol and serum antigliadin antibody test.
After the challenge, group A patients showed a significant increase in the mean intraepithelial lymphocyte count (before challenge 11 (3), afterwards 19 (6)) and a decrease in the villous height/crypt depth ratio (beforehand 1.5 (10.1), afterwards 1.3 (0.2)), while the intestinal permeability test remained normal and the IgA-antigliadin antibody increased in four of 10 children.
After the challenge group B showed more pronounced histological changes, an increase in the mean urinary celloobiose/mannitol % (beforehand 0.028 (0.020), afterwards 0.058 (0.028)), and IgA-angigliadin antibody positivity in six of eight subjects.
The discriminant analysis function showed that the pretreatment group, group A after challenge, and group B after challenge were correctly classified in 90% of cases by functions based on the individual intraepithelial lymphocyte count and the villous height/crypt depth ratio.
This study shows that chronic ingestion of small amounts of gluten causes dose-dependent damage to the small intestinal mucosa in children with coeliac disease.
The predictive value of laboratory tests, such as the antigliadin antibody test and the intestinal permeability test seems to be lower in treated patients than in those with active coeliac disease.
Although the causal role of gluten in coeliac disease is well established, the relationship between the quantity of gluten ingested and the severity of the histological and clinical abnormalities in coeliac disease patients is still unclear, especially for small mounts of gluten.
This issue could have practical relevance in the follow up of coeliac disease patients who may seem healthy during dietary treatment but still suffer from some degree of jejunal mucosa damage because of the ingestion of ‘hidden’ gluten.
Several studies have shown the consequences of a gluten challenge in coeliac disease subjects, whether as a single amount or as repeated daily administration of gluten within the range of a normal diet.
However, information on the effects of chronic ingestion of small doses of gluten (or gliadin) in coeliac disease patients is rather scarce.
We therefore studied 20 coeliac disease children who underwent a four week challenge with either 100 or 500 mg of gliadin per day.
We report here the results of morphometric study of the jejunal mucosa and of laboratory evaluation (the antigliadin antibody test and sugar intestinal permeability test) in these subjects.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
We studied 20 children with coeliac disease who had been following a gluten free diet for mean (SD) 14 (3) months.
They were admitted to our department between January 1990 and December 1991.
Diagnosis of coeliac disease was based on subtotal villous atrophy in the first biopsy specimen and subsequent improvement of morphology in a repeat jejunal biopsy specimen taken after the gluten free diet.
The gliadin challenge described here represented the first phase of the diagnostic gluten challenge adopted by the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition (ESPGAN).
Two weeks before joining the study the degree of compliance with dietary treatment was assessed by a dietitian and a standard gluten free diet, including commercially available gluten free products, was recommended.
Available information suggests that the gliadin content of the standard gluten free diet is about 1 mg per day.
The patients' parents gave their informed consent to the study.
These 20 patients were taken from a total of 32 diagnosed during the same period; 12 patients were excluded because of poor compliance with the diet (seven cases) or denied consent to the protocol (five cases).
STUDY DESIGN
The study design is shown in Figure 1.
After the basal evaluation (T), patients were randomly assigned to either group A or B. Group A comprised 10 children (two boys and eight girls with a mean age of 4.0 (2.4) years) and group B comprised 10 subjects (six boys and four girls with a mean age of 4.7 (2.7) years).
Two coeliac disease patients in group B showed a selective IgA deiciency.
During the four week gluten microchallenge the standard gluten free diet was supplemented with 100 mg/day of gliadin (crude Gliadin, Sigma Chemical Company, St Louis, MO, USA) in group A children and 500 mg/day of gliadin in group B. The daily gliadin was administered with some sugar in a single dose, 15 minutes before breakfast.
Patients were seen at the department after two and four weeks (T 1 ) to assess dietary compliance and for clinical and laboratory monitoring.
The timing of the jejunal biopsies, antigliadin antibody test, and sugar intestinal permeability test is shown in Figure 1.
The one week and three week intestinal permeability tests were performed by patients at home.
Patients who did not show evidence of relapse after this four week microchallenge had the diagnosis of coeliac disease confirmed by an open challenge with higher doses of gluten.
METHODS
Peroral jejunal biopsy specimens were obtained by a Watson capsule from the area of the ligament of Traitz under fluoroscopic control.
Specimens were fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin wax, sectioned at 5 µm thickness and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
Only well-oriented sections were examined.
The morphometric analysis of the sections was performed on at least 10 villi by a computerised image analyser IBAS-AT Kontron (Munich, Germany).
The following morphometric parameters were evaluated: villous height, crypt depth, villous height/crypt depth ratio, and the intraepithelial lymphocyte count.
The numbers of intraepithelial lymphocytes for a total of 1000 enterocytes was counted and expressed as intraepithelial lymphocytes per 100 enterocytes, as previously described.
Antigliadin antibodies of IgG and IgA classes were measured in serum samples by an ELISA technique.
For the sugar intestinal permeability test, an isotonic acqueous solution of cellobiose (5 g) and mannitol (2 g) was given orally after an overnight fast.
All the urine passed during the following five hours was collected and the volume was measured.
An aliquot was stored at -20°C.
Urinary sugars were determined by a previously described HPLC method.
The result of the intestinal permeability test was expressed as the ratio between the percentage of cellobiose and the percentage of mannitol recovered from the urine (cellobiose/mannitol %).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data are presented as mean (SD).
Differences between group means were evaluated by non-parametric tests (the Mann-Whitney test for non-paired data and the Wilcoxon matched pairs test).
The relationships between variables were evaluated by the simple correlation coefficient and a multiple regression analysis.
The morphometric parameters of the jejunal biopsy specimens before and after challenge were analysed by the discriminant function analysis.
All the statistical tests were performed by a computer using SPSS-X software.
Results
All patients completed the study protocol.
At the end of the four week period, no clinical abnormality was found in group A patients while signs of active disease (anorexia, pale stools) were reported in three subjects from group B (patient nos 12, 16, and 20), who showed evidence of laboratory and histological relapse at the T 1 evaluation.
The persistence of the gluten sensitive enteropathy was definitely assessed in the other 17 patients by an open challenge with normal amounts of daily gluten.
The individual demographic and clinical data are presented in Table I. No significant difference was found in the mean values of the prechallenge morphometric parameters between groups A and B, that is the two groups were histologically homogeneous in the basal condition.
The results of the prechallenge and postchallenge morphometric studies and laboratory investigations are shown in Table Ii and Figures 2–4.
At time T the intraepithelial lymphocyte count was normal in all patients (normal values 8 (3)) but it showed a clear cut increase at time T 1 in both group A and group B patients.
No other morphometric or laboratory parameter showed such a constant trend at the individual level.
Before the microchallenge, five of 20 subjects (three in group A and two in group B) showed a slighty abnormal cellobiose/mannitol % value (upper normal limit: 0.04).
After the microchallenge an abnormal value was found in four of 10 children from group A and seven of 10 children from group B. The intestinal permeability test result in the whole study group, expressed as cellobiose/mannitol %, was significantly correlated with the villous height/crypt depth ratio (r=-0.323; p=0.042) and with the intraepithelial lymphocyte count (r=0.50; p= 0.01), but not with villous height or crypt depth.
Multiple regression analysis showed no increase in the correlation when the villous height/crypt depth ratio and intraepithelial lymphocyte count together where compared with the cellobiose/ mannitol % (multiple r=0.50).
To show whether simultaneous consideration of different morphometric measurements could discriminate between differently treated groups, the data were analysed by discriminant analysis.
A discussion of the use of this method in the morphometric analysis of jejunal mucosa specimens is given by Penna et al .
Analysis of the 40 childrens' biopsy specimens showed that the intraepithelial lymphocyte count and the villous height/crypt depth ratio values allowed separation into groups (with minimal overlap) corresponding to (a) the prechallenge style (group A and B together),(b) ostchallenge with 100 mg/ day of gliadin, and (c) postchallenge with 500 mg/day of gliadin.
For the first canonical discriminant function the standardised coefficients were -0.76732 for villous height/crypt depth ratio and 0.78201 for intraepithelial lymphocyte; for the second canonical discriminant function the standardised coefficients were 0.66324 for villous height/crypt depth ratio and 0.64585 for intraepithelial lymphocyte count.
The unstandardised canonical discriminant function coefficients were (a) function 1: -6.069984 (villous height/crypt depth ratio), 0.1825418 (intraepithelial lymphocyte), 5.515047 (constant);(b) function 2: 5.246663 (villous height/ crypt depth ratio), 0.1507579 (intraepithelial lymphocyte), -9.734492 (constant).
Figure 5 shows that the resolution of the two canonical discriminant functions separates the T groups A and B (left) from the T 1 group A (centre) and the T 1 group B (right), with only four cases out of 40 being misclassified.
The predicted group membership corresponded to the actual group in 100% of cases in the basal condition, 80% in the 100 mg/day gliadin microchallenge group (10% were misclassified in the other groups), 80% in the 500 mg/day gliadin microchallenge (20% were misclassified in the 100 mg/day group).
Discussion
The major finding of this study is that the effects of chronic ingestion of a small amount of gliadin in this group of coeliac disease children were clearly dose-dependent.
After a four week microchallenge with 100 mg/day of gliadin (roughly equivalent to 200 mg of gluten or to 2.5 g of wheat flour) there were minimal morphometric changes in the jejunal histology.
Jejunal mucosal changes were more pronounced in the patients who had received 500 mg/day gliadin.
In patients taking 500 mg/day gliadin, the laboratory investigations often yielded abnormal results and clinical signs of relapse were also seen in some.
The dose-effect relationship was confirmed by discriminant function analysis of the morphometric variables, which showed that the pretreatment group, the 100 mg/day challenge group, and the 500 mg/day challenge group were correctly classified in 90% of cases by functions including the individual intraepithelial lymphocyte count and villous height/crypt depth ratio (Fig 5).
It is interesting that the dose-response effect we found in these coeliac disease children is similar to that found in the single gluten challenge study by Ciclitira et al , which showed no evidence of jejunal mucosal damage after the infusion of 10 mg of gliadin, minimal changes after 100 mg of gliadin, and noticeable histological changes after an additional 500 mg challenge.
With single doses of 0.1 to 1.5 g of gluten using Frazer's fraction III, Marsh et al found a time dependent dose related increase in intraepithelial lymphocyte after 12 hours, but no changes in mucosal architecture.
Taken as a whole, these data could indicate that a 100 mg dose of gliadin is near the threshold for morphologically detectable intestinal damage in most coeliac disease patients.
This is not to say that lower gliadin doses are not potentially harmful to coeliac disease subjects.
Previous studies have reported that the chronic ingestion of less than 10 mg of gliadin daily is occasionally sufficient to cause problems in coeliac disease patients.
It has also been shown that an acute challenge with 12–15 mg of gliadin induces an increased intestinal secretion of prostaglandin E 2 , albumin, hyaluronan, and beta 2 -microglobulin in coeliac disease subjects.
This study confirms previous results indicating the intraepithelial lymphocyte count is the most sensitive morphometric parameter of gluten induced mucosal changes in coeliac disease patients.
A definite increase in the intraepithelial lymphocyte count was indeed found at the end of the challenge in all subjects who had received 100 or 500 mg/day of gliadin.
None of the other morphometric variables showed such an unequivocal trend, especially in the patients who had received 100 mg/day of gliadin.
Local increase in the number of intraepithelial lymphocytes seems to be an early event in the coeliac lesion (the so called infiltrative lesion).
Consequences of the stimulation of the intraepithelial lymphocyte could be cytokine induced crypt hyperplasia, increased epithelial HLA class II expression, and increased epithelial permeability.
Laboratory investigations, such as antigliadin antibody test and the sugar intestinal permeability test, are commonly performed in coeliac disease patients' follow up.
Although it is commonly assumed that these tests reflect compliance with the diatary treatment, this has never really been proved for ingestion of small amounts of gluten.
In this study the antigliadin antibody-IgG test was often abnormal on gluten free diet and showed almost no correlation with the microchallenge.
This result was not unexpected, given the relatively short period these patients had been following the gluten free diet before entering the protocol.
Antigliadin antibody-IgG may in fact remain high for years after starting the treatment, due to the ‘immunological’ memory.
Although the serum antigliadin antibody-IgA value was more closely related to the study phase, a negative result could still be found in coeliac disease patients challenged with 500 mg/day of gliadin, a dose corresponding to a ‘visible’ amount of daily gluten containing food (approximately 12.5 g of wheat flour).
The intestinal permeability test result was even less reliably related to the gliadin intake than the antigliadin antibody test.
The reduced predictive power of the former test in treated coeliac disease patients could be explained in different ways.
Firstly, intestinal permeability could be primarily abnormal in treated coeliac disease subjects.
This possibility, which was suggested some years ago, has recently been reproposed by Hall et al who studied the development of gluten sensitive enteropathy in the Irish setter, an animal model of human coeliac disease.
With regard to the modest intestinal permeability test-intestinal morphometry relationship, it should be noted that previous attempts to correlate the intestinal permeability test results with jejunal histology have given conflicting results in patients with and without coeliac disease.
This is not surprising since the test explores the overall mucosal integrity while jejunal histology evaluates a small fragment of mucosa which is not always representative, particularly when intestinal damage is patchy.
In summary, this study shows that ingestion of small amounts of gliadin over a lengthy period causes dose dependent damage to the small intestinal mucosa in children affected with coeliac disease.
Other important variables of this response could be individual factors (for example, age and the HLA haplotype), the type of gluten ingested and the length of the exposure to gluten.
The intestinal biopsy specimen with morphometric evaluation of the jejunal mucosa is presently the most accurate method for assessing a patient suspected of poor compliance with the gluten free diet.
An increased intraepithelial lymphocyte count should always suggest the possibility of gluten ingestion in treated patients, even when the mucosal structure looks otherwise normal.
Although the diagnostic value of both the antigliadin antibody-IgA and the sugar intestinal permeability test is high in patients with active disease, our data seem to indicate that the predictive value of these tests, particularly the intestinal permeability test, is lower in treated patients.
Caution is therefore needed when interpreting the results of these investigations in coeliac disease patients who are in long term treatment.
The search for accurate, non-invasive tools, for the follow up of treated patients still seems to be needed.
When is Helicobacter pylori infection acquired?
Abstract
Cross sectional surveys have shown an increasing prevalence of Helicobacter pylori (H pylor ) infection with increasing age in Western populations.
The aim of this study was to examine the pattern of acquisition of H pylori infection over a 21 year period in a group of 141 adults who had blood samples and serum stored in 1969, 1978, and 1990.
A prevalence of H pylori antibody of 39% in 1969 serum samples, 40.9% in 1978, and 34.8% in 1990 was found when assessed by an enzyme lunked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Of the 86 subjects who were seronegative in 1969, only six (7%) were seropostive in 1990.
These data suggest that a cohort effect may contribute to the pattern of increasing prevalence of H pylori infection seen with increasing age.
Acquisition of infection in adults is rare.
It is unlikely therefore that reinfection will occur after successful eradication.
Previous studies have shown an increasing prevalence of Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) antibody titres with increasing age in Western populations.
One explanation for this finding would be that H pylori infection is acquired by people throughout their lives.
Alternatively, it may have been a commoner infection in past generations and the high prevalence of antibody titres in elderly people may reflect their greater exposure to the infection in years gone by; in other words, a cohort effect.
If this latter proposition is true, it would suggest that most patients in whom H pylori has been eradicated are unlikely to become reinfected at a later date.
By measuring H pylori antibody titres in serum samples collected and stored between 1969 and 1990, we aimed at describing the pattern of acquisition of H pylori infection over a 21 year period in an adult population and thereby to determine the explanation for the higher prevalence of H pylori antibody with increasing age found in Western society.
Methods
The Busselton population study is a series of cross sectional surveys conducted in a normal community population in Busselton, a small coastal town (population 9000) in the south west of Western Australia, every three years from 1966 to 1981.
A serum was taken from every participant at the surveys in 1969 and 1978 and placed in deep frozen storage (-30°C).
Additional serum samples were taken in December 1990 from a randomly selected cohort of 141 people aged 40–65 years.
There was a male predominance because this group was initially selected for the purpose of a study of sleep apnoea, a condition that is commoner in men.
Neither sleep apnoea nor any other medical condition was a prerequisite for inclusion in this sampling.
One hundred and forty one people were chosen for our study.
The inclusion criteria were that all subjects were current residents of Busselton, aged between 40 and 65 years in December 1990, had been randomly selected except for a deliberate male to female bias for the purposes of the sleep study, and serum available from 1969 and 1990.
An acid glycine extract ELISA technique was used to test for H pylori as described by Goodwin et al , and was performed in 1991 on serum samples, which had been taken in 1969, 1978, and November/December 1990.
At a titre of 300 ELISA units, the assay has a sensitivity of 86% and a specificity of 96% when measured against the standard of histological examination or culture of endoscopic antral biopsy specimens or both (in house data based on 100 patients of whom 62 had H pylori gastritis.)
Results
There were 141 subjects with a mean age in December 1969 of 33.7 years (range 20.2–44.0) and in December 1990 of 54.7 years (range 41.2–64.0).
Men predominated with 103 (73%) compared with 38 (27%) women.
The mean age of the men in December 1990 was 54.2 years (range 41.3–65.0) and of the women 56.0 years (range 41.1–64.4).
All 141 aubjects had a serum sample from both 1969 and 1990 available for analysis and 109 (77%) also had a sample available from 1978.
The prevalence of H pylori antibody in the serum samples showed no significant change at the three timepoints tested, 39% being seropositive in 1969, 40.9% in 1978, and 34.8% in 1990 (Figure).
Of the 55 serum samples taken in 1969 that were positive, 41 were retested in 1978 and of these, 37/41 (90.2%) were still seropositive.
All 55 seropositive subjects from 1969 had serum samples taken in 1990 and 43/55 (78.2%) remained positive.
No initially seropositive subject who subsequently was seronegative in 1978 became positive in 1990 (Table).
Of the serum samples taken in 1969, 86/141 (61%) were negative for H pylori antibody.
Of these 86 subjects, 68 had samples available from 1978 and 60/68 (88.2%) remained negative.
All 86 subjects had samples from 1990 tested and 80/ 86 (93%) were seronegative (Table).
Of the eight subjects, initially seronegative but who became positive in 1978, four remained positive whereas four reverted to seronegative in 1990.
As only 6/86 (7%) subjects who were seronegative in 1969 were seropositive 21 years later, this suggests a seroconversion rate of only 0.33% per person (95% confidence intervals 0.08 to 0.59% per person year).
This is a minimum estimate, however, because our 1978 data, although incomplete, showed that four subjects acquired H pylori antibody and at a later date reverted to seronegative.
Discussion
Recent cross sectional surveys of Australian blood donors and healthy white Americans showed that 10–14% of 30–40 year old subjects had H pylori antibodies whereas 37–45% of 50–60 year old subjects were antibody positive.
The results from our 1990 serum samples (34.8% of subjects of mean age 545.7 years were seropositive) were similar to those of the cross sectional surveys.
By contrast, our 1969 results showed an unexpectedly high prevalence of H pylori antibodies (39% of subjects of mean age 33.7 years).
The two key findings of our study, therefore, were firstly that H pylori infection was more commong than expected in our population in 1969 and secondly that acqusition of infection over the subsequent 21 years was a rare occurrence.
These findings suggest that a cohort effect may be at least in part responsible for the pattern described in recent surveys of increasing prevalence of H pylori antibodies with age.
As our study has also shown that most subjects who were seropositive in 1969 remained so over the next 21 years, it is probable that the high prevalence of H pylori antibodies seen in elderly subjects is at least in part a reflection of greater exposure to the infection in earlier years.
One other study, in which a group of 341 epidemiologists had H pylori antibody state assessed over a mean period of 8.5 years, also showed a low rate of serovonversion to a positive antibody state over time,(0.49% per person year).
Although this was a very highly selected study group, the results were in agreement with our findings.
Our 1978 data detected four subjects who seemed to acquire and then lose H pylori antibodies.
These subjects had comparatively low positive titres in 1978 and may have been false positives.
Alternatively, some subjects may require H pylori infection and then clear it spontaneously or with the aid of antibiotic treatment, perhaps given for some intercurrent respiratory or urinary tract infection.
It is possible that the ELISA antibody testing on serum may not be reliable in that antibody may be lost if storage is inadequate and there is frequent freezing and thawing.
The H pylori antibody positivity rate of 39% of young adults in 1969 is somewhat higher than that reported by other surveys and the consistency of our antibody results over the 21 year period that the testing is valid.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that H pylori infection may have been predominantly acquired at a young age in the past.
Our data also imply that it may be becoming rarer in Western societies as it is difficult otherwise to reconcile our findings with the greater prevalence of H pylori antibodies found in more elderly subjects in Western populations.
An interesting speculation is that the decline in H pylori infection over the past few decades would account at least in part for the reported decline in duodenal ulcer disease in Western populations.
Furthermore, because H pylori infection is rarely acquired in adult life, reinfection would not be expected in adult patients whose infection is successfully eradicated.
This finding provides support for the belief that adequate treatment of H pylori infection will give longterm protection from duodenal ulcer recurrence.
Intraperitoneal ivalon mimicking peritoneal malignancy after plugged percutaneous liver biopsy
Abstract
Intraperitoneal ivalon mimicking peitoneal malignancy after plugged percutaneous liver biopsy is reported in a 20 year old woman with a history of nausea and abdominal disterision.
Plugged liver biopsies are both effective and safe when used to perform percutaneous liver biopsies in patients with impaired coagulation.
A variety of substances have been used to plug the biopsy tract during needle withdrawal, one of which is ivalon, a polyvinyl foam (150–300 µ particle size).
Complications of its intraperitoneal leakage have not previously been described.
Case report
A 20 year old woman was admitted with a four week history of nausea and abdominal distention.
She had a past history of Crohn's disease which was quiescent and she was taking oral contraceptives.
Examination showed moderate hepatomegaly and ascites.
Investigation including imaging and a standard percutaneous liver biopsy, which showed congestion, some necrosis, but no fibrosis, confirmed the clinical diagnosis of venous outflow obstruction.
The patient was treated with anti-coagulation, pending a portocaval shunt operation.
Shortly afterwards, however, the patient deteriorated, with worsening ascites.
A second plugged liver biopsy was performed with ultrasound guidance to assess necrosis.
The prothrombin time was 21 seconds (INR 1.9) despite vitamin K administration.
This was performed with an 18 gauge Biopty cut needle and ivalon, and showed more extensive necrosis with early fibrosis.
Nine days later she had a laparotomy with a view to performing a portosystemic shunt.
At operation she was noted to have multiple, grey, firm peritoneal nodules mainly in the infrahepatic space but also throughout the peritoneum.
Biopsy specimens showed multinucleated foreign body giant cells surrounding irregular, angular vacuolated fragments (Figure).
Theliver was seen to be severely congested.
Unfortunately, the patient deteriorated after fashioning of the porto systemic shunt.
She was referred for an urgent orthotopic liver transplant, which was subsequently performed.
Discussion
Ivalon, when histologically prepared by a similar method to the biopsy specimen, was found to be identical to the central material of the peritoneal nodule.
It is presumed that ivalon injected to plug the liver biopsy leaked intraperitoneally and caused the foreign body reaction seen.
This complication has as a result of a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure in humans and not been previously described.
A similar reaction, however, is described experimentally in rabbit bladder and guinea pig subcutaneous tissue.
Although this complication is unlikely to cause overt clinical problems it may result in diagnostic confusion particularly with peritoneal malignancy.
In this patient a computed tomography before operation did not show any peritoneal abnormalities.
We feel it is important that clinicians using ivalon are aware of this reaction, which might be a frequent occurrence especially when the operator attempts to plug the entire length of the biopsy tract in a patient with a coagulopathy.