

Introduction
The HCIMA Reference Book is now a very well established service for members.
It is always well received, not only by HCIMA members but by colleges and industry alike.
It gives details of all the services which we offer to our members and gives a wide range of information for reference within our industry.
I do hope you enjoy looking through the Reference Book and that you will make good use of it throughout the year.
I am sure you will find it extremely beneficial whatever sector of the industry you are employed in.
At this time I would like to thank all companies who have taken advertising space in the Reference Book for their valuable contribution to the publication.
highlights of the HCIMA year
May 1991 : After 15 years as Director of the HCIMA.
& name announced her intention to retire.
then Chief Executive of the Northern Ireland Hotels and Caterers association (now consultant) was elected the new HCIMA President 1991–92.
His vice-President was  Managing director of Gardner Merchant.
took over the chain of office from retiring President 
The Association appointed its first full-time Marketing Manager,.
The guest speaker at the HCIMA Annual Luncheon, held at the Royal Lancaster Hotel, London, was  MP the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture Fisheries and Food (MAFF).
The winners of the 1991 HCIMA National Catering Business game was a team of lecturers and students from Brighton College of Technology.
met with Eire's first ever woman President, Mary Robinson, in Dublin.
Among topics discussed was the possibility of drawing up a joint European Community initiative between HCIMA and the Dublin based Irish Hotel and Catering Institute.
As part of the HCIMA accreditation programme  and , from the Association's education department, visited five hotel schools in Switzerland.
They also attended a meeting of the recently launched HCIMNA Switzerland chapter at the Hyatt International Hotel, Montreux, where a chapter Foundation Certificate was presented to the Chairman.
The European Year of Tourism officially ended at a conference in Budapest, at which the HCIMA presented and participated in the workshop on training and management along with a few others, including the President of the Committee for Vocational training in Germany and the Deputy Secretary of the World Tourism Organisation.
June 1991:HCIMA's technical Advisory Group published a briefing document entitled Providing Accessible Accommodation , which focused on design criteria for accommodation to meet the needs of disabled people.
The HCIMA was working closely with the British Nutrition Foundation, through consultant food scientist, in a European programme to make hotels and restaurants more nutrition aware.
The programme was known as the European Nutrition and Health Initiative and heralded the European Year of Nutrition, planned for 1994.
The first year of the new HCIMA programmes of study was shown to get off to a good start, with over 740 student enrolments.
On the first intake for the Certificate there were 540 students, and over 20O enroled for the Diploma.
July/August 1991:There was a mini-launch at trinity Road for HCIMA's distance Learning Scheme, when  the scheme's coordinator, and  of Newcastle College, joined some of the course tutors from the colleges which would be Distance Learning centres, to celebrate the production of the first unit.
was the author of the first course off the press,Human Resource Management,and he has already piloted it in his own college.
HCIMA's technical Advisory Group (TAG) published a technical brief entitled BS5750 —Quality system Guidelines , designed to give an overview of British Standards (BS) 5750 and suggest how it could be applied to a hotel and catering operation.
Executive director of Environmental Services, Gardner Merchant, joined TAG.
Expressing his pleasure at working with TAG, said, ‘My experience over the last 20 years has given me the scientific and technical background which the modern catering industry requires.
I see my biggest contribution to TAG, therefore, as being able to marry the art and craft side of catering with its scientific side.’
General Manager, Norwich Sport Village and Hotel, was named Britain's Best Boss.
was nominated by  Personnel and Training Manager, and his staff in a contest organised by TV-AM, the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) and Manpower training Agency.
September 1991:HCIMA Greece became the first European Chapter to be inaugurated, by Director  at a gathering in Athens, attended by 120 senior members of Greece's hotel and catering and tourism industries.
The occasion was hosted by  Secretary General of the Greek National Tourism Organisation, who made a public statement of support for the aims and objectives of the Association and its new Greek Chapter.
British Ambassador, was also present to lend his support, and  had an opportunity to discuss the Association's education work with the country's Secretary General to the Minister of Education 
Croner Publication's Practical Food Hygiene manual was published in association with TAG.
October 1991:Some 150 members attended HCIMA President  's Presidential Dinner, at the Savoy, London.
a student at Thames Valley College studying for the HCIMA Professional Diploma, was the 1991 winner of the Booker Fitch Award.
the prize of £1000 and a silver cup was presented to her at the college by  Chief Executive, Best Western Hotels.
This was the third year running that Booker Fitch had given the award to students on the HCIMA course, and it attracted the greatest number of entries to date.
Entrants were invited to write an essay suggesting ways in which the industry should handle recession.
The former HCIMA Cambridge branch was renamed Mid Anglia branch.
The HCIMA Branch Secretaries Meeting was held at Trinity Road, chaired by president Denis Broderick.
It brought together key branch members and staff for a lively exchange of HCIMA news and comment.
November/December 1991:The HCIMA led a delegation to the European Parliament in Strasbourg to promote, through a European Community Intergroup meeting, the need for Europe-wide standards of training and education in the hospitality industry.
Such recognition would stimulate higher standards and greater mobility of hotel and catering professionals within the Community.
The Strasbourg delegation included .
also travelled to Strasbourg for a look at the European Parliament and for meetings with MEPs, and to Zurich where he was met by  Secretary of HCIMA Switzerland and Principal of the Swiss School of Hotel Management and Tourism.
In addition, lunched with members of HCIMA Switzerland and attended a meeting, chaired by  Academic Dean of the Hotel and Tourism School, Leysin.
HCIMA Director  joined Canadian members of the HCIMA and their families as they gathered together in the Rocky Mountains for Thanksgiving weekend.
The venue was the Radium Hot Springs Resort Hotel and their host was  of Toda International Resorts of Canada.
Representatives of tourism interests in the valley were invited and met over lunch to talk about the HCIMA and its work for the industry worldwide.
There was a discussion on the possibility of forming an HCIMA chapter of Western Canada.
The HCIMA Annual Carol Service, held at the Queen's Chapel of the Savoy, London, raised £275 towards the Hotel and Catering Benevolent Association.
January 1992:Following an agreement signed with City & Guilds of London Institute, HCIMA was itself to be an awarding body for National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs).
The two organisations announced their intention of working together at levels 1–111, with HCIMA involved in the quality assurance system and endorsing the City & Guilds NVQs.
At level IV there will be joint certification.
As a result of HCIMA's presentation to the Tourism Intergroup of the European Parliament in Strasbourg in November, the Association was invited to have direct representation on the board of management of the European Foundation for the Accredition of Hotelschools (EFAH).
This was a new organisation, created to act as an EC wide body which would set standards, determine procedures and then undertake accreditation of craft and management courses offered by universities, colleges and schools.
The winner of the HCIMA Branch Public Relations Award was, for the second time, Cumbria.
, Hotel Services Manager, Westmoreland General Hospital, received a cheque on behalf of her branch for £20O from HCIMA President .
Despite a somewhat smaller stand than the Association had the good fortune to occupy in previous years, Hotel olympia proved to be none the less hectic for HCIMA.
The Association was pleased to contribute to the organisation of student seminars held during Hotel olympia week when top speakers gave an insight into their industry sectors.
February 1992:Following the inauguration of The Institute of Tourism Studies  (ITS), Malta, HCIMA Malta was involved in encouraging the island's authorities to seek HCIMA accreditation for its courses.
As part of a continuing process of improving the look and contents of the association's Hospitality magazine, a survey was conducted by the marketing department to find out what members thought about the publication.
was elected by HCIMA's Executive Committee to the role of Student Liaison Councillor to act as focal point for student activity and comment.
Students could now channel their views and interests through  HND Course Coordinator at South Devon College, to HCIMA Council.
March 1992:HCIMA initiated a major research programme in response to the creation of the single European market in 1993.
The programme was designed to look at the skills and knowledge needed by hospitality industry managers, at all levels in every sector of the profession, to operate successfully within Britain and Continental Europe.
The findings of the research, which were being undertaken on behalf of the HCIMA by the University of Surrey, would be used to extend the Association's existing Corpus of Knowledge research, providing information on the functions hospitality industry managers perform at different levels and in different situations, to raise the profile of the 23000-strong professional body within the European forum.
Objectives of the research included: to provide hospitality companies with information and advice on the skill and knowledge requirements of managers working in different sectors of the industry, in some European countries, which will assist them in their recruitment and human resource development activities; to identify the education and training needs of managers moving within the European hospitality industry and offer a basis for the design of short courses, distance leaning materials and training packages to meet those needs, in collaboration with European partners; and to assess the extent to which the skills and knowledge required by hospitality managers are generic and may be transferable across different industries.
Two hundred and ten hotel and catering college students and their lecturers gathered in Paris to attend the HCIMA/Banks Sadler Student Conference at the Palais.
It was announced that HCIMA and Kennedy Woodward Allen, London based chartered surveyors and architects, would be working together to advise and assist HCIMA members on matters of property and construction, as part of the association's membership services programme.
April 1992:The opportunity of giving part accreditation to the diploma offered by the American Hotel and Motel Association (AHMA), was discussed during a visit to Trinity Road by  President of AHMA's educational institute.
was keen to establish links with HCIMA not only for accreditation but in identifying joint ventures between the two associations.
The HCIMA's Education and Development Committee established new procedures for the accreditation of degrees, following the demise of the Council for National Academic Award as a major quality control mechanism for hospitality degrees.
In order to assure industry relevance, the association would wish to develop close links at an early stage with institutions seeking accreditation.
A new membership service was established by the HCIMA with Legal Partners, offering a dedicated financial helpline, exclusive to HCIMA members.
Under the scheme, Legal Partners would refer any financial enquiries from members to one of 70O qualified independent financial advisers who would then be able to offer local advice.
It was announced that HCIMA was to lead a major industry initiative to consider a Quality assurance programme designed specifically for the industry.
Following discussions by a forum of some 70 senior executives from the industry, brought together by the Association, and which invited the HCIMA to set up an industry-led accreditation scheme.
TAG was taking steps to bring together a working party to design an appropriate scheme.
The group would comprise senior industry figures, but not consultants, and would consider all aspects of Quality assurance, including BS 5750.
Highlights of the industry's year, May 1991-April 1992
May 1991:Hoteliers in Edinburgh reacted angrily to a council proposed tourist tax in the city.
According to a survey by INNTEL, hotels which host conferences are often overpriced and offer poor standards of service.
Forty per cent of companies surveyed said they were not satisfied with conference facilities throughout the UK.
Gardner Merchant acquired Rowland Commercial Catering (Australia) making it the second largest operator in Australia.
Utell launched Summi International Hotels, a new consortium specialising in de luxe and five star hotels.
Police in Brighton were investigating a dry cleaning scam involving restaurants and a bogus client claims.
chef at Harvey's Restaurant in London, announced plans to open two new restaurants in the capital.
Cunard reported a drop in profits to 31 March from £30.1 million to £7.6 million.
cunard's Vice chairman blamed the poor trading results on the weak dollar, deteriorating economic conditions and the gulf War.
Orient Express announced a loss of $5 million for the first quarter of 1991.
June 1991:Forte announced a radical restructuring of its tariffs in Posthouse and Crest hotels.
chief executive of Brent Walker, was forced to resign.
City Centre Restaurants and My Kinda Town (owner of Chicago Pizza Pie Factory) signed a licensing agreement to develop a chain of joint restaurant ventures throughout the UK.
Former French Prime Minister, warned fast food operators on the Champs Elysees to ‘clean up or get out’.
He claimed that they contributed to the ‘degeneration of a once prestigious avenue’.
The Academy of Culinary Arts launched its first residential course programme.
A working party to tackle the under representation of ethnic minorities at management level in the hospitality industry was set up by the Commission for Racial Equality.
vice chairman of the Restauranteurs association of great Britain, was made a Member of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen's Birthday Honours.
Isotron of Swindon was granted the first irradiation licence to preserve food.
The company preserves and packages spices.
Fuelled by an increase in business in Africa, Meridien Hotels announced a 53 per cent improvement in profits compared with previous year's figures.
Two separate surveys found that many prepacked sandwiches were being stored at dangerously high temperatures, causing the spread of harmful bacteria.
Principal Hotels signed a deal to take over six of the 12 Crown Hotels which went into receivership in April.
announced her retirement as director of the HCIMA.
A Cambridge cafe owner was fined over £13,000 for breaching Food Hygiene Regulations on 15 occasions.
July 1991:The Meetings Industry Association (MIA) launched a strict code of business conduct.
Facilitator, an organisation to help women travellers feel at ease while staying on their own in hotels, was established.
Initially 26 hotels joined the pilot scheme.
of Forte Heritage Harrogate was named Housekeeper of the Year in the 1991 Catey Awards.
Other awards were presented to .
Hotel of the Year was the Old Course Hotel in St Andrews.
Trade and Industry Secretary, Peter Lilley, announced that Britain will still be able to down a pint after 1992, despite some attempts by Brussels to bring the UK into the metric system.
Gardner Merchant retained its £25 million catering contract for British Aerospace, despite competition from both the UK and the Continent.
BAA Hotels sold its interests in the Grand Hotel, Amsterdam and the Sterling Hotel, Ghent, Belgium.
The British Hotels, Restaurants and Caterers Association announced it was to change its name to British Hospitality Association (BHA).
According to Mintel's Healthy Eating survey, the British are still complacent about their eating habits, despite easily available advice on healthy diets.
August 1991:Tourism trips to Wales slumped by 1 million in 1990 according to the Wales Tourist Board.
Plans by The Ritz Carlton Hotel Company to manage the Windsor Hotel in London (the former BR headquarters at Marylebone) appeared to be in jeopardy when it was announced that the hotel's owners were facing financial difficulties.
Plans to abolish the Army Catering corps as a separate body was announced.
The corps had recently celebrated its fiftieth anniversary.
Consumer Association magazine Which?criticised motorway service stations as overpriced, understaffed, and offering poor quality food.
editor of Caterer and Hotelkeeper for 36 years, died aged 86, after a long illness.
The International Passenger survey revealed that visitors to the UK dropped by 12 per cent in the first five months of the year.
UK consumption of beer dropped from 39.41 million bulk barrels in 1989 to 39.11 million barrels in 1990.
The Philippines Government announced a 20 year tourism master plan with the aim of attracting 5.3 million visitors by 2001.
September 1991:The National Economic Development Council renewed pressure on the government to lengthen the summer tourism season by adding a bank holiday in October.
Westminster City Council's  was appointed to set up training sessions with Chinatown restaurant owners as they prepared to meet requirements as laid down by the Food Safety Act.
According to the study Restaurant Chain Market in Europe fast food accounts for one meal in every 10 served in the UK.
This boom in fast food is providing strong competition for both staff restaurants and school meal services.
UK hoteliers came under attack as the ETB, once again, expressed concern over the cost of telephone calls to guests, particularly to those from overseas.
Expotel Executive Travel was bought by the Jersey based Modern Hotel Group.
According to an Institution of Environmental Health Officers report, complaints made to local authorities about food quality rose by 71 per cent over the past three years.
Stapleford Park, near Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire was put on the market for £6.5 million.
Kebab King opened its twenty-third franchised restaurant.
Singapore's Raffles Hotel reopened after a three year face-lift costing £55 million.
October 1991:Proposed Green Taxes on hoteliers and other service industries causing pollution were put on hold by the Department of the environment.
Suggestions of a tourist tax on hotel beds or at airports proposed by the shadow local government minister, was met with anger and dismay by the hotel industry.
American Express started a national advertising campaign as part of a multi-million pound promotion aimed at encouraging existing card members to use their cards in restaurants.
Year-on-year figures released by the Japan Travel Bureau showed a growth of almost 20 per cent or 17 000 visitors in the past 12 months to the United Kingdom.
November 1991:Hilton International launched its customer led Wa No Kutsurogi Service, specifically designed to look after Japanese travellers.
A wrangle in the US courts began between Hilton International and Hilton Hotels Corporation regarding the use of the Hilton name.
In a report by Mintel, British holiday makers were found to rate food and accommodation in Britain more highly than that of abroad.
The Ladbroke Group announced that it had acquired the 505 room Dom Hotel in Berlin, one of East Germany's most prestigious hotels, as the Berlin Hilton.
A food alert was issued by the Department of Health after salmonella was found in food products from Malaysia containing desiccated coconut.
According to the BTA, long delays in the immigration areas of London airports are giving overseas visitors a very poor welcome, BTA chairman, cited undermanning of immigration desks as one cause, and called for urgent action.
It was confirmed that the Rank Organisation was looking for a buyer for its five star Royal Garden Hotel in London.
US group Radisson Hotels International announced a marketing partnership with London based Edwardian Hotels.
December 1991:The Academy of Culinary Arts announced it was facing liquidation.
, managing director of Compass Group, resigned to join  former chief executive of Compass Group at Granada.
He took over as head of Granada's leisure division.
The Lanesborough Hotel, London opened its doors.
Owned by American group Rosewood Hotels, the 95 bedroom de luxe hotel was estimated to have cost £10O million.
Receivers were called into outside catering group Town and Country.
Northern Ireland's hotel industry needed to improve its accommodation standards to gain markets, according to a survey carried out by Horwath Consulting.
January 1992:The end of Holiday Inn's 20 year association with Scott's Hospitality was announced.
Scotts claimed to be looking for a new franchiser to take over its hotels when the contract with Holiday Inn expires in July 1992.
Forte purchased outside caterers Town and Country.
The government asked the UK hotel industry to come up with a workable system for implementing the European Commission's directives on package travel.
The number of hotel and catering companies to fall into the hands of receivers more than doubled during 1991, according to figures published by Touche Ross.
The 1992 Hotel olympia opened to a subdued attendance.
US based Park Inn Hotels took over two London Ramada Hotels.
February 1992:Scotts Hospitality signed an agreement with Marriott Hotels as franchisee for its 15 UK based hotels.
The number of meals served by contract caterers in the UK increased from 609 million to almost 655 million, according to a survey conducted by the BHA.
chairman of the London Tourist Board, died after a short illness.
Britannia Hotels in Manchester was fined £4000 for 15 breaches of the Environmental Health Act.
Resort Hotels announced a pre-tax profit increase of 27 per cent for the six months to 31 October 1991, while the Rank Organisation's pre-tax profits slumped 20 per cent from £312 million in 1990 to £250.5 million in 1991.
A Department of Trade and Industry Committee met to consider the implications of the service charge in the hospitality industry.
Stricter fines were announced for incorrect litter disposal.
These were set out in the code of practice issued under the Environmental Protection Act.
Meanwhile, the Department of Health was urging caterers to adopt total quality management systems in order to avoid being caught out by environmental health officers.
Granada Leisure announced the loss of 20O support jobs under the restructuring of the division.
Airlines using UK airports drafted a self-regulatory code of practice on food hygiene — pre-emptying legislation to control the industry.
Welsh Tourism announced that it is to spend over £7.5 million on marketing in Britain over the next three years.
Receivers were called into Principal Hotels.
March 1992:American fast food chain Arby's announced its intention to develop its roast beef sandwich concept in the UK.
The aim is to set up over 50 restaurants within the next five years and to increase to over 10O within 10 years.
Littlewoods announced plans to open a pilot stand alone restaurant in Blackpool city centre.
SAS International Hotels sold its 40 per cent stake to Inter-Continental Hotels back to the Japanese Saision Group but retained the Portman Hotel, London and two others overseas.
Mount Charlotte Thistle announced its pre-tax profit down to £1.5 million from £29.1 million the previous six months.
At Hilton, profits were down at £163.8 million.
Mandarin Hotel's profits declined by 17 per cent for the year to 31 December whilst trading profit for Boddington's hotel and restaurant division increased by 7.3 per cent to £2.6 million in 1991 from £2.4 million in 1990.
The BTA launched a customer charter which provides a code of practice for restauranteurs.
Hong Kong based regent Hotels emerged as the operator of the Windsor Hotel.
The hotel which was to be run by The Ritz Carlton Hotel Company, will be called the London Wilshire.
Wendy's rejoined the fast food market in Great Britain after an absence of nearly six years.
A guide aimed at improving training within the Scottish tourism industry was launched by the Scottish Tourist Board and Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise.
The European Year of Health and safety was launched in London.
April 1992:the first wholesale organic food market was opened in London.
Burger King announced plans to open a 20O seat restaurant at Thorpe Park, Surrey.
This is the first time a high street fast food chain has linked up with a theme park.
According to an index of advanced bookings, European hotel bookings for April were up nearly 34 per cent on the same month last year.
Rank put all its London and provincial hotels on the market.
Forte announced a group pre-tax profit fall of 62 per cent from £190 million to £73 million on turnover which rose by just one per cent to £2.66 billion.
Northern Ireland was urged to go up market to attract affluent visitors according to a report by the Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre.
A Meetings Industry association poll confirmed fears that Britain is increasingly losing conference business to Europe.
the professional body
As the professional body for managers in the food and accommodation services industry, the Hotel, catering and Institutional Management Association sets and maintains standards of managerial education, experience and practice for the benefit of its members, the industry and the general public.
Membership is open only to those who meet the strict education and industrial standards required and who accept the Code of conduct and the disciplinary procedures of the HCIMA.
Operational standards in the industry depend on the competence and integrity of managers.
Members of the HCIMA, by employing professional skills and training, aim to provide the consumer with the proper level of care in all aspects of food and accommodation services.
In turn, the members of the HCIMA accept responsibility for the health and well-being of others as well as their obligations to their employers.
Members may seek advice from the HCIMA on relations with employers, employees, customers and the general public.
Objectives
The objectives of the Association are:
The promotion of standards of good practice in catering and accommodation management.
the advancement of education and training and the promotion of research.
Within these objectives the association is empowered:
To establish and maintain appropriate standards of competence for managers in the industry.
To encourage just and honourable practice and discourage malpractice.
To test and/or assess knowledge and experience in the industry.
To hold conferences, seminars, readings of papers, lectures and discussions.
To hold or promote exhibitions.
To publish and distribute books, writings, and other material including periodicals, slides and other visual aids.
To disseminate information.
To establish and maintain a library.
To raise or borrow money for the purposes of the association.
To co-operate with other bodies to promote any of the above objects.
MEMBERSHIP
The various grades of HCIMA membership fall into two broad categories.
These are corporate members (fellows, honourary fellows, life members and members) and non-corporate membership (associates, licentiates, affiliates, intermediates and students).
The only difference between the two categories is that non-corporate members have no voting rights and are not eligible for elections.
Fellows
This is the most senior grade of corporate membership and members are entitled to use the designatory letters FHCIMA.
A member to be elected to fellowship must:
have made a significant personal contribution within the industry.
A period of at least five years in a senior position will generally be needed to enable this requirement to be met.
And either have been a corporate member for at least 10 years
Or have been an associate for four years and a member for six years
Or at the discretion of the Board of Fellows exceptional entry via the accreditation of prior learning scheme
And be able to demonstrate a contribution to the aims and work of the Association
And illustrate acceptance of the need to keep their own skills and knowledge up to date through participation in education activities or training appropriate to their role in industry.
Applications for fellowship must be supported by two fellows who have known the applicant for at least three years and will be considered individually by the board of fellows.
A person may be nominated for direct entry to fellowship if, by reason of public standing and professional experience, they appear to the council to be able and willing to personally advance the objectives of the Association.
Honourary fellows
Honourary fellowships may be awarded at the discretion of the council.
Life members
The council may admit as a life member any corporate member who, in the opinion of the Council, has performed outstanding services to the Association.
Members
Members are entitled to use the designatory letters MHCIMA and form the main corporate membership of the Association.
To qualify for corporate membership a person must:
have passed the HCIMA professional qualifications (Certificate and Diploma)
Or
have been granted complete exemption by holding one of the following qualifications:
1
A university degree or CNAA degree in catering subjects.
2
HCIMA membership examination (intermediate and final, Parts A & B).
3
Higher national diploma in hotel, catering and institutional management subjects awarded in Great Britain.
4
HCI membership examination.
5
IMA diploma.
6
IMA certificate prior to 1964.
7
Abridged course in institutional management (one year) up to 1976.
8
National diploma in hotel keeping and catering.
Or have gained the appropriate number of points through the licentiate assessment scheme.
Or have held the associate grade for at least four years.
And normally have had not less than three years' experience in a junior or first line management post directly concerned with the provision of food or beverages or with the provision and servicing of accommodation.
Or normally have had not less than three years' experience in a responsible position in an approved specialist field within the industry.
And held a position in the industry at a level not less than junior or first line management at the time of application.
Associates
This grade of membership is designed for those qualified in another discipline but working within the hotel and catering industry.
They should
Either 
i
hold a position of responsibility within the industry and have been in such a post for at least two years
And
ii
possess one of the following qualifications:
a
a degree; or
b
membership by examination of another professional body approved by council
Or
i
have been a full-time teacher for at least two years in college, polytechnic or university teaching students following a course leading to the HCIMA professional examination or such other qualifications as are defined from time to time by the council
And
ii
possess one of the following qualifications:
a
a degree; or
b
membership by examination of another professional body approved by council; or
c
Certificate of Education awarded by a British University or equivalent
And
iii
be supported in his or her application for membership by the principal or head of department of the college, polytechnic or university.
Applications for Associateship should be supported by two Fellows of the association who have knowledge of the candidate for at least two years immediately preceding the application.
Licentiates
This is a non-corporate grade designed either for senior managers whose careers are based on practical rather than academic foundations or managers with acceptable academic knowledge of the industry but with little practical experience.
All licentiate members may use the designatory letters LHCIMA.
In the first category, for senior managers, a person is eligible for licentiateship if he is a manager of at least 25 years of age, holds an executive post and has experience of education or both which earns at least 60 points on a special assessment scale.
On application for licentiateship a person is given an assessment and is advised of a suitable course(s) of management study to bring his score to 10O points within five years.
On reaching 10O points, of which at least 40 must be education based, a licentiate member is eligible to apply for full membership.
In the second category of licentiateship (that for junior management) a person is eligible for membership of this grade if he has passed the HCIMA professional Certificate/Diploma programme, or Parts A and B or one of the current examinations listed in the section under members but cannot yet meet the experience criteria required for full membership.
Student members of the HCIMA on appropriate courses (see under students heading) are automatically upgraded to licentiateship on successful completion of their studies.
Intermediate
This grade is designed for those who have gained a well recognised qualification but who, previously, could only be student members of the HCIMA.
Persons should be aged 18 or over and should:
Either have passed Part A of the professional examination.
Or TEC/BTEC National Diploma/SCOTVEC National Certificate in hotel & catering and institutional operations
Or BTEC continuing Education Certificate in hospitality management
Or a qualification at the same level which pre-dates the above.
affiliate
A person shall be eligible to be admitted to the non-corporate grade of affiliate of the Association provided that he or she is, in the opinion of Council, a fit and proper person to be so admitted and
Either 
i
works in a specialist function directly or indirectly associated with the hotel and catering industry, its services or suppliers at management or equivalent level
Or
ii
holds a position within the industry at management level and,
a
holds a degree in a non-catering discipline of a qualification of another professional body
or
b
holds a qualification in hotel and catering management which cannot be accepted for complete exemption from the Association's education criteria.
or
c
a minimum of 20 points attributable under the licentiateship scheme
or
d
such other qualifications or experience as the Board or Fellows may from time to time deem appropriate.
Students
A person is eligible for student membership if he or she is following one of these recognised courses:
1
OND in hotel, catering or institutional operations subjects.
2
HCIMA professional examination (Part A or Part B*).
3
* HND in hotel, catering or institutional management subjects.
4
* University or other recognised degree in hotel and catering subjects.
* Courses which meet the educational requirements of the junior management category of licentiate and full membership .
Subscriptions
Subscriptions are payable annually and fall due on 1 December.
Payment of subscriptions by direct debit, either annually or quarterly, makes more efficient use of Association resources.
Forms to arrange direct debit payment are available on request.
Members are reminded that, while they remain in employment which is connected with activities of hotel, catering and institutional management, they are entitled to claim income tax relief in respect of their subscriptions to the HCIMA.
Subscriptions (retired members)
Members who have reached retirement age and are no longer actively engaged in full-time employment are entitled to a reduced rate of subscription.
Members who are temporarily retired to raise families are also entitled to this concession.
The retired rate is approximately one third of the corporate membership rate.
Applications forms and details of the retired rate may be obtained from the HCIMA membership department.
Resignation
Any member may resign by giving written notice to the council, accompanied by his certificate of membership.
The certificate of membership remains the property of the HCIMA and must be given up on resignation.
This certificate should not be confused with an examination certificate which is the property of the individual.
If notice of resignation is not received  before the day on which the annual subscription becomes due, the member shall be liable to pay his annual subscription for that year.
CODE OF CONDUCT
General statement
HCIMA exists to promote and develop the professionalism of managers in the catering and accommodation industry.
In particular the Memorandum of Association states in paragraph 3 that these are:
1
The promotion of standards in the practice of good catering and accommodation management.
2
The advancement of education and training in the practice, in particular promoting research and the dissemination of the useful results of such research.
The obligations of members
Members of the Association are committed to the achievement of these objectives and to the maintenance of the standards of professional conduct as established by this Code of Conduct.
This Code of Conduct defines the standards required by Article 14 of Articles of Association.
It is in two parts:
a
Rules of Conduct 
These define the professional standards which members must maintain as a condition of membership.
Adherence to these rules is obligatory.
Failure to do so may lead to disciplinary action being taken against the member in accordance with Bye-laws 56–71.
b
Principles of good professional practice 
These principles expand upon the basic standards set down in the rules of Conduct and indicate the standards which members should seek to achieve in the interests of good practice.
Failure to achieve these standards alone would not lead to disciplinary action but in the event of any complaint being considered under the disciplinary procedure, such failure would be admissible in evidence and taken into account in proceedings before the Disciplinary Committee.
The rules of conduct
In general, members of the association are required to exercise their professional skill and judgement to the best of their ability and faithfully to carry out their professional responsibilities with integrity.
In particular, members shall:
a
Comply with the laws and ethical customs and practices of any country in which they work.
b
Uphold and safeguard the reputation and standards of HCIMA.
c
Use HCIMA designatory letters only:
i
For purposes and in a style which conforms with the objectives and upholds the dignity of the Association: and
ii
In conjunction with their own name.
d
Declare to HCIMA any conflict of interest which might arise in the course of representing the Association.
e
Not misuse their authority for personal aggrandizement or gain.
f
Respect the confidentiality of information.
g
Maintain a proper balance between the interests of employer or proprietor and customers, clients and suppliers.
The principles of good professional practice
HCIMA members must accept the responsibilities and obligations implicit in their work.
In respect of themselves and others with whom they interact in the course of their professional life, they should seek to maintain and promote the following standards:
a
In respect of HCIMA and fellow members:
i
Avoid injuring or damaging, directly, or indirectly the reputation, interests or prospects of fellow members.
ii
Promote and recommend the association and its standards.
iii
Uphold the educational standards and policies of the Association and support the advancement and acquisition of education, training and qualifications.
iv
Avoid bringing the association into disrepute.
v
When acting as a representative of HCIMA the interests of the association should be paramount to personal or employers' interests.
vi
Not knowingly misrepresent the corporate views of the Association in public.
vii
Avoid professional criticism by maintaining the standards of performance.
b
Personally:
i
Regulate their professional affairs to a high standard of integrity and uphold their statutory responsibilities in all respects.
ii
Make proper use of resources available.
iii
When in pursuit of personal ambitions and interests, take account of the interests of others.
iv
Maintain their standards of professional competence, knowledge and skill.
v
Take advantage of opportunities for training and education offered to advance and improve personal professional standards.
c
In respect of their employers:
i
Carry out duties and responsibilities conscientiously and with proper regard for the employers' interests.
ii
Apply the lawful policies of the employer obviating corrupt practice, particularly in relation to receiving gifts or benefits.
iii
Disclose immediately and fully to an employer any interest which conflicts with those of the employer.
iv
Consult with and advise the employer on the implementation or adoption of new developments in the profession or industry.
v
Have full regard for the interests of the profession and the public interest in fulfilling obligations to the employer.
d
In respect of colleagues and subordinates
i
Help and encourage their professional development through the acquisition of skills, qualifications and training.
ii
Promote good relationships through effective communication and consultation.
iii
Establish their confidence in and respect for himself (the member) and his qualification.
iv
Protect at all times their health, safety and welfare.
e
In respect of customers, clients and suppliers
i
Promote the standing, impartiality and good name of HCIMA.
ii
Establish good, but detached relationships.
iii
Avoid endorsing any product through advertising in a way which impairs HCIMA's impartiality.
iv
Establish and develop with customers, clients and suppliers a relationship leading to mutual confidence.
disciplinary procedures
The Articles of Association of the Association provide for the Council to conduct an enquiry to administer disciplinary action and in the case of an appeal to nominate an arbitrator.
Complaints
Members of third parties may make complaints in writing to the director.
The Director will immediately seek permission from the complainant to approach the person against whom the complaint is made to obtain the latter's observations (that is, would be written to, with the nature of the complaint and the complainant's name).
enquiry
a
Once any observations have been  received, these and the complaint will be considered by the Director and an honourary officer and their Decision as to whether there is a case to answer before the disciplinary committee will be conveyed in writing.
b
the respondent's observations must be received at the Association's offices within 14 days; if none is received within this time the Director and honourary officers will have to consider such evidence as is available to them.
c
In all circumstances the proceedings will remain confidential.
Disciplinary committee
Constitution
Chairman of the Board of Fellows, three members of the Board of Fellows and if appropriate one or more persons (non-voting) to provide specialist knowledge relevant to a particular case.
All members will be appointed by honourary officers.
Terms of reference
To find whether a case has been proved or not.
To recommend to the council which sanction or sanctions is or are appropriate, for example, termination of membership (expulsion); suspension of membership for a defined period; downgrading from fellow to members; suspension for a specified period from office holding at branch and national level; reprimand (by way of rebuke); caution (by way of warning).
To recommend to Council whether the findings and decision should be published and whether or not the name of the respondent should be divulged.
No action shall be taken until the 28 days notice of appeal has expired.
Procedures
Notice of hearing
When it has been decided that there is a case to answer, the respondent will be notified within 21 days of the nature of the complaint and be given 28 days notice of the hearing.
Legal representation
a
The disciplinary committee may be legally advised by a solicitor or by Counsel.
b
The respondent will inform the secretary of the disciplinary committee whether he wishes to be legally or otherwise represented, to call witnesses and/or submit documents as evidence.
Presentation of case
At the hearing, the director will present the case or if the respondent is legally represented, then the association may be similarly represented.
Decision
When the hearing is completed, all except the chairman and members of the disciplinary committee and its legal adviser will retire to allow the disciplinary committee to reach a decision.
When a decision has been reached, all concerned will be recalled and informed of the decision of the disciplinary committee.
This will then be put into writing to the respondent within 21 days, who will also be informed of the appeal procedure.
In all cases the respondent may request in writing that the disciplinary findings be published.
The final decision regarding publication of the findings shall rest with the Council.
Appeals
Notice of Appeal
Notice of Appeal must be submitted to the Secretary of the Disciplinary Committee by the Appellant within 28 days of receipt of the written notification of the decision of the Disciplinary Committee.
Membership
Three Arbitrators shall be chosen for each case as follows:
One chosen by the Appellant.
One chosen by the Council of HCIMA.
One chosen by the other two arbitrators who is independent and who will fulfil the role of Tribunal Chairman.
All Arbitrators should not have been hitherto involved in the disciplinary process or hearing.
The Council's Arbitrator will be chosen at the next Council meeting after the Notice of Appeal has been formally submitted in writing by the Appellant.
The name of the Appellant's Arbitrator must be given to the Director of the HCIMA not more than 10 days after the meeting at which the Council's Arbitrator is chosen.
If the Appellant fails to comply with this requirement, then the decision of the Disciplinary Committee shall sand and be reported to the next Council meeting for ratification.
Administration
The Tribunal will meet at the HCIMA Offices at 191 Trinity Road, London SW17 7HN, at the earliest possible date agreed by the Arbitrators and in any case not later than 28 days after the meeting at which the Council's Arbitrator is chosen.
Any other convenient location may be selected by the Arbitrators and arranged by the HCIMA secretariat.
Ten clear days' notice of the meeting will be given in writing to all persons concerned.
The Secretary to the Tribunal shall be the secretary of the Disciplinary Committee, or as supplied by the HCIMA secretariat.
Admissible grounds for Appeal may be
That the Disciplinary Committee erred in principle in finding the complaint proven; that is, that the decision was perverse in that the weight of evidence supplied did not support the allegation made;
That the sanction recommended by the Disciplinary Committee to the HCIMA council was in appropriate or excessive.
Terms of Reference
The Arbitrators shall have power by their award to annul and/or amend the decision of the Disciplinary Committee or to do so subject to the performance of any conditions which they may think fit to impose.
Procedure
The Tribunal will meet in private.
The record of the Disciplinary committee and all papers submitted to it will be made available to the Arbitrators.
The Arbitrators may call any relevant person to give evidence, or may ask for further written evidence.
Those appearing before the Arbitrators may be accompanied by a legal advisor if so desired.
It is envisaged that the Tribunal may require two meetings, for example:
i one to consider papers and written evidence, and
ii one to examine witnesses if the Arbitrators so desire.
The first meeting will be called in accordance with the requirements set out above; the second will be called for a date agreed by the Arbitrators.
Minutes of the Tribunal meeting will be taken.
The Tribunal is not required to reach a unanimous decision.
The Tribunal may reserve its judgement or may give its decision after a retirement before the close of the meeting.
In any case, the Tribunal will give written notice of its decision to both parties within 28 days of the meeting.
The decision of the Arbitrators is final and not subject to ratification by Council.
A formal notice of the decision reached will appear in the next available issue of the Association's publication Hospitality .
At its discretion the Tribunal may award assistance towards the travel costs incurred in attending the meeting by anyone invited to give evidence.
At its discretion the Tribunal may abridge or extend time limits specified in this paragraph as it may deem necessary.
Readmission of expelled members
In the event that a person previously expelled should apply for readmission and fulfil the basic admission criteria, it shall be for the Council, on the advice of the Board of Fellow, at its next meeting to decide whether the applicant may be readmitted and on what terms.
The Council will not on such an application for readmission review, annul or amend the decision of the Disciplinary Committee which led to the expulsion and which the Council had formally approved.
The Council will not normally consider any such application until five years have elapsed from the date of the expulsion and the Council will only consider any such application on its facts and merits.
THE COUNCIL
The Council is responsible for the administration, direction and management of the HCIMA.
The majority of members serving on the Association's various standing committees are elected from the representatives on the council.
Constitution
Membership of the council is open only to corporate members of the Association.
The council is formed by representatives of each of the HCIMA's 27 branches, by members elected on a national basis and the immediate past president.
Council has the power to co-opt, to a maximum of five additional members as required.
Elections
Only corporate members may participate in elections, either as candidate, proposer, seconder or voter.
The electoral cycle (and thus the normal term of office for a councillor) is three years and the pattern is as follows:
Year One: One half of the branch representation elected.
Year Two: Second half of the branch representation elected.
Year Three: National representation elected.
a
Branch elections 
Corporate members may only participate in elections of that branch to which they are attached.
Any corporate member of a branch may nominate a candidate.
A nomination is made on a prescribed nomination form, signed by the candidate, proposer and seconder.
The completed nomination form should be delivered to the director at Trinity Road 42 days prior to the Association's annual general meeting.
If the number of nominations exceeds the vacancies, then a ballot paper will be distributed 28 days prior to the association's AGM, to be completed by corporate members of the appropriate branch and returned to the HCIMA's auditors 14 days prior to the AGM.
b
National elections 
Branch boundaries do not have any significance in national elections.
The electorate is the total corporate membership of the Association.
The vacancies may be filled by any corporate member of the Association regardless of location.
The form and timing of nomination and ballot procedure is the same as for branch elections.
Honourary officers
The senior honourary officers of the HCIMA are the president, the vice-president and the councillor for finance.
They are elected by the council from among its members at a meeting held within six months of the AGM.
The president and the vice-president are elected for one year and they are eligible for re-election, although they may not serve for more than three years.
The president is chairman of the council and the vice-president is chairman of the executive committee.
Sponsorship
Support from suppliers helps Branches and Chapters keep to minimum charges for various events.
Controlled charges encourage members to attend meetings and help attract potential members.
The following guidelines on sponsorship have been approved by Council for the Assistance of Branches and Chapters.
These guidelines effectively restate the rules which have become custom and practice:
a
Sponsorship should be generic if possible;
b
The support of several suppliers should be sought so that preference cannot be inferred;
c
Where only one sponsor is required, alternative sponsors should be sought on at least an annual basis;
d
That all sponsors should be treated equally, none being offered more prominence than others when acknowledgement is given;
e
Sponsorship should be acknowledged in a discreet way, preferably in a single alphabetical listing;
f
The use of sponsors' logos should not be at the expense of the prominence of the HCIMA logo;
g
The income from sponsorship should be used to underwrite educational professional activities which benefit the industry generally as well as the Association.
HCIMA staff
It is not always easy to know who does what at Trinity Road or who to speak to on any requests or queries you may have.
We hope the following few paragraphs will help you make the best use of the services available.
Chief Executive
The HCIMA Chief Executive, has the ultimate responsibility for all the work undertaken by the various departments.
Leading the directorate and advising the honourary officers and committees on policy and forward planning is part of the role.
The work includes travelling to speak to members and other interested groups to further recognition of the association.
This latter objective is also covered by visiting companies and talking about the requirements of HCIMA membership to encourage a link between their recruitment and training policies and the HCIMA membership criteria.
The Director is also responsible for liaison with government officials and representatives.
Secretariat services
The work of this department covers; the statutory regulations of the Association, the elections to Council, the administration for Council, Executive Committee (and its working parties) and the Board of Fellows,Hospitality , the Reference Book, the library and information office, advising members on employment and personnel issues, branch and overseas groups.
& name (manager) has overall responsibility for its activities.
In particular, she deals with the regulations of the Association, elections, publications, the Board of Fellows and assists the Director in the work of Council and the Executive Committee.
additionally, she acts as the point of contact with the various agents handling the magazine,Hospitality .
(deputy manager) is responsible for the overall running of the information office and library with specific regard to purchasing, updating the computerised data bank and developing the service.
He is also Secretary of the Technical Advisory Group (an executive Committee working party) responsible for producing the regular Technical Briefs.
(deputy manager) has responsibility for the day-to-day personnel affairs within the Association, and for advising on the formulation of HCIMA policy in relation to the broad manpower and employment issues.
The administration and promotion of the externally operated membership services are also undertaken by this department.
These include:
Appointment Service
Eddington Hook Book Service
Christie and Group Business Advisory Service
HCIMA Mastercard (credit card)
Caterer and Hotelkeeper Discounts
Theatre and Concert Travel club
Kennedy Woodward Allen Property and Construction Advice
Legal Partners Financial advice
Lawson's ‘Lift Off’ Holiday club
Independent UK Hotels Discount Directory, and
MinOtels Top club
Officers in the information office are:
(information officer) who is responsible for answering members' enquiries for information and also compiles the quarterly Bibliography.
(deputy information officer) assists the information office in answering enquiries, maintains the subject and company files and administers the postal library lending service.
Finance and administration office
The work of this department covers the implementation of decisions by Council on all matters of finance, investments, general financial matters and salaries, the collecting of subscriptions, maintenance of all membership records and the processing of applications for membership (other than students) and upgrading and administration of the offices at Trinity Road.
(manager) has particular responsibilities for handling the financial affairs of the HCIMA, and its investments and acting upon the decisions of Council as they affect the finances of the HCIMA.
He has overall management responsibility for the membership and administration activities.
Officers of this department are as follows:
is deputy manager of the department and, in addition to normal deputising duties, is responsible for the production of monthly membership statistics and management accounts, also assisting in the preparation of budgets.
Other duties include maintenance and security of the building at 191 Trinity Road and co-ordination of in-house catering and entertaining.
(membership officer) processes all applications for membership (other than student grade) and administers the upgrading procedures.
She provides the material for the Board of Fellows when it meets to consider the applications for upgrading to Fellowship.
(subscription and computer officer) is responsible for the maintenance of the Association's computerised membership records and the production of subscription notices, hospitality labels and so on.
She also administers the subscription collection procedures.
(accounts officer) is responsible for bookkeeping and salary procedures and assists the manager in the production of financial reports.
Education Services
The responsibilities of this department cover the development of the HCIMA professional qualifications, liaison with centres offering HCIMA programmes and administration of the moderation system, accreditation of hospitality programmes in the UK and overseas, management development activities for members' self development, Student Members recruitment, Licentiate assessments and career counselling.
(manager) is responsible for the implementation of education policies as agreed by the Association's committees.
The manager advises committees and working parties on the recognition of qualifications, guides management development work, acts as the Association's spokesman on education matters and is secretary to the Education and Development Committee.
(deputy manager) is involved in HCIMA curriculum development and Distance Learning material.
Other areas of work include liaison with other education and professional bodies, such as CGLI and NCVQ and design of the NVQ framework with the lead body (HCTC).
(deputy manager) is involved in the development of a computerised record system for new programmes and administration of APL system.
Other areas include Licentiate assessments, and office management and organisation.
(college liaison officer) is involved with liaising with centres in matters relating to programme development and the administration of the moderation system and processing of results.
Other areas of work include the keeping of records and acting as secretary to the Course Approvals Panel.
and  (careers and training advisers) provide information on management careers in the hospitality industry and promote junior grades of membership (student and intermediate).
They are also involved in extending links with industry and especially the recognition of membership by employers.
The counselling of licentiate members and assessment of in-company and management development courses and the assessment of exemption applicants are also part of their joint responsibilities.
(Scottish officer) liaises with Scottish colleges and works closely with SCOTVEC and the SED.
She works with Scottish companies, promoting HCIMA membership, management development and the accreditation of in-company courses.
She is also involved in careers advice to school leavers and careers advisers in Scotland, and career and education counselling to individual members as requested.
(NVQ co-ordinator) this post is sponsored by the HCIMA/CGLI joint awarding body for NVQ level IV.
is responsible for the development of level IV assessments and for the promotion of the joint awarding body activities.
This includes offering advice to companies and centres on the delivery of NVQs and assisting companies in the implementation of the new qualifications in the workplace.
Marketing department
This new department, specifically created to raise the profile and thereby create a stronger image for the HCIMA, is working towards greater awareness of the Association and its activities, to promote membership, introduce new (and enhance existing) services, and to advise and assist all departments and branches to ensure the HCIMA is market and member led.
(manager) is responsible for devising the marketing and public relations strategy, including corporate identity, advertising, direct mail, exhibitions and events, market research, investigating new services and initiatives, liaising with the media, industry and other bodies, and conducting presentations.
(marketing and PR officer) is responsible for assisting with the implementation of marketing and PR strategy, organising exhibitions and events such as conferences or seminars that may be arranged, the annual lunch and any public receptions planned from year to year.
Company Patrons
The objective of the Company Patrons Scheme is to foster and strengthen the links between HCIMA and the industry at large.
The Company Patrons have committed their organisations to give the association substantial, planned support over a number of years.
In return the companies are assured that the association is able to extend its resources and concentrate on developments which take account of the longer term interests of the industry and those who work in it.
Company patronage gives the member companies opportunities for private, informal dialogue on important issues which confront the industry and ensures that HCIMA is closely attuned to the industry's responses.
Company Patrons are organisations closely associated with the work of HCIMA and which support fully our aims and objectives.
Company patronage is tangible evidence that the companies are committed to high standards of professional management.
The Company Patrons are now an established part of the HCIMA consultative procedure.
Knowledge of their perspectives on matters of professional concern has afforded HCIMA invaluable assistance on policy matters, particularly:
the development of the new qualification and establishment of the distance learning programme.
Changes in the national provision of educational programmes for our industry.
Issues within the scope of our Technical Advisory Group, with particular reference to the Food Safety Bill.
The development of our unique information and library service.
The establishment of the research programme into remuneration and careers in the hotel and catering industry.
Identifying and making contacts in Europe to prepare for HCIMA's changed role after 1992.
HCIMA is pleased to acknowledge the support of the following company Patrons.
HCIMA services
1
HCIMA information office and library service 
The information office and library is situated at the HCIMA's Trinity Road office and is a unique source of books, journals and advice on research.
This service is a privilege of membership.
There is no charge for its use.
The information office comprises information officer, & names .
We operate a postal lending service for books and journals, for which members pay only the return postage.
The service currently receives over 790O enquiries a year from members on a wide range of topics.
Both student members and practising managers make active use of our facilities.
We aim to respond to enquiries within two working days.
We can also send a limited amount of information by fax if required.
Members are encouraged to request from the information office a prepared guide to all the facilities available.
The library office is open for telephone enquiries and our information officers are more than happy to receive your calls.
We also welcome personal visits to the library, which is open Monday to Friday from 9am to 5pm.
Because the library specialises in the hotel, catering and tourism industries, we tend to hold books, journals, market research reports and videos which you would not normally find in many local libraries or even in your regional library.
It is, perhaps, not appreciated that the information officers scan over 60 journals and four daily newspapers in order to maintain a wide range of company files and over 10O subject files on items of relevance.
We maintain files on all major companies within the industry along with their latest company reports.
We have a lot of requests from our student members for help with their college projects.
While we are very happy to provide a list we ask that the students understand a little about the essay topic so the student's answer is his and not ours.
While the purpose of the library is, in the main, to collect, catalogue, and lend books and journals, it is the provision of information that carries that process one step further.
Every three months the library produces a bibliography which refers by categories to longer articles held in the library.
In categorising this information, in what is a sorting process, we have the basis of providing information on request.
The HCIMA bibliography has been established over nearly 10 years, and the past seven years has been on a computer database.
This allows the information officer to categorise topics by a key word, by category, by author or by title.
We, therefore, have an excellent way of researching any subject within the hospitality industry.
The bibliography is open to subscription and costs £50 per annum for UK residents and £60 per annum for overseas residents.
The information office has recently updated its directories of information, some of which are included in the HCIMA Reference Book.
We are therefore in the position to give company names, addresses, phone numbers, and contact names on a majority of organisations within the UK.
We also have a list of hotel schools outside the UK.
An important input into the work of the information office is the deliberations of the Technical Advisory Group.
The Group meets four times a year and draws its membership from senior members within the industry.
One of the Group's tasks is to produce technical briefing documents.
These should be regarded as best practice guides, covering matters of importance to the membership.
The group invites specialists to assist in writing these documents and so encourages a wider circle of advisers on the issues we discuss.
It is such a group of specialists that has helped us write technical briefs on the Food Hygiene (Amendment) Regulations, microwave ovens, BS 5750, accessible accommodation for the disabled and cook-chill catering.
It is with this approach that we make the Group's work truly representative.
The Group has also established detailed background information on the workings of the Food Safety Act 1990 and the Food Hygiene (Amendment) Regulations.
If you couple this with the work of the Richmond Committee, it is clear that food safety is an important issue for our industry in the 1990s.
The forthcoming proposed regulations on Food Hygiene Training will continue to focus an emphasis on the work of the Technical Advisory Group and the value of the service of the information office.
Recent research, commissioned by the HCIMA, shows that out of the 790O members that use the library and information service, all have a very high regard for the prompt and efficient attention that they receive.
We would hope that in the year to come members give the information office an opportunity show the value and direct relevance of the work that it does.
If members require any further information on the library and its facilities please do not hesitate to contact either ,, or .
2
General services for members 
The following range of services have been chosen not only to be relevant to members in the course of pursuing their professional objectives, but also to be of interest on a more personal level.
For more information on any of the services listed below, please contact the Membership Services Advisor at Trinity Road.
i
HCIMA Appointments, recruitment Service 
Operated on behalf of HCIMA by approved recruitment consultants — currently:
Berkeley Scott Personnel Consultants
Duffield-Harding & Associates
Portfolio International
Project 90
This recruitment service is based upon a precise Code of Practice which each of the above consultants has voluntarily agreed to be bound by.
A brochure detailing the service is available on request.
ii
BUPA, Healthcare 
Discounted BUPA healthcare cover (10-15 per cent) for HCIMA members, whether UK or international.
An application pack is available on request.
iii
Eddington Hook, Book Service 
A wide range of titles are available, many of which are on the student reading list.
Updates are circulated in Hospitality regularly.
A full list of titles is reproduced later in this publication.
iv
Christie Group, Business Services 
The group comprises Christie and Company, RCC Financial Services and  Venners, Stocktakers.
Services, some of which offer discounts of 10 per cent to members, include:
Selling, buying and valuing of hotels
Financing and re-financing of hotel and restaurants
Specialised insurance packages
Pension and insurance advice
Stocktaking and stock control
v
HCIMA Mastercard, Credit Card 
Available to all UK members over 18 years of age, subject to bank approval, this Bank of Scotland Mastercard bears the HCIMA logo.
At the time of writing there is no annual fee.
This card can be used in the same way as any other credit card.
For every card issued, the Bank of Scotland makes a financial contribution to HCIMA.
Application forms are available on request.
vi
Caterer & Hotelkeeper 
Discounted annual subscription for HCIMA members to this weekly trade journal.
vii
Theatre & Concert Travel Club 
Three months free membership (from application date) to this unique club providing members with a central booking point for entertainment, rail travel and hotel accommodation, often with substantial discounts.
viii
Kennedy Woodward Allen, Property and Construction 
Advice and assistance to members on matters of property and construction.
Services offered at a discounted rate include:
Architectural services
Building surveying
Interior design
Arbitration and construction law matters
A detailed advisory service on planning
Landlord and tenant matters, and
Valuations.
ix
Employment Advisory Service and Training Video Advisory Service 
Individual advice to members on employment and any personnel matters associated with their work.
This includes contracts of employment, personnel procedures, legal aspects of employment and salaries and conditions of service.
Individual advice is also given on appropriate training videos available to the industry.
This service is linked in with the HCIMA video lending and preview library (see section1).
x
Legal Partners/The Conway Group, Financial Advice 
A dedicated telephone line for HCIMA members giving access to advice on a range of financial matters including:
Mortgages and personal loans
Savings and investments
Retirement planning
Annuity open market options
Business funding and protection
Personal insurance matters (for example, contents and car)
Health care plans, and
General financial planning.
Telephone the Financial Advice Line (Monday-Friday, 9am-5pm) on .
xi
Resource Conservation, Energy Management 
A consultancy service offering 10 per cent discount to members requiring an in-depth study into the area of energy conservation within their organisation.
This service includes a full report with recommendations for immediate financial savings.
Travel
xii
Lawson International, Lift-off — HCIMA Holiday Club 
This holiday club, exclusive to HCIMA members, provides the opportunity to enjoy holidays under similar terms to the special rates available to staff working for airlines and travel agencies.
A full colour brochure is available on request.
xiii
UK Hotel discount Directory 
Provides a list of UK hotels offering discounted rack rates to HCIMA members.
xiv
MinOtels, Top club 
Membership of this club gives 10 per cent discount on B & B rates at all MinOtels' group of hotels UK and international , together with other related discounts, for example car hire and ferries.
MinOtels also offers a special bonus to HCIMA members joining their Top Club.
Progress with the HCIMA — new seminar programmes announced
Management development and topical seminar programmes for hoteliers and caterers are to be launched this October by the HCIMA in conjunction with Progressive Training a leading training company specialising in the hospital industry.
Open at management level, not only to HCIMA members, but also to the industry as a whole, the management development topics will cover a range of disciplines, from marketing and personnel to finance.
Each seminar will be staged (not simultaneously) at five locations throughout Britain to encourage attendance from as wide a geographical area as possible, and will be designed for groups of about 10 to 15 people to encourage maximum delegate participation.
The HCIMA is looking to award education points to management development seminar attendees, depending upon the subject matter, which will count towards HCIMA entry requirements.
It is hoped that this will help potential HCIMA members obtain the highest possible membership grades, and assist existing members to upgrade their HCIMA membership level.
The topical seminars (for 50 to 10O delegates) are being planned with Progressive Training to give the HCIMA the means to react to major industry developments as and when they arise, and could cover subjects as diverse as employment law, health and safety at work, and National Vocational Qualifications.
Director of Progressive Training, says, ‘We are delighted to be working with the HCIMA, since both our organisations are committed to improving professional standards within the industry.
We have developed what I am sure will be a tremendously stimulating range of seminars.’
A full programme of planned topics, dates and venues is currently available.
For further information or a copy of the programme contact: & name number.
City and Guilds of London Institute (C& G)
Most people in the hotel, catering and hospitality industry have heard of City and Guilds.
Founded in 1878, it is an independent non-profit making company, operating under Royal Charter, and a registered educational charity.
Initially it was founded and financed by the Corporation of the City of London and 16 of the livery companies, hence its name.
City and Guilds (C & C) is the UK's largest testing and awarding body.
Courses leading to C & g qualifications are run in a variety of approved centres including colleges of further education, companies, training centres and schools.
Many programmes are available on a part-time, day release or full-time basis.
candidates range from school-leavers to mature men and women who are consolidating their work experience, re-training or re-entering the workforce.
C&G now offers a total of 238 different National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs) in industry sectors ranging from agriculture to retail.
Twenty-four of these are in the catering and hospitality sector; there are awards at levels I to IV in food preparation and service, accommodations operations, and on-licensed premises management.
At level IV, C&G and the Hotel, Catering & institutional Management Association (HCIMA) have joined forces to offer new NVQs.
For catering and Hospitality Management NVQ level IV there will be joint certification of the awards and HCIMA will also have a key role to play in determining relevant assessment structures, external verification and quality assurance and control.
At levels I, II and III a statement of support from HCIMA will be included on the NVQs issued.
In addition to the four main occupational levels of awards, City and Guilds offers an employment-based route to senior awards.
Licentiateship, Graduateship, Membership and Fellowship awards are available as a means of recognising professional competence to the highest levels.
City and Guilds remains in the forefront of vocational education and training, working to provide nationally recognised qualifications, to enable people to gain recognition of their skills and knowledge and to provide a skilled workforce across a wide range of industrial sectors.
Further information on awards in the hotel, catering and hospitality sector is available from: & address .