

Business management
Memorable design: a marketing plus
Good hotel design cannot have too much careful planning and attention to detail, as  a regular hotel user, explains.
There was once a hotel in Somerset which proved conclusively that its three stars from the AA and RAC were an indication of facilities, not design standards,.
Ten years and a couple of hundred hotel nights later, the memory lingers on: the yellow lino with glitter detail, the handle hanging from the wardrobe, a flickering fluorescent light over the bed, with its violent orange blanket and holed sheets, a television alternating colour and mono, and a bathroom straight from Fawlty Towers — threadbare towels, tacky unwrapped soap and a toilet lid which would not stay up.
A combination of design and housekeeping disasters.
Sadly, negative memories are often strongest and the recollection of adequate but unexceptional four and five-star hotels merges into a chintz and marble blur.
But there are positive memories too, notably of properties which showed a spark of originality.
Reception areas, which should set the tone for the entire hotel, so often let it down.
Mass market properties are generally tied to the practical lobby, with heavy-traffic flooring and impersonal but efficient reception counters equipped with computers.
But in hotels where mass arrivals are not an issue, there is a trend towards the residential welcome, with attractive carpeting and registration at a table, with the weary traveller comfortably seated.
And what a difference that small touch can make!
A lounge implies relaxation.
Comfortable sofas and armchairs should be grouped to allow a semblance of privacy for each couple or party.
Hoteliers constantly argue that Muzak encourages relaxation but it is certainly not to everyone's taste.
A Hampshire hotel hit on a clever country house compromise with gentle piano recordings that appeared to come from a live performer in the next room — creating a delightful backdrop to afternoon tea.
If the lounge reflects the proprietor's domestic preferences, one can only speculate about the Georgian town house style hotel whose lounge boasts two public telephones with wall mounted perspex hoods, a cigarette machine and, on one occasion, dead arrangements of pinks and carnations on each coffee table.
Most guests use a lounge for coffee, tea or for meeting friends; but for those who simply want to relax away from the bedroomn, newspapers and magazines are an essential extra.
Low coffee tables may look appropriate, but a scattering of 60 cm tables is preferable if bar snacks are served in the lounge.
Few guests enjoy bending double to eat or balancing lasagne on the knee.
In any event, coffee tables should be tough enough to withstand wear and tear from the type of guest who uses the furniture as a footrest.
It is a fact that many guests are more comfortable with plain, practical furniture than with antiques.
‘I know antiques look impressive’, remarks one frequent traveller, ‘but I do worry about upsetting a cup of tea or glass of wine onto that polished surface.’
Hard-wearing upholstery is essential.
Cheap fabric soon frays and leather-look plastic stains and splits easily and looks cheap.
Chair covers should camourflage wine or coffee stains and be easy to clean.
Regular travellers emphasise a preference for subdued colours and design: bright shades and busy pattens on fabrics and carpeting can make tired guests feel tense and irritable.
Many aircrew welcomed the Gatwick Sterling Hotel's understated block colour schemes, some find it hard to unwind in busy, chintzy bedrooms.
And here is a final point from a female conference organiser: firm seating is preferable to deep sofas as it is difficult to rise gracefully from the depths to greet a colleague, especially in a fashionably short skirt.
The lounge should reflect the hotel's style and attention to detail.
If guests enjoy the ambience, they are more likely to return, and the same applies to non-resident visitors.
Restaurants, too, can encourage or deter repeat visits.
Decor should never distact from the food and guests should be able to enter and leave banquette seating without shifting the tables on either side.
It is important to check that no seat is subjected to the full force of an air-conditioning outlet, and to ensure that no guests are distracted by waiter activity at an adjacent service station or kitchen door.
Public area lighting should be adequate for both daytime and evening activities, flattering to tired complexions, and gently dimmed after dark.
At London's new Lanesborough Hotel, public area lighting is linked by a timer to an outdoor sensor which controls the lights according to the time or cloud cover.
Lights are never dimmed suddenly, but adjust gradually over half an hour.
Flexible lighting systems are also essential for conference and banqueting rooms, where practical or mood lighting must be considered.
A hotel near Gatwick Airport has brilliant halogen daylight lamps in an interior conference room which strike the casual visitor as harsh but are designed to keep delegates awake.
Long tables break down as needed, and contour-designed seating pampers delegates lucky enough to spend the day in the boardroom rather than the seminar room.
Ideally, all conference seating should give maximum lumbar support throughout an eight-hour day — Hilton's eight-hour chair is an advance here.
Working walls have become fashionable in many conference areas but banqueting rooms usually aim for elegance.
Chandeliers and wall sconces are the preferred lighting.
The Dorchester has used black Spanish glass panels and sheets of blue and dusky pink mirror to splendid effect in its ballroom.
Crystal wall-lights add sparkle to tiny mirrored bows fixed to the panes with diamanté studs, and heavy midnight-blue French silk drapes around the windowless room provide the final touch of luxury.
Heavily patterned carpeting may seem a good idea, concealing ground in crumbs and cigarette burns until the cleaners get to work, but there are alternatives to the garish patterns so often selected for public areas.
Patterns which appeal as a swatch can be repellent by the acre.
Aspirations to elegance, with well-dressed tables and crystal chandeliers, are instantly destroyed if the carpet screams at the guests.
Despite the effort expended on getting public areas right, many guests see only the lobby and their bedroom; and if the bedroom does not work or the decor is offensive, the guest will not return.
It is in the bedroom that originality can prove its worth, if only in the accessories.
So many hotels resemble each other, with fashionable limed wood furniture, chintz fabrics and marble bathrooms.
It is essential  to provide some distinguishing feature so that the guest remembers, a year or more later, than the hotel merits a return visit.
Although chain hotels are often constrained by bulk purchasing agreements and central decision making, it should not be beyond the imagination of those involved to make each property memorable through small design details such as prints or lighting.
Proprietor run hotels have an advantage.
of The Capital Hotel in London near Harrods, has furnished the town house bedrooms in a variety of styles, but the most memorable are decorated with distinctive Ralph Lauren fabrics and wall coverings in warm shades of brown and burgundy with red and green detail.
The effect is strikingly original and so successful that several more rooms have been decorated in the same way.
The decision to go for darker shades was a brave one, as many hoteliers opt for pastels or similar standards in the erroneous belief that they will not cause offence.
Dark, as in the Lauren schemes, should not be confused with the chill of monochrome, as in The Halkin Hotel, whose rooms are more macho and functional than warm and cosy.
Minimalism can also be seen in action at La Réserve in Fulham and the Sterling hotels at Heathrow and Gatwick.
The advisability of using antique furniture in a hotel bedroom is debatable.
Hartwell House in Aylesbury is a treasure house of fine antiques.
The Lanesborough in London decided that antiques were impractical, even in a hotel patronised by seriously wealthy guests.
Carefully chosen period reproductions, to complement the Regency/Georgian interiors, were ordered from a range of manufacturers, including William Maclean.
Frank Wensum at William Maclean also worked closely with Edwardian Hotels designer Martin Farrell on an exclusive range of eighteen century rose-wood pieces with period decoration for the Edwardian International at Heathrow.
The company is now benefiting from the popularity of period design in a wider market.
Aiming to achieve a smart town house atmosphere.
The Lanesborough's design team from Ezra Attia Associates came up with suitably residential interiors, although the smaller rooms seem rather heavily furnished.
However, the period design features cleverly conceal a wealth of high tech services.
There is a fax and a safe hidden in a handsome Georgian desk, and a concealed entertainment centre incorporating radio, TV, VCR, CD and tape deck.
Room keys activate the temperature controls and turn on an entry light, so guests never enter a dark room.
There are three levels of lighting, and the bedside drawer console controls the mood and also activates a night-light which turns on floor lights leading to the bathroom, and a lowlight actually inside the bathroom.
Bedroom lighting is particularly important in setting a mood, and for guests who read or work.
Task lighting around the desk is the expected norm in most hotels, and some designers favour floor lamps beside the armchairs.
Wall-mounted up-lighters are still popular with many designers but there are signs that central pendant lighting is making a comeback.
Economy lamps are widely used.
At 42 the Calls in Leeds, Philips E11 lamps, burning 11W of energy to give 100W of light, are concealed in stone-look plaster up-lighters which complement the style of the former grain warehouse.
The lamps however, take a while to warm up, which can confuse guests accustomed to 100W at the flick of a switch.
of LightGraphix has noticed an increase in low voltage tungsten halogen lighting in hotels, with compact fluorescent strips over bathroom mirrors using a 10W lamp to give 60W of lighting.
However, strips are generally unpopular with female guests, and few hoteliers can boast well-lit mirrors which eliminate shadows and flatter the skin tone.
Designers are notoriously unimaginative in bathrooms.
An abundance of white marble may suggest luxury, but marble is porous and needs careful cleaning to avoid dinginess, while marble floors are icy to bare feet.
And how many guests have black and white bathrooms at home?
Textured wall coverings, wood finishes, and towels in warm shades can soften the room and make it more user-friendly and less clinical.
Well-chosen taps and accessories may help, but gold swans are out.
Many hoteliers boast of their whirlpool baths but a leading hotel engineer cautions that those on a suck-blow system can trap water in the pump, risking legionella, while detritus sucked in may be blown out into the next bath if the unit is not adequately maintained.
The essential power shower must also be rigorously cleaned to avoid hygiene problems.
Walk-in shower cabinets are popular where space and budget permit, but ventilation must be adequate to avoid suffocation in the steam, and shower pressure should be tested to avoid a needle sharp spray.
Attractive bathrooms need not break the bank.
At least one Forte Travelodge has very acceptable blue and white tiles with matching striped shower curtains, big basins with lots of storage space, and heated towel rails.
Fog-free mirrors (a boon to women in a hurry to apply make-up after a shower) can be found in many mid-range Hiltons, Holiday Inns and De Vere hotels.
Prefabricated bathrooms have proved a practical option for htels from budget Ibis (who buy from France) to the new London Wilshire (Hosby of Denmark).
Standards are so high that guests never suspect they are bathing in a prefab and installation is quick and easy.
The finished hotel may look wonderful, but does it work? of Gravetye Manor earned valuable free publicity in the Sunday times when he invited couples to road test his new look rooms as his guests, but most hoteliers lack that foresight.
At best, the staff may be invited to spend the night, but all facilities must be tested.
Nobody discovered, pre-opening, that the hair-dryers provided in one luxury provincial hotel could only be used if the guests bent double or sat on the bedroom floor.
The designer's illusion of luxury was irredeemably shattered.
How computers create the ultimate in customer care
Computerised telephone systems and front of house systems can be installed in any size hotel, and as well as impressing your guests, they will make life easier for you and your staff, as  managing director of Interconnect Led, explains.
‘One hundred per cent caring’ is how  proprietress, with her husband Steve, of the 16-bedroom Hallery House Hotel (a Victorian, listed house in Cheltenham Spa) described their operation.
And with a record of ‘at least 60 per cent repeat business all the year round, including weekends’, the  have definitely got the hospitality formula right…with just a little help from their friends!
Hello to computerised care
We first came in contact with Hallery House, a picturesque, family run hotel with a welcoming, relaxed and comfortable atmosphere, a couple of years ago, when  and  were looking for an ‘all-singing, all-dancing telephone system’ which coped with every one of their detailed service requirements, and provided accurate room billing information at the end of each guest's stay.
We had a telephone system which fitted the bill for them — exactly.
The system has been designed and developed specifically for use in today's modern hotels.
From the moment guests phone through their reservation, to the day they check out, it provides a range of services which make their stay more enjoyable and brings them back time and time again.
, and their staff have found that, as soon as people arrive at Hallery House, they are impressed with the level of service.
Each guest's name and room number are recorded, plus his or her newspaper requirements, their room status and the time of their alarm call if needed (the system automatically rings at their selected time).
Additionally, the system automatically monitors the calls made by each room and provides a summary report on each guest.
And for people accompanued by small children, there is a unique automatic baby listening service to give them complete peace of mind while enjoying their stay.
A mix of ordinary phones are utilised, for use in bedrooms, together with key-phones, for use by staff.
Plain English text displays are used on the keyphones so that if John Ward in Room 16 calls for room service John Ward 16 is displayed on the keyphone in the kitchen, enabling the call to be answered with ‘Good evening Mr Ward, may I help you?’
It is all there, on screen
Hotel operators will already be familiar with the typewriter or personal computer keyboard; the latter and the screen-based console are the heart of the system, which has been designed to make operation as simple as possible.
The plain English instructions are very user-friendly.
As well as providing multi-line switchboard status information, the screen informs the proprietor or receptionist of the status of the rooms, for example, whether that early morning alarm has actually been set, which paper the guest has requested, whether breakfast has been ordered, and if the room has been cleaned.
You can also tell at a glance which lines are in use, how long each incoming call has been waiting, and even when each guest is scheduled to leave.
Suitable for even the smallest operation
Hotels, larger or smaller than Hallery House, will also benefit from the system which can be installed to handle two exchange lines and 10 extensions, and can grow in size to 40 exchange lines and 140 extensions.
Also, each system will be tailored to exactly meet your needs.
This specialist hotel system is based on an existing business telephone system which has a proven track record of reliability in thousands of companies throughout the UK.
So not only do you get a full commercial system, but you also reap the benefits of a set-up which has been tailor-made for the hotel trade, without sacrificing any of the functions.
Increased profit for you
and  have proved that putting a phone in each guest's room encourages them to keep in touch with their office or home.
From their room they can make UK or international calls at rates set by the hotelier, enabling recovery of the cost of the call, together with a service charge.
You can also provide your guests with a printed bill, on your own stationery if required, showing the number of calls made, the cost of their calls, the amount of VAT and your VAT registration number.
Other services, such as baby listening and internal calls, can also be charged, to generate additional profit.
Also, if you have not already installed a phone system for guests, you may be able to increase your rating, and, accordingly, the room rate you charge.
Front of house support
and  were very happy with their computerised telephone, and decided that what Hallery House needed next was a front of house package which would be equally helpful to both themselves and their guests, and take the hard work out of record keeping and marketing.
At this time, we had just put the finishing touches to some new software, designed specifically to serve the needs of small to medium sized hotels, which interfaces with any reasonably up to date PABX based telephone system, and IBM compatible computer equipment.
The software contributed to Hallery House's profits (through really accurate billing) from the moment it was installed.
It is British designed and made, and  and  have just one point of contact, the local installing distributor for every aspect of operation, including training and maintenance.
As to cost, the system is recognised by the industry as being amongst the best featured and most cost-effective frontend systems available in the UK.
‘Profitability, in employee time saved and guest calls charged, soared as soon as our equipment was operational’ says 
The benefits to your business
In a short article, it is impossible to spell out everything that a computerised front of house system can provide for a busy hotel such as and  's Hallery House.
These are just some of the aspects which they have found particularly useful to their operation:
The system interfaces with their existing telephone set-up to ensure that no calls are lost and that intemised bills can be produced in the event of a dispute at checking out time.
The system improves your service, keeping a record of the guest's history so that you can identify where he spent his money last time he stayed (by analysing his spending pattern), which room he stayed in, what his favourite drink is, whether he has to have special foods, and important facts like did he pay, did anything go wrong last time he stayed, and so on The risk of non-payment or bad debts is reduced.
If customers have accounts at the hotel, the system keeps a track of all expenditure and payments.
Credit limits can be sent and a record is kept of the debtor days, for future reference
With repeat business being the key to survival, the system allows for extremely flexible plans.
The hotelier can set up for any number of different plans, for example, golf weekends, leisure breaks, family rates, and so forth Test handling: the computer automatically produces confirmation letters, key cards, invoices, mailshots, labels and the like.
Marketing information is possibly the most powerful tool on the system.
The computer keeps a record of many important facts and figures, including:
1
Where your guests heard about you.
2
Where they came from (by region, for example, north-east, south-west, London and so on ).
3
How much they spent (in addition to accommodation), and where they spent it.
4
Which plan they were on.
5
What your percentage occupancy has been, by year, month and week.
6
What the takings have been, by year, month and week.
All this information helps the manager/proprietor to pinpoint his or her prime markets, so that advertising and mailing can be more targeted in the future.
A word of thanks
We are grateful to  and  for their cooperation in putting this article together, and, of course, the last word comes from them:
‘Our computerised systems have definitely played a big part in the fact that our guests keep on returning to Hallery House; the hotel continues to provide the same level of efficient, friendly service (whether or not we are there in person ourselves) at all times.
The handshake factor is important to us, and we have every support we could possibly need at our fingertips’, says    
the cost of hard water
Hard water costs hotels and restaurants hard earned revenue.
of Permutit explains how hard water is formed and elaborates upon the problems associated with hard water, tracing the history of water softening, and giving advice on the points to consider when buying a water softner.
Hard water is formed as rain water passes down through layers of limestone which contains calcium and magnesium minerals; the more calcium and magnesium minerals absorbed, the harder the water becomes.
A surprising fact is that 65 per cent of the UK is supplied with hard water, a situation which means that a high proportion of hotels, restaurants and other institutions are faced with hard water problems which are costing them hard earned revenue.
The problems associated with hard water fall into two main categories: namely scale and scum.
The problems and costs of hard water
Whenever hard water is heated or evaporated, scale immediately begins to build up as calcium and magnesium ions precipitate out of solution into a crust forming solid.
(The most visual example of this is scale to be found in the domestic kettle).
Scale has a direct impact on fuel costs.
In a boiler, for example, scale on the heating surfaces must itself be heated before the water.
Since scale is a poor heat conductor, inefficient fuel usage soon becomes apparent.
In fact calculations show that scale just 3mm thick can cause an appliance to use 20 per cent more fuel.
Scale can also lead to expensive and time-consuming maintenance problems in dishwashers, blocking spray nozzles as well as building up on heating elements and causing their premature failure.
In bathrooms, scale build up on shower heads constricts water flow, whilst build up around sanitary fittings and lavatory bowls is unsightly and unhygienic.
A common problem encountered in kitchens is that of smears and stains on glassware and cutlery, the result of hard water evaporating on their surface.
Scum is formed when soaps and detergents react with hard water.
Little or no lather is obtained, nor is any effective work done by the soap or detergent until all the hardness has turned to insoluble scum.
This means that not only is the use of soaps and detergents unnecessarily high, but towels and linen takes on a hard and unluxurious feel.
Scum that settles out in baths, basins and sinks leaves a film which is both unsightly and requires increased use of cleaning materials and labour to remove.
Where scum settles on wetted surfaces in kitchens, it creates an ideal breeding ground for bacteria.
Even if an establishment is suffering from only a few of the above problems, the cost penalties can remain extremely high.
The history of water softening
It was the industrial revolution which was the major foce behind the development of water treatment processes such as softening.
As industry grew, more and more water was needed for heating, cooling and for hundreds of processes.
It also became apparent that a means of removing hardness salts in water was necessary, particularly for steam raising boilers.
Two British soil chemists, Thompson and Spence, were the first to discover in 1845 that natural materials such as zeolites (alumino silicates) and greensands had properties for exchanging alkalis and acids.
Although development work on this discovery continued, it was a process called Lime Soda softening which was commercially developed to overcome the problems of hard water.
This process involved the addition of doses of lime and soda ash which after a time led to precipitation of the hardness salts.
Some years later in 1905 a German chemist, demonstrated the exchange of cations in the softening of water by replacing the hardness forming calcium salts with sodium which has no hardness properties.
He also showed that the zeolite used as the exchanger could be regenerated with sodium to replace the calcium taken up during the softening cycle.
Thus the process was capable of repetition again and again.
The trade name Permutit was given to this patented ion exchange process, it being derived from the Latin verb to exchange.
Although Permutit was not adopted as the company name until some years later, it was in fact Permutit's forebear who installed the  very first ion exchange water softner in the UK in 1911 at Burrill's Wharf in London's docklands.
With advance in other areas of chemistry over the years, the zeolite based exchange material was able to be replaced by manufactured, synthetic ion exchange resin beads, with a highter capacity for ion exchange, coupled with physical and chemical stability.
These sulphonated cross-linked polystyrene resin beads are now used in all softening plants.
The operation of a modern softner
In the process of softening, hard water is passed through a bed of ion exchange resin held in a vertical cylindrical vessel.
The ion exchange resin beads have the ability to exchange sodium ions held on the resin, for the calcium and magnesium dissolved in the water, so that after passing through the resin bed the water contains non hardness forming sodium slats, the calcium and magnesium having been removed and held on the resin.
The ability of ion exchange resin to remove calcium and magnesium ions is finite; that is to say, when it has given up all its sodium ions it can no longer soften the water.
When this point is reached, the resin and thus the softner is said to be exhausted, and it is therefore necessary to regenerate the resin in order to restore its softening ability.
Regeneration is achieved by passing a solution of sodium chloride (good quality salt dissolved in water) through the resin bed.
This displaces the calcium and magnesium ions from the resin and restores it to the sodium form.
With most modern softners regeneration is carried out automatically, being initiated by one of two main methods.
A water meter operated softner regenerates after a predetermined volume of water has been softened, the benefit of this method being that it is very salt efficient since the unit regenerates only when it needs to.
To overcome the problem of the softner regenerating at a time of peak demand, it is common practice to install duplex units in service/standby mode.
The second method for regeneration to be initiated is by a time clock, so that it takes place at a convenient time such as during the night.
The benefits of installing a water softner
The installation of a water softner is likely to pay for itself very quickly, as well as minimise costly and time consuming remedial maintenance.
By preventing the build up of scale numerous cost savingsd are to be made.
Boilers and hot water systems will operate more efficiently and use less fuel (remember, 3mm scale results in 20 per cent more fuel usage).
Heating elements and spray heads in dishwashers and glass washers will no longer scale up, extending their life, and drastically reducing costly maintenance and replacement.
Softened water will prevent scaling of shower heads and bathroom fittings.
Furthermore, the installation of a softner will gradually eradicate existing scale, since the softened water gradually dissolves it.
The prevention of the formation of scum around baths, sinks and kitchen surfaces means that cleaning is faster, requires less cleaning agents, and is more hygienic.
Laundry will require less soaps, detergents and fabric conditioners and will take on a luxurious feel.
How to buy a water softner
The starting point is to identify the volume of softened water that you require now and in the immediate future.
It is important to estimate peak flow requirement every hour as well as the total amount required per day.
The next stage is to get an analysis of your raw water supply.
If this is not available from yhour local water authority, a reputable wazter treatment supplier will be able to undertake one on your behalf.
It is essential that such an analysis is undertaken in order to identify the degree of hardness of your water, since this will directly influence the size of softner that will be required to meet your needs.
As explained previously, ion exchange resins have a finite capacity to remove calcium and magnesium (the hardness forming salts).
Thus the volume of water that a softener can soften before regeneration is a function of the hardness content of the water.
For example a unit which can soften 5000 litres of water with a hardness of 200 ppm as CA Co3 would only be able to soften 2500 litres of water with a hardness of 400ppm, since the resin has to do twice as much work.
Another important point to consider is whether or not a continuous supply of softened water is essential at tll times.
This information will enable the supplier to propose a solution which matches your requirements.
For example, it may be necessary to install duplex softners operating in service/standby mode to ensure that softened water is available at all times, even during the night.
Alternatively, a single softner operating on a time clock and regenerating during the night may be the best solution.
Finally, evaluate each potential supplier critically.
For example, although softening is a well proven and relatively simple process, the quality and reliability of the product will be dependent upon the quality of the components used and the design and manufacturing expertise of the supplier.
Another consideration is whether or not the supplier can offer the level of after sales service that you require, since like any other type of equipment a softener requires regular servicing and maintenance in order to keep it operating at peak efficiency.
Hotel communication systems
marketing manager for TOA Electronics, investigates the various forms of communication used in hotels.
These systems when used effectively can bring increased efficiency and at the same time help create a desirable environment for guests.
In a world of fast transport and high mobility, working for an international company has given me much opportunity to travel, particularly in europe, the United States and the Far East.
Glamourous maybe, but years of staying away from home, and being accommodated in everything from a Seamans Mission to a Penthouse Suite, seriously dampens initial enthusiasm.
It has meant that I have sampled virtually every type of hotel/guest house accommodation imaginable and this I present as part of my qualification to address the subject in question.
Before waxing lyrical about types of communication we need firstly to appreciate the uniqueness of the hotel environment.
Whilst most commercial environments are designed to stimulate motivate, even excite the guest, the hotel is, in general, quite the reverse.
Most hotels seek to create an air of calm, quiet efficiency, coupled with relaxation, cosiness or luxury.
In other words, the guest is made to feel that the hotel is a home from home.
We must make our customers feel safe, secure and even pampered.
Do methods of communication play a part in the creation of this desirable environment?
Oh yes, they most certainly do!
Take the most obvious example, the background music; low-key, calming, soothing — without it, a hotel appears more harsh and businesslike and less homely.
So, let us look at the various forms of communication.
We have already mentioned background music, although this should really be expanded to be the public address system, as almost always the background music is fed by the same amplification and uses the same speakers as the guest paging system.
This is fairly straightforward equipment, normally modular and therefore infinitely expandable, allowing systems to suit the needs of anything from a six bedroom guest house to a 2000 bedroom high rise hotel complex.
Many hotels will incorporate leisure facilities in the form of fitness centres or nightclubs, or both.
Now we are looking to more powerful sound systems.
Bring in the dumb-bells and we need the decibels, start to pump up the jam on the dance floor and we are into pumping up the volumes.
This may not fall quite so easily into the category of a communications medium as you see it, but its relevance will be glaringly obvious later.
We said earlier we wanted to make our customers feel safe and secure, so allow me to introduce closed-circuit television of CCTV.
Big Brother?
Cameras spying have moved on, CCTV is now seen as a source of protection.
Where in a hotel might you use CCTV to help you manage (which is what efficient communication is all about)?
Most often, the car parks, protecting your customer's property, offering him or her protection; the fire exits (not to stop people getting in because they are already alarmed but to check that they are not obstructed); the reception or foyer and other public areas so that management can see which parts of the hotel are being used by guests and roughly by how many, which is very useful if there is an emergency and you have to clear the building; and finally as a good old-fashioned deterrent and for detection.
Cameras are often placed behind staff at cash tills, particularly in bars.
This not only protects staff against abuse or attack, but it is also capable of recording the activities of staff and the transactions that take place.
This visual means of communication is the most effective aid to a busy hotel manager who has to keep his or her finger on the pulse.
In larger hotels, knowing the whereabouts of staff, especially when you need them most, is often a nightmare problem.
A radio paging system means staff can be bleeped when needed, all they have to do is go to the nearest intercom substation and they are straight through to reception or the management office.
No need to interrupt the background music just to  page the concierge.
It is so efficient and saves vast amounts of time and money.
Finally, the ultimate form of communication is Voice Evacuation.
Currently in Japan, any hotel that still uses bells to warn its patrons of fire is considered decidedly out of date.
Research shows that fire bells induce panic and confusion or, even worse, people ignore them and wait for the PA announcement to say that the bells were a false alarm and everybody can now go back to bed.
This costs lives.
Much better to use the public address system to deliver clear, calm and precise directions, all stored digitally on eproms, communicating your important voice evacuation message to your clientele (even in different lagnuages).
The only stipulation is, if you use the PA system as a Voice Evacuation tool, it must meet the BS 5839 standard which means that all speaker circuits, eproms and amplification are fully monitored for faults or breakdown.
Should a failure occur, audible and visual warning is given and stays operational until the fault has been rectified, thus ensuring that at all times you know your evacuation medium is always ready for action.
We have now considered the most important forms of communication for the hotel environment, each of them functional and efficient in their own right.
Consider then what happens when you start integrating one communication tool with another, in other words, the use and state of one system interacting with that of another to bring increased effectiveness.
Let us consider a few exanples.
Scenario 1
Suppose the night porter has gone through to the kitchen to make a sandwich.
His radio pager bleeps because the camera in reception (near the till) has detected movement and gone into alarm mode.
With the CCTV and radio paging systems being interfaced, the night porter can be warned of an alarm situation even while he is away from his desk.
Scenario 2
You see (on your CCTV monitor) some children playing dangerously close to the temporarily unmanned swimming pool.
So, using the public address you send, to that zone only, a warning for them to take care.
At the same time you bleep the missing swimming pool attendant who responds by picking up the nearest intercom substation handset allowing you to issue instructions directly, all within a matter of seconds rather than minutes.
Scenario 3
Imagine the nightclub is in full swing, your 2000 watt sound system is rocking the foundations and a good time is being had by all but…a small fire starts in the adjacent kitchens.
Let us assume you wish to evacuate the nightclub immediately but put the rest of the hotel on standby as there is a good chance of getting the fire extinguished.
Your public address, voice evacuation system is zoned so you relay the emergency standby message to all zones of the hotel apart from the nightclub zone.
For this zone you use the priority microphone which automatically cuts the amplification in the disco and allows you to address the nightclub guests.
This controlled situation is the result of having the fire alarm (smoke detectors), public address voice evacuation and pro-audio sound systems all interfaced.
This level of management control afforded by integrated communications is the standard we should all seek to achieve.
All this is fine for the hotel priprietor/manager, but does the hotel patron who is trying to relax, really want to be surrounded by a lot of high tech equipment?
The truth is, he or she will not even know.
You might get the occasional guest who notices a camera in the foyer or speaker in the restaurant but we are nearly into the twenty-first century and high tech equipment does not have to be offensive.
If you are well advised and you choose your products carefully you can incorporate aesthetically pleasing, even fashion conscious equipment into the hotel environment.
More often than not they will enhance the surroundings rather than detract from them.
Remember too, we are trying to instill into our guests a feeling of comfort, quality, safety and security.
To conclude: hotels large and small have a real need, for the sake of their customers and the sanity of their managers, for communication systems which are properly designed around dependable, quality products which themselves are, shall we say, environmentally friendly and ideally, capable of integration.
How do you know where to start?
Simple, work out what you would like to achieve, get some idea of the budget available and consult a specialist in communcation systems.
No luxury without security
Hotels are constantly striving to improve the level of guest services.
general manager of VingCard, explains how keycard locks can provide the hotel industry with more efficient and effective means of protecting guests and their property inside hotel rooms.
Mr. Constantine arrives at the hotel and is warmly welcomed by a smiling front desk clerk who explains all the services the hotel has to offer.
He is given the room key for room number 210 and is courteously shown to his room.
Mr. Constantine has a very pleasant evening and a good night's sleep and is suitably impressed with the furniture and fittings, especially the bathroom and the luxurious towels.
Leaving his personal belongings in the room he walks down to enjoy a good breakfast before continuing his journey.
There are only a few people in the restaurant this morning and Mr. Constantine selects a spacious table with good views over the surrounding countryside.
His room key and tag feel bulky in his pocket so he leaves them on the table with his newspaper before visiting the well assorted buffet table.
Having enjoyed a very tasty breakfast, he feels good and returns to his room to collect his luggage.
He enters the room key into the cylinder and turns the key, but the door will not open.
Slightly irritated he thinks that there is something wrong with the lock and goes down to reception for assistance.
The front desk apologises for the inconvenience and they accompany him back to his room with a duplicate key.
they open the door and find that all his personal belongings are gone.
Similar incidents occur over the next few months, a pattern emerges, surveilance teams are used and eventually the intruder is arrested.
During breakfast, when the guest left his room key and tag unattended at the table the criminal replaced the room key with a false one and went up to the room to complete his business undisturbed.
Hotel security and keycard systems
Security problems at hotels resulting in loss of property or injuries to guests is bad for business and time-consuming for the hotel management and staff.
When such incidents occur the guests feel that their trip has been ruined and blame the hotel, even when they may have contributed to the criminal opportunityby not securing their valuables in a safe deposit box.
Over the last decade the concept of hotel security has changed dramatically.
The card operated hotel locking system was introduced in the late 1970s' with the focus on replacing the traditional metal key for guest room doors with a more easily recodable system.
Since that date some 1.5 million hotel rooms and cruise ships cabin doors have been fitted with Keycard access control systems.
The reasons for the change are simple enough.
Greater security is attained because if a keycard is lost or stolen, the lock code can be changed very quickly and simply to prevent unauthorised access.
The systems also offer cost efficiencies in terms of easier administration and cheaper maintenance.
It was during the 1980s that the hospitality industry started using the power of computers and communication technololgy.
The demand from the hospitality industry was to integrate different computer systems and to continue the automation of the keycard concept.
In the same period the hotel industry itself became much more international in its scope of operation and a major segmentation of hotel security products occurred.
It was also in this period that the frequent stayer programmes were introduced.
Services tailored for the frequent traveller to obtain an increasing share of the profitable business market became an important issue for the international hotel industy when utilising new card technology in security systems.
Products for different hotels and different budgets
Keycard systems hold a number of advantages over traditional cylinder locks for both the guest and the hotelier.
Most importantly the hotel gains a security system whose cards cannot be copied at the local locksmith.
If a keycard is lost the lock is simply and quickly recoded to accept a new card without the need and cost to replace a lock or reckey a cylinder.
As well as the reassurance of a higher level of security the guest also benefits from the convenience of a card which can be carried alongside credit careds and dispenses with the bulk and weight of a normal key and tag.
All hotels are not alike.
It is important to provide the hospitality industry with a wide range of products to ensure that each hotel gets the right product for its size, location, local crime level, budget, community standards and method of operation.
The keycard locking systems found on the market today can be divided into three distinct categories:
Mechanical card locks
Electronic one-way communication locks, and
Electronic two-way communication locks
The mechanical card operated locks have distinguished themselves over the years with proven durability and reliability as well as pure simplicity.
The mechanical card system does not require wiring, batteries or computer hook-ups.
Using the keycard is very straightforward.
The guest simply inserts the keycard into the slot and the door unlocks.
The electronic one-way communication locks combine proven keycard lock reliability with the power of electronics.
When a new guest inserts an authorised keycard into the lock, the room's lock combination is immediately recoded, cancelling out the previous code.
The one-way communication locks are stand alone products without any wiring.
The system protects guests and deters thieves by enabling the management to obtain the information they need to investigate illegal entries into guest rooms.
A portable computer can be taken to any room to interrogate the lock and produce a list of the last 100 events at that particular lock-set.
The read-out includes the time of entry, user identification and method of entry, for example, keycard or emergency metal key.
This information can be obtained from all the lock-sets.
The electronic one-way communication system is more than just a lock system.
The Verified Access option allows hotel management to control perimeter access and secure entrances to all guest service facilities and back of the house areas.
A verified Access unit, similar to the regular lock-set can be positioned at perimeter doors leading to car parks, sauna, pool and other areas that require access control.
The unit is controlled from the front desk and it is programmed to accept cards with the correct codes.
The Verified Access system works together with the guest room system through the same check-in computer.
In addition, card readers and display units can be located at various point-of-sale positions such as bars and restaurants.
These are used to check the identification and validity of guest keycards before charges are made to the guest's account.
The third security concept is the electronic two-way communication system.
The system provides instantaneous online guest room security control.
By linking the system through a standard telephone wire, the management is able to control all operations from a centrally located computer.
The guests may even use their own credit cards as the room key.
This system offers reduced keycard expenses for the hotel, increased efficiency and increased flexibility.
Hotel guests and staff can use the same keycard for many applications throughout the property.
This extremely flexible system allows the hotel to tailor service preferences for each guest.
International service and support network
An important criteria for a hotelier to consider when the decision is made to obtain a card access system is the availability of local after sales support.
As front desk personnel come and go, training and retraining is crucial for the daily success of any system.
An hotel is a 24-hour service machine that requires top security, reliability and excellent after sales support.
At the end of the day, the right keycard system choice will depend not only on technololgy, its ability to adapt to the specific application and how easy it is to use, but on the reliability and the pricing of the product, and just as important, on the suppliers and their ability to provide international service and support.
Hotel security is an international business.
System integration
The integration of the key system with the hotel management programme, speeds up the traffic at the reception desk since the keycard is authorised automatically when the guest checks in.
This also means you are saving space by minimising the number of terminals at the reception desk.
Cards can be pre-issued, integrated into automatic check-out systems, integrated into service out systems, integrated into service facilities and even contain key combinations and guest information for multiple lodging within the same hotel group.
The unique keycard will now control guest access to one's room, swimming pool, car park, and so on, and at the same time can be used as a credit card during one's stay at the hotel.
When checking out, the key-code will be cancelled from the POS system, making it void for use afterwards.
Sponsored keycards
The cost of replacinng a keycard is crucial in a good security system.
A service oriented hotel supplier has invested a lot of time making files of important companies such as banks, credit card companies, large stores, tobacco companies, soap and perfume shops, beverage companies, newspapers, discotheques, restaurants, and so forth, which can sponsor in part or in total the cost of purchasing new keycards.
Sponsored keycards can be a good marketing too for both the hotel and the local tourist industry.
There is more luxury with good security.
Improved communications on the menu
How much time is wasted tracking down cleaners, porters and even the hotel manager?
Paging systems and private mobile phones could help solve this problem and have significant benefits for the hotel and catering industry, as Maxon Europe Ltd explain.
The hotel and catering industry experienced a difficult year in 1991.
The effect of the Gulf War, combined with the current recession, led to a considerable reduction in profitability.
During the Gulf War, hotel occupancy rates dropped to as little as 30 per cent in some areas, well under the average 60 per cent occupancy in the first two months of a normal year.
The recession also cut deeply into the UK catering market.
The latest Caterer and Hotelkeeper/American Express Business Barometer Survey, covering the first quarter of 1991, found that high interest rates, inflation and falling consumer demand were the key worries facing hotels and restaurants.
Of the companies surveyed, 49 per cent stated that their turnover had decreased compared with the same period in 1990.
In order to counter the effects of this drop in trade and profitability, and at the same time ensure a successful and profitable year in 1992, companies within the hotel and catering industry should now be looking at making savings in time and money, while at the same time improving their service to the customer.
One way in which these objectives can be achieved is by improving communication between members of staff.
In a hotel, for example, this means ensuring that every employee — manager, housekeeper, waiters, porters, cleaners, and others — can be contacted at a moment's notice and alerted to customers' requirements.
This becomes a possibility once a mobile communications system is adopted.
Two types of communications system are appropriate for the catering industry, namely on-site paging systems and private mobile radio, also known as two-way radio.
Clearly the importance of these systems will increase in proportion to the size of an establishment and the number of employees it has.
Paging
In a large hotel, consider how much time can be wasted attempting to track people down.
While cleaning staff are busy working on one floor, they may suddenly need to be directed to another room.
Valuable time can be wasted in trying every tlephone extension in the rooms where they might be working, or in sending another member of staff to search for them.
Not only is this time-consuming, but it also runs the risk of disturbing guests.
Similarly, maintenance staff may need to be sent quickly to carry out repairs at the request of a particular guest.
In practice, they can often be difficult to locate.
It is of course well-known that a customer's overall impression of a hotel often depends on small details such as the speed at which a light bulb is replaced or a television repaired.
These problems can all be solved by means of a paging system.
This works with an existing telephone system and gives instant communication with staff who cannot always be contacted via a specific telephone extension during the course of their work.
Choice of pagers
A paging system consists of a central control unit together with a pager for each employee.
Three different kinds of pager can be used, each functioning somewhat differently, though all are contacted via the control unit.
When his pager bleeps, the members of staff being contacted picks up the nearest telephone and dials a prearranged number, such as the reception desk.
He is then given his message.
Alternatively, a numeric pager can be used, having its own small display screen.
This can be programmed to show the number of a room to which the emplloyee should go, or the extension which must be telephoned.
To extend the use of numeric pagers, each number can indicate a pre-determined action, for example that the employee should go to a certain area or undertake a particular task.
Finally, using the third kind of pager, known as an alphanumeric pager, a message can be spelled out in words on the screen.
All these pagers are small, light, compact and unobtrusive.
As well as bleeping, they can be programmed with the silent option, alerting the user by means of vibration rather than sound.
This is particularly appropriate when the wearer is in a meeting or in a public place, such as the hotel foyer, where he does not want attention drawn to his pager.
Two additional features are available with some systems, irrespective of the type of pager used.
With a dial access terminal anyone can contact a pager from any internal telephone extension, thus obviating the need for an operator for the paging system, and considerably speeding up communications.
A second feature allows pagers to be alerted from remote alarm sensors, thus increasing safety or security where appropriate.
For example, when a fire alarm rings the fire team's pagers are automatically contacted.
Alternatively, the opening of a security door will activate the security guard's pager.
See the benefits
One hotel in Scotland, the 30 bedroom Dryburgh Abbey Hotel in St Boswells, Roxburghshire, is making good use of its paging system.
general manager, said he could not operate without it.
‘Effective communications without it would be impossible, and trying to contact staff by telephone a nightmare.’
The system has only been in place for a month but already, says  ‘we are seeing the benefits.’
All key staff at the Dryburgh Abbey Hotel have pagers, including  himself, the housekeeper and porters, as well as the duty manager and bar manager.
They use numeric pagers which have been pre-programmed with specific codes for each type of message.
For example, a 1 displayed on the screen requires the person contacted to call reception, a 2 indicates that the manager should be contacted, and so on .
‘For me, the arrival of a VIP at the hotel is particularly important,’ said  ‘I can be paged immediately by reception and can greet the guest straight away.
Before we installed the new system, such a guest could be left waiting whilst the receptionist attempted to locate me by telephone.
This sometimes took several minutes.’
Fast food operations
The use of paging systems is not restricted to hotels.
Any catering operation with its staff spread over a wide area can benefit.
A fast food restaurant chain in the United States is pioneering the use of pagers for its waiters.
They are paged with the number of the next table that needs attention, instead of having to return each time to the serving hatch.
In tne fast food business, every second counts and a rapid turnover of customers is essential to maximise profit margins.
Related uses for pagers could include motorway service stations or perhaps breweries.
Both of these can be large multi-site operations with widely scattered staff.
The silent vibration alert could be particularly useful in a noisy factory type environment such as a brewery.
Private mobile radio
The second category of mobile communications which can help the catering industry to operate more efficiently is private mobile (or two-say) radio.
a private mobile radio system gives an organisation its own radio frequency on which employees can communicate using hand-held radios.
This is particularly effective in situations where the sender of a message is working in an area far from any telephone extension, and would therefore find it difficult to alert a pager system, or where two-say conversation is necessary during the course of certain operations.
For example, maintenance staff in a hotel can benefit in situations where they need to talk constantly to another member of staff located in a separate part of the hotel, such as while they are repairing and testing lighting or heating.
Also staff working in leisure areas, such as swimming pools or fitness rooms, sometimes have two-way radios in order to alert the reception desk in the event of an accident or call for assistance.
Other uses for private mobile radio in the catering sector inlcude security operations and airport catering.
Particularly in large hotels in cities, threats to security are now taken very seriously.
when some security staff are located outside the hotel, they may need to be in constant communication with their colleagues inside the building, in order to verify that people arriving are bona fide guests, for example.
Airport catering
The use of private mobile radio by airport catering organisations has benefits arising from the large distances which must frequently be covered between the airport buildings and the aeroplanes which have to be supplied with food before departure.
Should an order for meals need to be altered, or an error be discovered, while unloading is taking place at the plane, the driver of the vehicle supplying the meals can simply radio back to base and within minutes the problem is resolved.
Both paging systems and two-way radio can have significant benefits for the catering industry.
At present, their potential for use within this industry is largely untapped, in contrast to the situation in many other areas, where their use is widespread.
In today's difficult economic climate, however, it is important to realise this potential as part of the drive to increase efficiency and improve customer service.
Raising hotel standards
A lift which is out of order is a frequent and frustrating sight.
of Leonard Lifts Limited looks at how this can be avoided with regular maintenance and modernisation and the use of the latest technology to help maintain high standards of customer care.
Some years ago the technical director of Hyatt International Hotels was reported as saying that ‘if the air conditioning works, the telephone system works and the lift installation works, there is a good chance that the hotel works’.
This statement was made in the context of the planning and design of hotels for new constructionn, but an obvious corollary is that these major systems should be properly serviced to ensure that the hotel continues to operate successfully every day.
Regular maintenance
In the case of lift installations it is essential that they receive regular preventative maintenance inspections to meet the paramount conditions of safety and operational efficiency.
This maintenance service is normally provided under contract by specialist lift maintenance companies and the extent of the service provided is determined by the mutual requirements of the building and the building administration.
Most maintenance companies are able to provide a number of options on a wide range of originally installed equipment.
However, the lift industry cliché that a lift is a lift needs to be rethought for hotels.
A better cliché would be a lift is a lift is a lift but not when it is in a hotel.
Hotels in particular do require special attention.
Hotels have high standards of customer care and lift maintenance organisations have to understand these requirements.
Engineers are especially trained and briefed for the hotel environment as well as being equipped with uniforms and positive ID.
In addition to the usual administration and operational needs of any building, hotels have some very important and significant differences.
The main cause of these differences is the hotel guests who come and go according to their own personal arrangements and who quite rightly expect high standards and quality service to be maintained throughout their stay.
In action day and night
Therefore the usual periods of calm and quiet in the routine of a building do not exist, for example, outside normal office hours, over the weekend and during the annual holidays.
In fact, the routine of a hotel building is one of the most demanding possible for the lifts are in action day and night, throughout the year.
For these reasons the maintenance service contracts should include, as a minimum requirement, the following items:
The service contract is of a comprehensive nature to include labour and materials required for any repairs or attention that may be required.
Twenty-four hour, 365 days a year fast emergency response is included in the contracts to ensure the maximum convenience to customers and guests
To ensure fast and empathetic response to customers we include for dedicated supervision to allow for close communication and co-operation with the hotel staff
Routine contractual visits are made by appointment to ensure that lifts are taken out of service for routine maintenance only at times convenient to the hotel
In view of the high profile nature of lifts in a hotel, the contracts normally include for special attention to be given to the cosmetics of the lift installation.
This includes looking after indicators, lighting and general tidiness to ensure that lift cars and such like are left in a good condition.
These factors are particularly important as the best preventative maintenance service in the world can be seen as less than satisfactory, if oily, unkempt, poorly dressed engineers are given to camping out in your hotel lift lobby without warning and taking lifts out of service just as you are receiving a large influx of guests.
Technology aids efficiency
State of the art technology can be applied to existing installations to systematically monitor and record all lift activity and events.
Indeed these monitoring devices can be arranged to automatically signal a lift breakdown to a remote point by a telephone line.
This actually allows the lift maintenance monitoring organisations to know that the lift is out of action before you do.
When these systems are employed, identification and rectification of any problems can be speeded up dramatically.
Obviously this is achieved by attending to lift stoppages as they occur and not as they are reported and, in addition, the lift monitoring devices record all events affecting the operation of the lift which provides a detailed case history, which in turn leads to speedy and accurate diagnosis and correction.
Like any mechanical or electrical equipment, lifts are not eternal.
Therefore, after a number of years of operation, regular service and preventative maintenance, it can become increasingly difficult to retain peak performance and preserve the capital value of this expensive asset.
As part of the lift maintenance contract, maintenance companies will provide regular reports on your lift installations to advise you, on a continually updated basis, as to their condition, reliability and future performance expectations.
Modernisation
Eventually it will become necessary to carry out modernisation and replacement of key components to maintain performance, reliability and to meet current user expectation levels.
In some cases, it may be possible to consider complete renewal of the lifts, but the demands of hotel operational requirements and over-all time-scale usually conspire to make in situ modernisation the most practical solution.
As these works are carried out whilst the hotel is occupied and operation, it requires a flexible approach to the work and very close co-operation with the hotel and their representatives.
This obviously includes a good awareness of the demands and requirements of the hotel guests.
An example of this type of modernisation project for lifts was undertaken by Leonard Lifts Limited for the Cavendish Hotel in Jermyn Street, London.
The original installation provided in the 1960s comprised two main passenger lifts, together with an adjacent baggage lift.
Although the lifts were adjacent in a common lift well, the main passenger  loading was taken by the two passenger lifts which shared a common control system.
With the ageing of the original relay control system, the performance of the lifts was becoming progressively less satisfactory and therefore it was decided that the installation should undergo a major modernisation.
Microprocessor control system
To achieve maximum optimization of the existing lifts, it was agreed to combine all three lifts into a common group with a state of the art microprocessor control system.
At the same time, the main drive units were to be thoroughly overhauled and the existing motor generator sets replaced.
The existing passenger lifts operated at a contract speed of 2.5m/s, employing a gearless DC motor drive system and the baggage lift employed a gearless DC motor drive system with a contract speed of 2.
Om/s.
The new microprocessor control system was custom designed to provide compatible logic control of these two systems.
Extensive modernisation of peripheral equipment was carried out including the replacement of all the door operators and refurbishment of doors and door equipment.
To minimise any impact on the hotel operation during the modernisation of the lifts, it was decided to carry out the work on a lift by lift basis, with each lift being modernised within a 16 week period.
As each lift was modified, work was commenced on the next lift, so that two lifts were available for full service to the hotel at any time.
Certain work that was carried out involved noisy operations and the programme was carefully coordinated with the hotel administration to minimise disruption and inconvenience.
On completion of the modernisation, the lifts were subject to a one year Defects Liability (Guarantee) and free service period, and subsequently have become subject to a new comprehensive Maintenance Contract.
Since the modernisation was carried out, the hotel is now known as the Forte Crest St James.
Obviously considerable improvement in passenger handling performance was experience on completion of the installation and the special requirements of baggage handling were accommodated by providing the facility of selectively removing a specific lift from the group at required times.
To avoid any lobby congestion, access to the baggage lift was provided by auxiliary doors at the rear of the car.
The operational characteristics of hotels are determined by the demands of hotel guests and the preferred response of individual hotel administrations in line with their targeted guest market.
Unfortunately, the lifts are specified and their operation determined at the time of construction.
Specialists
However, considerable experience and expertise is available from specialist lift companies who are able to carry out traffic studies and listen to detailed requirements so that they can propose a range of solutions.
These solutions can extend to wholesale modernisation, but can also include revised maintenance practices, smaller modernisation schemes, cosmetic improvements to lift car interiors and improving indication systems for hotel guests.
No matter how complex your lift problem, or the extent of your budget, a syumpathetic lift specialist with the range of technical solutions and the necessary understanding and experience of the hotel environment can provide you with a satisfactory solution.
Highly experienced surveyors and engineers are available to listen to your requirements and present comprehensive reports on available options which will meet your particular requirements and budget.
Leonard Lifts is a major division of Kone Lifts Limited.
a unique solution
Tents, marquees, conservatories, umbrellas, awnings and covered walkways are all used within the hotel and leisure industry to provide more space in an attractive and cost-effective way, as  and  of Pagoda Space Covers Ltd explain.
Tents and marquees have traditionally been used in the grounds of hotels and country clubs for special functions such as receptions and parties.
These structures need to be erected and dismantled quickly with a minimum of disturbance whilst encountering many difficult locations.
A modular type of structure has the advantages of quick build, easier site accessibility and less weight when contemplating relocation and storage.
Of course, the actual shape, cololur and basic aesthetic appeal are also very important factors.
The structures must be able to withstand bad weather, including gale force winds, ensuring there is no distracting and perhaps alarming flapping of canvas on windy days, which is particularly important if a PA system is to be used.
Large umbrellas offer high visibility and are often branded.
They are mainly seen in pub gardens and street cafes on the continent to offer shade and add colour.
This branding element can be a useful source of revenue, as this space can be sold to advertise local businesses.
Awnings serve many different functions, from just a shade over a window, to a focal point over an entrance, as well as keeping the concierge dry.
A row of well-designed awnings can transform a building, especially if they incorporate the hotel's or restaurant's logo using the same colour schemes.
Awnings must be able to be easily customised with logos and graphics; all the better, if the canopy material is transulucent to to allow back lighting to illuminate the restaurant's name at night.
The large conservatory market has been one of the largest growth areas for the refurbishment of pubs, hotels and restaurants to increase space and to create breakfast or dining areas.
Also a conservatory can improve the overall image and give an extra incentive to attract new customers.
They are popular due to the continental influence of eating alfresco and these types of structures give a feeling of dining out of doors without the uncertainty of the British weather.
There are many diffeent ways to provide covered walkways and other areas such as gazebos and shade around swimming pools, each with its own merits.
In these areas, what is required is a product that is both functional and, above all, pleasant to look at.
Wider opportunities for franchising success
The success of the concept of franchising is self-evident as it has grown to encompass more and more business sectors.
The commitment, enthusiasm and dedication of business owners, allied to the power of a major, well-known brand name, is a powerful combination that has enabled individual franchisees to enjoy business satisfaction and reward, and franchiser companies to grow more rapidly, as Burger King explain.
Burger King, the quality fast food hamburger chain, is one of the best known and most successful examples of the benefits of franchising.
Founded in 1954 in Florida, the company has grown to become the world's second largest chain of its kind and franchising has played a crucial role in this development.
There are now more than 6400 restaurants in 41 countries and about 85 per cent of these restaurants are owned and operationed by franchisees.
Burger King is now part of grand Metropolitan plc, one of Britain's largest international conglomerates with considerable interests in food and drink.
Grand Met's commitment to the brand name and to expanding the business aggressively, should continue to provide considerable opportunities for current franchisees and for those prospective franchisees seeking attractive business opportunities.
In the UK, Burger King has 181 restaurants, 108 of which are franchised.
Evidence of the company's determination to continue its remarkable expansion plan can be seen in a recent management restructuring, designed to give a sharper focus on key growth markets, such as the UK.
Growth in the UK, while continuing to be spearheaded by traditional high street and Drive-Thru restaurants, will be further accelerated with the introduction of a number of new trading concepts which will bring greater flexibility to the franchise options.
They are designed to maximise retail selling space at investment levels that can be matched to a variety of business options, and to provide growth potential in non traditional locations, at significantly lower capital investment compared to the traditional concept.
The new retail concepts are:
The Burger King neighbourhood restaurant: ideal as a low-cost investment where lower turnover is projected.
It provides a unique trading opportunity where market conditions or size do not justify the capital investment required for a conventional Burger King restaurant.
The Burger King kiosk; occupying only 120ft2, it is ideal where retail space is at a premium, and provides a positive return in investment where lower volumes are anticipated.
The Burger King Double Drive-Thru: designed to take advantage of smaller free standing sites, it maximises retail selling space and cuts development costs by 50 cent.
Indeed the franchise system can now be tailored to meet the needs of larger corporate organisations as well as the independent businessman — further positive proof of the fact that franchisees are regarded as a vital part of the company's expansion ambitions in the UK.
Burger King's founding philosophy is to sell good quality food quickly and courteously, in clean and pleasant surroundings, at value for money prices.
The company still remains wholly comitted to these principles today and ensures they are shared by its franchisees.
The company recognises it owes its status as a major world force in fast food to the quality of its products and the quality of its franchisees.
This is reflected in the guiding principles of the franchise:
Respect for the franchisee's autonomy: the original meanings of the word franchise, in other words, independence and freedom, are particularly apt in the case of the company's franchise system in which the franchisee is the true owner of the business and therefore has control over his assets.
Permanent support from the group: from the outset, the franchisee receives the backing of the company's teams who contribute their professional skills and know-how, in order to monitor the franchisee's progress and advise him on the day to day management of the restaurants.
The quality of the group representatives' relationships with the franchisee is a key aspect of this brand name support
Priority for training: when an investor opens a franchise, he is given the opportunity to acquire specialist skills through a training course covering all aspects of the business from personnel management to administration and from procurement to marketing.
All applicants for a franchise must successfully complete this training programme.
A key factor in the success of the company, and the way franchisees can ensure they contribute to and share in that success, is the marketing support provided.
According to the local market situation, the company manages the marketing budget allocated to brand recognition development.
Campaigns are designed and media are selected with the assistance of advertising agencies.
Marketing support covers assistance in a wide number of areas such as signs within restaurants (menu boards), training in local marketing, adaptation of group programmes at the local level (marketing aimed at children, assistance in launching new products, development of local promotions items).
The marketing department also ensures that the image and promotion standards set are applied consistently in order to maintain the strength and competitiveness of the trade name.
Burger King is widely regarded as the quality fast food hamburger restaurant chain.
That is a reputation of which the company is justly proud and from which franchisees can benefit directly.
It is a reputation everyone connected with the company guards jealously.
Total Quality Management
If Putting People First was the buzz phrase of the 1980s, Total Quality Management is the concept of the 1990s.
But how do you define TQM? answers this question and more, and looks at how TQM can help achieve the quality standard BS 5750.
Many towns and cities have suffered in the recession.
In Harrogate, three of the largest hotels have been in receivership, with many others fighting to survive.
But the Moat House International has increased its markt share, reduced a traditionally high staff turnover to 8 per cent(the hotel has 145 staff covering 240 rooms) and turned an average of 40 compliments to 60 complaints into 82 per cent compliments to 18 per cent complaints.
The Moat House attributes much of its success to total Quality Management.
In Edinburgh, the Scandic Crown regularly achieves the highest occupancy in the city with outstanding rival hotels.
Can it be coincidence that the Scandic started work on TQM in January 1991, aiming for BS 5750 by autumn 1992?
Total Quality Management is based on the premise that a failure to deliver a product or service can be compared to a virus which attacks, grows and spreads with devastating effect.
TQM eliminates the virus by changing company culture and management behaviour.
Culture (a favourite TQM buzz word) results from the growth and development of a company, of management techniques, and slavery to entrenched traditions.
Company growth results in vertical management structures, while the transactions which provide products and services move horizontally.
Therefore those at the top of the pile have no first hand knowledge of the cause of a failure virus, while the employees who understand the failure have no power to change the process which caused it.
Reduced to simple terms, those with the power have inadequate knowledge, those with the knowledge have inadequate power.
What is needed is a change in management — staff relationships.
Managers should not necessarily blame an employee for failures, but should determine whether the process is to blame, and involve the staff in improving the process.
Customer research is important, too: the product or service must be geared to what the customer actually needs.
With fewer mistakes, and staff involved in decision making, everyone benefits.
The provision of goods and services costs less, and their quality is improved: staff are highly motivated, leading to greater loyalty and job satisfaction and lower staff turnover; the staff are respected and rewarded for using their initiative and suggesting improvements, and customer complaints are reduced.
That is the theory.
How does it work in pratice?
Pioneers who are applying TQM to hotel and catering operations seem universally delighted with results, both in staff motivation and in customer satisfaction.
‘Our staff turnover is down 50 per cent and that is not entirely due to the effects of the recession,’ says  general manager of the Holiday Inn Bristol, a Scotts' hotel which recently completed a £10 million refurbishment and emerged as the Bristol Marriott.
‘In the middle of the refurbishment we had no public areas, but we were still able to sell rooms and guests were returning.
Last February, we monitored their reactions and not one said they would not come back.’
claims that Holiday Inns' commitment to TQM, introduced to the group in 1989, made it easier for the 14 Scotts' Hospitality properties to switch their franchise to Marriott Hotels, who are long-standing TQM enthusiasts.
‘Our product and service standards are geared to what the customer requires, not set in concrete,’ says  ‘The standard of service is set by the guest.
He may come in for a steak, but he wants to take his time and enjoy a leisurely meal.
Tomorrow he may come in for a steak, but needs to be in and out in ten minutes.
‘People accuse us of being a chain hotel with a standardised product, but we believe our staff do make a difference, and that our systems should never be unwieldy.’
defines TQM as follows: ‘Total means involving everyone, Quality means delighting the guest, and Management involves organising rather than supervising.
‘The Total element covers communication, training, recognition, reward and empowerment.
We train the staff to know how to do their job, and we tell them what is going on elsewhere in the Hotel.
Each member of the staff is empowered to do anything to ensure the guest returns.
They now listen to the customer and report back, and we are improving our market research and developing guest databases.
We also have guest relations staff to greet all first-time guests.
‘At management level, we are changing the culture and the way we operate.
We are out to make work exciting.
We want sparkle on the job, and we want to make the right tools available.
The housekeeper used to decide what vacuum cleaner to order, but the maids had to use them.
Now they decide what they want to use.
It is a case of removing obstacles raised by past practices.’
A handful of hotels are using TQM practices to achieve the quality standard BS 5750 (ISO 9000 in europe, and its international equivalent EN 29000).
Part 2 of BS 5750, which applies to the hotel and catering industry, contains 18 clauses; and the company must produce evidence to show that each has been met.
(Call ILI on number; for details on how to obtain a copy of the Standard documentation Part 2, currently priced at £23).
Achieving BS 5750 requires total commitment from every member of staff.
the property will be independently assessed by an accredited third-party organisation; and once the BS rating has been achieved, the property will be assessed twice a year to ensure that standards are maintained.
One of the certification organisations, Marketing Quality Assurance (& phone no;) has produced a detailed set of requirements leading to accreditation.
Is the certificate worth the extra time and considerable effort involved on top of implementing a TQM programme?
‘If a hotelier says ‘we are wonderful’ and the client says ‘prove it’, that is where registration by an independent authority counts,’says  of MQA.
‘If a hotel is trying to land a major conference, they may be asked if they have BS 5750 accreditation.
The client may need reassurance that the standards the hotel claims to offer have been scrutinised by an independent body.
It is critical to understand your market and the importance of registration to that market.
‘I don't think quality is about winning medals.
It is a never ending commitment.
And it could bring the industry out of its present position.’
When Edinburgh's Scandic Crown Hotel decided to introduce TQM to achieve the BS 5750 target, the programme was launched in January 1991 and quality and training manager  started work full-time five months later.
Staff were split into quality teams, meeting for half an hour each week, with team leaders meeting weekly, also for half an hour, to discuss suggestions raised by staff.
and her general manager chaired a steering committee to discuss implementation of ideas.
‘Initially we had a rush of ideas.
More than 300 from 120 staff, of which we implemented more than 100,’ she says.
‘Most ideas relate to individual departments.
Room maids told us guests were asking for lighter duvets, and suggested we improve signs as guests were constantly asking for directions.
Security asked for clip-on ties, which are safer in an attack.
‘Some staff reported that lights were left on unnecessarily in certain areas, wasting energy.
And leisure club staff suggested their bar should be non-alcoholic, as the hotel has two bars and the club has children around.
Room maids also suggested improving the honeymoon suite, so we gave them a project to look at suitable fabrics and rival hotel suites.
That kind of project improves staff commitment.
‘We also monitor customer satisfaction, which has improved a lot.
We ask guests to complete a short, quality-related questionnaire in return for a donation to charity, so we get a willing and very satisfactory response.’
At the Moat House International in Harrogate, general manager  has dedicated 1992 to staff training.
Key managers have been on Dale Carnegie courses, and all staff are invited to take any training course at company expense.
‘Training is a good investment, as we end up with happier and more efficient staff and happier guests,’ he says.
decision to work towards BS 5750 naturally followed on an existing project to achieve the TEC Award for Investors in People.
He expects the Bs rating to help maintain his increased market share in the international conference market: the hotel is next to the popular Harrogate Convention Centre.
‘We have built department trainers into one team, with regular meetings and training sessions,’ he says.
‘Every three months, the heads of department and managers sit in and discuss the benefits of what we are doing and how we can make improvements.
I make full use of our consultative committee, and our sales team of selected departure members who meet to suggest marketing, promotional and in-house selling ideas.
They ran their own open day for local businesses, which was a great success.
And I have regular letters and comments from returning guests saying how friendly and helpful the staff have been.’
The benefits to the customer of quality trained staff are immediately evident.
A guest in the newly opened Grand amsterdam was surprised and impressed by breakfast service.
As the table waitress was away delivering the order, a passing waiter noted an empty juice glass and stopped to ask if he could fetch a refill.
In a US property, a guest let off steam to the bartender because his room was not ready and it was already late.
The bartender lent the customary ear, then placated the guest by offering a complimentary drink and snack, using the empowerment code to authorise a small expenditure to retain the guest's goodwill.
At the London Hilton on Park Lane, general manager  who implemented a quality management programme while in Jakarta in the 1980s, invited US trained experts to explain the concept to senior managers and supervisors attending a weeklong series of workshops.
‘We operate from a comprehensive manual of quality standards listing tasks and procedures,’ he says.
‘Sometimes everyone becomes so intent on doing things by the book, the real needs of the customer may be overlooked.
The way to change the situation is by harnessing staff expertise and encouraging them to become part of the process of customer service.’
TQM is not a domestic concept linked to BS 5750.
It is well-established in the US, where Ritz-Carlton and Marriott lead the field.
Ritz-Carlton adopted the system in 1990 with a corporate director of quality based at their Atlanta headquarters to supervise the work of the quality leader in each hotel.
Quality networks within the hotels encourage employees to make suggestions which will help them perform better.
At the end of each day, they list incidents or accidents which have occurred, along with actions taken to satisfy guests.
Employees are empowered to use their initiative to meet requests.
Strategic planning and problem solving teams meet regularly to identify problems and solutions, and develop action plans to achieve long-term goals.
‘When the hotels all reach the point where they do the job right first time, then we know we have attained true quality,’ says president 
Marriott Hotels have been introducing quality management throughout the corporation.
In one year, 30 per cent of the workforce at the up-scale Marriott Marquis in Atlanta came up with 2800 suggestions to improve service.
Each idea is fed into a computer and the results tracked, while staff improve leadership skills through team systems.
‘One person cannot pull a Greyhound bus,’ says general manager  ‘But when 1300 people get on the rope, the bus moves.’
At New York's 1874 room Marrion Marquis on Broadway, a five to six year programme was launched in 1989.
‘The concept of TQM dates back to the postwar period when a  tried to persuade corporate heads that business should become service driven.’
says the Marquis'  ‘They were not convinced, but the Japanese took up the idea a few years ago and they are now industry leaders.’
Marriott's corporate management saw the potential of TQM 10 years ago and started work on a Zero Defect Policy to deliver perfect service every time.
At the Marquis, where non-management staff are known as associates, all 1800 employees were given half day seminars on TQM1: Empowerment.
They were given authority to make decisions to help guests at the point of contact.
If a wrong decision is made, the associate discusses the situation with a manager.
In March this year, the hotel moved on to TQM2: Team Building, with three day seminars for managers and associates working together in groups of ten, all from different departments to further interdepartmental understanding.
‘If an associate sees a problem’, says  ‘they inform their manager and peers and form a CAT (corrective action team).
They draw up a flowchart of the problem solving process, and develop fish bone cause and effect diagrams.
‘The final process is the quality service composite, whereby guests are randomly mailed for their judgement on our service.’
Marquis CAT teams have identified five areas where guest satisfaction is vital: speedy check in, cleanliness, attitude, value, and breakfast quality.
A cleanliness CAT team discovered the front desk was blocking rooms which had not been cleaned, and groups were arriving to claim them between shifts, so communication between housekeeping and the front desk was improved.
In the encore restaurant where up to 750 breakfasts are served, CAT members cut rush hour queues by reorganising procedures, with extra clearing staff, a section for one-price buffet breakfasts, and à la carte diners nearest the kitchen for speedy, hot service.
Operational problems still exist but the Marquis, with its own massive convention facilities and proximity to the vast Jacob K Javits convention centre, claims the highest occupancy in New York city.
So something, somewhere, is working in its favour.
Printing, publicity and design for hoteliers
marketing director for Prontaprint, sets out a few simple guidelines to help anyone in the hotel industry who is commissioning design and print.
He outlines the qualitites to look for in a printer and explains how best to get the results you require.
Commissioning design and print should be a straightforward and uncomplicated task.
And yet it is not unusual to hear of problems.
However, by taking time to consider exactly what the print requirements are, and by comparing different designers and printers, it is possible to dramatically reduce the chances of difficulties occurring.
Before picking up the phone to place a brief, it is important to consider the following:
What market are you selling to?
What is the quality of the product being sold?
Is it a long-term or short-term promotion?
What sort of budget is available?
All are simple guidelines, but it is surprising how often they are overlooked.
They help to clarify, for both the hotelier and the printer, what is required and reduce the changes of a misinterpreted brief.
Thought should be given as to whether the requirement is for printing only, or whether design is to be included.
Usually it makes sense to commission a business which is able to undertake both design and print.
Over the last few years, the impact of new technology on the printing industry has led to a great diversification of products and services offered by many printers, and this includes the quick print and copy outlets.
This enables every aspect of a job from concept to print production to be handled under one roof, making a hotelier's job much easier.
It also means that there is no longer a need to go to an expensive design company or advertising agency to produce company stationery, direct mail material or even sophisticated brochures.
It is now common for printers, particularly quick print outlets to employ an artist or in some cases a creative team.
Depending on the requirement, it is advisable to find out exactly what facilities are available, for example, whether electronic desktop publishing and computer-aided design are offered.
One of the best ways to find out is to visit the printer in person.
If this is not possible, then most printers are more than happy to visit enquirers.
Being able to understand what the client is trying to achieve is vital and this is often confirmed by a visit to the hotel to get a feel for the market.
It is this time which pays dividends.
Service today is of the utmost importance.
Prospective customers should always be on the look-out for good communication skills and an in-depth knowledge of the hotel trade.
Ideally, the printer should be familiar with hotel terminology, for example, sweda bills, TDH and absolute standards.
It all helps to give clients confidence and peace of mind when ordering print and design.
On the other hand, while being able to demonstrate a knowledge of the client's business, a printer should be able to offer jargon-free advice.
The relationship between printer and buyer is then strengthened if, over time, the printer builds up an excellent knowledge of the customer's business.
Printing is the easiest part of most jobs, the skill comes in meeting a customer's brief.
A good designer/printer should be there to advise, remembering that design is not just there to look pretty, but there to sell a product.
Being able to rely on advice can be invaluable.
For example, if a hotel wants to develop an impressive mail-out, then it may not be advisable to use a third A4 size — it should perhaps be larger with a specially designed envelope which interests the reader sufficiently to open it and read its contents.
Always get a quote before proceeding with work and it is a good idea to check out methods of payment.
It is usually possible to open a charge account, a useful arrangement especially in the current economic climate where cash flow rules the day.
Costs will be kept to a minimum by making sure the job is proofed as the typesetting stage before it goes to press.
Check that the design and layout is right, as well as the copy.
Agree a deadline for the job at the outset and be prepared to allow two to five days for the job to be completed after the proof has been checked.
One thing is for sure, commissioning design and print will always have its pitfalls, whether it is a doorhanger, bar bill or sophisticated brochure, but those willing to spend time carefully considering the requirements and choosing a printer will not be long in reaping the rewards.
The benefits of occupational testing
Can the use of psychological tests for personnel selection find you the right person for the job? of The Psychological Corporation Ltd looks at the history of ability and personality tests and compares their predictive validity and cost effectiveness with more traditional types of assessment.
There is widespread recognition that the employees are an organisation's greatest asset.
The combination of skills and commitment in a workforce can turn a company round from low to high performance.
This awareness, and the increased emphasis on the development of this asset is epitomised in the term human resource management.
Companies have seen the importance of investing in their workforces and of improving performance both through training and by deploying effective recruitment procedures.
The aim of an organisation's recruitment procedure is to find the best candidate for a vacancy by predicting the future performance of applicants for the job.
The question is, can the use of psychological tests during the selection process help to predict this future performance?
A recent survey of selection methods used by companies in both Britain and France for management selection, demonstrated that although the number of British companies using psychological tests had increased since an earlier survey carried out in 1984 (Robertson and Makin, 1986) most organisations still relied on the traditional selection methods of the application form, interview and letters of reference (Shackleton and Newell, 1991).
Accumulated research over many years has shown that these traditional methods are not particularly effective.
As long ago as 1915 Scott published the first research on interviews showing that 6 personnel managers could not agree about a common set of applicants, a finding that has been replicated innumerable times and will be reflected in the personal experience of most interviewers.
Since the time psychologists and personnel managers have searched for more effective methods of personnel selection and psychological tests are one result of this work.
One compelling reason for trying to improve selection methods is that poor personnel selection practices can be very costly to an organisation: Schmidt and Hunter (1981) estimated that poor or non-existent selection by the US Federal Government costs $16 billion a year.
Conversely, the use of reliable and valid selection methods can save an organisation a considerable amount of money.
The Civil Service Commission uses internally devised test procedures with proven validity to assess graduates for their fast stream.
Analysis shows very convincingly that, in effect, this procedure saves the Exchequer over £2 million a year (Rees, 1989).
Psychological tests used for selection purposes can be divided into two main categories, ability tests and personality tests.
the origins of ability tests can be found in the development of individual intelligence scales, the first of which was written by Binet and Simon in 1905 to identify educationally retarded children.
Since then tests have developed to cover a wide variety of abilities and people of all ages.
The spur for development in tests usually came from a pressing practical need.
Group testing received its first big boost when the US entered World War 1 in 1917 to provide for the rapid classification of a million and a half recruits who needed to be assigned to suitable roles in the military machine.
Aptitude tsting developed from the realisation that a single IQ score was a rather rude measure which obscured an individual's varying underlying abilities; for example, an individual may score high on a verbal subtest of an intelligence scale and low on a numerical subtest or vice versa .
Within an individual's global intelligence this kind of distinction has obvious occupational relevance.
Multiple aptitude batteries are able to provide a measure of the individual's standing in each of a number of traits, producing a profile on which job decisions can be made.
Tests in use today for personnel selection include both multiple aptitude batteries like the Differential Aptitude test which provides the kind of profile described above, and specific aptitude tests like the General Clerical Test which concentrates on one group of skills.
Personality tests also originated during World War 1.
The US Army devised a screening test to identify individuals unable to cope with the stress of continuous battle, called the Woodworth Personal Data Sheet.
Although there are a number of methods of measuring personality including observation, situational tests and projective tests, the most common method used in personnel selection is the questionnaire or inventory.
Two notable examples of personality tests are the 16PF and the California Psychological Inventory.
The usefulness of any test in a selection procedure is evaluated by analysing the predictive validity of these tests within a specified situation.
Predictive validity refers to the ability of a test score to predict future job performance.
A common method of assessing predictive validity is to correlate a candidate's test score with subsequent supervisor ratings or some other index of their subsequent job performance.
A number of researchers have looked at the predictive validity of various types of assessments, including interviews, aptitude tests, personality tests and other techniques.
Muchinsky (1986) reviewed the research on validity of personnel selection methods and concluded that work samples, biodata and peer assessments had high validity, intelligence tests, aptitude and ability tests, personality and interest tests and situational exercises had moderate validity, and interviews, self-assessment and letters of reference had low validity.
Smith, Gregg and Andrews (1989) devised the following ranking of selection methods with respect to their predictive validity: graphology and astrology were at the same level as chance prediction, references and interviews were a little higher, then structured interviews, then biodata, personality tests and assessment centres for performance, then ability tests and work sample tests and finally, at the highest level, assessment centres for promotion.
While these two assessments of the predictive validity of various personnel selection methods differ slightly, what they both demonstrate clearly is the enhanced predictive validity of both ability tests and personality tests over the traditional selection methods of the interview and letters of reference.
Meta-analysis, a statistical technique used to pool results of studies and therefore yield estimates based on samples of thousands rather than tens, allows for a  re-evaluation of the predictive validity of selection methods.
Cook (1988) has collapsed the results of a number of meta-analytic studies to determine the usefulness of 10 selection methods with respect to validity, cost, practicality, generality and legality.
He finds that there are six classes of selection methods with high validity — peer ratings, biodata, ability tests, assessment centres, work sample tests and job knowledge tests, and concludes that ability tests are probably the best alternative because of their high generality, high practicality and low cost.
Although ability tests receive a higher ranking in terms of their predictive validity from these meta-analytic studies than they do from Muchinsky, personality tests were rated as having lower validity.
However, Cook expresses the view that although the research on the validity of personality tests has proved disappointing, they have no less predictive validity than the interview and they have the advantage of being cost-effective and standardised.
The meta-analytic studies mentioned above have tried to collapse data from individual validity studies because validity coefficients for psychological tests have been found to vary widely in different situations.
The findings led to a widespread belief that psychological tests were situation specific and therefore limited in their usefulness for personnel selection.
However, Schmidt, Hunter and their associates (1977, 1979, 1980, 1981) demonstrated that much of the variance among obtained validity coefficients may be a statistical artifact resulting from small sample sizes, criterion unreliability and restriction of range in employee samples.
The samples available for test validation from organisations are often too small to yield a stable estimate of the correlation between predictor and criterion.
For this reason, also the obtained coefficients may be too low to reach statistical significance in the sample used, and therefore may fail to provide evidence of the test's validity.
Schmidt, Hunter and their associates applied their new techniques to data from many samples drawn from a large number of different occupations.
They demonstrated that the validity of verbal, numerical and reasoning aptitude tests can be generalised far more widely across occupations than had previously been realised.
The variance of validity coefficients found in earlier studies was shown to be no greater than would be expected by chance.
This research would seem to show that successful performance of a wide variety of occupational tasks depends to a significant degree on a common core of cognitive skills.
Other implications of validity generalisation research are firstly, that ability tests have higher validity than earlier research has shown, secondly that ability tests are transportable rather than situation specific so there is no longer a need for local validation studies and finally, that job analysis need not be considered essential.
However, although the results of validity generalisation studies are impressive and constitute a strong argument in favour of using ability tests for personnel selection, it has yet to be seen to what extent its conclusions will be taken up by practitioners in the field.
So far, this discussion has examined the usefulness of psychological tests in selection procedures in terms of their predictive validity.
Another way of looking at the usefulness of tests is to evaluate the productivity of employees selected on the basis of a test, as compared with those applicants that would have been selected without the test,(1950) first demonstrated that the expected increase in output is directly proportional to the validity of a test.
He devised a formula whereby the amount an employer can save, for every employee recruited, each year can be calculated.
Although the  formula means that the higher the validity the greater the return, it also means that selection tests can be worth using even when their validity is low, so long as their cost is also low.
Schmidt and associates (1979) used analysis of productivity in relation to test validity to evaluate the benefit of using a computer aptitude test to select computer programmers in the US Federal Government.
They calculated expected gains of from $16.5 million to $97.2 million spread over the expected length of employment of the employees.
These claims have not gone uncontested.
Other researchers have claimed that some of Schmidt and  Hunter's estimates of savings are too high.
Increased productivity can also mean increased costs, and the costs of selection are incurred before the savings are made, so interest charges need to be included.
Also, employers are constantly employing new staff so the return on selection has to be calculated over a longer period of time to get a true picture of the effects of selection methods.
(1983) provides an alternative estimate looking at benefits over 10 years; the gain was almost $8 million this time, allowing for increased costs, taxes and interest.
Although these initial estimates are somewhat crude, either way the available results strongly suggest that use of a valid selection test can contribute susbstantially to an organisation's profitability.
In conclusion, research over eight decades has demonstrated the predictive validity of ability tests to be high, or certainly much higher than an interview.
Clearly, financial gains can be made from using valid selection instruments.
Personality tests have not been found to have such high predictive validity as ability tests.
However, they too could be useful to an organisation's selection procedure, since they can give more valid information than the traditional interview.
Catering Design
What is new in catering microwaves?
Microwaving is now a recognised method of cooking.
a former chef but currently consultant to Merrychef Ltd, looks at the development of the commercial microwave and the microwave combination oven, highlighting their advantages in terms of speed and food quality.
New must be one of the most overworked words in an advertising agency's vocabulary.
Modified, redeveloped or even vastly improved are usually more appropriate adjectives when it comes to describing catering equipment, and microwave combination ovens are no exception.
After all, the principle of making an oven which could cook by microwave energy simultaneously with hot air was established back in 1968 when British inventors Kenneth Hilton and R J W Constable filed the patent on the complete specification for the Articair oven which later developed into the Mealstream.
Coincidentally, it was in the same year that the first supersonic airliner took flight and the first channel hover-ferry service was inaugurated — quite a year for fast machines — quite rightly dubbed then, as being new!
It is no coincidence, however, that the speed of a service is often the first criteria for customers' perception of a good service.
Caterers can reap very real rewards from this attitude by using microwave combination ovens as the central pivot of the kitchen equipment and basing a menu choice around a multi-task oven.
If one considers that, whilst diners may be perfectly at ease lingering over the dessert and coffee stage of a meal, there is usually a sense of urgency surrounding the arrival at table of the main event, the entrée.
The microwave combination's ability to prime cook à la carte dishes in about a fifth of the usual time offers opportunities to introduce items on the menu which traditionally have meant advance ordering, for example, racks of lamb, beef Wellingtons, en croûte dishes and so on .
There is also a great advantage in regenerating large columes of previously cooked food on high throughout operations only as the demand occurs.
Wastage can be dramatically reduced by bringing multi-portions forward for service, freshly and quickly, without the need to hold hot food.
There are other benefits too, but probably more appreciated by busy kitchen staff, for instance, the oven is occupied for less time on each item and therefore free for other foods.
Also there are fewer bottle necks in the kitchen's work flow as time to table problems are resolved.
Adapting techniques
The idea of combining two energy sources for cooking may take a bit of rethinking on the cook's part initially.
But it is not such a quantum leap to understand two cooking media as it is to grasp the principles of some multi-task ovens which appear to have nearly as many functions as the ubiquitous Swiss army knife.
It was hardly surprising that in the bad old days, the adverse and misleading consumer publicity which surrounded microwaves was enough to discourage many a traditionally trained chef from learning new techniques.
But since microwaving became a recognised method of cooking on catering students' curricula, the level of microwave knowledge sits equally alongside that of steaming, frying and grill work alike.
Coupled with the fact that over half the households in Great Britain have a microwave and surveys suggest that most catering establishments use a microwave at some time, the techniques of microwaving can hardly be a mystery by now.
Therefore, by combining the craft skills applied to normal forced air oven cookery with those of a straight commercial microwave, a major rethink on cookery methods is simply not necessary.
Also, encouragement is being given by the fuel industries to install new kitchens with combustion free, stream-lined equipment in a move towards the  clinically clean kitchen which is environmentally safe and has energy efficiency in mind — microwave and electric conversion combinations have proved themselves successful in this respect.
Understanding the engine
Naturally, to gain the optimum food results, it is always useful to understand a few fundamentals of an oven, including the engine, the latest Mealstream ovens being a far cry from the 1968 version in terms of safety, design and performance specification.
They are available in two sizes, a standard 2/3 gastronorm capacity and a full size 1/1 model, the Gastronorm.
Due to the technical matching of microwave power output to cavity size, to ensure an even heat pattern, the standard model has 1425W and the Gastronorm delivers 2000w which is quite clearly far higher than models in that grey area of low powered domestic equivalents which masquerade as being suitable for commercial premises.
It cannot be stressed too often that it is essential to only install commercially designed and built microwaves which conform to the international safety and performance standards appropriate for industrial use.
To provide the convection heat, air is drawn through a centrally placed fan on the interior back plate and pushed back into the cavity via all four edges of the plate for even heat distribution.
This method of directing hot air forms a ring doughnut shaped pattern which is perfect for combination cookery.
The oven's temperature is controlled electronically for highly accurate settings by touch pads up to 250°C.
Initial heat up time takes about 15 minutes, efficient heat insulation completes the picture.
Because the vitreous enamel inside panels act as insulators which prevent the microwave energy from arching, it is safe to use metal pans, trays and trivets provided that they are at least 1.5in away from the side walls and the same distance away from each other.
Toughened glass and vitro-ceramics are the most universally suitable containers for all three functions.
But heat-resistant hotelware, earthenware, crockery and china may be used provided it does not have metallic decoration which will blacken and spoil if used with microwave energy.
A Mealstream oven can be operated as a straightforward commercial microwave oven.
And, if needed for defrosting work, this is best carried out before the start of service periods, whilst the oven is still cold.
It can be used as a forced air convection oven alone — forced air being faster than conventional static hot air.
However, it is when the two heat sources are used together in combination that the true capabilities can be appreciated.
The highest quality food results can be achieved and the oven has been designed to give optimum performance in this function.
Microwave combination ovens can successfully prime cook fresh and frozen foods and regenerate ready cooked dishes from chilled and frozen.
In addition to ordinary manual control, for experienced cooks, the established instructions can be set into the oven's memory.
Up to 10 different sets of instructions for timings, temperature and microwave power level may be programmed.
By doing this, non-craft trained staff can repeat faithfully the correct cooking instructions thereby ensuring a monitor to due diligence and allowing greater management peace of mind.
In the interests of both food hygiene and food quality, it is, of course, important that these instructions are accurate in the first place.
Therefore, it is strongly recommended that correct information is established by fully qualified and experienced caterers.
And that only reliable operators programme these settings into the oven's memory.
Food research
To provide customers with reliable guidelines for successful microwave combination cooking, we took the view that in the light of tighter temperature control in the food supply chain and stronger emphasis on the need to raise hot food to bacteria killing temperature, it would be safer all round to scrap previously attained cookery knowledge and start with a new set of rules, particularly since the ovens have undergone design specification changes and have dramatically more accurate controls.
An evaluation programme was scheduled to establish a database for the widest possible range of foods, from breakfast service items to main meals; from call-order snacks to pudings; and from popular ready-prepared multi-portions to the generic food groupings like meat, poultry and fish.
To establish a start point, traditional cooking temperatures were set and balanced with a microwave power level to suit the food's characteristics, that is to say their dielectric properties, for example, dense or delicate, sugar or liquid content, chilled or frozen and so on .
then, by setting a fifth of the usual time, a ball park figure was laid down for trail and error, up and down the variables until a best method was agreed by all.
Under the guidance of British Meat Catering, some highly interesting results were observed on the latest kitchen ready cuts which would have been previously destined for the grill or griddle.
Steaks and chops retained their natural juices without drying out, and this was assessed as being because of the much shorter cooking time.
Two whole racks of lamb cooked out to just pink perfection in under 15 minutes and gave a markedly superior eating quality, and a best method for roasting a 4lb boned lamb averaged out over all tests with remarkably only an 8 per cent weight loss.
As a general rule of thumb, darker meats and large joints benefit from a lower microwave power level than full.
This was borne out by the tests on ‘bootiful’ Norfolk turkeys which needed an hour at half microwave power to cook right through without drying the breast meat.
But the smaller 3lb chickens, cooked with best results at full microwave power.
Precooked honey roast half Lincolnshire duckling took only four minutes from frozen using full power.
An unexpected bonus came up from the Uncle Ben's food team whereby, regardless of the convection temperature, lkg of long grain dry rice cooked with 2.5 litres of water in 20 minutes on full power.
Deep dish, frozen multi-portions have always presented difficulties to microwave regeneration as all too often edge burning occurs, before the centre is up to corret temperature.
But by using the latest vitro-ceramic cookware with lids or by applying innovative shielding devices under development, it was possible, with the invaluable advice of the UK catering industry's largest frozen food company, to produce the popular 9 x 9in multis from frozen in between 13–15 minutes, and from chilled, a half gastro size Deep Pan lasagne was ready for service in half an hour.
Significant time savings by any catering standards.
A summary of the research has been published and is freely available from the Catering Advisory Service at Merrychef as a quick reference guide.
Whilst never daring to suggest these catering methods are new they can be the key to a foodservice that is certainly vastly improved.
Kitchen ventilation canopies
The Food Safety Act has taken its toll on many kitchen ventilation canopy manufacturers.
Construction, fire risk, air movement, and maintenance must now all be taken into great consideration, as Michael Burland, managing director of Kingfisher Canopies Ltd, explains.
The introduction of the Food Safety Act has sent shock waves through the industry.
Even Coronation Street's Rovers Return has had to respond.
While most environmental health officers are keenly applying the new regulations, the shortage of staff coupled with the wide range of new products and processes which have to be assessed has resulted in a somewhat irregular interpretation and application of the Act.
One product which is already beginning to be affected is the kitchen ventilation canopy.
For so long there has been no regulation or regulatory body who can impose standards upon the canopy designer and manufacturer and, as a direct conslequence of this omission, the quality of both have varied from very high to ‘good grief is that thing legal!’, all lwithout legal recourse.
Any specialised product, which is as directly involved with the hygiene and comfort levels within the kitchen area, must be viewed as a potential risk if not designed, manufactured or maintained properly.
Throughout the country the irregular application of the Food Safety Act, the Health and Safety at Work Act, and various preferred standards can create a minefield for designer, manufacturer and operator.
The single lack of intelligent, professional, enforceable legislation has resulted in a hotchpotch of product shapes, materials and functions, has allowed overseas manufacturers to establish footholds, has weakened the market by allowing any sheet metal factory to ‘knowk out an ‘ood’, and in many cases has put operators, and clients, health and safety at risk.
The effective design of any kitchen ventilation system must be based solely upon that particular kitchen, but also be backed up by a minimum standard of construction and air movement.
An efficient canopy system should provide good comfort levels, reduce contamination levels by means of effective filtration, reduce fire risk to an absolute minimum and, by its construction, not endanger the operating staff — easy!
The overall design concept must take into consideration serveral critical factors, namely:
Construction
The construction must be free from dirt traps (so any form of framed system with infill panels will not be acceptable as the construction forms dirt traps which can never be effectively cleaned).
It must be made from a material which is structurally suitable for the hygienic environment, and be without any form of coating which could prove risky once the surface has been damaged and expose an unsuitable material such as mild steel, to the environment.
the only materials which are both practical to manufacture and suitable for the environment are stainless steel and aluminium.
The method of manufacture must be free from sharp edges and exposed fixings which create problems for staff trying to keep the unit clean.
The unit design must also ensure that condensation will not drop from the canopy structure and deposit upon food stuff or floor surfaces, as either would create potential risks.
Within this country there is no regulation relating to the standard of construction (such as the National Fire Protection Association Code 96 as applied in America), but the use of a formed, folded and seam welded method of construction must always be considered as the only acceptable method of manufacturing a suitable product.
It is important to remember that the ongoing hygiene requirement is ultimately more important  than the manufacturer's production limitations.
Fire risk
Not only is the professional designer faced with a wide variety of hygiene regulations, but in many cases fire officers disagree as to exactly how the fire risk which is inherent within any working kitchen can best be minimised.
Other than restricting the kitchen to salad preparation, there is no other clear-cut answer, and if all restaurants were to offer only salads, surely that would antagonise the Vegetable Liberation Front and severly restrict turnover and profit!
As the nature of catering equipment changes, the nature of the fire risk becomes more critical.
The emphasis on fast food operations has brought into play appliances which concentrate extremely high temperatures on raw products containing fats and other volatile substances.
These appliances are operated by staff whose skill levels can be extremely low, making a combination of circumstances designed to send most fire officers into early retirement!
The canopy designer must be aware of the nature of the risk under any specific canopy, and where necessary, install dedicated fire suppression systems, and preferably the liquid agent type which is the most effective media, within the canopy structure.
The installation of these systems would ideally be provided by the canopy manufacturer in order to ensure that the design integrity of both canopy and fire suppression are not compromised.
Air movement
The primary function of any kitchen ventilation canopy is to remove from the kitchen area the airborne effects of the cooking process, namely smoke, steam, contaminants, and as much heat as deemed effective.
While this might seem a basic requirement, it has resulted in a wide range of design criteria, each designed to fully respond to the environmental conditions.
Many discussion papers and theories have been offered, and each one seems to offer a different conclusion.
As each kitchen is different surely each response will be likewise.
However, clearly established ground rules have not been put into place and many kitchens rely on open windows and doors, or merely the tolerance of staff.
To design effectively an air movement system, the information provided must allow the professional designer to take all factors into consideration, such as room size, location, catering appliance details, style of catering, and levels of utilisation which can all drastically influence the design offered.
In addition, most canopy systems are available with integral make-up air, energy efficient extract, and air entrainment systems or spot cooling.
There is a wide choice of systems which, in thoery, can respond to any kitchen requirement.
The days of a small grease-coated, wall-mounted fan hopefully are numbered, although the sheer number in use preclude their quick disappearance.
Maintenance
It is the ongoing maintenance requirements which will be most scrutinised by the environmental health officer, and in many cases, it only takes a dirty grease filter system dripping onto the food cooking surfaces to alert the authorities.
Contaminated filters, canopy surfaces and lights all create direct risks to both operators and clients, and they indicate the level of cleanliness throughout the kitchen area.
The onset of open kitchen fast food catering, as introduced by the Americal multi-outlets, has shown that cleanliness can be a central part of an operators product and marketing strategy — grubby kitchens invariably produce grubby food.
It is in the field of maintenance that kitchen canopies will be most changed.
So far, once the system is installed it is forgotten, but in the future, maintenance contracts will be considered the norm rather than the exception.
This is an oncost which, if handled professionally, will save the operator money rather than be considered a liability.
The biggest threat to standards remains the state of the economy.
In a restrictive climate we all review our expenditure levels.
But a saving in cost is, as we all probably know, not necessarily a saving in the long term.
In the period up to April 1992, canopies which were installed will be replaced within the next three to four years.
As environmental health officers become more aware of the implications of poor canopy design, manufacture and maintenance, and their own staffing levels and training improve, many kitchen operators are in for a very rude and expensive awakening (in most cases the cost of replacing an inefficient system is considerably higher than fitting that same system from the outset).
The future
As design technology filters its way down to the kitchen canopy world and standards of hygiene improve, how will we resp; ond?
Canopy design will become more specialised.
Today's forward thinking manufacturers are already offering systems which include self-washing filter units and energy efficient airflow patterns.
However, the basic concept of collecting and removing filth will not be affected, as any system which does not localise contaminants merely spreads them so think as to make the problem less obvious.
Also, as staff expectations improve the ‘they don't know any better’ policy so popular today will fade away.
As for the Food Safety Act, everybody tells me there is much worse on the horizon…!
Looking into refrigeration
marketing manager of Williams Refrigeration Limited, gives a brief guide to the selection of refrigerators, consideration of kitchen design and an explanation of the chief technical features of refrigeration.
Question: Which piece of equipment works for you for 365 days a year, 24 hours a day, saves you money, protects your reputation, helps you comply with the law, and is expected to function without complaint for up to 10 years?
The answer is one of the most neglected and abused kitchen appliances ever invented: the refrigerator.
Despite food hygiene regulations and the Food Safety Act, it is surprising that one of the principal aids to compliance is often neglected; where one would expect to see commercial refrigeration it is still not uncommon to find domestic style refrigerators and freezers.
An old domestic cabinet will not enable you to meet your legal obligations under current legislation.
And with the emphasis placed on temperature control, your visiting environmental health officer is bound to find your refrigeration equipment worth looking into.
There are several important differences between commercial and domestic refrigeration.
You may already have a good idea, when planning your new kitchen, of the type of operation you want, but unless you have previous experience of designing a kitchen, there could be problems in store.
Whatever the size of your project, don't be afraid to ask for advice.
If the project is a large one, use the services of a specialist in kitchen design to provide a turnkey service.
Use the services of manufacturers to your advantage.
After all, these services are free and we take it as a compliment if you ask.
With the help of guides, technical literature and a few telephone calls you can often determine precisely which pieces of equipment you require.
You can save a lot of time by letting your designer know your preferences at an early stage.
The most obvious thing to check, and one that is often overlooked, is the physical size of your intended purchase.
Commercial cabinets are usually significantly larger than domestic refrigerators.
Upright cabinets are the most popular because they take up less floor space.
However, counter style refrigerators have the advantage of providing a work surface as well as storage, they have smaller doors and may be fitted with drawers.
The latter two points help to minimise disturbance of the interior air and thus reduce the possibility of temperature fluctuations.
Always make sure that there is enough room to open the doors fully, and check that your purchase will actually pass through the doors en route to its eventual site — your refrigeration supplier should take care of this for you.
In old buildings this has become a problem, but one we have overcome by the design of modular cabinets.
These can be reach-in or roll-in designs and are assembled on site once all the components have been brought in.
Pay attention to the materials used in the construction of the cabinet.
Much of the cost involved in manufacturing is in the cost of themetal.
Most high quality kitchen equipment is manufactured in stainless steel for its strength, resistance to damage and for hygiene considerations.
Commercial refrigerators are subject to an enormous amount of abuse, mostly knocks and bangs from other pieces of equipment — trays, trolleys, pans and so on.
For longevity, therefore, a stainless steel exterior is desireable.
Its heat convection is also minimal.
Interiors may be of aluminium or stainless steel.
Once again, stainless steel is the first choice.
Insulation is important since it keeps out the hot ambient kitchen air, reducing the load on the refrigeration system.
Good quality cabinets will usually have 70-90mm of polyurethane foamed in situ insulation.
Purchasers should be aware that environment-friendly CFC-free insulation is now a standard feature of most manufacturers.
Efficient refrigeration operates on the fan assisted principle.
Fans are used to draw ambient air over the condenser and air over the evaporator inside.
This is the key difference between commercial and most types of domestic refrigerator.
Domestic cabinets are designed on the assumption that they will not be opened frequently.
Therefore, a less efficient fixed plate evaporator system can be used.
Fan assisted cabinets have a very rapid recovery following an air change, whereas plate evaporator designs can take a long time to return to the correct storage temperature.
Plate evaporators may be found on some of the less expensive  frozen food storage cabinets and on special fish storage refrigerators.
One of the things most likely to exasperate staff and reduce hygiene standards in the kitchen is a cabinet that is difficult to clean.
Choose a machine in which the shelves and supports are removable, where there are no inaccessible areas, and where there are no drip trays to empty.
Castors, as well as being a straightforward mobility device, also help with kitchen hygiene when it is time to clean the floor.
In addition to the physical attributes to look for there are naturally a host of technical features to check.
Among the most important is the defrost arrangement.
Automatic defrost is most desirable since it eliminates human error and is energy efficient.
Once the machine has been defrosted there should be some means of disposing of the defrost water.
In some cabinets this may be as simple as a tray beneath the cabinet, which collects the water.
This arrangement is acceptable, but it depends on someone emptying the collection tray.
In practice, the trays are often left to overflow, leaving puddles of water that are sometimes concealed by the cabinet.
A more satisfactory method is the incorporation of an automatic vapouriser.
Energy efficient systems use the waste heat generated by the compressor to vapourise the defrost water, and can therefore save you money in the long term.
The cabinet should be fitted with an easy to read thermometer.
Digital instruments are easiest to read and respond slightly more quickly.
In addition it often helps if the cabinet is labelled as to its purpose and operating range.
Any temperature deviation is then more apparent.
Self closing doors with magnetic gaskets make sure that the door shuts and stays shut.
Door locks also help with security.
A word on freezers.
A common misunderstanding is to call a frozen food storage cabinet a freezer.
Frozen food storage cabinets are designed to accept pre-frozen food and hold it at the proper storage temperature — 18°C to -22°C.
To freeze food, a blast freezer should be employed.
So much for this brief guide to selecting a refrigerator.
Assuming that its purpose has been determined, once the machine arrives there are several steps that can be taken to maintain its good condition and ensure a long life.
Importance of ventilation
First, consider where it is to be located.
Refrigerators need ventilation.
Since they extract heat from the food inside, and since the compressor and fans generate heat, it soon becomes apparent that the area around a poorly ventilated refrigerator can quickly become hot.
Added to the heat already being generated in the kitchen, the lack of ventilation can easily put undue strain on the system's ability to cope.
Refrigerators will work more efficiently if sited on a level floor.
Many cabinets are fitted with adjustable legs for this reason.
As mentioned earlier, commercial refrigeration relies on fans to circulate the air within the cabinet.
If food is stacked in such a way that the air circulation is impeded, performance will suffer.
In severe cases, when items block the fans altogether, damage to the mechanical parts can result.
Carry out a preventative maintenance programme.
there is not much to go wrong with the equipment provided that it is properly cared for.
Most problems arise from neglect and, since repairs involve skilled labour, righting a wrong can be expensive.
Regularly clean and inspect the door gasket.
A damaged door gasket can jeopardise food safety as well as cause problems with the equipment.
Clean the condenser coils regularly with a stiff brush, taking care not to damage the fans or push dirt and dust further in.
Clean the outside of the cabinet with warm soapy water and a soft cloth, or use a food-safe stainless steel cleaner.
Remember that equipment that looks well maintained is more likely to be respected by members of staff.
To some, there may seem a host of potential pitfalls to be negotiated in choosing kitchen equipment, refrigeration in particular.
However, it is worth taking the time to make a careful selection — after all, you could be living with your choice for 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, for the next 10 years.
Project Alaska
In light of the recent Food Safety Act, a new CO2 refrigeration system has been especially designed for the inflight catering industry.
of Distillers MG explains how it has been shown to be more cost-effective compared to the use of dry ice slices.
The recent introduction of new food legislation has resulted in many companies re-examining their processes and procedures to ensure compliance.
The transportation of chilled foods from the point of production to the point of sale has posed problems for a great number of catering supply companies.
One particular catering industry has some rather unique problems which have been overcome with the help of similarly unique new technology.
The industry concerned is the in-flight catering business which in the UK alone, produces many thousands of meals 24 hours a day every day and has to transport them at chill temperatures from the flight kitchens to individual aircraft, quite often with additional problems resulting from flight delays and so on.
Traditionally, this cooling requirement has been accomplished using slices of solid carbon dioxide, better known as dry ice.
One or two lkg slices were placed in a special tray at the top of the familiar airline catering trolleys which were then transported in unrefrigerated vehicles to the aircraft.
A joint investigation of this procedure by  of Distillers MG Limited, the UK's leading supplier of carbon dioxide, and  general manager in quality assurance for Forte Airport Services, one of the world's leading in-flight caterers, demonstrated that the dry ice slice technique could not meet the requirements of the new legislation, and in many cases hardly had any effect at all other than freezing the meal at the top of the trolley.
The two companies decided to set up a joint research and development project to find a system which would meet the new standards in a cost-effective way, and Project Alaska was born.
Project Alaska resulted in the development of an innovative new CO2 Snowshooting system, which has recently undergone extensive trials to establish quality and temperature effects on the meals and tray sets, cost efficiency, and ease of application.
During the summer of 1991, a small scale prototype was tested under operational conditions with United Airlines at Colnbrook.
The success of the system led to the building of a full-scale 6 tonne installation at Gatwick, to establish how snowshooters would perform in full-scale, multi-airline use.
The results have been extremely positive, with full implementation achieved within three weeks of starting.
A patent application has been submitted for the Snowshooting system, which won the equipment section of the 1991 IFCA Mercury Award competition.
The system is believed to be a major innovation and an answer to a difficult and potentially costly problem within the industry.
who led the project for Forte Airport Services, comments, ‘Above all, this system gives high standards of food safety — which is of paramount importance to our company and our customers.’
A different system has been developed for companies whose product is packed in trays or boxes.
The basic process is the same, but the equipment is different, usually being custom designed to suit the layout of existing packaging lines and the size of the container being used.
A typical installation would involve the use of a CO2 snowing system mounted above either existing or new conveyor track.
The CO2 system would normally include a number of specially designed CO2 snowing horns contained in a stainless steel shroud custom built to suit the tray or box.
The amount of CO2 sbow added to each container is varied by a simple timer circuit to allow for changes in the ambient temperature or the temperature of the product before snowing.
Systems have alreeady been designed and installed for a variety of chilled products, including sandwiches, poulty and poultry products, prime cuts of meat, meat products, such as pies and pasties, pizzas and so on.
The installation of a CO2 snowing or snowshooting system can save considerable costs or inconvenience when existing cold stores are not large enough, or dwell times in the store are too short to meet the new temperature regulations.
CO2 systems are also flexible enough to allow for variations in product temperature, ambient temperature and the duration of transit for delivery.
The system is economical because it uses no power or CO2 except when a product is being packed.
Another advantage is that, because the refrigerant is inside each and every box, hot spots in the centre of palletised products in cold stores can be avoided.
Planning a food facility
Planning a proper food service facility is an essential aspect of hotel design, but until recently food service consultancy has been a neglected profession.
, director and general manager of Catermaster International Contracts, explains the role, and problems of a food service consultant.
Thirty years ago, a new professional, the food service design consultant, made his appearance in the engineering field.
It has taken many years for these professionals to gain recognition and acceptance.
The word consultant lends itself to a very wide interpretation and many food service operators, and particularly hotel operators, believe they are all capable of being food service consultants.
The food service design consultant, however, is a professional man who has been trained to be a designer after having gained a varied experience in the food service industry.
A consultant's job can be divided roughly into three areas of work, all of which are interrelated, but each of which may be taken and given as a separate service.
1
Feasibility study
2
Management consultancy
3
Food service planning
As it is possible for a hotel owner or developer to have feasibility studies undertaken by their own staff, and for the developer to obtain the service of hotel management companies to run the hotel for a fee, it is the role of the food service planning consultant which will be examined in this article.
There are broadly speaking, two methods in which the design consultant is employed:
1
Directly by the client
2
By an architect on the owner's behalf
In both cases the consultant is there to assist the architect and to advise the client on all specialised aspects of food service planning.
It is basically the function of the designer to protect the client's interest and ensure that the food service planning is carried out from a food service operator's point of view, rather than from the architect's or interior designer's point of view.
Just as a motor car cannot run along the road without an engine, we say that a food service facility, be it a hotel or restaurant, cannot run without its engine and that engine is the food production facility.
It is absoloutely essential that this should work effectively, efficiently, and economically in order that the customers will be satisfied and return.
Who, therefore, is responsible for seeing that the areas available are planned in such a way that this end may be achieved?
Not the architect, because he has no specialised knowledge of operations.
Not the equipment manufacturer because he is interested in the commercial aspect of selling his own equipment whether it be right for the particular job or not.
It is therefore left to the specialist food service planner to perform the required functions.
How does a food service planner do his job?
The first and foremost step in planning a food facility is to establish what the facility is going to sell, and what type of function is required from the service facility.
It is at this stage, that the food service designer should be appointed and be able to work with the architect from the inception of the building.
This, however, I am sad to relate, is a very rare case.
In the majority of cases, the architect will design a building, paying perhaps too little regard to its functional capabilities and concentrating instead on its aesthetic appearance.
After designing an architect's dream, he will then have to try and make it functional, having committed himself to a particular shape and size.
The first task of the designer, therefore, is to fight with the architect and often with the client to obtain the correct amount of space for the functional part of the hotel.
At this stage, a diagrammatic area layout is prepared, showing the ideal space requirement, and relating it to the space allocated.
It is understood that space is expensive, and it is the popular misconception, that as much space as possible should be devoted to seating and as little as possible to the kitchen.
This however, will only lead to an inefficient facility in the long run.
Having established the correct space allocation, and had it agreed by the architect, a basic layout of all areas, kitchen, pantries, stores, bars and so on, is planned, bearing in mind the logical sequence of operational events.
If the designer is working on a project where a food and beverage manager has been appointed, he should always be involved from the inception of the project, in order that he may be aware of the development of the facility.
The facility should not, however, be designed with the ideas of a particular individual in mind, although agreement on basic principles is obviously important.
On agreement between all parties on the basic layout, the designer then prepares detailed equipment layouts for all areas.
This entails the choice of the best pieces of equipment to perform the required function, ensuring that the flow of work and service is at its most economical.
Because of the many opportunities that a designer has of seeing many types and design of kitchen equipment in action, he is able to pick for his client the best type and design for the job in hand.
At this stage, the designer works closely with the services engineers to ensure that the utilities are sufficient and necessary for the equipment.
He also works with the quantity surveyor to prepare budget costs.
Writing specifications based on the accepted and approved plans are an essential part of the designer's work.
At this point it would appear that a consultant's job is now over, but in fact he should co-ordinate with the contractors, and stand by until the equipment is fully installed and be present at the opening of the facility for a number of days in order to iron out any problems that may arise immediately after opening.
The most important factors to consider when you employ a food service designer are that he is a professional, has integrity of purpose, is working for the client all the time, and has the client's immediate financial interest at heart, plus the continued operational interest in the facility when it is opened.
Hygiene solutions
sales and marketing manager for Whirpool Commercial, looks at the hygiene regulations that apply to the caterer, with particular reference to the Food Safety Act, highlighting the importance of using a commercial, rather than domestic microwave, and also looking at the economic and environmental benefits offered by a waste compactor.
Numerous food scares and the dramatic rise in reported cases of food poisoning over the last few years, plus the need to comply with European Community requirements led to the Food Safety Bill, now nearly two years old.
As most people now know, the broad aim of the Act is to control all aspects of food safety throughout the food contribution chain.
Less well known is that the Act also gives enforcement officers powers to deal with food premises and with equipment which is unhygienic and unsatisfactory within the context of the legislation.
For example, commercial microwave ovens are now an essential piece of equipment in catering establishments throughout the UK.
Many caterers however, still ask the question, ‘Why do I need a commercial microwave when cheaper domestic ovens are available?’
The answer is that hygiene regulations stipulate that the caterer must use suitable equipment.
The Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food (MAFF) and EHOS strongly recommend that caterers use a commercial rather than a domestic model.
There are a number of technical differences between the two.
A domestic model is designed for around half an hour's use a day.
In a catering environment the oven could be used for up to 10 hours a day.
The end result in a domestic oven is a drop in power output and the very real risk that food will not be heated to the required and safe temperature level of 70°C as specified by the food safety laws.
Use of inadequate machinery may result in food poisoning and subsequent prosecution under the Food Safety Act 1990.
Domestic ovens are not constructed to take continual punishment: the door might be opened and closed over 50 times a day, frequently slammed shut and generally abused by the busy caterer.
A powerful cooling system in the oven is essential to prevent the critical composnents from overheating.
Also, an important point to remember is that domestic ovens used in a commercial environment will not be covered by the manufacturer's guarantee.
Selecting the right commercial model will not only ensure that you are complying with the food safety regulations, but will also in the long run reduce the repair and replacement costs.
The higher output powers will also give you a greatly improved throughput, and the more covers you serve, the more profit you make.
Over the last 12 months or so a new microwave product has been made available to the caterer — the combination microwave.
This relatively new concept gives the user the additional benefit of convection cooking and, on some models, a grill.
All these functions can be combined to give you the advantages of traditional cooking in less than half the normal cooking time.
The combination oven is available in all sizes from the compact to the larger industrial models.
However, big is not always beautiful, and often having two smaller models which are used at the real point of use in a catering establishment can give greater flexibility and be more cost-effective.
For example, a larger combination microwave which may cost over £3500 is ideal for turning over consistently large batches.
But, there will also be many instances where the oven is only working to half or less than half of its full capacity for most of the day.
To re-heat or cook a small load is a sure way of wasting energy.
To compare this situation with using two or three small ovens, the capital outlay may be the same or even less, but running costs, especially during the quiet period, will be considerably less.
Different types of food can also be cooked at the same time, such as batch baking in one oven and reheating smaller items as and when required in the other.
Features to look out for on a commercial microwave oven include a turbo-grill, a convection oven and microwave functions that can reduce cooking times by up to 50 per cent.
Given the high turnover of catering staff and the huge numbers of part-time and seasonal staff, microwaves offer a simple and efficient cooking method.
Most people now have domestic models  in their homes and so are used to using them.
A short training session should have them proficient with a commercial model.
Training is essential and basic food hygiene courses can be completed in six hours.
The main bodies providing training are the Institution of Environmental Health Officers, the Royal Institute of Public Health and Hygiene, and the Royal Society of Health.
Courses are also run by local authorities around the country, and private training agencies and college courses are available.
If in doubt, your local health officer should be able to advise you.
Waste management is also becoming an increasingly important issue for all caterers.
The hygiene control and safe handling of waste is now becomeing a legal obligation and should be a top priority for all catering businesses.
The Department of the Environment has recently introduced the Duty of Care with a code of practice that clearly lays out the responsibility of businesses to manage their waste correctly.
Establishments that do not comply with this code face heavy penalties and fines of up to £2000 in a magistrates court and unlimited fines in a crown court.
Waste compactors offer a new concept in efficient and cost-effective waste disposal by safely and hygienically reducing waste to up to a quarter of its original size.
Reducing the volume of waste not only makes it more manageable and reduces the further risk of contravening the hygiene regulations, but since most local authorities or waste contractors charge for removal based on the volume, you will also make considerable savings on removal charges.
Using a compact model where waste is generated, also saves continuous trips back and forth from the kitchen to outside dustbins.
There is only one way to control rubbish: reduce the volume.
Also, recent research from America shows that compacted rubbish can be easily separated and sorted into plastics, glass, paper and so on for recycling.
The conclusion?
There is definitely a place for compactors in the future of recycling.
Before deciding on which model to buy, talk to a reliable manufacturer or dealer as their advice could save a lot of time and money at a later stage.
They will be able to give you a practical demonstration and support with an after sales service that offers a same day or out of hours call.
Meeting the needs of the modern caterer
Today's chefs are looking to state of the art equipment for convenience, reliability and consistency of cooking.
of Franke Catering Equipment considers ways in which a manufacturer can help to make life easier for busy caterers.
With increasing demands on caterers to provide top quality food quickly and efficiently, chefs are turning to well-established equipment manufacturers to provide them with state of the art equipment which will make their job easier.
Years of experience supplying the catering industry combined with in-depth research and development programmes, have allowed equipment manufacturers to transform what were once humble pieces of kit into the sort of ultra-modern hardware now available for installation in kitchens of all shapes and sizes.
European suppliers in particular, are leading the field in the all-important areas of innovation and precision engineering.
Their goal is to provide robust and reliable machinery which allows hardworking chefs the freedom and time to be creative and serve up dishes which will meet the high standards diners expect, safe in the knowledge that the equipment will not let them down.
Progress through innovation
One of the latest pieces of equipment to come out of Europe is the fully automatic beverage centre, which features a unique high-speed, low scale water heater with a revolutionary new pass-through boiler system.
Also available, is a range of high tech combination ovens, offering the very latest in computerised control without blinding the operator with science.
they feature a unique direct injection steam generation system which, coupled with a Britamatic water filter, totally overcomes the ccostly problem of scaling.
This simple but effective method of steam generation eliminates the need for a boiler so helping to cut down the incidence of scaling while also reducing water consumption by up to 80 per cent.
Major hotels and restaurants are making the most of new ideas like these and, realising the need to invest in the best modern equipment available, they are increasingly relying on equipment manufacturers to fit out their kitchens with these innovations.
And with the large capital invetment involved, the customer depends on the fact that any new model must be capable of taking on the task in hand without difficulty — there is no room for mere gimmicks.
State of the art cooking systems
One example of the kind of cooking systems which are frequently being installed, is at the prestigious St Pierre Park Hotel, Guernsey.
The St Pierre Park has to give its guests four-star quality on a mass basis.
Quantity alone is just not good enough.
All too often banqueting and other forms of large scale catering are associated with disappointing, dried out and lacklustre food.
Recognising this need to offer excellence en masse and at high speed, the hotel had a new cooking system installed.
Once up and running, the equipment was put to the most rigorous of tests almost immediately — catering for a banquet with over 300 guests.
This gave the new kitchen the perfect opportunity to show what it could achieve.
St Pierre Park staff were pleased to report that the new kitchen passed with flying colours, enabling the main course to be served to all the diners within 10 minutes of the plates going into the ovens.
What makes this system unique, is a batch of computers which control the ovens and ensure the food is cooked for the correct length of time and in the most ideal conditions.
The ovens' microprocessors are able to monitor the temperature, time and humidity of the cooking environment, so avoiding the age-old problems of overcooking and drying out.
Instead, the computer control means that both meat and vegetables are as near perfect and succulent as possible while retaining correct levels of moisture.
For added consistency, the ovens have a 200-program memory.
At St Pierre Park half of these memories are pre-programmed by the chefs, which means menus can be reproduced and also gives room for extra fine running, all at the touch of a button.
The system can also be pre-set to cook and hold while no one is in the kitchen and, in these cost-conscious times, food can be cooked overnight or on a half-power setting to take advantage of cheap electricity periods.
Of course, none of this means that the equipment is taking anything away fromm the chef's own individual skills which are irreplaceable.
What it does ensure is that the chef has complete control over some of the most vital tools of his trade, with computer guidance as an important aid.
A system like this frees the chef to devote extra time and energy into adding those special little finishing touches which give his creations the mark of individuality.
Perhaps one of the most welcome results of its installation, has been the fact that hotplates, which can often cause dishes to dry out, can now be dispensed with for high volume catering.
As an alternative, a racking system covered with thermal wraps was developed, which keeps the food hot but completely fresh for up to 30 minutes.
Commitment
The investment, back of house, at the hotel came partly as a result of consultation with local environmental health officers.
With the expertise of a well respected manufacturer aware of the demands of modern catering, the hotel installed equipment which was right for the job and which culd be relied upon to help meet strict hygiene standards.
Manufacturers are aware of their responsibilities and the impportant part they and their agents can play in helping the caterer with advice on subjects such as kitchen planning and hygiene.
For many suppliers, this is all part of the overall value for money service.
The other major concern of every caterer is cost-effectiveness.
At the St Pierre Park it is estimated that the oven system will have paid for itself inside 18 months.
Distribution network
In order to install systems such as that at the St Pierre Park, equipment manufacturers rely on a good relationship with their distributors, ensuring the best possible service at all times.
It is this commitment to customer service which singles out the reliable manufacturers.
By listening closely to what chefs want from their equipment and by striving to scale new heights in service and product development, they are doing their utmost to meet the needs of the modern caterer.
The birth of a legend — the combi-steamer
of Rational UK Ltd looks at one of the greatest inventions of cooking equipment in recent years in the professional kitchen — the combi-steamer.
Like all good innovations, it is based on pure simplicity and offers the opportunity to cook in an oven chamber using pressureless steam, dry heat or a combination of the two.
Already I can hear you asking what is a combi-steamer?
A genuine combi-steamer offers the opportunity to use either pressureless steam in a controlled environment, or dry heat (similar to a convection oven).
Both can be used singly, as a combined energy source, or in any sequence, to provide the ideal environment for varying food types.
This may sound complicated, but rest assured, that it is simplicity itself.
Steaming
At a constant cooking cabint temprature of approximately 100°C, the fresh steam guarantees cooking that is exceptionally uniform and gentle.
Food which has been through the steaming mode has an appetizing colour, is cooked al dente (still firm when bitten), and retains all the important nutrients, vitamins and minerals.
This mode is ideal for stewing, blanching, steaming, poaching and simmering.
All food consists of cellular construction and, in this gentle steam, this is not attacked or broken down.
Hence, over-cooked vegetables are a thing of the past, thus preventing waste and food loss (you place 2lbs of peas in the oven and you get 2lbs of peas out again).
Sulphur rings (blue/black/ in hard boiled eggs are also eradicated.
All this is true, if you have a well-balanced combi-steamer — steam only transmits heat during the process of condensing and, once the food reaches the temperature of the steam, it stops condensing and thus stops cooking.
However, this is not true in all combi-steamers so make sure you have one with a well balanced/controlled oven chamber.
To ensure that this is being achieved, watch out for two essential ingredients: One is that the combi-steamer produces fresh clean steam from its own generator, and the other is that it has an efficient waste air quenching system.
Apart from ensuring a balanced chamber, there is an extra benefit created by these functions — the guarantee of a clean oven chamber to prevent transfer of flavours and odours.
For example, onions, bananas, trout and cauliflower can all be cooked in the same chamber without taste transfer.
Hot air
This mode replaces frying or roasting in a hot air unit, a tilt pan or a frying pan, and replaces baking in a normal or multi-tiered oven.
Hot air is circulated at a high velocity in the cooking cabinet where it instantly envelopes the food and seals the meat so that it remains juicy.
It is important that your combi-steamer can achieve as near 300&degree: C as possible.
There are three main reasons for this recommendation:
If you can achieve 300°C, you will be able to genuinely grill or bake au gratin (even toast in bulk).
For short time, high temperature bakery items at 200°C–220°C, pre-heating at 300°C will ensure that you bake at the correct temperature (on average 80° C will be lost whilst loading the oven)
More engineering has to be built into these units than in lower temperature ones to enable them to withstand the higher temperature.
Hence, they are better value for money and potentially a stronger unit which will last longer.
Most people are already familiar with convection ovens which, in essence, is what the hot air mode is trying to achieve, but with two main differences — the ability to achieve 300°C and the waste air quenching system.
An effective waste air quenching system is even more important on this mode otherwise, when you cook an oven load of chickens, the chamber will fill with smoke and adversely affect their flavour.
Combi-steaming
This mode unites all the advantages of hot steam, such as short cooking times (when humidity is added to dry heat you achieve 2–3 times the amount of heat penetration), low cooking losses, and juicy roasts that have the benefits of hot air, namely intensive flavour, appetizing colour and crunchy crusts.
As the food does not need to be turned, this mode saves up to 50 per cent of the roasting losses otherwise associated with conventional units.
Combi-steaming is used for combi-roasting, glazing, baking au gratin , combi-baking and for forced steaming at 110-125°C.
This mode is used for intensive cooking and reduced the cooking time by 25–30 per cent, which is ideal for root vegetables, such as carrots and potatoes.
It is also an ideal mode for regenerating multi-portions and individual packs of cook freeze products, as it eliminates drying out of vegetables, custards and sauces, prevents burning at the edges and, by the improved heat penetration, it breaks through the ice barrier and bacteria barrier faster than any other method.
It also renders the food safer as it is now proven that moisture, in addition to heat and time, kills off salmonella, chlostridium botulinum and lysteria most effectively.
Cooking sequence
A food item which benefits from all three cooking modes previously described, is a roast joint of port (this can be any cut, for example, a loin or a leg).
Firstly, it is placed into the oven on the steam mode for one-third of its cooking cycle.
The meat does not become tough as it would in conventional steaming, as it is not being immersed in water and it is gentle pressureless steam.
the results are impressive as the steam seals the meat and stops the protein oozing out as it is already setting in the joint.
As the heat is moist, it does not attack the juices, and the crackling is softened.
Once this mode has finished, the joint is removed, and the softened crackling is easily scored.
The meat is then replaced into the oven and set on combi-steaming for the rest of the cooking time.
Colouring takes place, but the meat remains moist as the air in the chamber still has humidity.
This considerably reduces shrinkage and weight loss.
At the end of the cooking period, if further colouring is required or the crackling needs further crisping, turn the oven up high on dry heat/hot air for 10-15 minutes.
Now you have a superb pork roast with crunchy crackling and a cold joint which will not crumble when carved (the normal problem with pork on a buffet), as the moisture has been retained in the meat.
Cleaning
Thanks to the availability of steam, cleaning is now a simple task, taking very little effort and no elbow grease.
After use, let the oven cool down to approximately 60°C and then spray an approved oven cleaner around the inside of the chamber, the oven rack, grid shelves and used gastronorm containers.
Allow this to work on the cooking residues for 20 minutes and then switch the combi-steamer onto the steam mode for 10-–15 minutes.
Using a wash-down hose, rinse out the oven and then finish off to a fine sparkle with a quick wipe around.
Never ever use scourers or coarse cleaning pads as this will scratch the stainless steel surface and make cleaning an arduous task in the future.
This process is much simpler and quicker than cleaning a convection oven.
Vario-steaming
This is the steaming mode, but with a distinct difference, where a constant cooking cabinet temperature can be achieved in a temperature range of 30-99°C.
Extremely gentle steam can be used to prepare sensitive foods, enhance the typical taste of dishes, intensify natural cololurs, and ensure uniform cooking.
Vario-steaming can be used for scalding, simmering, poaching, blanching, soaking, vacuum cooking cuisine sous vide , defrosting, reheating, preserving and pasteurising.
A lot of food we eat contains albumen, for example, eggs and fish, and this mode allows gentle coagulation of the albumen without any fear of curdling.
The best example is creme caramel, where the dariole moulds are placed straight into the oven set at 85°C, and a perfect product results without any fear of honeycombing.
Reheating
Whilst reheating can be successfully achieved by using other modes, this is a speciality mode developed in recognition that the majority of food will be stored in a refrigerator.
This means that when heat is applied it will produce greater volumes of condensation.
To compensate the problem, this mode is a mini version of combi-steaming, insofar that both steam and dry heat are used, but only one third of the steam is produced to eliminate unsightly water puddles.
Low temperature cook and hold
This is for gentle cooking in a dry heat at a temperature of between 30°C and 99°C.
Low temperature proceeds in two phases; an initial cooking phase in the hot air or combi-steaming mode, followed by a maturing phase in the low temperature cooking mode.
The meat becomes very tender during the latter phase, retaining its natural juiciness and reducing weight losses still further.
The meat can be kept at serving temperature for a prolonged period without the slightest deterioration of quality.
This method of roasting has achieved a remarkable 6 per cent weight loss and, this varies dramatically from all previous low temperature cook and hold ovens, because other modes are available to achieve traditional roasting textures and crusts.
Moistening
When baking in combination with the hot air mode, the touch of a button releases an instant cloud of moisture giving a smooth and glazed surface, and ensuring that the dough rises evenly.
Core temperature meat probe
This is an extremely beneficial tool as it eliminates the guesswork from roasting joints, because the cooking period is determined by the temperature you wish the core of the meat to achieve.
Hence, it is possible to guarantee the same perfect result time after time.
It is also a crucial instrument when reheating, in ensuring that the correct temperatures are reached and that the food is safe for consumption.
Over-cooking is thus effectively prevented, and is it no longer necessary to constantly watch the cooking process.
It can be adjusted to any temperature between 20°C and 99°C, and it can be used in conjunction with all operating modes.
It is, therefore, proven that a combi-steaner is not only an advantage in the commercial kitchen, but an essential ingredient designed and built to make the chef's life easier and to realise dramatic savings so that it quickly pays for itself.
However, when you decide to purchase one for yourself, here are a few Do's and Don'ts to assist in your selection:
Do's
Select the right sized unit for the numbers you cater for.
There are many sizes and shapes available but the main rule of thumb guide to size selection is: 6 shelf 40-80 people 10 shelf 80-140 people 20 shelf approx 200 people 20 double shelf approx 400 people
Ensure that the oven is simple to use and is not a pilot's cockpit
Check for good materials and engineering
Look out for functions that benefit you and the type of catering you offer
Be selective of safety features, like door drip trays, to ensure that the floor remains dry; door stop positions to protect your staff; positive runners on the oven racks to stop loaded containers from spilling over you; and lock position for the oven rack
Remember the advantage of 300°C
Remember the advantage of the core temperature meat probe
Select a combi-steamer with an integrated hand shower to enhance the ease of cleaning
Remember the advantage of a good waste air quenching system
Select a combi-steamer with its own self-clean automatic steam generator
Select your combi-steamer from those who offer a demanded related power supply — this can save 20-30 per cent of your fuel bill
Check that your supplier offers full training on the product, as a high investment is a waste of money if you are left to work out how to use it
Ensure that the software package and an after sales service is available on the product
Make sure that parts to be maintained are easily accessible, to cut down on repair bills in the future
Don'ts
Select the cheapest combi-steamer — you get what you pay for
do not be pressuried into a quick hard-sell; this is an important investment which should be afforded due consideration
Technology and energy efficiency combined
Catering establishments of all types are constantly looking at ways of saving energy without reducing performance and there are a number of areas within the kitchen where such savings can be made.
and  outline the latest technology and energy efficient equipment available, focusing on induction cooking, tunnel cookers and double rinse dishwashers.
Traditionally, people tend to equate technology with expense — the idea that if something is electronically controlled or operated using a computer system, then it will inevitably be more costly.
This need not be the case, for advancements in the use of technology within the catering kitchen have progressed to the extent that it is unusual not to find a catering establishment using high technology within the work-place.
There will always be an element of the old school that insists that proper cooking must be done using traditional methods, but increasingly, chefs, catering managers and kitchen staff in general are putting their trust in 1990s' technology to enable them to carry out their work.
One of the main criticisms of using technology in the kitchen is the expense, but while the initial outlay may be high, the day-to-day cost of running the equipment can be considerably lower.
Maintenance costs are frequently reduced and with regard to cooking equipment, some new methods can save the chef time and effort on mundane tasks, leaving the skilled craftsman or woman more time to concentrate on creating the culinary masterpieces that guarantee the future of the restaurant.
In areas of cleaning and hygiene, such as warewashing and storage, savings can be made by using high quality, reliable machines which rely on electronic and other high tech components to ensure the smooth running of the equipment.
For example, many warewashers require very little product expertise to run on a day-to-day basis and can thus be operated by general kitchen staff, who are traditionally lower paid than skilled workers.
By using simple to operate but reliable equipment, staffing costs can be reduced.
Unless a total kitchen refit is planned, it is best to introduce new technology in stages to give staff time to gradually learn about the new equipment and methods on offer.
It is important to prioritize and target areas which reflect on the key areas of the operation.
Remember that the staff are the key part of any operation, and if they are being prevented from doing their best because of the poor standards of their tools, then the business will suffer overall.
So if your dishwasher is unreliable and you are getting complaints from customers, then that might be the area to begin with.
Or if your cooking facilities need an overhaul because the standard of the dishes is erratic, despite the cordon bleu chef, then a new cooker may be in order.
In fact, when a hotel or catering establishment decided to update its kitchen equipment, one of the first places that is often targeted for changes is the method of cooking.
Some sceptics may feel that it is inevitable that by saving energy, and therefore cash, there will be a rduction in both the standards and the versality of the products served.
But there are now several recognised cooking methods that not only maintain the standards of traditional cooking, but improve on them.
The increasing part played by high technology in the manufacture and operation of cookers and ranges, enables the chef to have his cake and eat it.
Induction cooking has been hailed by many as the cooking revolution.
It not only offers chefs total control in the kitchen, but also has the added advantage of being a more flexible, practical and energy efficient alternative to conventional cookers — points that will please the person responsible for the finances.
Induction cooking saves energy in a number of ways.
For example, the power controls can be so sensitive that heat can be regulated by degree.
Power is instantaneous, which means that no preheating time is required, so overall cooking times are reduced.
Additionally, less electricity is used and the chef wastes no time waiting for the correct temperature to be reached.
Also, this electronic method of cooking means that only the pan is heated, and the moment it is removed from the hob, energy consumption stops.
sales and marketing director for Masters & Andren, explains, ‘Induction cooking is becoming increasingly popular in kitchens because it brings together the key elements of energy saving and new technology.
It is popular with chefs too because it is such a clean, safe and efficient way of preparation.
‘That is where induction cooking has the edge.
It is no good offering an alternative cooking means to the traditional methods if the chef is not happy with the equipment or the results it gives.
‘Induction offers the chef total control down to the last degree, and because only the pan is heated it means chefs no longer have to work in a hot, uncomfortable kitchen environment.’
In high volume kitchens, where continuous cooking is in operation, the use of a cooking tunnel can be the key to efficiency.
Multi-energy cooking tunnels are among the first in the world to combine four different types of energy — steam, microwave, forced convection and infrared.
Each type of energy has specific advantages.
The combination of these methods provides optimum cooking quality and shorter cooking times of up to five times less than conventional methods.
This enables the chef to plan delicate, difficult to prepare recipes in large quantities using traditional equipment.
Cooking tunnels mean that between 1500 and 5000 meals can be prepared a day while freeing the chef from performing repetitive tasks and surveilance.
This leaves him free to concentrate on the creative side of cooking while maintaining effective management control.
Tunnel cookers are completely automatic and fully programmable using either manual or computer controlled systems.
Another key area where energy efficiency is required is dishwashing.
In large hotels and other catering establishments where there is a high turnover of pots and dishes, a reliable tunnel dishwasher is vital.
The purchase of dish and warewashers is an important investment and caterers should look for equipment that offers long-term energy savings costs.
Caterers can no longer afford to look for a machine that gives performance at any cost.
As well as the initial outlay of purchasing the machine, they need to know what to expect in terms of running costs.
Energy saving during the warewashing process can be done in a number of ways.
The ideal dishwasher will be highly cost efficient in three ways — water, energy and detergents.
Correct positioning of water jets will ensure that the utensils are thoroughly cleaned first time round, thus removing the tiresome need to put pots through a second time.
Jets must be high pressured to boost the cleaning process.
One new development is the double rinse system.
This enables water that has been used in the final rinse for previous dishes to be boosted on the next batch to clear off detergents.
The water is reprocessed by a pump and injected on the dishes at pre-wash stage.
This system saves both water and energy and the regeneration guarantees excellent results.
An additional benefit is that the machine is easy to clean, meaning a reduction in labour time.
And, because there is a minimum of moving parts, it ensures greater reliability.
For smaller catering operations, front loading and hood type dishwashers are available, offering high quality pot washing even with intensive use.
Made from strong, long lasting materials, they are easy to operate and easy to clean, guaranteeing a perfect result with the minimum of supervision.
One area where saving can be made with a low outlay, is storage of both recipe ingredients and pre-prepared meals.
Every year, thousands of pounds are wasted through incorrect storage methods.
Hygiene practices being of the utmost importance, it is necessary to use a food storage system that adheres to all legal requirements.
By using containers that can be used at all stages, it enables the caterer to optimise the organisation of all storage areas.
Different sizes mean that the best use is made of the space available so that food loss and wastage are reduced.
There are numerous areas within the kitchen environment where energy efficiency can be improved and once caterers take the plunge and decide to choose new technology operated equipment, then improved standards inevitably follow.
Food handling
managing director of Stellex Ltd, looks at the background of events leading up to mechanised food handling and addresses the need for regulation in the industry.
He also includes a guide to equipment selection, training and purchasing.
At one time, the average person could harvest around a sackful of wheat a day.
The price of a loaf of bread was several hours labour and both the miller and the domestic baker had to slog away to procuce a loaf.
Today a combine harvester can produce 30 tonnes of wheat an hour, flour and bread can be produced in a matter of minutes and, in no time at all, the bread reaches the supermarket shelf fresh and ready for consumption.
I am certain that, in those days, the quality of food was so poor that eating was probably hazardous.
Little was known about bacteria and viral infections, and they must have been hard to avoid without knowledge of modern hygiene standards, let alone the benefits of refrigeration and freezers.
Many of the feasts, fasts and shortages were due to production scarcities caused by storage limitations.
No doubt, as meal times were such a major effort, people were less self-conscious about weight or diet.
So, what changed everything?
Fuel — oil, gas and electricity, and the ability to convert them into useable commodities like transport, heat, light and power generation.
But, even with all this sophisticated support, the final few years to the point of consumption continue to defy mechanisation.
The complicated problems surrounding the temperature management of prepared food for volume consumption are all too apparent by the time you get your meal on the plate and are able to eat it in comfort.
Engineering v food management
The problems of temperature control are a result of the engineers' own success.
We can preserve, conserve, store, freeze, can, bottle, jar or produce doorstep-fresh anything you want (short of the snowflake), but as a result of this, a greater understanding of the very composition of food has become necessary, which in turn has given a deeper insight into handling systems.
Packaging, transport and temperature controls have resulted in the growth of industries which are connected with handling and storage, but still those last few feet to the point of consumption remain critical.
They make or break the entire supply chain process if the meal arrives as a disappointment to the consumer or, worse still, as a health hazard.
A growing technology
In 1987 fast food services really started to spread throughout the UK.
At the peak, the breweries were one of the single biggest spenders, upgrading bars and restaurants to new levels of speed and hygiene.
This was quickly followed by the burger bars and now, with Crown immunity being lifted, the Government institutions, such as health care, education and reform are also being marshalled into conformance with new and higher standards of product control and cost management.
Industry will be the last to be affected, but that too will be forced to conform by upgrading works' canteens and food preparation areas.
The larger companies are already coming to terms with the new regulations.
Regulation
So what is it all about?
Well, for my part, I believe that progress can often run away with itself, and when that happens, it needs regulation.
Once people have been diagnosed as suffering from food poisoning, or have been struck down by viral infactions and diseases caused by doubtful practices, it is necessary for somebody to step in and legislate for the industry.
There is still a struggle to control the age, quality and temperature of food on your plate and the last leap forward seems to be to attain the perfect temprature for consumption.
Purpose
The engineers involved in this final part of the supply chain handling process have had their work cut out.
Our brief has been to provide distribution equipment that will maintain prepared food at the correct temperature to the point of consumption, so that the consumer receives optimum quality at the optimum levels of hygiene.
We feed patients in hospitals, prisoners, school children, company employees, businessmen — people from all walks of life.
These people, our ultimate users, are surely the best judge of our progress in this field of engineering.
Getting it right — technically speaking
Our brief?
To provide equipment capable of transporting finished food products (meals) ready for consumption at 3°C for chilled food and 85°C for hot food.
This temperature has to be constant throughout the holding compartment.
We had to ensure that all working surfaces were hygienic and dirt trap free, and that food could be transported without spilling.
Equipment had to be able to travel outside without damage being caused to electrical and refrigeration support gear by vibration or ingress of water.
We were (in my own case) encouraged to tackle British Standards 5750 in the middle of all this.
The result is that this sector of the industry now has a new generation of site distribution equipment to transport bulk food or plated meals, in equipment which suits its requirements, at sensible, serviceable and, most importantly, affordable prices.
It has not been easy to change so quickly to the needs of a more demanding market place, but if your customers, staff or management have cause to complain of imprecise or unreliable temperature control equipment, of a poor maintenance record or of substandard temperatures at the point of consumption, we are the correct sector of engineering you require.
Our industry has made huge progress in providing the right equipment for each application.
Some manufacturers are not as flexible, so it pays to shop around to obtain the perfect solution.
Choosing the right system
On site there are principally five ways to distribute cooked food after the plating up rocess.
These are:
1
An insulated food box meal distribution system.
2
In a trolley designed to hold food at the correct temperature.
3
A servery system.
4
By waiter or another ambient distribution system.
5
A combination of some, or all, of the above methods.
The representative who comes to help you will normally spend time taking details of your problems.
You should expect him to listen carefully to those problems and take notes and measurements, paying specific attention to narrow doorways, lifts, steps, working obstructions and restrictions, route conditions and floor or ground surfaces.
You should tell him what you expect the equipment to do and the duty cycle or period involved.
As a rule, you are not expected to be technical, and should avoid being drawn into technical conversations.
If your equipment has to go outside on open roads or gravelled surfaces, remember castors are not always suitable.
Towing can be a major consideration and you should show your prospective supplier the chosen route, not forgetting it might be quite different on a snowy or frosty day.
You may wish to tow equipment in train to save repeated trips back and forth to the kitchen.
It is possible to obtain positive track equipment whereby the trolleys follow exactly the path of the tow vehicle, so if you have a winding route with 90° bends, your trolleys will not cause structural damage to the buildings or, worse still, be subjected to expensive damage themselves.
Ask about braking systems.
Consider your fixtures and fittings and ask how to guard against damage to property.
When you have done all this, you should be far better equipped to make logical and accurate decisions on the best system, or combination of systems, for transport/conveyance on your premises.
Incidentally, this is also the same sector of engineering that can help you with plating up and food/tray clearing conveyors and systems.
Choosing the best supplier and equipment
Once this is decided, you can look at your original operational requirements and compare them to the products in the representative's portfolio.
Most products have been developed to suit general needs or niche needs.
The more customised the equipment, the more expensive it is, but as a rule both the life and quality of the equipment improve.
The opposite is generally applicable for standard equipment, but of course there is a financial reward for adapting to standard, readily available products or modifying standard products to suit your needs.
No commercial equipment is inexpensive.
Commercial catering is a very harsh environment, proprietary manufacturers to the industry know this, and even PVC, nylon and polycarbonate materials are built to cope with ardous duty cycles.
Training
Finally, manufacturers have to be competitive.
Do not expect equipment to withstand abuse, if it did it would be unaffordable.
The answer is to train your operatives.
Most manufacturers will offer training, so ask them about it — it is definitely worth the money and if you think training is expensive, ignorance is extortionate!
Competitive tender
Always obtain three prices before short-listing a potential supplier and do not forget to squeeze them for discounts.
Most people will offer something even if it is only a few per cent for cash on delivery.
Be wary of cash with order unless you know the supplier is viable, reliable, honest and solvent.
Further help
The HCIMA has echnical information and lists of potential sources of help, many of whom are contained in this yearbook.
They will be pleased to help and so will the suppliers listed, including, of course, myself.
I hope this information will help you with your purchase or project.
Operational safety — floor matting
Floor matting is leading the way to operational safety and efficiency in the food science industry.
of Teknor Apex International examines the way mats can help protect workers and your business while repaying the investment with greater productivity, less breakage and fewer slips and falls.
A safe and efficient working environment for your employees is paramount in importance to every successful food service venue, regardless of menu or operational size.
It is apparent that our industry must address the floor safety issue more aggressively by protecting our workers and businesses from potentially costly hazards of slips and falls.
Leading the way to operational safety and efficiency is the installation of appropriate floor matting, specific to the work station requirements.
In a typical institutional kitchen the combination of floor tile, water, grease, food spills and so on can make for a very dangerous environment.
A recent food service industry survey in North America revealed just how dangerous institutional kitchens are:
One out of every three restaurants had a problem with employee and customer slips during the past year, most occurring in the kitchen
More than 17 per cent of all disabling occupational injuries, plus many thousands of less serious accidents, were caused by falls in 1990, according to the National Safety Council, and they cost US business billions of dollars
Worker's compensation payments alone in cases involving falls, now average more than $8500 per incident in North America, and
Worker fatigue is a major contributor to accidents.
Worker discomfort in feet, lower legs, back, neck, and shoulders all increase the longer workers are on their feet.
The appropriate mat can help protect your workers and your business while at the same time pay the best return on your investment with greater productivity, less breakage and fewer slip and falls.
The right mat provides the optimum combination of safety, comfort, drainage, quality and durability for each particular application.
Specifically, the food service professional's premiere concerns would be:
Slip-resistant surface
Effective cushion to reduce back and leg fatigue
Grease-resistant level of the mat
Cleaning and handling ease
National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) certified
Performance guarantee
Long lasting value.
focusing on your specific matting needs requires a few guide lines that should eliminate slection confusion and more importantly, put your workers on the right mat:
Choose the mat thickness you need for proper comfort level.
In general, the thicker the mat, the greater the comfort level.
Choose 7/8in mats where workers remain for a full shift; 1/2in mats at work stations used for hours at a time; 3/8in mats in traffic areas.
Consider your drainage requirements.
Mat design determines how fast a mat will drain.
In areas of frequent spills and where standing water may be present, choose a full-drainage mat.
In drier work and traffic areas, a mat that offers moderate drainage is adequate, and in dry areas where spills and drainage is not a consideration, choose a solid, non-draining mat for cushioning comfort under foot.
Choose the performance level you need.
Grease and oil degrade ordinary anti-fatigue mats and shorten service life.
In high-grease areas, around dryers and grills, for example, choose a best-quality greaseproof mat for long-lasting performance.
Where grease poses less of a problem, in food preparation areas, for example, choose grease-resistant mats for long service life.
And in areas where grease is not a factor such as traffic areas, behind the bar and so on, standard, non-grease formula mats may prove economically correct.
Build a safer foundation for your business, and pave the way to better productivity with the proper anti-fatigue rubber mat under foot.
A safe and effective working environment will always be your best investment.
The right anti-fatigue mat will pay the best return.