

MEDAU TRAINING & RECREATIONAL WEEKEND in Edinburgh
4th–5th October, 1986 Forrester School Broomhouse Road
Training sessions for teachers and experienced class members
Sat. 10.00 am — 12.30 pm £3.50
Sun. 10.30 am — 12.30 pm £3.00
FREE ‘Come & Try It’ session Sat. 2.00pm — 3.00 pm
Recreational classes for all Sat. 3.30pm — 5.00 pm £2.00
Sun. 2.00 pm — 3.45 pm £2.50
Further details from:—
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin Kynaston School on Saturday 15th March 1986
PLEASE READ CAREFULLY AS THERE MAY NOW BE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
1.
Apologies
In the absence of the Society Chairman, Pauline Kenward gave apologies from Hilda's absence due to a family commitment and a further fifteen apologies were registered.
2.
Office Organisation
Due to the illness of John Hewitt, Hilda's husband it may be necessary for you to use the Answer Phone as Hilda could be out of the Office during normal working hours.
Our best wishes are extended to John and Hilda and we hope he recovers soon.
3.
Beryl Smith
Arrangements have been made to plant a tree in Regent's Park, in the vicinity of Molly's tree close by St. John's Hall, on Tuesday 25th March at 11.00 a.m.
It is hoped that as many people as possible can be there on the day.
4.
Annual General Meeting
The A.G.M. is to be held on Saturday 19th April 1986 at Merton Adult Education Centre, Whatley Avenue, London SW20 .
Nearest railway stations Raynes Park, Wimbledon Chase and on the Northern Line Morden plus a bus outside the door Nos. 156–157 10.30 for 11.00 Open classes, Ploughman's Lunch followed by the Business Meeting.
PLEASE make every effort to attend and encourage your class-members to come too.
Slip re-attendance to be returned to the Office as soon as possible — Thank you.
5.
Teachers' Representative
Due to the changes made to the Constitution at the last A.G.M. the position of Teachers' Representative comes up for election this year.
Bridget Ewing has indicated her willingness to once again stand for re-election; however if there are any nominations for this position will you please send them in to Hilda at the Office by 2nd April or as time is short and you know of anyone who would like to be proposed — please ring Hilda with her name BUT this must be followed up with written confirmation.
If a vote is necessary, ballot papers will be sent out for you to return by 12th April for the result to be announced at the A.G.M.
6.
Coburg Course
If you are one of those going on the Course you will have already received a letter stating the balance of fees, travel, insurance etc. due by the 15th April with a reminder that a contribution will be required in DM's from those travelling in the coach from Frankfurt to Coburg.
PLEASE CHECK THAT YOU HAVE A VALID PASSPORT!
If you have any queries about the travel arrangements Betty Syrett or Hilda Hewitt will be happy to advise you.
7.
Annual Reunion 29th November
Venue — Warwick Park School, Peckham
Offers of Organisers for this event welcome!
Advice through notes on past events available and Pat Palmer, who teachers at this school is willing to liaise if required.
June Bascombe, who is co-ordinating the displays has only had four items offered so far.
If you have one you think suitable please contact her as soon as possible.
8.
New Treasurer and Finance Committee Members
There is an urgent need for new members to serve on the Finance Committee and as Joan Daniels wishes to retire at the end of the present financial year we will also need a new Treasurer to take her place.
Joan has worked very hard and conscientiously during her term of office but she feels that a fresh look at the job through a new treasurer in 1987 can only be of benefit to the Society.
If you are interested in becoming involved in either of these duties will you please contact Pauline Kenward or Joan Daniels.
DON'T DELAY…
COME FORWARD TODAY!
Your Society needs YOU!
9.
Development Plan
You are already aware that the Sports Council very generously grant aided us for 1985 and when you receive your Annual Report you will see that we have a surplus of approximately £7.500.
This surplus is due to the fact that our grant was not available until the middle of the year and therefore our targets have not yet been reached in certain areas.
Our various committees are aware of this situation and plans to  rectify this have been set in motion.
We did have to predict how much we could help ourselves financially and Joan is pleased to report that through the marvellous efforts made through fund-raising this prediction has been achieved.
Now the same thing will have to be achieved in 1986 so our fund-raising efforts must be continued with added vigour.
We must show the Sports Council that our teachers and Society members have every confidence in the work we are promoting.
A further condition of the Grant was that we increase
a)
Society membership
b)
class participation numbers
c)
the number of teachers teaching and training
d)
the number of Medau classes.
Sadly — we are not doing very well in any of these areas and we must take heed of the suggestions put forward by the N.D.O. and Trainers and any other good ideas proposed.
Our future Grant rest in YOUR hands!
10.
Potential Teachers' Days
The day scheduled for 8th March had unfortunately to be cancelled due to lack of support.
By the closing date there were only seven names on the list and although the cancellation of the event was unprecedented and most regrettable, it would have been quite impossible to fulfil the purpose of the day with so few.
Potential Teachers' Days
However, we plan to re-schedule it to run simultaneously with the Teachers' Training Day at Stockwell Park School on Saturday, 5th July 1986.
PLEASE do all you can to encourage potential teachers to attend, as we depend largely on this event for the new intake to the course, now postponed until the Autumn.
Should any new applicants emerge from the ‘Physical ‘86’ and ‘Healthier Living Show’, we will accommodate them at the Stockwell Training Day on Saturday 4th October 1986 and hope to filter out those prepared to make a firm commitment to the course.
In any event we would like to know of any intending applicants for training, even if they are unable to come to the Potential Teachers' Day.
Application forms should be available from the Office after Easter, but any further information  may always be obtained from Rita Quick or any of the trainers.
11.
Urgent and Important —‘Guinea Pigs’ Wanted
We need volunteer class-members for the Examination on Saturday 19th April 1986 at Stockwell Park School.
PLEASE put across the vital role that ‘guinea pigs’ perform and although the date clashes unavoidably with the A.G.M. we hope that some class-members will be willing to channel their efforts on behalf of the Examination candidates.
Between ten and sixteen would be ideal, to take part in classes at intervals through the day, starting at 9.30 and finishing at approximately 4.30.
Please make sure that everyone coming  has adequate directions and transport arranged and let Rita Quick know as soon as possible , how many you have been able to muster (Please remind them to bring packed lunch).
12.
Teachers' Training Course
Next term we are planning to organise some weekly training, possibly at Balham, for as many of our existing students as can come.
We hope that this more intensive schedule, extra to current monthly timetable, will consolidate the progress of our students and in turn contribute noticeably to the attainment of training goals as set out in the Development Plan.
13.
Alexander Method
At the next Q.T. Day Ilana Machover (Medau Teacher) is taking a session on the Alexander Method and she advises those who wish to take part to bring a neck pillow or book (2½) depth.
14.
In-Service Training Day 14th June 1986
‘Teaching the Elderly and Handicapped’— A doctor and an occupational therapist will attend together with a group of elderly people.
The day to be organised by Kay Evans and Margaret Charlwood will be held at Queen's Road Centre, St. Mary's Road, Peckham SE15 starting at 10.30 am to 4.30 pm.
If you have not taught a Special Needs class why not come along and find out about it this may be another avenue of teaching for you.
If you are interested please send your name in to the Office by 23rd May.
If you are already working in the Specialist field your helper may come too.
15.
National Development Officer
Pat Palmer underlined the necessity to try and find ways of opening new classes in all parts of the country and said if anyone would like to explore the possibilities in a new area, it may be possible to receive some financial help to get started.
Please get in touch with Pat or with Bridget.
It is realized that some teachers have had to temporarily give up teaching for various reasons and the longer one is out of teaching the harder it is to build up confidence to teach again.
It is hoped that some refresher sessions will be included in the Easter Course and at the weekends at Green Park which provide insight into the up-to-date methods of teaching Medau.
It has been decided to recruit a number of ‘volunteer’ Area Organisers to keep records of classes int heir area and Pat hopes that you will co-operate with them in giving fullest details of your classes so that communications can be improved both within the Society and with the public.
It is hoped, also, to establish personal contact between organisers and teachers so that there is always a clear and accurate picture of classes in any given area.
Your assistance in telephoning alterations, even temporary, of time, place, closure and most importantly of any new classes would help the scheme to be efficient and always up-to-date.
As some of your teach in more than one area, after initial contact to give relevant information, only one area organiser will need to be contacted.
The advantage to teachers will then outweigh the inconvenience caused when we set up the scheme.
Fitness for Fun
The final total raised in the Fitness for Fun sponsored event was £2110.50.
The cheque for Action Research for the Crippled Child was presented at a reception in the Mayor's Parlour in Reigate on 19th March 1986 and a representative from Age Concern will be coming to the A.G.M. to receive their cheque from our President, Lady Braithwaite.
16.
Forthcoming Events
Eastern Region Day of Movement and Dance, Ipswich — details Pat Palmer.
Medau Weekend, Edinburgh 3–5th October — details Anne Seaton.
Evening of Medau to include a sponsored event 6th June — details Elsie Streek.
Surrey Rally, Nork Park School, Banstead 10th May — details Margaret Charlwood.
Barn Dance nr Midhurst 19th July details Pat Shere.
17.
Easter Course
Bridget reported that the numbers for the Easter Course were much lower than at the previous courses held at Avery Hill.
Some regulars will be going to Coburg, but some are going to both.
Nevertheless there are many of you that are not going to either!
Is there any particular reason?
If there is Bridget would very much like to hear from you what it is.
18.
Dinner Dance
Congratulations were extended to Cecilia Taylor for organising a most enjoyable evening and a very pleasant venue in Regent's Park.
19.
Next Year's Training Programme
Please let Hilary Weedon have any ideas that you want considered for inclusion in the Training Programme for next year by the middle of June.
Have you any special requests?
20.
Teacher's Day Teas
Thanks were extended to the Surrey group who provided the tea and Inner Kent teachers were asked to organize the June teas to be co-ordinated by Marion Nalder.
21.
Next Qualified Teachers' Day
This is on 21st June.
Hope to see you there!.
DISCUSSION TIME
Membership
Constant need for encouraging new members.
Ideas would be welcome.
Several teachers suggested the re-introduction of group membership as they felt the change over had caused many not to renew and teachers did not seem able to keep track of those who did.
It was pointed out that if we switched back to dual membership the administration involved would be horrendous.
However, it was agreed that more thought could be given to ‘specialist groups’.
Medau News
All news and reports should be sent into the Office in writing — editing was sometimes necessary to either shorten/lengthen etc.
Deadline dates for each issue was mid July and mid November.
All comments regarding the Medau News should be sent to Adrienne Ring or Hilda in the Office.
Rita Quick expressed disappointment at the lack of publicity given to Potential Teachers' Day — an apology was given on behalf of the editors but it was once again pointed out that items for inclusion should be sent in in writing.
Dinner Dance
Jean Parmiter raised the question of the Dinner Dance.
She was disappointed at the lack of support given by the teachers and she had felt embarrassed by their absence.
Jean thought it most unfair to the organiser, in this case, Cecilia Taylor.
If teachers did not intend to patronize the Dinner Dance they should make their feelings known in advance.
Many felt this social occasion should be continued but perhaps in a different form.
Q.T. Day — 15th March, 1986
Speaker — Roy Williamson Formerly of Radio 4, more recently with Radio 3.
Now solely concerned with training for working with the media.
Brief: How to feel comfortable when reporting Medau
1.
From the interviewer's point of view
2.
From our point of view.
BROADCASTING NEEDS TO BE ENJOYED.
The Radio Interview
Using the Microphone: Don't get too close, you need to be about 9’ away from it to avoid distortion.
Talk at or across it, don't move about too much or turn away from it.
The interviewer will organise the best position, it is not your responsibility to do it.
Don't mumble or spit at it.
Talk as you would to one person across a table.
Don't think of shouting to 8 million.
Look at person you are talking to.
LOOK and LISTEN are key ideas.
BE CONFIDENT —‘I can do it’.
Various radio studios were discussed comparing the large sophisticated studio for the ‘Today’ Programme to local radio and the basic hospital radio stations.
Studios have their own distinctive ATMOSPHERE, as a result of well-insulated walls, carpets, red lights etc.
Voices come from ‘nowhere’, actually unseen producers, etc. communicating through intercoms.
A successful interview, How Can YOU Help?
NO jangly bracelets, etc. or noisy watches.
Leather jackets squeak.
No heavy breathing, mouth noises.
Don't riffle through papers, kick the table or drum fingers — all are sounds which are picked up by the microphone and have to be edited out.
LIVE and RECORDED
Live means Now and cannot be amended.
Recorded can be done in the studio or the interviewer can come and visit you (or your class so that music can be included)
If  you have the choice, make him visit you, it is easier.
Advantages of recording — can be re-recorded on the spot and then edited later.
Can be a long interview and then condensed.
When taking part in a PHONE-IN programme, turn the radio off.
It is normal to feel nervous, this is what gives a best performance.
Talk the way you normally do.
People want to hear you as they know you, not with a false accent.
Be as natural as possible.
Unlike T.V., the microphone ‘knows’ if you are not sincere, don't know your facts, just stupid, etc. as it only hears your voice (no facial expression, hand gestures, etc.)
This was later demonstrated when an interview was recorded describing a fictitious Rally.
Before an interview, ask the interviewer what ground he wants to cover, though he won't tell you the actual questions.
Answer in manageable lumps, not just ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
Similarly, don't keep going for too long.
Take the bit he has asked you and talk for say 30 seconds then round off and be quiet.
He should then carry you on with the next question.
He will round off the interview.
Eliminate as many ‘ums and ers’ as possible.
They sound very untidy and have to be edited.
Be prepared for off the subject remarks — put in to perk up the interview, or comments like ‘so you all prance about in leotards, then?’
Get your facts correct — information cannot be taken back once it has been broadcast.
Possible topics.
Some questions about Medau which may be asked.
History
Ages — everybody
Why
Funding
Social Aspect — Class size
What is it
How different
Who comes
Cost
Who tells you
Training and Qualifications
Cost
Aims
Organiser
How often
Music
How long
Events — Displays
Wear
Where
Interviews cannot be too long.
Home in on a particular aspect.
We split into pairs to practise interviewing and being interviewed.
We were given 10 minutes to prepare, then had to give an interview of 2 minutes.
Notice was given after 2 minutes, so giving 30 seconds to round off.
We then changed partners and roles.
It was  interesting to note how difficult it was to ask the questions as well as answer them.
It was emphasised that reality would be easier than the way we did it.
An experienced interviewer would put you at your ease beforehand and would know how to ask questions to the best advantage.
It would be only a few minutes — ENJOY IT.
Microphone technique in LARGE HALLS is very different from radio.
You would be at the mercy of the hall's acoustics and ideally you would need to practise a bit beforehand.
You would probably need to pitch your voice a certain amount, but without shouting, and slow down.
Again, don't get too close — it distorts too much.
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin Kynaston School on Saturday 21st June 1986
PLEASE READ CAREFULLY AS THERE MAY NOW BE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
1.
Hilda Lodge welcomed the group of 50 qualified and student teachers present and gave a special welcome to Peggy Secord who had come along to share our day.
Apologies for absence had been received from .
2.
Congratulations and best wishes were extended to our five newly qualified teachers and Peggy Secord took great pleasure in presenting them with their certificates.
A list of their names and addresses are included to be added to your directories.
3.
Membership
Subscriptions for 1987 will be as follows:—
Members £2.75
Over 60 under 16 £1.75
New members enrolled from September get three months free but must pay at 1987 rate.
As a membership incentive and to mark our 35th year as a Society everyone who enrols as a member in 1987 will receive a free gift.
PLEASE — can we all use this as a selling aid as we desperately need to increase our membership and this just might help  us all to find new members as well as encourage existing ones to re-enrol.
4.
Professional Affiliation Fee (P.A.F.)
This fee due in September will remain at £7 as we have had such good support from most of you.
A little perk this year for those who pay will be a pack of Medau headed postcards that may come in useful for advertising your classes in shop windows and the like.
5.
Q.T. Public Liability Insurance
For those running private classes will be increased to £7 (due in September) as the cover has been increased from £ million to £1 million.
6.
Q.T. Fees
All grades are to remain the same for the coming year.
As with the P.A.F. your support has been much appreciated and we hope that by keeping the fees the same you will do the same next year.
The facility for paying all your fees on one cheque proved quite popular last October so if you would like to do the same at the next Q.T. Day please remember to analyse on the back of the cheque the fees you are paying.
7.
Appeal Meal
Thank you to Pauline Kenward for organising this particular scheme to raise money for the Society.
£300 has now been paid into our Account.
Thanks also to those people who enjoyed this way of raising money, please pass the message on to the many class members who took part.
8.
Society Development
Hilda reminded teachers that in order to continue to receive grant aid from the Sports Council we must show that we are a growing and flourishing Society.
This meant more teachers and members.
The trainers are aware of the need to shorten the training course whilst still preserving our standards and are looking for an optional mode of training which is more flexible.
During the summer an extra six week course is taking place to help accelerate reaching exam standard by existing trainee teachers.
All teachers are reminded to look out for and encourage new potential teachers.
9.
In-Service Training Day —‘Work with the Elderly’
Hilda Lodge reported the success of the day and expressed the Society's thanks to Kay Evans, Margaret Charlwood and Joan Gatfield for both organising and demonstrating Medau work with the Elderly.
Hilda read extracts from letters received from Dr. Monnica Stewart, Margot Hawker, physiotherapist and June Sutherland, occupational therapist all expressing their enjoyment of the day and appreciation of our work.
We were asked by some teachers for a ‘follow-up session to be included in a Q.T. Day.
N.B. If you have any requests for ‘special’ training days or anything at all you would like included in Q.T. Days please let Hilary Weedon or the Office know.
10.
Area Organisers
There is now a network of Area Organisers (list enclosed) and they need to have details of ALL projected classes for the autumn term by the end of July so that local publicity can be arranged.
Pat Palmer is asking everyone to co–operate — if you have not yet filled in a pink form or given verbal class details to your Area Organiser will you  please forward these details to the Office by early August so that we can have a comprehensive up-to-date class list ready to meet all enquiries for the new season.
11.
Spare Equipment
Pat Palmer is co-ordinating the distribution of spare equipment particularly to help teachers starting new classes and if anyone has any equipment not in use which could be loaned (even for a short time) would be a great help.
Pat anticipates receiving quite a few requests in the near future.
Any unused equipment already on loan will be welcomed back (Pat has taken over Jean Parmiter's list).
12.
Rally Programmes
The National Development Officer has been asked to co-ordinate Rallies 1986–87.
Would all organisers contact her prior to finalizing plans in order to avoid congestion of dates for teams involved.
13.
CCPR Sports Leadership Award
If anyone is taking the course for this Pat Palmer would be very interested to know (particularly for handicapped classes).
She would like to know their reaction to the work involved in taking the course.
14.
Movement Days
These days have been organised for 13th September at Homerton, Cambridge and Ipswich.
Further details from the N.D.O. or the Office at Epsom.
Both days organised by the Eastern Region Sports Council Liaison Group.
15.
An In-Service Further Training Day for a Recorded Music Workshop
This in-service training day has been arranged for 27th September at Cecil Sharp House, Regent's Park Road.
If you are interested in coming please contact Pat Palmer as soon as possible.
Offers of pieces of music which you have enjoyed using and would be willing to share would be welcome — if possible so that Pat can record them prior to the day.
A charge of £3.50 will be made for the day.
16.
Publicity
A new descriptive leaflet and one for specialised work have recently been printed plus a postcard on which class details can be displayed in shop windows etc.
Hilda Hewitt had copies of two posters run off on the Office photo-copier.
All are available from the Office to help publicise your classes.
Please use them.
17.
Annual Reunion
Jean Parmiter reported that she has been asked by the Executive Committee to organise the Annual Reunion on 29th November.
It is planned that a Christmas Fayre will take place on the day so each area is asked to produce a stall.
Obviously some areas have more classes and teachers than others so the following is suggested:—
Offers of stalls from outer areas would of course be very welcome but we realise the difficulty of commuting/carrying etc.
18.
Physical ‘86 31st August — 3rd September
Lucy Jackson will again be organising this even to be held at Kensington.
Your support, as always, will be much appreciated.
19.
Summer Classes
To be run at Avery Hill College from 24th June for six weeks.
Further information from Elsie Streek.
20.
On the 31st May this year Hilda Hyam, correctly dressed in a blue leotard and a pink rose, celebrated her ninetieth birthday in style, for her fellow teachers in Avon had organised the perfect day just for her:— classes morning and afternoon interspersed with coffee — a tasty lunch — and a delicious tea complete with a birthday cake.
Hilda Lodge, Jean Parmiter and Hilda Hewitt travelled down from London to join in the day with many old friends.
The Society presented her with a beautiful flower arrangement and she also received a selection of other gifts including a small tea service.
The following message was received in the Office from Hilda.
‘May I thank all the Medau girls for adding to the pleasure of my 90th birthday by sending a gorgeous card signed by so many and good wishes.
The flower arrangement from the Society is beautiful and will give pleasure and remembrance for a long time.
Also — a card was signed and sent with flowers to greet Janice Glen on her birthday and Janice later telephoned the Office to ask for her thanks to be given to you all.
21.
Retirements
Two of our teachers are retiring from active classes at the end of the 85–86 season.
They are Mabel Jo Smith from Wallington, Surrey and Anna Koller from Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire.
Good wishes cards for them both were signed by teachers present on the 21st and these were sent together with flowers to Mabel and Anna.
22.
Alexander Technique
We thank Ilana Machover, one of our qualified teachers, who is also qualified in the Alexander Technique, for the most interesting session she gave on this subject.
A leaflet about Alexander Technique is available from the Office on receipt of a S.A.E.
23.
Office Closure
The Society Office at Epsom will be closed during the week 18th–22nd August when Hilda will be on holiday.
24.
Teas
Thanks go to the Inner Kent girls for arranging such a nice tea on the 21st June.
Outer Kent has been asked to do the honours at the next meeting.
 24.
Date of the next Q.T. Meeting
Saturday 11th October 1986.
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Notes of Qualified Teachers’ Day held at Quintin Kynaston School Saturday 22nd June 1985
1.
Welcome
Hilda Lodge, in her new capacity of Chairman, welcomed everyone and said that apologies had been received from a number of teachers which had resulted in a smaller than usual attendance.
2.
Beryl Smith
We had all been deeply saddened by the news of Beryl's tragic death in May she had endured her illness with great fortitude and courage — her loss will be felt throughout the Society.
Her family wrote and said that Medau was Beryl's whole life and what a great comfort it was to them to know she had so many loving friends.
They are arranging for a Memorial Service to be held at St. Marks Church, Hamilton Terrace, NW8. during the morning of the 27th July.
Although classes have finished please try to let as many people as possible know of this occasion and make every effort to attend to show our affection and appreciation of the years of help and skill Beryl gave to Medau.
3.
June Bascombe
June had asked Hilda Lodge to thank everyone for the lovely flowers sent to her during her recent stay in hospital.
(We are pleased to report that she is now home again and feeling better).
She also asked for those who were unable to attend the AGM to be thanked for the lovely watch presented to her at the end of her term as Chairman.
On that occasion The Society thanked June for all her commitment and  hard work during her four years of office.
She tackled any problems which arose with great tact and charm and also played a major part in the production of our Expansion Programme.
4.
The Society's Development Plan
Since our last meeting June Bascombe, Hilda Lodge, Joan Daniels and Janet Rogers had appeared before a Sports Council ‘panel’ and answered many questions with reference to our development plan.
Subsequently The Sports Council have offered a very generous grant providing we appoint a National Development Officer (which has already been done) and that we show that the Society is growing — not only by increased numbers of participants but particularly in Membership.
Our new NDO is Pat Palmer, please take your problems to her, let her try and help.
Another concern of the Sports Council is the length of time and expense of training teachers — and this subject will be a matter of priority during our own Trainers' Conference Weekend.
5.
Pat Palmer NDO
I am both pleased and excited about my appointment as National Development Officer, but realise that there is a considerable challenge to be met, protecting existing classes, developing new ones, maintaining good working relations with all administrative and governing bodies and most importantly supporting the Society's most valuable asset — its Teachers.
Although I do not have a magic wand, I hope to be able to establish some means of providing the physical back-up that you would like to receive from the Society and to start the ball rolling I am compiling a list of all the ways in which you have been supported or would like to have been supported, in the past plus suggestions for the future.
Please write, phone or talk to me with your ideas so that a mutual exchange can benefit all teachers.
I shall be administrating the Concentration of Resources Programme and if you have any project which might qualify for grant aid in the year 1985–86 please contact me either directly or through your Regional Representative.
I do not intend to interfere with any arrangements that you wish to handle yourself, but please let me know about all Medau special activities throughout the country; especially those related to the Sports Council's ‘Ever Thought of Sport’ and 50+ Campaigns and I shall be delighted to help if needed.
An increase in membership of the Society is vital, so to help you ‘sell’ the idea to your classes Medau is putting even more sparkle into your life — every new member enrolled between now and 30th November (Crystal Palace) will be included in a free Champagne Draw — one bottle for each 100 members.
Perhaps existing members can persuade their families to become members to support their Medau interest.
Maintaining contact with all Medau teachers, especially those in isolated areas, is my particular concern and I shall be happy to visit any area or negotiate on behalf of any teacher if you request it and I would like to be invited to area teachers' meetings.
I will probably contact many of you over the next few months to try to establish the working conditions in various areas and develop future strategies accordingly.
6.
Treasurer's Report
i.
Membership Rates for next year will be as follows:— Ordinary member £2.50 and Over 60 and under 16 £1.50.
These rates are payable for any new members joining the Society from September on — thus giving three free months.
ii.
Enclosed with these notes you will find a letter referring to Fees for 1986.
Please give this your urgent attention.
iii.
We are going to continue with our very successful Fund Raising Appeal which now stands at £2,000.
7.
Ann Langford's Parachute Jump
Hilda Lodge thanked Ann for raising nearly £500 each for Dr. Barnardo's and the Medau Society following her parachute jump.
Thanks also to Toni Bergman for all her efforts.
Ann in her turn thanked everyone who had sponsored and collected the money.
8.
English Course in Coburg 1986
Plans are going ahead for the proposed course — arrival on the Friday 16th May — start 17th May and end 23rd May — departure Saturday 24th May.
A provisional list already, so please let Hilda know if you or any of your class members are hoping to attend 50 is the maximum — Cost 400 DMs (c. £100 cheaper than we could run an equivalent course here).
Alternative methods of getting there will be investigated.
9.
Further Education Teachers' Certificate for Movement and Dance Teachers
A new course will be run on Wednesdays 3.30–6.00 at the Elgin Avenue branch of Paddington College starting in September.
Details from the Departmental Secretary, Dept. of Continuing Education, Paddington College, Elgin Avenue, London W9 2NR.
Tel. 01.969.2391 x 22.
10.
Westminster City Council's 400th Anniversary
The Greater London and South East Movement and Dance liaison group are taking over the Seymour Halls on 19–20th October to help celebrate this event.
All member organisation, including us, will be taking part — it will be a chance for those of you in the regions to offer an event to your new class members in September.
More details from the Office in due course; probably ‘Come and Try It’, teachers' workshop sessions, demonstrations, swimming etc.
11.
Teachers' Workshop in the Eastern Region
21st September at Homerton College Drama Studio, Cambridge.
9.30 a.m. to 4.15 p.m.
Tutor: Jacqueline Smith (Principal Lecturer in dance at the London College of Dance and Drama, Bedford) Cost £5.00 — Closing date 31st July — Full details from — Mr J Rockett, 41 Sweeting Avenue, Little Paxton, St. Neots, Huntington PE19 4PY.
19–20th October at Easthampstead Park Concentration of Resources Movement and Dance Weekend.
Following options on offer:— English Folk Dance, Keep Fit, Laban, Margaret Morris Movement, Medau, Women's League of Health and Beauty, Yoga.
Cost:— to include meals (resident) £40.00 (single) £38.00 (sharing) Contact Chris Markham for further details etc.
12.
Phonographic Performance Limited
We have received a letter from PPL exempting the Society's teachers from the need to pay any licence fees in view of our piano accompaniment, educational nature and work with the disabled.
13.
Publicity
Adrienne Ring announced that she has taken over as Chairman of the Publicity Sub-Committee and she asked that all dates of rallies etc be sent to the office as soon as possible.
Angie Guilford will be retiring from this committee at the end of the year and there is an urgent need for ‘New Blood’.
If you feel that you could be useful please contact Adrienne or Hilda at the Office.
14.
‘Physical '85’
Lucy Jackson will again be organising a Medau stand at this exhibition.
She has already raised over £500 towards the cost of this enterprise.
Please give this event all your support.
15.
Guildford Rally
Teachers who sold tickets please send a list of names of those attending to Pat Shere.
Equipment missing 4 clubs (white) one marked PS, one marked T.
16.
Office Closure
Please note that the Office will be closed from the 29th July until 9th August when Hilda will be on leave.
17.
Thanks
Thanks were extended to Surrey for providing refreshments and October's tea is to be organised by N. London, Hounslow, Hants., and Sussex with Adrienne Ring as co-ordinator.
The Medau Society
Do you like working with people?
Do you enjoy the art of movement?
Would you like to know more about the Medau method of teaching?
Then come to the POTENTIAL TEACHERS DAY on Saturday 8th March to enjoy an informative Day of Movement with the Medau Society's Trainers.
APPLICATION FORM
To: The Secretary Medau Society, 8b Robson House, East Street, Epsom, Surrey KT17 1HH
Please reserve a place for me on the POTENTIAL TEACHERS DAY on Saturday 8th March, for which I enclose the fee of £5.00.
I understand that the exact venue in London will be notified to me with confirmation.
Name
Address
I attend a Medau class taught by
I do not attend a regular Medau class
(Please delete as necessary).
MAKE 1986 YOUR CHAMPAGNE YEAR
JOIN THE MEDAU SOCIETY TODAY TO GAIN FREE ENTRY INTO THE CHAMPAGNE DRAW
The Medau Society needs YOU to boost the membership figures for 1986, therefore throughout the year there will be a series of CHAMPAGNE DRAWS — one bottle for every 100 new members.
Everyone who supports the work of the Society is welcome to join (relative, friends etc) but we would particularly ask all regular class members to think seriously about supporting the Society through membership.
We are fortunate to have been Grant Aided by the Sports Council for a period of two years, during which time growth must be shown in all areas of our operation.
Our new Teachers' Training Programme is starting to show results, a number of new classes have been established, which leaves the most important target of steadily raising the number of Society members.
You can help to secure the future by joining the Society now.
A national Reunion, residential courses, many local and regional events take place each year offering considerably reduced fees to members and The Medau News is distributed free to complement our administrative network which unites Medau enthusiasts throughout the country.
PUT THAT EXTRA SPARKLE IN YOUR LIFE JOIN THE MEDAU SOCIETY.
SPRING ALIVE
An easy to follow rhythmic movement video based on the Medau Method
Devised and choreographed by LUCY JACKSON
Available directly from:—
Price:— £9.99 plus £1.00 postage and packing 
MOVE WITH MEDAU
Are you as fit as you could be?
See your fitness improve weekly with a Medau class designed to keep your body supple, improve posture and give you that lively feeling.
Contact our secretary for details of your nearest class.
Patron Dame Ninette de Valois 
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin Kynaston School on Saturday — 11th October 1986
1.
Apologies
Apologies were given from Hilda Lodge who had been in hospital for several days for tests.
A card was passed around for those present to send their good wishes for a speedy recovery.
A number of apologies had been received from Q.T's.
2.
Pauline Kenward welcomed the teachers who had come from Norfolk to share the day with London teachers and expressed the hope that this would be the first of many such visits.
3.
June Bascombe
Pauline read a letter which had been received from Bob Bascombe thanking the Society for the flowers sent to June.
Pauline also gave an apology to anyone who had not been told personally about the tragedy and explained that as many people as possible had been contacted in the circumstances.
4.
Teacher Training
Rita Quick brought us up-to-date on the Training Course, which has just begun the autumn term with a new intake.
In order to try and comply with the Sports Council's insistence that we need to shorten our teacher training, the new students will follow a more intensive programme, scheduled on more frequent training days, to be known as Course II.
This will operate along side students who are still completing the original longer spaced out schedule.
We hope that the more frequent training schedule will enable us to get students out teaching classes earlier in the course, returning later to top-up for the examination.
5.
URGENT
Training Weekend Aston Clinton 14–16th November 1986.
We have some spare places and would welcome any Q.T's who are interested in seeing the training course in action.
Several Q.T's have joined us over the months and have greatly enjoyed getting to know the students and working with them.
The cost £33, covers board and food, tuition is free.
Please let Rita Quick know as soon as you can if you would like to come — we can take up to ten.
6.
Further Training for Teachers Tinka Medau Coming to England
Katarina (Tinka) Medau, Hinrich and Senta Medau's daughter, will be in Europe next summer and has offered to take a course for us.
We plan to invite her for the weekend of 10th — 12th July and hope to be able to use Froebel Institute, Roehampton.
Places will be limited, so let Hilda know if you want to come — further details as soon as possible.
7.
What about the over 60's?
An extra chapter to the Sports Council's ‘booklet’‘A safe approach for Leaders’ has been produced called ‘What about the Over 60's’.
If you would like a copy please send an SAE to the Office.
8.
 Exercise Why Bother?
750,000 copies of this booklet have been produced and we will try to get copies for you for the next Q.T. Day.
Hilary and Margaret helped with the  exercises , although they can hardly recognise them now!
9.
PAF (£7.00) and PRIVATE INSURANCE (£7.00) are now due from 1st Sept. until August 1987.
If you have not yet paid these fees please can you send them to the Office as soon as possible together with an SAE.
10.
National Development Officer
Congratulations to all those teachers who have successfully launched new classes this autumn.
It is very encouraging that so many of you have tried.
If you are among the few unlucky ones and would like to try an alternative attack — please get in touch with me.
Many thanks to all the Area Organisers for their hard work in making the 1986 Recreational Class List available to meet public enquiries in August.
Every teacher will receive a copy with  their Q.T. notes.
We are now producing the new list of Specialised Classes — some areas have already sent in details — but I need the rest as soon as possible.
One ‘grey’ area is where to put active over 60's — in future if the class is fully mobile, even though at a more sedate pace, the class should be included as Recreational specifying ‘active retired’etc. but if the range of movement is limited or mainly seated then the class should be on the Specialised List.
The trend is towards offering classes for special groups of people and I shall be very interested to hear of anything you are trying and to monitor the progress of Mums and Toddlers groups and classes ‘For those who have not taken Exercise recently’
The Recorded Music Workshop on the 27th September was received enthusiastically by those who came and suggestions for future projects will be welcome.
I hope you will all keep your eyes and ears open for events where we could display and/or publicise Medau.
There are some balloons available to be given away at suitable events (not for sale)— let me know if you are participating in any public event and would like some.
We hope to have a stand at the Holiday and Leisure Spectacular at the Rainbow Exhibition Centre from 23–25th January 1987.
Section 2 Objective 3 of the Society's Development Plan states:—‘To maximise attendance at and geographical cover of event’ and to this end we would like to see some days organised regionally or in areas to incorporate a Study Day with or without a public recruiting session.
We need to work hard to promote membership of the Society, increase participation and recruit more teachers' these will be the underlying objectives although the prime one will be the enjoyment and increased knowledge of our members.
Two projects in the melting pot at the moment are a Youth Award Scheme, which could help us liaise with schools as well as the community and a package of favourable trading arrangements as a membership incentive.
Your comments and/or suggestions will be most welcome.
11.
Reunion
Jean Parmiter reported that tickets are now available for the Reunion — Please remember they are for Members Only and Teachers are reminded that membership cards may be checked at this and future events.
There will be two sittings for tea and to avoid chaos we must ensure that everyone goes to tea at their allotted time.
11.
Reunion (cont'd)
The display programme is now being organised by Pat Palmer.
There will be the following stalls:— Cake — Toiletries — Jewellery — Bottle Tombola — Christmas Gifts — Raffle Contributions for these various stalls will be most welcome.
HELP is still required for catering — Please contact Jean Parmiter if you are willing to make CAKES or prepare SANDWICHES.
12.
Teachers were reminded that we would need nominations for the three places becoming vacant on the Executive Committee for the coming year.
These would have to be sent to the Office by the end of January so that in the event of more than three names ballot forms can be sent out.
It was also reported that both the Finance and Publicity Sub-Committees were in need of new members.
AN APPEAL TO ALL TEACHERS
Jean Parmiter expressed concern that the Officers of the Society are under considerable pressure.
She appealed to the Teachers to give them their support in every way possible.
Prompt response to requests would help to ease the pressure as would a concerted effort being made to increase membership.
She suggested that if each Teacher enrolled just TWO members before the end of the year our CHAIRMAN would have more confident in our Development Plan and feel happier when facing the Sports Council.
If you cannot persuade your class members how about enrolling your — husband — mother — or other members of your family.
An increase in the Society's membership is VITAL!
PLEASE ACT NOW.
13.
DISCUSSION
Please send in any questions or queries on any subjects you would like discussed/clarified.
It is planned to have smaller group discussion first with an Open Forum to follow.
Please send your questions either to — Hilda Lodge — Bridget Ewing — or to the Office.
14.
Membership
Next year every member — new or renewing — will receive a ‘free gift’ to mark the 35th year of the Medau Society.
It is vitally important for us to keep the initiative flowing to gain new members for the Society.
As an incentive in 1987 if you enrol FIVE new members at any one time the sixth enrolment will be FREE — ask Hilda Hewitt for more details.
Bridget Ewing has had very few enquiries about Residential Homes' Membership and she would be pleased to hear from more teachers involved in these type of classes.
15.
Movement and Dance from School into the Community
The Annual General Meeting of the Movement and Dance Liaison Group (Greater London and South East Region) will be held on Monday 15th December at the London Central Y.M.C.A. Buffet Supper, short business meeting and guest speakers on 1) The changing face of PE in schools 2) Dance and Movement in the school curriculum and 3) Movement in the community.
Full details from Hilary.
16.
Annual Dinner Dance
As requested on the previous Q.T. Day a River Trip and Disco had been costed.
A full description of the type of meal and cost was given and no particular feelings were expressed by those present.
A price of £11.00 was envisaged for a meal of Chicken in a Basket with full payment at least two weeks in advance.
17.
Workshop Days — Pineapple Studio — Kensington
These days will be held on — 17th January 7th March 1987
Apply to Lucy Jackson for details.
18.
Teas.
Thanks to outer Kent for tea.
January 10th will be the ‘Shires’.
19.
Next Qualified Teachers' Day will be on 10th January 1987.
See you there.
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAYS 1985/86
You will find the programme for the coming season attached and I hope you will agree that once more we have planned varied and stimulating sessions for you.
A considerable amount of time was spent in assessing the answers to the two questionnaires you filled in during the year; the proposed programme reflects your wishes.
I hope you will find it a balance of traditional and modern Medau work combined with some first class guest lectures.
Among these, Margaret Peggie, a League of Health and Beauty trainer, is a great ‘fan’ of Medau work and regularly attended classes herself for several years.
She was the choreographer and producer of their ‘Sounds Scarlet’ item at the Albert Hall Festival and by popular request will take a practical session in October.
In January, Chris Benstead, a freelance percussionist, who has already run a very successful with our trainers, will be with us all day, both to accompany a class (which I can promise you will be quite an experience) and to run practical workshops.
You may have caught him imitating sand hoppers and sundry creepy-crawlies on the current David Bellamy TV series.
In March we plan a lecture and practical workshop from Roy Williamson who is with BBC Radio 4.
He heads the department dealing with training for radio presentation and travels widely taking training sessions and teaching the use of recording equipment.
He also happens to be marked to a Medau class members.
In June, we have a session by one of our own qualified teachers, Ilana Machover, who has since trained in the Alexander Technique.
You will remember that Molly was a great advocate of Alexander work and I know that several of you have benefited from the System.
To fill in the gaps the usual band of trainers and experienced teachers will do their best to give you worthwhile sessions.
Many other organisations are envious of all the In-Service training we provide, so do your best to support it and enjoy yourself at the same time!
Incidentally, we would be grateful if you would do your best to be ready to start work at 11.00 a.m.
I know it is hard for those of you travelling a long way, but it is very disconcerting for the poor teacher to have a steady trickle of latecomers all through the lesson — particularly when most of the latecomers are not the people who have travelled  furthest !
A further day is proposed on the subject of teaching the elderly and/or physically disabled.
This is in the planning stage, but will probably be on 28th June 1986 at Stockwell Park School.
We are looking to the ILEA and Sports Council to support this, but a small charge might be necessary as this day is over and above the normal QT days.
We hope that Pat Kennedy will be able to work with us on this and intend to invite the student teachers to participate.
Lucy Jackson is also intending to run the Choreographic Workshops again this season — further details will be available from her in the Autumn.
Good Luck with your enrolment and the start of the new academic year — see you in October.
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quinton Kynaston School on Saturday 11th January 1986
1.
Welcome
Hilda Lodge wished a Happy New Year and welcome to the large group of qualified teachers present also to the student teachers who had come along to share our special ‘percussion’ day.
2.
New Teachers
On 23rd November 1985, Rosalind Garton from Fife, Vera Reeves from Herts., Henny Whitaker from Kent passed their Teacher's examination.
Vera and Jenny were present so received their certificates and warmest congratulations.
3.
Training Course
Rita Quick reported that the Teacher Training Course had reached the stage when the first intake of students would soon be completing their training and three had qualified in the examination last November.
The next examination was scheduled for April, to be followed shortly by a new intake.
In the meantime, there would be several places spare at the next residential training weekend at Aston Clinton on February 21st to 23rd 1986.
Please contact Rita as soon as possible if you would like to attend.
Several Q.T's have already been and have enjoyed ‘back to the drawing board’.
Cost of W/E £32.
4.
IMPORTANT.
The continuance of our training programme depends on attracting new students so please do all you can to publicise the Potential Teachers' Day to be held on Saturday 8th March 1986 at Warwick Park School, Peckham High Street, London SE 15.
Application forms available from the Office.
Fee for the day £5.00.
5.
Jean Jones
We were all very sorry to learn that Jean was taken seriously ill just prior to the Christmas holiday resulting from a brain haemorrhage.
She has undergone two operations and now, hopefully, is on the road to gradual recovery.
A card was signed by all present and sent on behalf of the Society.
6.
Fees
Joan Daniels reminded teachers that their fees were due and that prompt payment would be very helpful.
Insurance
Private Insurance Scheme Clarification
Our policy covers teachers should an accident happen to a pupil in a privately run class ONLY if that teacher's negligence can be established.
We have recently received a claim from a class member who had an accident in a class and as the teacher was in no way responsible that claim had to be refused.
If you have any questions on this insurance cover please ring Joan Daniels, or bring your queries to the discussion time at our next meeting in March.
7.
Crystal Palace Reunion
Josephine Williams thanked everyone who helped to make Crystal Palace such a success.
Bridget thanked the teachers for their generous support of the Raffle which raised a splendid £444.
The sponsored event was referred to by the NDO.
Special thanks were expressed to Margaret Hickman and Jean Moss who ‘organised’ the children during the afternoon.
Hilda Lodge said that some disappointment had been expressed at the lack of equipment used in display items and very little live piano music, which is our forte, was used to accompany them.
No doubt new items are being choreographed already for 1986 reunion, which will be held in a school, so the acoustics should be a great improvement on Crystal Palace and the atmosphere much cosier.
June Bascombe has agreed to co-ordinate the display items — so please contact her with your idea and whether or not your item will be accompanied either by live piano or professional recorded music.
8.
Dinner Dance 15th February 1986
Cecilia Taylor would like all those teachers who have taken tickets for sale to let her have number sold as soon as possible and by 31st January at the latest.
Her telephone number until that date is — 01.398.5819 — if you are unable to contact her please let Hilda Hewitt know details at the Office.
We still need to make sure that there will be a goodly number participating so if there is  any way you can make up a last minute table don't hesitate to contact either Cecilia or Hilda.
9.
Easter Course
Bridget asked that teachers encourage class members to attend although no german teacher would be there a very enjoyable and lively time was envisaged with Society trainers taking the sessions.
10.
National Development Officer
i.
Many thanks to everyone who helped to make the ‘Fitness for Fun’ session at Crystal Palace such a great success.
Sponsorship money is still coming in and the total on 11th January stands at £1415.30.
If any teacher has not received a card of thanks to take to her class, please let me know.
If there are still outstanding sponsorships monies to be collected, could you please send them in by 31st January, so that we can send the donations to Age Concern and Action Research for the Crippled Child.
ii.
Would you please let me know about all events at which Medau was represented during 1985 (if you have not already done so) and I welcome thoughts and suggestions to explore for 1986.
It is very important to keep our name and work in the public eye and if you know about a suitable event, but feel you cannot cope with it yourself, please contact me for help.
iii.
A bottle of Champagne for every 100 new members is still on offer!
Our most important target for 1986 is to increase membership of the Society.
Once again I am asking you to ‘plug’ it in your classes and if there is still some reluctance on the part of class members, perhaps the proceeds of social fund raising could be used to buy membership for some members of the class; at the present time membership is just as important as society funds.
You could remind existing members that membership is open to all those who support the aims of the Medau Society so their families might like to join to support their interest.
iv.
I hope all local areas will think about acquiring a stock of good movement photographs of local people which could be sent to the press in support of a feature — many local papers are cutting back on the expense of sending photographers out to events but are delighted to use suitable contributions.
iv.
Kent teachers are arranging a photo session in Avery Hill Dance Studio during the time of the Easter Course, with a professional photographer who will allow amateurs to function at the same time.
Other areas are invited to send along models, camera buffs and above all ideas for the composition of movement photographs (details from Pat Palmer in March).
v. We also need to increase the number of Medau classes being taught and if anyone thinks they might like an additional class or is already considering opening one and would like help to promote it, needs an introduction to pave the way with a new Institute, Leisure Centre or other official body or would just like to talk over the possibilities, please get in touch with me — I shall be delighted to hear from you.
11.
Press Officer
Lucy Jackson underlined what the NDO had said about using local press photographs and materials being ready before the event to ensure possible publication.
She also pointed out articles in the Woman's Journal and Honey.
12.
Chris Benstead
Our thanks were expressed to Chris Benstead for a very enjoyable and instructive day.
For those teachers wishing to purchase his cassettes please apply to:—
Tape 1 short pieces suitable for warm-up.
Tape 2 Longer pieces for creative work.
Price £6.75 each or £13.00 for two
Cheques payable to J.C.
Benstead.
Shops noted:
13.
Poster Competition
All members will have received their copies of Medau News by now.
Please encourage your classes to try their hand at poster designing, reminding them of the closing date for receipt at the Office is 17th March.
Entries will be judged by the Publicity Committee and the winner will be notified by post.
14.
Class Lists
The production of up-to-date Class Lists has been delayed due to the tardy response of teachers to requests for current details.
The List will now be available in areas e.g. ‘Norfolk & Suffolk’‘London’‘Home Counties’ etc. or where required a complete set of the whole country on receipt of a SAE or at Q.T. Day on 15th March.
15.
East Grinstead Rally
22nd March 1986 Tickets available from Brenda Morgan.
£1.50 for members £2.00 for non-members.
16.
Thanks
Thanks were give to Surrey (outer) for the tea provided.
Next time tea will be prepared by Surrey (inner).
17.
Courses
Notice was given of two outside courses taking place during February.
1.
The Physical Education Association Course ‘Physical Activity and Epilepsy’
To be held at the Russell Hotel 
2.
To include health of dancers and provision of care, gynaecological concern, musculo-skeletal injuries, nutrition and dietary concerns, complementary medicine, prevention of injury and use of anti-inflammatory drugs.
On Saturday 15th February Cost £10.
Course form from the Medau Office.
100% MEMBERSHIP
100% Membership of the Society is still our TARGET into 1989
As a continuing ‘Medau Mover’ you are obviously enjoying your Medau class/es — may we suggest that to add to that enjoyment perhaps you would like to fill in this form and become a ‘Member of the Medau Society’
With each new membership in 1989 we are giving a FREE gift pack
MEMBERSHIP SUBSCRIPTIONS AS FOLLOWS:—
Standard Membership 4.25
Over 60 Under 16 or in receipt of SuppBen 3.25
Family Membership (2 adults and all children living at home — form from Office/Teacher) 10.25.
CAN YOU HELP?
IF EVERY QUALIFIED TEACHER WOULD TAKE ON ONE NEW CLASS, ALL OUR TROUBLES WOULD BE OVER!
NOW is the time to plan new classes and campaigns to increase participation in existing ones, well before the start of the Autumn term.
If you need any help — promotional, financial or physical please talk to Pat Palmer (National Development Officer) or Bridget Ewing (Teachers' Representative).
Teachers are needed for the following well established and well supported classes:
BEDDINGTON Monday evening 7.30 to 9.00 pm.
WALLINGTON Thursday morning 10.00 to 11.30 am.
Individual photocopies A4 handouts/posters can be run off for you on coloured paper at the office if you send in a clear original (photographs/cut outs can be gummed on to the page and words either cut out, written, stencilled or typed).
PLEASE THINK SERIOUSLY ABOUT WHAT YOU CAN DO.
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
33RD ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
To be held at Hounslow Manor School, Myrtle Road, Hounslow (close to Hounslow East (Piccadilly Line) Station and local Bus Station.
Travel directions available on receipt of S.A.E. Ample car parking spaces) at 2.000 pm on Saturday, 27th April 1985.
OPEN CLASSES PLOUGHMAN'S LUNCH A.G.M.
10.30–12.30 classes open to all Society members will be given by Ann Langford and Christine Markham.
These will be followed by a ploughman's lunch — for which a small charge of £1.25 will be made.
The business meeting will begin at 2.00 pm.
NOTE Please complete slip at the bottom and return to the office by 22nd April otherwise we cannot guarantee your lunch!
WHEN COMPLETED PLEASE RETURN TO THE SECRETARY, THE MEDAU SOCIETY, 8b ROBSON HOUSE, EAST STREET, EPSOM SURREY KT17 1HH
THANK YOU
I shall be attending all day (open classes, lunch and AGM)
I shall be attending the AGM only
I shall not be attending
Signed
PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE CONSTITUTION
SECTION 2 OBJECT
Existing wording:—
The Object of the Society is to advance the education of girls and women in physical activity in accordance with the principles of Medau Rhythmic Movement and in particular by the training of teachers and leaders.
In furtherance of the Object the Society is empowered to do the following things:—
a)
By examination the granting of certificates and otherwise to promote the supply of teachers and leaders.
b)
To foster contacts with the Medau College at Coburg as to Society's source of inspiration and training, to spread knowledge and understanding of the work of the College and to recruit students for training there.
c)
To promote and foster contacts with Medau Teachers and friends in other countries.
d)
To co-operate with other organisations whose aims are similar or complementary to those of the Society and generally to spread and encourage interest in Medau Rhythmic Movement in Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Proposed change:—
The Object of the Society is to advance the movement education of a wide variety of individuals whatever their age or ability in accordance with the principles of Medau Rhythmic Movement.
In furtherance of this objective the Society is constituted to:—
a)
promote the supply of teachers by organising training courses and qualifying examinations for the Medau Society's Teachers' Award,
b)
promote further training for qualified teachers by organising in-service courses and conferences,
c)
foster continuing contact with the Medau College in Coburg and the Gymnastikschule in Bern,
d)
promote and encourage contact with Medau teachers and friends in other countries,
e)
co-operate with organisations whose aims are complementary to those of the Society,
f)
promote interest in and knowledge of Medau Rhythmic Movement.
B SECTION 4 FINANCE
Proposed new clause to be inserted:—
e) Every member of the Executive Committee and its standing Sub-Committees and the holder of any office of the Society shall be entitled to be indemnified against all costs, charges, losses, expenses and liabilities incurred by them in the execution and discharge of their responsibilities relating to the Society.
C SECTION 6 GOVERNMENT
Existing wording:—
a) The affairs of the Society shall be managed by an Executive Committee of the Officers, together with not less than two and not more than twelve other members of the Society, at least one of whom must be a holder of the Medau Society's Leadership Award.
Biennially at the Annual General Meeting four members of the Executive Committee shall retire and shall not become eligible for re-election within a period of two years.
Proposed change:—
a) The affairs of the Society shall be managed by an Executive Committee of the Officers and the chairmen of the standing sub-committees, together with not less than two and not more than twelve other members representing all aspects of Medau activity, one of whom should be a representative of the Medau teachers elected from among their own number.
Annually at the Annual General Meeting three members of the Executive Committee shall retire and shall not become eligible for re-election within a period of one year.
Existing wording:—
c) The Executive Committee shall have the power to co-opt not more than three additional members without voting powers who need not be members of the Society, and who shall serve for one year and be eligible for immediate re-appointment.
Proposed change:
c) The Executive Committee shall have the power to co-opt not more than three additional members who shall serve for one year and be eligible for immediate re-appointment.
Existing wording:—
d) The Executive Committee shall be able to call upon help and advice from an ‘Advisory Panel’ which shall consist of all fully-trained Medau teachers resident in Britain during the current year, who are not Officers or Members of the Executive Committee; a representative of the Medau Leaders who is not an Officer or member of the Executive Committee, to be elected from among their own number by holders of the Medau Leadership award; a Medical Adviser to be appointed by the executive Committee and such others as the Executive Committee may from time to time appoint.
Proposed change:—
d) The Executive Committee shall be free to appoint specialist Advisors from whom assistance and guidance may be sought as appropriate.
QUALIFIED TEACHERS' FURTHER TRAINING INFORMATION
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT NOTICE
At our Annual Review of the Qualified Teachers Further Training Fees it came to our notice that many of you have not yet paid your fees for this year.
The Training Programme has been improved recently with invited lecturers and an interesting choice of classes; all of which are designed to keep you informed and up-to-date.
It is most disturbing to realize that many of you do not receive any Further Training and some do not even pay their Membership subscription.
THE SOCIETY NEEDS YOUR SUPPORT
Fees for 1985–86 set out below — These may be paid in one lump sum at the September Qualified Teachers' Day if more convenient.
Professional Affiliation Fee payable by all QTs for Admin.
Services 1.9.85 £7.00.
Private Insurance payable to QTs with private classes 1.9.85 £6.00.
Further Training Fees all QTs for 4 FT days a year within a 50 mile radius of Training venue 1.1.86 £15.00
Further Training Fees all QTs for 4 FT days a year outside 50 mile radius of Training venue 1.1.86 £13.00
Music Lessons (London Training 4 lessons) 1.1.86 £7.00
Further Training Fees (within 50 mile radius) Daily rate £5.50
Further Training Fees (outside 50 mile radius and/or not teaching £4.00
Further Training Fees (Class members attending regionally) £3.50
QT Notes only 1.1.86 £2.00
Medau Society Membership Subscription (ALL QTs) 1.1.86 £2.50
Medau Society Membership subscription (over 60 and under 16) 1.1.86 £1.50
JUNE 1985 
RECREATIONAL CLASS LIST 1987/88
SCOTLAND
PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE FOR PRIVATELY RUN CLASSES
Received from Anne Seaton the sum of £8 being the PREMIUM in respect of the year:— 1st September 1987 to 31st August 1988
The Policy covers:—
All named participating Medau teachers and teachers-in-training who undertake classes privately.
e.g.
1)
who hire premises (church halls, schools etc.) and run their own class/es
2)
who are requested to reach and are paid by a private concern (W.I., T.G., sports sections of a firm etc.)
3)
who teach voluntarily (handicapped, elderly etc)
The Policy covers them in respect of their liability at law in connection with the private classes and arising out of:—
1)
an accident to a pupil (including children) as a result of the teachers' negligence.
2)
accidental damage to property or accidental injury to any other person.
3)
any accident arising out of the action of an employee of the teacher.
MAIN EXCLUSIONS
1)
any liability in connection with vehicles.
Teachers should have business use cover under their own car policy.
2)
liability to an Employee.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RELEVANT FROM 1st SEPTEMBER 1986
PLEASE note that this is a Public Liability Insurance Policy not an Accident Insurance.
It is to protect the insured against liability for the accidental death or injury to someone other than his employee.
If the accident results in the person insured being sued and the Insurance Company thinks the claim should be resisted in Court the Company pays the legal costs.
As from 1st September 1986 the cover under this policy will be increased to one million pounds.
Should an accident happen to a student in your class PLEASE DO NOT assume that you are covered on our Insurance Policy.
Only if the teacher's negligence can be proved will there be any chance of a claim being met.
Job Description — Qualified Teachers' Representative
QT Days
Help to set up room when necessary.
Welcome and maintain personal contact with all Qualified Teachers.
Keep register of attendance.
Liaise with Society Chairman for order of lunch-time notices.
Chair that part of the proceedings taking notes of general information and discussions, but ask each speaker for copy of their particular notes.
After QT day collate, edit and prepare notes ready for Society Secretary to type and distribute.
Try to get teachers to voice their opinions on important subjects.
Liaise with teachers and NDO to investigate any problems that may arise.
Assist treasurer with the collection of all monies due from teachers and monitor the payment of PAF, QT fees, Insurance if applicable and Society Membership.
EXECUTIVE MEETINGS
Expected to attend Executive meetings — 4 per annum— to present the views of Qualified Teachers.
Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day at Quintin Kynaston School on Saturday 21st June 1986
1.
Hilda Lodge welcomed the group of 50 qualified and student teachers present and gave a special welcome to Peggy Secord who had come along to share our day.
Apologies for absence had been received from .
2.
Congratulations and best wishes were extended to our five newly qualified teachers and Peggy Secord took great pleasure in presenting them with their certificates.
A list of their names and addresses are included to be added to your directories.
3.
Membership
Subscriptions for 1987 will be as follows:—
Members £2.75 Over 60 under 16 £1.75
New members enrolled from September get three months free but must pay at 1987 rate.
As a membership incentive and to mark our 35th year as a Society everyone who enrols as a member in 1987 will receive a free gift.
PLEASE — can we all use this as a selling aid as we desperately need to increase our membership and this just might help  us all to find new members as well as encourage existing ones to re-enrol.
4.
Professional Affiliation Fee (P.A.F.)
This fee due in September will remain at £7 as we have had such good support from most of you.
A little perk this year for those who pay will be a pack of Medau headed postcards that may come in useful for advertising your classes in shop windows and the like.
5.
Q.T. Public Liability Insurance
For those running private classes will be increased to £7 (due in September) as the cover has been increased from £ million to £1 million.
6.
Q.T. Fees
All grades are to remain the same for the coming year.
As with the P.A.F. your support has been much appreciated and we hope that by keeping the fees the same you will do the same next year.
The facility for paying all your fees on one cheque proved quite popular last October so if you would like to do the same at the next Q.T. Day please remember to analyse on the back of the cheque the fees you are paying.
7.
Appeal Meal
Thank you to Pauline Kenward for organising this particular scheme to raise money for the Society.
£300 has now been paid into our Account.
Thanks also to those people who enjoyed this way of raising money, please pass the message on to the many class members who took part.
8.
Society Development
Hilda reminded teachers that in order to continue to receive grant aid from the Sports Council we must show that we are a growing and flourishing Society.
This meant more teachers and members.
The trainers are aware of the need to shorten the training course whilst still preserving our standards and are looking for an optional mode of training which is more flexible.
During the summer an extra six week course is taking place to help accelerate reaching exam standard by existing trainee teachers.
All teachers are reminded to look out for and encourage new potential teachers.
9.
In-Service Training Day —‘Work with the Elderly’
Hilda Lodge reported the success of the day and expressed the Society's thanks to Kay Evans, Margaret Charlwood and Joan Gatfield for both organising and demonstrating Medau work with the Elderly.
Hilda read extracts from letters received from Dr. Monnica Stewart, Margot Hawker, physiotherapist and June Sutherland, occupational therapist all expressing their enjoyment of the day and appreciation of our work.
We were asked by some teachers for a ‘follow-up session to be included in a Q.T. Day.
N.B. If you have any requests for ‘special’ training days or anything at all you would like included in Q.T. Days please let Hilary Weedon or the Office know.
10.
Area Organisers
There is now a network of Area Organisers (list enclosed) and they need to have details of ALL projected classes for the autumn term by the end of July so that local publicity can be arranged.
Pat Palmer is asking everyone to co-operate — if you have not yet filled in a pink form or given verbal class details to your Area Organiser will you  please forward these details to the Office by early August so that we can have a comprehensive up-to-date class list ready to meet all enquiries for the new season.
11.
Spare Equipment
Pat Palmer is co-ordinating the distribution of spare equipment particularly to help teachers starting new classes and if anyone has any equipment not in use which could be loaned (even for a short time) would be a great help.
Pat anticipates receiving quite a few requests in the near future.
Any unused equipment already on loan will be welcomed back (Pat has taken over Jean Parmiter's list).
12.
Rally Programmes
The National Development Officer has been asked to co-ordinate Rallies 1986–87.
Would all organisers contact her prior to finalizing plans in order to avoid congestion of dates for teams involved.
13.
CCPR Sports Leadership Award
If anyone is taking the course for this Pat Palmer would be very interested to know (particularly for handicapped classes).
She would like to know their reaction to the work involved in taking the course.
14.
Movement Days
These days have been organised for 13th September at Homerton, Cambridge and Ipswich.
Further details from the N.D.O. or the Office at Epsom.
Both days organised by the Eastern Region Sports Council Liaison Group.
15.
An In-Service Further Training Day for a Recorded Music Workshop
This in-service training day has been arranged for 27th September at Cecil Sharp House, Regent's Park Road.
If you are interested in coming please contact Pat Palmer as soon as possible.
Offers of pieces of music which you have enjoyed using and would be willing to share would be welcome — if possible so that Pat can record them prior to the day.
A charge of £3.50 will be made for the day.
16.
Publicity
A new descriptive leaflet and one for specialised work have recently been printed plus a postcard on which class details can be displayed in shop windows etc.
Hilda Hewitt had copies of two posters run off on the Office photo-copier.
All are available from the Office to help publicise your classes.
Please use them.
17.
Annual Reunion
Jean Parmiter reported that she has been asked by the Executive Committee to organise the Annual Reunion on 29th November.
It is planned that a Christmas Fayre will take place on the day so each area is asked to produce a stall.
Obviously some areas have more classes and teachers than others so the following is suggested:—
Offers of stalls from outer areas would of course be very welcome but we realise the difficulty of commuting/carrying etc.
18.
Physical '86 31st August–3rd September
Lucy Jackson will again be organising this even to be held at Kensington.
Your support, as always, will be much appreciated.
19.
Summer Classes
To be run at Avery Hill College from 24th June for six weeks.
Further information from Elsie Streek.
20.
On the 31st May this year Hilda Hyam, correctly dressed in a blue leotard and a pink rose, celebrated her ninetieth birthday in style, for her fellow teachers in Avon had organised the perfect day just for her:— classes morning and afternoon interspersed with coffee — a tasty lunch — and a delicious tea complete with a birthday cake.
Hilda Lodge, Jean Parmiter and Hilda Hewitt travelled down from London to join in the day with many old friends.
The Society presented her with a beautiful flower arrangement and she also received a selection of other gifts including a small tea service.
The following message was received in the Office from Hilda.
‘May I thank all the Medau girls for adding to the pleasure of my 90th birthday by sending a gorgeous card signed by so many and good wishes.
The flower arrangement from the Society is beautiful and will give pleasure and remembrance for a long time.
Also — a card was signed and sent with flowers to greet Janice Glen on her birthday and Janice later telephoned the Office to ask for her thanks to be given to you all.
21.
Retirements
Two of our teachers are retiring from active classes at the end of the 85–86 season.
They are Mabel Io Smith from Wallington, Surrey and Anna Koller from Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire.
Good wishes cards for them both were signed by teachers present on the 21st and these were sent together with flowers to Mabel and Anna.
22.
Alexander Technique
We thank Ilana Machover, one of our qualified teachers, who is also qualified in the Alexander Technique, for the most interesting session she gave on this subject.
A leaflet about Alexander Technique is available from the Office on receipt of a S.A.E.
23.
Office Closure
The Society Office at Epsom will be closed during the week 18th–22nd August when Hilda will be on holiday.
24.
Teas
Thanks go to the Inner Kent girls for arranging such a nice tea on the 21st June.
Outer Kent has been asked to do the honours at the next meeting.
 24.
Date of the next Q.T. Meeting
Saturday 11th October 1986.
ANNUAL REUNION
Date 29th November 1986
Time 2.00 p.m. –5.30 p.m.
Venue Warwick Park School Peckham S.E.
Programme Open Classes Christmas Fayre Displays Tea and time to re-unite with old friends
Cost £2.00 members only no. of tickets 400
Organiser Jean Parmiter
It is hoped that each area will organise and be responsible for a stall — Stalls booked so far:—
Kent — Homemade Cakes
Essex — Toiletries
Sussex, Hants Berks — Raffle
Herts, Cambs, Beds — Bottle Tombola
Surrey — Jewellery
Please contact Jean Parmiter (01.393.3385) with offers for other stalls and please give name/s of person/s organising the stall.
Also offers of items for all the stalls.
Suggestions for other stalls:— Homemade sweets — Fancy Goods — Christmas Gifts — Secondhand Books — Decorations — Wrapping Paper — Side Shows.
Tickets will be available after 1st October 1986 from the Office and there will be just 400 to members only.
Please enclose S.A.E. with your ticket order — Thank you.
CAR PARKING WILL BE IN THE SCHOOL PLAYGROUND ENTRANCE — LYNDHURST ROAD 
SWING STRETCH SPRING INTO SHAPE WITH MEDAU
Fee
Classes Begin
Place
Or contact 
COME TO Our Introductory Workshop for an In-Depth look at THE MEDAU METHOD OF TRAINING AND TEACHING MOVEMENT at  on 
Topics will include:
Rhythmics
Use of small apparatus
Percussion
Relaxation
Training to teach Medau
The follow-up Course begins Sept/Oct 1988
APPLICATIONS FOR WORKSHOP WITH CHEQUE FOR £6.50 PAYABLE TO ‘THE MEDAU SOCIETY’ TO BE RECEIVED BY 24TH JUNE
Name
Address
Telephone No
Movement Experience
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT NORTH WESTMINSTER COMMUNITY SCHOOL PENFOLD STREET W2 ON SATURDAY 18th JUNE 1988
1 APOLOGIES
2 CHAIRMAN'S NOTES
Pauline began the Meeting by thanking everyone for attending the important meeting before lunch and for their concern for our future.
She then introduced the four new teachers who had qualified in April: welcoming them with congratulations.
Two letter of thanks were then read — the first from Edith Harlow thanking all the teachers for the lovely handbag, matching gloves and cheque which were presented to her at the Essex Rally together with a jewel box, cheque, flowers and an iced cake all given by Essex teachers and class members.
The second from Joan Daniels thanking the teachers for her garden chair presented on her retirement from Office as Honorary Treasurer at the AGM and hoping for the weather to use it.
3 POTENTIAL TEACHERS' DAY — 9th JULY
Pauline explained that our concern was not only a financial one and that we need to support our training programme to secure a healthy future.
She then asked Margaret Charlwood to talk about the Potential Teachers' Day on 9th July.
‘A new approach to advertising potential teachers’ day had been decided with an application form for ‘Workshop and In-depth Day of Movement’for people interested in learning more about Medau and taking our Teacher Training Course.
Leaflets have been distributed to a large number of Colleges Institutes and Dance Studios.
Every teacher and current member has been sent a copy and Margaret went on to ask that all teachers encourage any interested class member to apply quickly.
A new course begins in September at the Queen's Road Centre, Peckham and will run on the same lines as the present course ie nine Friday evenings and one residential weekend per term for a minimum of five terms.
PLEASE encourage people to attend the day and learn more about the Society and experience the different facets of Medau.
3 POTENTIAL TEACHERS' DAY (cont'd)
The Society needs more teachers; many of teachers have been taking classes for 20 years or more!
Who will take over their classes when they retire!!
Margaret then asked the meeting to consider the amount of work done by the Trainers — they too need help.
She asked for any qualified teacher interested in assisting with training — not necessarily on a full time basis — but willing to sit in and observe and become involved generally — perhaps you have a special knowledge and/or interest in Music — Dance — Anatomy — Etc or would like to know more about training and the role of the trainer.
A special meeting has been arranged for Friday 16th September 1988 at Queen's Road Centre Peckham at 7.30 p.m..
If you are interested please contact Margaret or Hilda at the Office — NOW — Overnight accommodation can be arranged for anyone travelling long distance.
Should you wish to just come and talk about it — you are still welcome — maybe the time is not right for you just now but you would like to hear more!
4 MEMBERSHIP
a) Current Membership — To date Society membership stands at 3041 only.
Last year, after the special meeting at Q.T. day, everyone pulled out all the stops and we reached our target growth for 1987.
As explained at that meeting the effort had to be ongoing.
We now need EVERYONE to rustle up those members who have fallen by the wayside.
To reach last years numbers we need another — 160 MEMBERS — and to maintain our 10% annual increase we need another 480 MEMBERS IN TOTAL.
b) Family Membership — Please take note of and advertise our new FAMILY MEMBERSHIP which will be introduced in OCT. 1988.
The rate will be — £10.50 — per household.
This includes two adults and any number of children, living at the same address.
Please note only ONE set of literature will be sent per household (unless extra are specifically requested).
5 N.D.O.
A reminder that Pat Palmer will be out of the country from 3rd July — 24th August.
a) Classes — September 1988 — NOW is the time to plan your publicity strategy for September in order to ensure full enrolment.
Don't wait until the end of August and just hope that people will turn up.
New classes particularly need maximum publicity.
Existing class members can be very inventive if asked to help publicise a class.
While Pat is away Elsie Streek will handle any requests for the T.V. and Video.
The Publicity Boards (all three sets) are already booked until the end of July but there will be one set available in August.
5 N.D.O. (cont'd)
b)— Publicity Photographs — If any teacher would like to order any of the Eileen Langsley photographs cash/cheque is needed with the order and delivery would be October Q.T. day
10’ x 8’prints in black and white — £3 each colour prints — £5.50 each
Copies of prints from earlier sessions for which we do not have the negatives, can be processed, but are usually more expensive.
c) Medau Quotes — Pat is planning to build up a bank of Medau quotes from 10 — 100 words each, she would like everyone to let her know what you write about YOUR class for Ad.
Ed. brochures, local organisations or the press.
Alternatively if anyone is lost for words or ideas and needs help, Pat will be happy to let you have a copy of what will be on the computer.
This will be an ongoing project and will be regularly updated.
6 R.S.A. EXERCISE TO MUSIC
A letter has been received from Elaine Burgess of the Sports Council, which clarifies the status of the R.S.A. Exercise to Music and the Medau teacher qualification.
A few copies are available if anyone needs one and if you are experiencing any repercussions please let the Society know IMMEDIATELY.
7 BUSINESS FITNESS SCHEME
The Business Fitness folders are now available on request.
We quote a session fee of £25 (45 min — 1 hr) in line with current trends in this market but feel that from every class launched under the auspice of our Business Fitness Scheme, the income of the Society should benefit by a £7 levy per session.
It may be possible to provide some relevant In-Service Training if enough people are interested.
8 TELEPHONE LINKS
Pat Palmer would like to establish an emergency telephone chain in each Area and it is hoped that every Area Organiser will be able to set one up by the Autumn using the same overlap list as for collecting class statistics.
9 ANNUAL REUNION 19 November 1988
Betty Boyce would like to hear from anyone who would be willing to organise and man a stall at the Reunion.
There are 400 teas to be provided please contact Betty at .
Forthcoming Events — Application forms are available for the Training & Recreation W/E Edinburgh 5–6 Nov 1988 and Indepth Day of Movement Gravesend 10 Sept 1988 from Pat or Hilda.
Don't forget Newbury Rally 1 Oct 1988 details Diana Merchant.
10 LOCAL AUTHORITY GRANTS FOR IN-SERVICE TRAINING
If anyone has made application to their local authority for an In-Service training grant (known as GRIST or LEATG) Hilary Weedon would like to know how you fared.
Did you get all monies applied for or only part payment or none at all?!
Please let Hilary know as soon as possible.
11 TEACHERS' DIRECTOR
Since our last Directory was printed we now have seven new teachers, so an updated version is being prepared.
This is now the time to let Hilda Hewitt know of any change in YOUR address and/or telephone number.
A.S.A.P. please.
12 CONGRATULATIONS
Our congratulations go to two Trainers, who will shortly be taking up new appointments — Joan Gatfield has been appointed as Associate Lecturer at Southwark and Hilary Weedon is now Senior Liaison Officer of the National Childrens Play and Recreation Unit of the Sports Council.
We offer them our very best wishes in their new posts.
We also send our good wishes to three of our Teachers who will be celebrating their  marriages shortly — Anna Koller — who is going to New Zealand to live after her wedding — Jane Rogers and Ruth Bell.
We wish them every happiness for the future.
13 Q.T. DAY 18 JUNE 1988
Due to sudden and unexpected problems the last Q.T. day had to have a shortened and condensed programme and it was not possible to provide tea at the end of the day.
To all who attended this day we thank you for your good humour and co-operation under difficult circumstances.
Tea at the next Q.T. day will be provided by Outer Kent and Essex.
14 DATE OF the NEXT Q.T. DAY
The date and venue of the next Q.T. day have yet to be decided.
You will be notified in due course.
15 OFFICE CLOSURE
Please note that the Office at Epsom will be closed from Monday 18th July and will re-open on 1st August.
16 THANKS
Thanks have just been received in the Office from Janice Glen for the lovely flowers and card she received on her birthday.
SPORTS COUNCIL GRANT AID
At the recent meeting of Qualified Teachers held at North Westminster School on June 18th, the chairman explained the up to date situation with regard to future grant aid.
The application which was submitted by the Society last November was discussed with the panel on February 18th and as you were told it was well received.
However a letter giving the details of grant aid for 1988 was not available for us until Easter.
The grant for 1988 falls short by £7000 and is one a reducing scale for the following 3 years after which we are told there will be no further grant.
Our Development Steering Group met in April and because we were by then well into our financial year it was decided that with an all out effort on everyone's part we should be able to raise the £8000 for 1988.
Profit made on the Easter Course £1000
Profit made on the Grand Draw £2000+
Profit made at the Annual Reunion £1000+
Cut in spending on NDT and 55+ team £1000
Area Fundraising £2000
£7000
It must be pointed out that we had already hoped to make at least £1000 at the Annual Reunion so this means a bigger and better Christmas Fayre and a rise in the cost of tickets.
Area Fundraising, we know and are very grateful that many teachers work very hard throughout the year to encourage class members in joining in fundraising.
PLEASE CONTINUE, those of you who have difficulty are reminded that a list of fundraising ideas was sent out with the last notes and we would hope that the areas would get together and hold rallies and/or cheese and wine evenings/coffee mornings etc.
The Steering Group meet again in September to formulate our plant for the future.
Our first concern must be the staff (Secretary, NDO and Trainers) and the upkeep of Office Premises, the Rent is still under review and increased costs in heating, lighting, maintenance , postage, telephone, stationery and printing, to name a few must be met.
We are not alone in having the grant cut, some of the governing bodies have only been given one  year's notice or nothing at all.
The Sports Council have to follow Government Policy and make everyone self financing and self sufficient you will no doubt read int he press and hear through the media about many similar cases, it is a case for grave concern and efforts will be made to seek the support of many people who applaud our type of work and so give the world of Movement and Dance the benefit of their experience and support.
PLEASE HELP ALL YOU CAN.
CONSTITUTION
Amended at Annual General Meeting held 20th March 1976
1.
NAME
The name shall be ‘The Medau Society of Great Britain & Northern Ireland’ with the sub-title ‘for the encouragement of Medau Rhythmic Movement, the form of movement education developed and taught by Herr and Frau Medau’.
2.
OBJECT
The Object of the Society is to advance the education of girls and women in physical activity in accordance with the principles of Medau Rhythmic Movement and in particular by the training of teachers and leaders.
In furtherance of the Object the Society is empowered to do the following things:—
(a)
By examinations, the granting of certificates and otherwise to promote the supply of teachers and leaders.
(b)
To foster contacts with the Medau College at Coburg as to Society's source of inspiration and training, to spread knowledge and understanding of the work of the College and to recruit students for training there.
(c)
To promote and foster contacts with Medau Teachers and friends in other countries.
(d)
To co-operate with other organisations whose aims are similar or complementary to those of the Society and generally to spread and encourage interest in Medau Rhythmic Movement in Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
3.
MEMBERSHIP
(a)
Individual Membership : Membership shall be open to all individuals who are interested in Medau Rhythmic Movement and wish to support the aims of the Society.
(b)
Group Membership : Any number of people in one locality may apply to the Society to join as a group.
Group members shall be entitled to all benefits and privileges of membership except that they will not receive individual copies of the Annual Report, information leaflets or other matter circulated to individual members.
(c)
Honorary Membership : The Executive Committee shall have power to admit to Honorary Membership of the Society any person whom they consider fit.
Honorary members shall be entitled to all benefits and privileges of membership.
(d)
Affiliation : Any other organisation may, at the discretion of the Executive Committee, be affiliated to the Medau Society on payment of an affiliation fee.
An affiliated organisation will receive all information circulated by the Medau Society but its members will not be entitled to the privileges of Medau Society membership.
4.
FINANCE
(a)
Subscriptions : All subscriptions are due annually by the end of January of the current year and shall be classed under the following categories:— Individual Members, Overseas Members, Group Members (subscriptions on a capitation basis) and Affiliated Clubs and Societies.
The subscription rates shall be subject to review from time to time and altered on the recommendation of the Finance Committee with the agreement of the Executive Committee.
(b)
The income and property of the Society shall be applied solely towards the promotion of the Object of the Society and no portion thereof shall be paid or transferred directly or indirectly to the members of the Society, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the payment in good faith of remuneration to any officer, servant or member of the Society in return for Services actually rendered to the Society and proper rent for any premises let by any member to the Society.
(c)
All monies shall be kept with the Society's Bankers, unless and until otherwise from time to time resolved by the Society in General Meeting, and all cheques shall be signed by one member of the Executive Committee and countersigned by the Treasurer or Secretary.
The banking account of the Society shall be kept with such banker as the Executive Committee shall from time to time determine.
If the body is dissolved for any reason the remaining assets shall go to some other charitable organisation.
(d)
The financial year shall run from the 1st January to the 31st December.
5.
HONORARY OFFICERS
The Honorary Officers, who shall be elected biennially and be eligible for immediate re-election, shall be a President, Honorary Treasurer and such Officers as the Society may from time to time decide to appoint.
The Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee, who shall be elected by that Committee, shall serve as the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Society.
6.
GOVERNMENT
(a)
The affairs of the Society shall be managed by an Executive Committee of the Officers, together with not less than two and not more than twelve other members of the Society, at least one of whom must be a holder of the Medau Society's Leadership Award.
Biennially at the Annual General Meeting four members of the Executive Committee shall retire and shall not become eligible for re-election within a period of two years.
(b)
The Executive Committee shall meet not less than twice a year in every calendar year: decide its own procedure: elect its own Chairman and Vice-Chairman, each of whom may hold the office for a maximum period of four consecutive years.
The Executive Committee shall be free to set up such committees as it may think fit and decide their terms of reference; and have power to fill in any casual vacancies among the Honorary Officers, any officers so appointed serving until the next Annual General Meeting at which elections are due to take place.
(c)
The Executive Committee shall have the power to co-opt not more than three additional members without voting powers who need not be members of the Society, and who shall serve for one year and be eligible for immediate re-appointment.
(d)
The Executive Committee shall be able to call upon help and advice from an ‘Advisory Panel’ which shall consist of all fully-trained Medau teachers resident in Britain during the current year, who are not Officers or Members of the Executive Committee; a representative of the Medau Leaders who is not an Officer or member of the Executive Committee, to be elected from among their own number by holders of the Medau Leadership award; a Medical Adviser to be appointed by the Executive Committee and such others as the Executive Committee may from time to time appoint.
(e)
The Executive Committee shall have power to appoint Patrons of the Society and Vice-Presidents.
(f)
A quorum shall consist of 50% of the total members of the Executive Committee entitled to vote.
7.
MEETINGS OF THE SOCIETY
(a)
The Society shall hold a meeting in every calendar year as its Annual General Meeting at such time and place as may be determined by the Executive Committee in order to give, receive and adopt a report of the previous year's work and a statement of accounts for the preceding financial year: to elect Officers and members of the Executive Committee and to appoint Auditors.
(b)
The Executive Committee may at any time call an Extraordinary General Meeting on receipt of a requisition signed by not less than 40 members, such requisitions to state business to be transacted.
(c)
At least 14 days notice shall be given of every Annual General Meeting and at least 14 days notice of every Extraordinary Meeting.
(d)
Chairman : At any General Meeting, the President or, failing the President, the Chairman of the Executive Committee, shall take the chair, and in their absence a member elected by the Meeting.
(e)
A quorum (General Meeting) shall consist of forty members.
8.
VOTING
Every individual and group member of the Society shall be entitled to one vote for each vacancy to be filled and in the case of two or more candidates receiving an equal number of votes, the Chairman of the Meeting shall have a casting vote.
Nominations for the Honorary Officers and Executive Committee Members shall be supported by a proposer and seconder and must be sent to the Secretary in writing at least one month before the Annual General Meeting.
The consent of candidates must be obtained.
The voting shall be by show of hands, or otherwise as the Executive Committee may determine.
9.
AUDIT
The Accounts shall as soon as practicable after the end of the financial year be audited by Auditors who shall be appointed at each Annual General Meeting.
The Executive Committee shall have power to fill any vacancy occurring in the office of Auditor during the year.
10.
ALTERATION IN CONSTITUTION
Subject to the preservation of the object of the Society, this Constitution may be amended by a resolution at any General Meeting provided it be carried by a majority of at least two-thirds of the members present and voting thereon.
Twenty-one days' notice of any proposed alterations, amendments or additions shall be given to the Secretary in writing.
The Secretary shall notify the members of such proposed alterations, amendments or additions, at least fourteen days prior to the Meeting.
In the event of any uncertainty with regard to the interpretation of the Articles of this Constitution the decision shall be left to the Executive Committee.
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT NORTH WESTMINSTER COMMUNITY SCHOOL PENFOLD STREET W2 ON SATURDAY 8 OCTOBER ‘88
1 APOLOGIES
With great sadness the recent death of Audrey Bartlett was reported and condolences were expressed by all former colleagues.
2.
CHAIRMAN'S NOTES
DONATION — Pauline was pleased to report that she had written to the National Westminster Bank Sponsorship and Community Affairs Dept. and received a donation of £500 to the Society.
TEACHER TRAINING — Due to the poor response on 9th July we were unable to offer a new course in September.
A New Course will now start in January 1989 at HORLEY SURREY.
To reduce the number of hours of our training it has been agreed to offer the next course over four terms only.
Students will attend one weekend (Aston Clinton) and four Saturdays per term.
They will be Medau trained in Medau Movement and taught to accompany their classes with percussion and some taped music.
Piano lessons will be an optional extra taken by students in their own time and at their own expense.
This enables us to brig the number of hours of training more into line with other organisations and to convince the Sports Council that we are doing everything possible to train our teachers more quickly.
The Sports Council recognises the quality of our training courses but however insists that they are still taking too long.
Sports Centres, Leisure Centres and Office complexes frequently do not have a piano — as we all know, lessons using alternative accompaniment have been a feature at Q.T. Day for many years now.
Some teachers already use taped music in their classes and the new teachers will hopefully go on to learn to paly the piano.
The decision to hold Course IV in this way has come about with some reluctance and a great deal of heart-searching and concern.
However, we must all see this as a challenge, a new dimension and a life-saving situation.
WE NEED YOU TO SELL THE NEW COURSE TO YOUR CLASS MEMBERS 
2 TEACHING TRAINING (cont'd)
PLEASE tell your class members about the course and contact Margaret Charlwood if you would like more information or have an interested person — NOW.
HORLEY is five minutes from Gatwick Airport.
Gatwick is served by the M25/M23.
British Rail Service is every fifteen minutes from Victoria Station — London and also from Luton (Beds) via Thames Link (Kings Cross) from South Wales via Reading from Portsmouth and Littlehampton from Brighton and Lewes
3 PREMIUM BONDS
As you may already know — we have held some single premium bonds since 1966, but would now like to amalgamate and increase this holding.
If you care to join us in this venture please send your contribution (in round pounds please) to Stella Webb, 14 Conyerd Road, Borough Green Kent within two weeks of receiving these notes.
Stella will then purchase one block of numbers, giving the Society an improved chance of winning!.
4 ANNUAL REUNION — 19 NOVEMBER — WARWICK PARK SCHOOL
Warwick Park School is in Peckham.
Tickets prices £3.50 (members only) are available from the Office please include a stamped and address envelope with your cheque stating if a directional map is also required.
A super afternoon which includes open classes — displays — tea and chat — as well as a Bumper Christmas Fayre.
We need to make a special effort to fundraise this year — so — Please publicise this with your class members and also request contributions for the stalls and contact holders as follows:—
Hankies and Scarves 
Surrey ‘Smellies’
 Jewellery 
The Village Shop 
Bottle Bola 
Cake Stall 
Treasure Island 
Christmas Decorations 
Second Hand Books 
Main Raffle 
Blanket Raffle 
Knitting Machine Raffle 
Donations of cake/s for the tea should be made to Jean Parmiter.
Ideas for additional stalls welcome — please contact Betty Boyce — 09323 40442 — A few more names to help with stewarding are needed — many thanks to those who have already offered — but — with more stewards — the load would be lighter!!
5 NATIONAL DRAW
Please sell as many books of tickets as possible, more are available from the Office — RING HILDA NOW — We must raise the much needed funds to complete this year's programme and YOU OR ONE OF YOUR CLASS MEMBERS COULD BE A LUCKY WINNER.
Please collect counterfoils and money from your class members and send to Joan Daniels as soon as possible.
By providing this service you can monitor the response and encourage more sales.
Cheques to be made payable to:— Medau Society National Draw
6.
WEEKEND OF MOVEMENT AND DANCE
Seymour Leisure Centre 29th and 30th October from 10.45 to 5.00 each day FREE.
Jill Kelly has volunteered to set-up the Society stand and man it on Saturday and Elsie Streek will on Sunday but they would both appreciate some help, to give them a break during the day, from amy teacher who will be there.
7 MEMBERSHIP
Last you pulled out all the stops and we reached our target of 3202.
This year we need to show a 5% increase but are currently 200 down on last year.
PLEASE KEEP RECRUITING NEW CLASS MEMBERS — don't forget they get three months free (Oct/Dec) by paying 1989 membership now:
Standard subscription £4.25
Under 16, Over 60, Receipt Sup.
Ben £3.25
Overseas £5.00
New in 1989 Family Membership (2 adults and all children living at home) £10.50
Please let Josephine Williams know how many of the vouchers issued to new members to attend a rally were actually presented — we need to assess the popularity and cost of this scheme for future plans.
8 PRESS OFFICER
Our Press Officer resigned from office earlier this year.
Please contact the Office immediately if you would like to take on the challenge of this demanding task.
Lucy has kindly offered to assist a new person in any way that she can with advice and help.
9 MOTIVATION SURVEY
It would be a great help to all our officers in planning future strategies (and probably of considerable interest to you) if you could enlist the help of your class members to complete the enclosed survey (either by photocopying the form and filling in one each or by a show of hands and entering the total numbers) Please let Pat Palmer have the results at or before the Reunion on 19th November.
10 FUNDRAISING
In view of the late notification by the Sports Council advising that our grant for the current year would be out by £7000 the Society's Steering Group felt we should all make a concerted effort to raise this amount so that all schemes and administration could continue as planned for 1988.
A number of major savings have been identified nationally, leaving £2200 which we hope can be raised regionally — the following targets have been set, based on the number of active teachers in each region.
Some excellent plans are already in hand ranging from video coffee mornings during half term week to a whole day of movement aiming to raise £200 in one go.
PLEASE THINK HOW YOU CAN HELP — and — if you are not already involved — contact one of the regional co-ordinators.
11 1988 STATISTICS
We need to analyse the current year statistics as soon as possible and hope you will find the form and printout of 1987 class details, which need only be ticked/updated, easy to use.
Please let us know about EVERY class that operated at any time in 1988, whether it was only a couple of weeks in January or a short summer course (children or adults) and take the highest number on roll at any time in the year.
12 EQUIPMENT
All offers of spare equipment (donated or loaned) will be gratefully received to help those about to start new classes — even broken hoops!!
Contact Chris Ruffle or Pat Palmer.
13 IN-SERVICE TRAINING DAYS
i
MOVEMENT ACCOMPANIMENT 13th May 1989
ii
HEALTH FOR LIFE DAY 17th June 1989
Both these days will have to be self-financing and need a minimum of 30 people attending — therefore — please complete the slip at the end of the notes and return to the Office.
A non-refundable deposit will be required in January.
14 MAILING LIST
There has been a proposal from the CCPR Movement and Dance Divisional Meeting suggesting that a joint mailing list of participants in Movement and Dance would generate some 100,000 people.
This number has considerable value on the commercial market and could generate funds for all taking part.
Most organisations are not against the proposal, we could opt out if we wish.
Society members who are at present on our own list would be asked for permission to allow their names to go forward enabling us to take part and benefit.
If you have any strong feelings about the proposal please write into the Office at once.
15 EVERY BODY ACTIVE (SEMINAR)
Sunday 4th December at Westminster Cathedral Conference Centre 10a.m. –4p.m. — Bringing together Movement and Dance tutors, Staff working with Disabled and Handicapped groups, Adult Education staff and Sports Development officers.
Margaret Charlwood will be taking a workshop session showing the Medau approach and would like to hear from anyone wishing to attend — especially those with cars who would be willing to help transport some disabled class members.
16 Following the ‘Streetwise’ talk given PC.
Ferguson it was noted that classes in Self-Defence are available at Quintin Kynaston School — Contact Stevie Dee (Community and Welfare Worker on 01.722.5151).
Any other information on Self-Defence classes:— PC Ian Reid 01.725.4461 (Marylebone Police Station) or PC.
Nick Norwood 01.725.4157 (St. Johns' Wood Police Station)
17 RALLY
Surrey Teachers are holding a Rally at St. Bedes School in Carlton Road Redhill on 10th December 1988.
Ticket prices — £3.50 (members £2.50).
All enquiries to — Jill Kelly — on — 01.644.8443.
IN-SERVICE TRAINING DAYS
Please delete as applicable
I am/am not interested in attending the MOVEMENT ACCOMPANIMENT DAY on 13th May 1989
A am/am not interested in attending the HEALTH FOR LIFE DAY on 17th June 1989.
Signed 
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Meeting held on Saturday, 3rd April 1982 at Quintin School, St. John's Wood.
Attendance at this meeting was small, due in part to the absence of teachers who are in the National Display Team and are performing that day in Edinburgh as guests of the S.W.K.F.A. We though of them and hoped that all was going well.
A welcome was given to Beryl Smith who kindly agreed to teach on this day because of the shortage of other trainers.
It was good to have Beryl with us again.
1.
Programme Changes
Jean Parmiter apologised on behalf of the Training Committee for the number of changes which had had to be made in the advertised programmes for the training days in 1981–82.
When the plans were made it was not known that Myrtle Mott would be unable to teach during the year or that one of the days selected would coincide with an invitation for the N.D.T. to appear in Scotland.
It has not proved possible as yet to get a Homeopathic lecturer but this is still being followed up and will be fitted into a future programme.
A change will need to be made for the next meeting as Myrtle is still not able to teach.
The revised programme for the 26th June is set out below.
To be held at Quintin School.
2 General Discussion
At the meeting on the 26th June it is proposed to start at 11 a.m. with a discussion on any matter which teachers wish to raise.
Attention has quite justifiably been drawn to the fact that we have not had anything in the way of a Teachers' Forum for some years.
Although teachers can always raise matters individually in their own areas with their reps or directly with me, to get an overall view it is vitally important to have general discussion from time to time.
So please come along with your problems, complaints, worries etc. ready to participate.
I hope you don't look on this as a waste of training time.
An exchange of views of this kind is extremely important to our work and the health of our society.
3.
Medau Society A.G.M.
Following on from above it is sad to have to report that the attendance of teachers at the A.G.M. of the Society was extremely small — only 7 apart from those who are officers of the Society or on the Executive Committee.
3.
Medau Society A.G.M. (cont'd)
The resolution proposed by the Committee were all passed which broadly means that the name of the Society is now ‘The Medau Society’ and that group membership will be abolished after this year.
It is disappointing that so few teachers thought it worth attending to express their views either on the resolutions put forward or to raise other matters.
The Society is essential to our being, Medau work would not have become established in this country and cannot be carried on without it.
Through it we are in fact a governing body of sport, as for example, the F.A.
or the L.T.A., a formal organisation is essential if we are to receive the support and guidance of the Sports Council and the C.C.P.R.
If one has not got a keen interest in the overall aims and objects of a particular body, then it is unlikely that its A.G.M. will be a terrific draw.
How many of us have felt interested enough to attend a Building Society A.G.M. provided we are receiving the interest on our deposits we think we are entitled to?
Surely our involvement with Medau goes deeper than that.
Whilst the venue on this occasion was central and it was not the first  time the A.G.M. had been held on a Friday evening, the Committee appreciates that perhaps the idea of holding the Meeting on the evening before the Dinner Dance to enable those travelling to London to attend both events was not a good one.
Those who attended the Q.T. Day on 3rd April were in general of the opinion that a Saturday would be preferable and that a more specific attraction a film, talk, classes with or the Reunion event itself.
The buffet provided at this year's Meeting with the opportunity to meet and chat with other members does not seem to have had sufficient appeal to justify another evening out.
Pity!
All views will be taken into account in future planning.
Meanwhile any further comments on 26th June please!
4.
Health and Leisure Exhibition
Thursday 29th April — 3rd May (inclusive).
Our stand is No.
H7 it is in the new light Pavilion on the Alexander Palace Site and we hope there will be hordes of visitors.
Our aim is, of course, to attract newcomers to our classes and to increase membership.
Please give a big build-up to your class members and encourage them to visit the exhibition bringing along families and friends.
Admission £ 3 Children and O.A.P.
£1 BUT…to holders of the leaflet distributed on Q.T. Day, there is a 50p discount (two are enclosed now) I have more leaflets if anyone wants them.
I also have a few big posters advertising the event.
Has anyone a friendly grocer or newsagent etc. who would be willing to display it in their window?
Snack bars are available for refreshments.
Many thanks in advance to area co-ordinators and their teams who are planning to stage demonstrations and supplying ‘sales girls’ for the stand.
5. 30th Anniversary Dinner Dance
Cicely apologised for not being at Q.T. Day to thank everyone for supporting this Gala event.
Over 260 people had enjoyed the evening and through the generosity of those who contributed prizes or money towards their purchase £137 had been made on the raffle.
30th Anniversary Draw
Results of the draw which took place on Saturday 20th March 1982 at the Regent Crest Hotel, London.
First Prize Holiday to the value of £500 or cash ticket no. 3478 
Second Prize Colour Television ticket no. 6490 
Third Price Premium bond worth £100 ticket no. 8903 
Fourth Prize Premium bond worth £100 ticket no. 12481 
Fifth Prize Premium bond worth £100 ticket no. 5683 
7.
Courses
Applications for the Easter Course came in well and the Lilleshall Course is full.
Teachers are asked to give serious thought to attending the Summer Course at Green Park, Bucks., if at all possible Full particulars are in the leaflet on courses of which you had a copy.
We need all your support to make this a success.
Remember you can come either residentially or by the day and camping facilities are available.
8.
Rally at East Grinstead
Saturday 24th April.
Tickets for this event are available from Pat Keen 01.668.7655.
9.
Summer Classes
10.
Office Closure
The Medau Office will be closed from 21st May — 7th June while Hilda is on holiday.
11.
Tea for Q.T. Day
Many thanks to Janet Brown and her band of helpers from the Sutton, Epsom, Malden areas of Surrey for providing a lovely tea for us on 3rd April.
On the 26th June, Toni Bergman has kindly agreed to co-ordinate the arrangements which will be in the hands of the teachers living in the Guildford, Redhill part of Surrey:—
12.
Lost Property
Betty Syrett still has a red thermos left behind in February.
Please claim it or it will be disposed of.
13.
Next Q.T. Day
Quintin Kynaston School, St. John's Wood on 26th June 1982.
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin School, St. John's Wood on Saturday, 27th February 1982
Greetings were received from Kay Evans, who was sorry that she was unable to attend the training day.
How nice it was however, to have Myrtle Mott with us again and looking well.
Apologies from Joan Gatfield who was scheduled to teach today but could not attend.
Many thanks to Lucy Jackson who stepped in at very short notice to take Joan's place.
1.
National Display Team
An half-hour programme of some of the team's repertoire has been video recorded.
A copy of the tape (VHS) can be borrowed from the office.
It is planned to add further items to the tape in future and any regional teams who would like to record any of their work are asked to contact the Steering Committee.
The cost of getting the display team to Edinburgh for the International Festival of Movement on April 2–3 is proving to be much higher than anticipated.
Any contributions — however small via the Admin Fund would be very welcome.
(Nearly new stalls at Rallies are proving popular or if you have access to a VHS video system, a coffee morning might raise a few funds).
The new display group has started rehearsals for the 30th Anniversary but already we need to start planning for 1983!
Items with apparatus and live music are particularly being sought — would potential producers please contact the committee.
2.
Health and Leisure Exhibition
Further to the details given in the last Q.T. Notes, while four areas have agreed to supply the necessary helpers we would still be pleased to hear from anyone who could help.
We particularly need help for Thursday, 29th April, but any offers will be gratefully received.
Please contact Adrienne Ring on 01.794.6295.
3.
Medau Society Membership
Subscriptions which are due now for 1982 are as follows:
Individual Membership £1.50 Group Membership £1.00 O.A.P's in a group/centre .35p.
4.
Statistics Slip (PINK)
In spite of the request for an immediate return, which accompanied the new pink slip, to the office or to Jean Parmiter with the required information over 60 teachers had to be contacted by telephone, a time consuming and expensive way of acquiring the figures etc. needed for the Annual Report.
Once again please send in details when they are needed…on time!
5.
Professional Affiliation Fee
In the past few months the Executive Committee has been considering most carefully a proposal of the Membership Working Party that in future all teachers, in addition to their membership subscription, should be asked to pay an Affiliation Fee.
The Executive Committee have agreed to this proposal for the following reasons.
Through the working of its Committee structure Honorary Officers and Secretary, the Society aims
i) to provide all teachers with professional backing and advice &
ii) to provide all teachers with a comprehensive administrative service.
In principle therefore payment of an Affiliation Fee would be an overt recognition of this vital link and mutual benefit.
5.
Professional Affiliation Fee (cont'd)
Some of the ways in which at present the Society renders this service are listed below:
1.
Information is mailed directly, several times a year to all teachers.
2.
A very reasonable insurance scheme, interest free loans, loan of equipment and help and advice from officers are always available.
3.
The office facilities which include a duplicator and photocopier are freely available.
4.
Publicity material is free and is constantly being up-dated.
5.
The Society gives help and advice to regional representatives who in turn liaise with their Regional Sports Councils from whom financial help and expertise is often available.
6.
Research is always being done to keep the Society abreast of current trends.
For example a great deal of work is being carried out at present on the re-structuring of our training courses with a view to safe guarding the status of our Examination Award and gaining future exemption from lengthy in-service training for newly-qualified teachers.
7.
In the past all Q.T's received a training which was heavily subsidised by the Society — in to-day's terms this amounted to about £200 per person for each year of training.
It is becoming increasingly obvious that in future all training must try to be more self-financing.
Therefore commencing 1st September 1982 an affiliation fee of £6 will become due on 1st September each year.
£6 was considered to represent approximately the rate for one hour's teaching.
Q.T's who have reached retirement age and are no longer teaching will not be expected to affiliate but will continue to enjoy all the benefits of the affiliated member.
6.
Medau Dinner Dance
The closing date for obtaining tickets has now passed and all money and unsold tickets should by now have been sent to Cicely Harris or Hilda Lodge, with the names of your guests.
Raffle prizes or donations towards them will still be gratefully received by Cicely.
7. 30th Anniversary Draw
Please remember that all counterfoils and money should be returned to Joan Daniels,(Not the Office) by the 14th March.
The results will be printed in the Medau News in September but if any teacher would like a Results Sheet before that date please send a S.A.E. to Joan.
She will be pleased to send one on.
Thank you to all Q.T's who have supported the Draw, particularly those who requested and sold more tickets.
8.
Notation of Display Items
It was not possible to put together a written record of the work we did not displays at the July ‘81 Q.T. Day, as some sections’ notes (1st & 2nd Ball groups, 2nd Club group) were never received.
The trail appears to have gone cold and it would be difficult now to resurrect it successfully, but the incomplete notes are available as received if anyone would like to look at them.
Perhaps there is scope here for future study, since notating our movement consistently and comprehensibly does seem to present difficulties.
9.
Reminder of Medau Events in 1982
10.
Spare Clubs
Further to the entry in the January Notes Hilary Weedon is still appealing for clubs which might be spared for a youth club.
Condition, shape and size are  immaterial .
Please contact Hilary if you can help and do not worry if you only have one to offer.
11.
Pianist Needed
If anyone is interested in playing for an Old Peoples' Class on Friday mornings, starting in September at Dulwich, please contact .
12.
Tea at Training Day
Our most grateful thanks must go to the teachers from Herts.
Beds.
Bucks.
Richmond and Hounslow, who with great ingenuity produced tea and cakes right on time with the aid of one small electric kettle and several ‘commandeered’ thermos flasks!
Their efforts were greatly appreciated (One thermos was not claimed at the end of the day, would the owner contact Betty Syrett).
Hopefully all will be well for the teachers responsible for tea at the next meeting.
They will come from New Malden, Sutton and Epsom.
Janet Brown (Epsom 20366) has agreed to co-ordinate and will teachers in these areas please contact her:—
A minimum of four is needed on the day to prepare and serve and as many as possible to help provide cakes etc.
Thank you in advance.
Date of next meeting
Dear Anne
As you will recall, it was decided earlier this year, to adopt the recommendations of the Membership Working Party and introduce an annual Professional Affiliation Fee of £6 for all Society teachers.
To remind you briefly about this decision — it was felt that at a time when the Society was under considerable pressure, not only to up-date its training structure but also to streamline administration, a Professional Affiliation Fee would benefit everyone.
Such a fee would serve as a mutual recognition of the aims of the Society, namely to seek to improve the professional back-up and administrative services provided by the Society for all teachers.
Further details of the Professional Affiliation Fee were circulated in the Q.T. notes dated 27th Feb. 1982.
We have been very pleased that in the intervening months, when there has been ample opportunity for discussion and feedback, considerable support for this scheme has been forthcoming.
It is very heartening to know that so many of you are prepared to under-write the future of the Society's works in such a positive way.
However — we do need your continuous support in providing us with information.
We can only try to provide an efficient service if we are clear what it is you need and are given sufficient time to do something about it.
Only then can we make the best possible use of all our assets!
With very best wishes for a successful and enjoyable year,
Yours sincerely,
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Meeting that was cancelled on Saturday, 9th January 1982
New date 27th February 1982
1.
Cancelled Q.T. Day
We are sorry Q.T. day had to be cancelled but because the weather conditions were so bad we felt it was the right thing to do.
Many thanks to all those who helped me contact everybody; we just  hope no-one was missed.
If you were not contacted please let me know so that it never happens again.
You will all however be pleased to know that a new day has been arranged — 27th February 1982 at Quintin Kynaston School.
The Programme will be the same as that organised for the 9th Jan.
To refresh your memory it is set out below:—
Due to circumstances beyond our control the Programme for April 3rd has had to be replanned — it will be as follows:—
2.
Q.T. Music Lessons
Would all those requiring music lessons on Q.T. days contact Jean Parmiter, so that groups can be arranged.
Please state whether you would like the lesson at 9.45–10.45 a.m. or 4.45–5.45 p.m.
Q.T. Fees Training Fees for 1982 are now due
£12 for the year for those living within a radius of 50 miles of the training venue.
£10 for those living outside.
All cheques to Betty Syrett, made payable to the Medau Society.
4.
Membership for 1982
Subscriptions for 1982 are now due they will be:—
Individual member £1.50
Group member £1.00
Old Age Pensioners (in groups) .35p
Please renew as soon as possible.
4a.
As it is our 30th anniversary this year we are presenting all individual members with a surprise gift as they renew their membership.
All new members will receive this token plus a key-ring.
Please try to recruit more members this year.
5.
New Membership Proposals
A year ago a Working Party was formed by the Executive Committee to look into various aspects of membership.
The Working Party felt it was very necessary to have a closer contact with Society members than was possible at present and that this could be best achieved by being in direct communication with them.
It was felt that improved contact would lead to a greater participation in Society affairs by members, which in turn, would lead to a healthier and more informed Society.
With this in mind, the Executive Committee will recommend to the Annual General Meeting in March, that as from 1st January 1983
1.
All members should be individual members
2.
All members should receive a copy of Medau News and the Annual Report
3.
All members should have full voting rights and receive papers directly by mail
It is hoped that the acceptance of these recommendations will lead to all members being offered a greatly improved service by the Society and that a democratic system of elections for Executive Committee members will be ensured.
The group system has been most valuable to the Society in the past and every effort should be made to use a class secretary wherever possible since she can help her teacher to encourage new membership.
6.
National Draw
With your Medau News you will have received a letter regarding the National Draw and some draw tickets.
We have sent five books to every Q.T., two books to individual members and one ticket per every group member.
We hope that not only will you sell your own tickets, but you will also encourage your class members to sell as many as possible.
There are many more tickets available and Joan Daniels will be delighted to be inundated with requests for them.
Please note that all ticket stubs and monies should be returned to Joan by 14th March 1982.
7.
Annual Report Statistics
It is essential that all Teachers fill in the enclosed form with regard to information for the Annual Report as soon as possible and return it to the Office or to  at the latest by the end of January.
Your co-operation is vital at this time, we need the numbers on the registers of all classes regardless of the type of class and all 
7.
Annual Report Statistics (cont'd)
…information about Rallies, Displays, Lecture Demonstrations, Open Classes, Supervisory Visits etc.
Each year time and money is wasted by the exorbitant amount of telephoning required to gather in all this information.
8.
National Display Team
An audition was held on 5th December to select a new team to start work on items for the 30th Reunion.
We would like to congratulate all the new members and wish them and the producers good luck for a successful and enjoyable year.
Many thanks are due to all the members of the old team who have worked so hard for many years and given up so much of their time to represent the Society.
Some of them will be making a video recording of the items which have been performed in the past and they will also be taking part in an International Festival of Movement and Dance in Edinburgh in April.
9.
Health and Leisure Exhibition
This is being held at Alexandra Palace from Thursday, 29th April until Monday, 3rd May.
It is an exhibition designed to attract and reflect all aspects of health and leisure activities.
The Executive Committee have decided that we should be represented and a static display stand has been booked for the five days.
There will also be a demonstration arena which we hope to be able to use to show our work through display items and open classes.
June Bascome has been in contact with several areas and Kent, Essex, Surrey and London have each promised to supply the manning power for one of the days.
It is suggested that each area elect a co-ordinator who would liaise with Janet Rogers who will be responsible for setting up the exhibition.
It is thought that a team of six, either Q.T's or experienced class members who can answer questions on our work, would be able to man the static displays without the task being too onerous.
The feasibility of providing a demonstration team will obviously depend on what items and people are available in the respective areas.
Any queries, problems or offers of help to Janet please.
10.
Medau Dinner Dance
The Society's Gala Dinner Dance to be held at the Regent Centre Hotel, Carburton Street, London, W.1. is on Saturday 20th March.
Make up your parties and come and enjoy a very happy evening to celebrate the Society's 30th Anniversary.
Lucky No.
Tickets are £11.00 each.
Reception 6.45 for 7.30 and we have an extension to 1 a.m.
Arrangement can be made to stay at the Hotel at a greatly reduced price.
Anyone wishing to avail themselves of this facility should contact the Hotel direct.
The price of the ticket has been kept low and it is necessary to run raffles to defray expenses.
If you can offer a raffle prize or give a donation towards this please let Cicely Harris know as soon as possible.
Those Q.T.'s who have already received tickets to sell will greatly assist Cicely in the organisation of the event if they would let her know by the first week in February how many tickets they have sold as she will be away from 8th Feb. to 8th March.
1st March is the final date for the return of all unsold tickets and money with the names of your guests.
While Cicely is away Hilda Lodge is standing in for her, and finalising the numbers.
Her telephone number is: Swanley 63771.
Stop press to No. 9.
It has since been suggested that a preliminary meeting for the chosen co-ordinators take place sometime at the Q.T. day to be held on 27th February.
10.
Medau Dinner Dance (cont'd)
Extra tickets can be obtained from:
S.A.E.s to accompany orders with cheques made out to ‘Cicely Harris’
11.
The Publicity Committee is in need of more members to help with this essential part of the Society's work.
Meetings are held on a Wednesday evening in Ewell.
Please contact Hilda Hewitt at the office for more details of what is required if you are interested.
12.
New Publicity Leaflet
A new leaflet has been printed to meet the needs of new class members who ask ‘What is Medau?’
Obviously, as you will see by the one we have enclosed with these notes they have cost the Society a fairly substantial amount of money and although we are still allowing you to have them free of charge we ask that you use them very sparingly Thank you.
Further copies are available from the office on request.
13.
Crystal Palace Rally
The rally was very well supported and the varied programme of classes and displays was much enjoyed by all those present.
Many thanks were due to all the teachers and performers who had made the afternoon such a success.
Special thanks were due to Chris Markham who had had overall responsibility for organising the day and her band of very efficient and hard-working helpers.
The raffle was a great success and the Society was very grateful to Adrienne Ring for all her work in getting this organised.
14.
Redhill Rally
To all ticket holders and teachers who have sold tickets for the postponed Redhill Rally please note it will now be held on 30th January.
Same programme.
Same place.
Same times.
Other Rallies
Please note that there are rallies in:—
15.
Important Medau Events 1982
The Medau Society A.G.M. 19th March at the Colson Room, Francis House, Francis Street, Victoria.
Courses Easter, Lilleshall and the Summer courses.
Details of all of these courses are in the brochure enclosed with your January Medau News.
More application brochures can be obtained on request from the Medau Office.
16.
Outside Courses Disco Seminar
The Greater and South East Regional Movement and Dance Liaison Group has organised a Disco Seminar for teachers of all our organisations.
We are very fortunate that Peggy Spencer has agreed to take the afternoon herself.
If you are interested please contact Hilary Weedon immediately as numbers may have to be limited.
To be held on Sunday, 28th February at the Spencer Dance Centre,(not far from the Crystal Palace) Cost £3.00 send cheques (made payable to ‘Movement and Dance Liaison Group’) with S.A.E. to Hilary Weedon if travel directions are required.
16.
Outside Courses (cont'd) Music and Movement for Groups with Special Needs
All aspects of Music and Movement considered.
A six weeks course starting on Tuesday 9th February at the Marlborough School, Sloane Avenue, London SW3.
All enquiries to:
17.
Do you know who your Regional Representative is?
You all know that you have an area/county representative who acts as your direct link with the Executive Committee through Betty Syrett, the teachers' representative on the committee.
Do you know who the official Society representative in your region is?
The country is divided into nine regions and in each of these we have someone or in some cases two people, who represents us in the regional Standing Conference of Sport and Recreation, and also on the Movement and Dance Liaison Group or Association.
They are your direct link to the regional Sports Councils and may be able to help you get financial or practical help for special project, particularly if these projects could lead to an increase in participation.
During the next year or two we will be forming part of a special Sports Council programme when they will be concentrating their resources to help movement and dance organisations.
Although this programme has not yet started if you feel you have an initiative which could quality contact your representative and have a chat.
18.
Any Old Clubs
We have been approached by the leader of a Youth Club who organises displays by the young girls in flag waving and club swinging.
They entertain the elderly and mentally handicapped and are short of clubs.
If anyone has a club or two which they can spare (any condition, as they will be repainted) please contact Hilary.
19.
Tea at Training Day
Many thanks to the Essex teachers who had undertaken to provide and serve tea at the January meeting.
No doubt they had made considerable preparations before the news came of the cancellation; it is hoped that they were not inconvenienced too much.
It would be appreciated if the Herts, Beds, Cambs., teachers would attend to the teat at the Meeting arranged for the 27th February.
Thereafter would it not be possible to from groups of say eight people who live in the same area to cope with the tea?
I suggest the following areas 
This would seem to be more representative and would allow some 2 years between turns!!!!
20.
Next Meeting 27th February 1982
Dear Anne
I have pleasure in sending you the Programme for the 1982–83 Q.T. days.
We do hope you will be able to attend; these days form a very important part of our further training scheme.
We have endeavoured to include many of the subjects requested by qualified teachers and this year we are paying particular attention to music.
The aim throughout the year will be to cover all aspects of accompaniment; Piano in October, Percussion in January, Taped Music in March and, finally in June a Music Workshop where it is hoped qualified teachers will bring along tapes and records that they have used in their classes and which might be helpful to other teachers.
Once again the Trainers will be assisted by experienced qualified teachers which will ensure that the Programme is as varied and balanced as possible.
I look forward to seeing you on 16th October, please note that all four Q.T. days will be held at Rutherford School, Penfold Street, London W.1.
Yours sincerely 
N.B. Will all teachers requiring music lessons on Q.T. days please notify Jean Parmiter or the Office as soon as possible.
Notes of a Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin School, St. John's Wood on Saturday, 26th June 1982.
Despite the tube strike over 50 teachers attended.
A great effort!
Well done!
1.
Report on the Morning Session
a) The Society's Financial Situation
Prior to the discussion and  in order to put matters in perspective, Janet Rogers presented a detailed breakdown of expenditure and income for both administration and training.
She expressed concern that in both instances income had fallen well short of expenditure.
A copy of the figures are enclosed and it was suggested that perhaps class members and secretaries might be interested in seeing how their subscriptions are spent.
b) Membership
Janet stated that the Executive Committee had agreed to a membership fee of £1.50 but that the fee for O.A.P. 's and under 16s would be 50p.
She explained that the subscription had been kept as low as possible to encourage maximum renewal of membership.
However, she pointed out that as far back as 1980, the Sports Council had been recommending all governing bodies to charge a minimum subscription of £2.00 per person.
To ease the  changeover , the Membership Working Party had recommended that the September Medau News feature an article about Membership which would particularly thank group secretaries, who we would like to call class secretaries in future, for all their past efforts and seek their co-operation with the new system.
The January 1983 Medau News would contain an article explaining the new system to all and a letter would be sent to class secretaries (some of whom may have changed since Sept.) asking again for their help in encouraging membership amongst class members.
This edition of Medau News would be sent to all 1982 group as well as individual members with a renewal form.
The bottom of the form would be marked ‘Return direct to Robson House or through  your class secretary.
c) Discussion Session
A full discussion followed which was chaired by Miss Kay Evans and covered many aspects of both membership and the new Professional Affiliation Fee due to be introduced next September.
Opportunity was given for other topics to be raised.
It was generally agreed that the discussion session has been most valuable and that if possible at least one a year should be included in the Q.T. day programme.
2.
New Teachers
Congratulations to the four successful candidates in the 1982 examination, Kay Evans welcomed the only one able to be present at this training day, Brenda Morgan, from the Surrey Course and presented her certificate.
We look forward to meeting the other new teachers.
They are:—
Urgent
Class Lists
It is vitally important that details of all classes for the 1982–83 Season be given without delay.
Please ensure that you check your list and bring it up to date now and return to the Office.
If you were not at the June meeting, your list is now enclosed for your attention.
Urgent
4.
Summer Course 26th July — 1st August
There are still some places available for the Summer Course at Green Park, Aston Clinton.
It is now possible to stay overnight for one or two  nights or for day people and campers to have meals if they wish.
Please apply to the Office for further details.
5.
Summer Classes
Urgent
6.
Teachers Needed
Southward.
St. Aylwin's School.
There has been a Medau class at this school for many years.
The present teacher is having to give up and a new teacher must be found…if not the class will be offered to another system Details from Enid Olding.
Richmond.
Thursday morning.
St. John's Wood, Quintin School Tuesday evening.
Stanhope Inst.
Monday afternoon.
Beryl Smith is giving up these classes all of which she has taken for many years.
Once again it would be sad if Medau interest was not continued.
Details from Jean Parmiter.
Urgent
7.
Q.T. Training Day Programme
Qualified Teachers are invited to send in their requests for next year's programme by 20th July either to Jean Parmiter or the Office.
It would be helpful to the planning committee if Q.T. could let us know their views on the last year's programme.
Do they prefer to have a choice?
Is there sufficient choice?
Are the days balanced in their content?
Your views would be appreciated.
When sending in a request for any subject please suggest who you would like to conduct the session.
8.
New Training Course 1983
All Q.T's are asked to be on the look-out for possible student  teachers during the coming year.
The proposed new course to begin in September 1983 will be structured very differently from previous training courses.
Instead of a weekly meeting the course will be held on two Saturdays and one week-end per term.
The Saturday meetings will be held in London and the week-ends in different areas, depending on the students attending the course.
Please do your best to advertise this new venture, full details will be in the January issue of the Medau News.
9.
Music Training Course in Guildford
The Guildford Teachers Training Course enters its final year in September, there will be very few student teachers in their final year.
9.
Music Training Course (cont'd)
It has therefore been decided to use the excellent facilities afforded us at Guildford to run a Music Teachers Training Course for selected Q.T.s so that these teachers can be used to assist the Trainers when the new course begins in September 1983.
The Training Sub-Committee is extremely concerned at the amount of pressure Trainers are under and feel there is an urgent need for a group of people to begin training now.
Margaret Charlwood, June Bascombe and Joan Gatfield will staff both the Teachers Training Course and the Music Course.
10.
New Trainer
Congratulations are extended to Joan Gatfield on completing her training as a Trainee-Trainer, we wish her every success for the future.
11.
Reunion 27th November 1982 Porchester Halls
Pauline Kenward reported that the arrangements for this event were going well.
There will be a Raffle as on previous such occasions and to raise funds for this it was suggested that we hold a ‘Bring and Buy’ home produce and cake sale at the October Q.T. Day.
Please come along with your contributions on that day.
12.
Dinner Dance 1983
Since Cicely Harris's retirement Pauline Kenward has undertaken arrangements for this event and following requests for a new venue plans are in hand to hold the next Dinner Dance on Friday 18th February 1983 at the Queen's Hotel, Crystal Palace.
13.
Medau Society A.G.M.
The 1982 A.G.M. was very poorly attended, especially by Q.T.s and we need to make a great effort to improve on this next year.
The majority of those present at the 26th June Q.T. Day voted to hold the next A.G.M. on a Saturday afternoon.
This will be 30th April 1983.
Please send in your suggestions quickly for a venue and ideas on the form the programme could take following the business meeting.
In the past we have had talks, films, refreshments.
Ideas to Betty Syrett please.
14.
Health and Leisure Exhibition at Alexandra Palace
This event held over the May Bank Holiday was not too well attended but considerable interest was shown in the Medau stand.
Over 90 enquiries were made about classes and the names were passed to teachers operating in these areas.
It is hoped these teachers will notify the Office or Adrienne Ring, who was in charge of the stand, of the action taken and any results.
15.
Disco Seminar
Following the successful disco session arranged by the Greater London, S.E. Regional Movement and Dance Liaison Group and given by Peggy Spencer in February, a follow-up is now being planned.
Further details from Hilary Weedon.
16.
Surrey Teachers
Surrey Teachers please note their next training day will be 2nd October at Redstone School 2.00 p.m. –5.30 p.m.
17.
Classes in Paris
Anne Locke is having to give up her classes in Paris as she is moving.
She has been teaching approximately 10 hours a week including one session for children and one for the elderly.
More can be arranged.
Anyone interested?— Please contact the Office for details.
18.
Tea
Many thanks to Toni Bergman and the other teenagers in the G'ford and Reigate areas of Surrey for a most delightful tea at the meeting.
Many of the delicious cakes were made from recipes taken from the Medau Cook Book; which goes to show what a valuable item this is.
Copies are available at £2.00 each from the Office.
Bridget Ewing has kindly agreed to co-ordinate the tea arrangements for the October meeting.
The others in this Inner Kent group are 
19.
Date of next Training Day
Saturday 16th October 1982.
Please remember your contribution for the ‘Bring and Buy Sale’.
Have you take action on the notes marked URGENT?
Where applicable please do so at once.
Our expenses are unnecessarily high because of postage and telephone calls in attempts to get overdue information.
Please act promptly!
Notes of a Qualified Teachers' Day held at Rutherford School, Penfold Street on Saturday, 16th October 1982.
It was a pleasure to have Miss Kay Evans with us for part of the afternoon session.
Her interest is greatly appreciated.
1.
Presentation of Certificates
As Kay Evans was unable to be with us during Notices June Bascombe presented their certificates to the three teachers who qualified in 1982 who had been unable to attend the training day in June.
We welcomed  to the ranks.
All teachers who qualified in 1981 and 1982 are reminded that they will be introduced as a group at the Reunion in November.
2.
Report on the Summer Course
The Summer Course held at Green Park Centre near Aylesbury was a great success and participants from all over England and Wales were joined by other Medau enthusiasts from France, Belgium and Germany.
Anke Rohlfs, the guest teacher from Coburg was a great ‘hit’ and we have received many requests for another course in the ideal surroundings of Green Park.
3.
International and Commonwealth Conference 1982
Hilary gave a brief report of the VIIth International and Commonwealth Conference on Sport, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance which she had been invited to attend on behalf of the M&D Division of the C.C.P.R. It was held at the University of Queensland, in Brisbane, Australia from 23–28th September, immediately preceding the Commonwealth Games.
There were over 700 delegates from all parts of the world and six separate ‘streams’ Physiotherapy in Sport, the Disabled, Sport Promotion and Administration, Health, Recreation and Movement and Dance.
Hilary had been invited to present two papers; the main one ‘Recreative Movement and Dance in the United Kingdom for the Dance Section and another entitled ‘The Voice of British Sport — the Central Council of Physical Recreation’ for the Administration Section.
Delegates could choose from the whole range of subjects throughout but the Dance Section had such a wide variety of topics and practical workshops that it hard to find time to fit everything in.
Hilary also took a practical Workshop which 25 people attended and the temperature in the gym was over 90!
(If you would like to read the papers please let the Office know and copies will be circulated).
4.
Footnote
In the short time available to her on 16th October Hilary could do no more than give a very sketchy account of her visit but enough to whet our appetites for more.
She has kindly offered to give a slide show for any who are interested — Please contact Hilary.
Movement and Dance Liaison Group A.G.M.
The Movement and Dance Liaison Group for G.L. & S.E. are holding their A.G.M. on Friday, 17th December 1982 in the Colson Room, Francis Street, London, S.W.1 at 7.30 p.m.
A buffet supper will be served from 6.45 p.m.
Please contact Hilary for further details.
4.
National Display Team
The N.D.T. will be starting on a new programme after the Reunion.
Details have still to be finalised and if there are any choreographers who would like to work with the team please contact June Bascombe.
5.
Reunion 27th November 1982 Porchester Halls
Arrangements are going well.
Very few tickets left and these to members only £2.00.
Stewards.
Names of those prepared to act as stewards on the day should be given to Bridget Ewing (01.302.9021).
Coaches.
Molly Crook has booked a coach to take people from the Surrey area (Mordern/Sutton).
Please contact Molly direct (091.644.8470) Julie Gilbert is also organising a coach from the Guildford area please contact Julie at (Guildford 36341).
Home Produce Stall.
Pauline Kenward thanked all the teachers who brought and bought at the Home Produce Stall on the 16th October.
The attractive array of goodies realised over £48 which will go towards buying Raffle Prizes for the Reunion.
6.
Disco Seminar
The Movement and Dance Liaison Group (Greater London and S.E. Region) is organising another Seminar on Disco Dancing to be given by Peggy Spencer at her Dance Studio on Sunday, 2nd January 1983 2.30 p.m. — 5.30 p.m.
The cost is £3.50 and applications should be sent to Hilary Weedon.
Cheques made out to Movement and Dance Liaison Group (G.L. & S.E.) please.
Venue Spencer House Dance Centre,
7.
Rally in Berkshire Saturday 29th January 1983
Please support Berkshire in this, their very first rally!
It will be held at the Emmbrook School, Wokingham, Berks.
on Saturday afternoon, 29th January 1983.
Betty Hartley and Margaret Charlwood will be teaching.
The cost of tickets, which includes tea, is £1.20 (members), £1.50 (non-members).
Further information from Chris Markham.
8.
Medau Dinner Dance 1983
To be held at Queen's Hotel, Crystal Palace on Friday, 18th February, 1983 and the tickets will be £12 each.
It is not too soon to start planning your groups.
9.
A.G.M. Saturday afternoon 30th April 1983
Please see Note 13 in Notes for Q.T. Day 26th June 1982.
No suggestions have been received.
As bookings for halls, films, speakers, etc. etc have to be made weeks in advance your thoughts on this subject would be appreciated.
Urgently Please — To any Committee Member or the Office.
10.
Training Course To start in September 1983
The new training course is due to begin in September 1983.
Its success depends very much on your support and the Publicity which all Qualified Teachers can give to it.
We would ask everyone to be on the look out for potential student teachers and to do all you can to encourage prospective candidates.
We urgently need more teachers for without them our work will not spread or even maintain its present level.
Each year we naturally lose a few active teachers through ill-health, retirement or when having babies!
Please tell all your classes about the forthcoming course and arrange for a ‘commercial’ to be given at all rallies, lecture dems, etc.
The course will be structured in a new way and will consist of two whole Saturdays per term in London and one residential weekend per term.
The course has not been costed at present but this information will be made available as soon as possible.
Would you please inform Jean Parmiter of any potential student teachers you may have so that we can get some idea of numbers and location.
Equipment
Any teacher who has been borrowing equipment from the Society or Jean Parmiter and is NOT using it, please return as soon as possible.
11.
Concentration of Resources Programme
The Sports Council aims to increase participation in sport during the 80's, with particular emphasis on women and the 13–24 year old and 45–59 year old age groups.
In order to implement this plan they are selecting sports to take part in the Concentration of Resources Programme.
Movement and Dance and Medau in particular come into the plan from 1983 in an ongoing programme which lasts for three years.
The Society in consultation with the Regional Representatives has set the national priorities as being:—
1.
The need to increase the number of teachers
2.
The need to increase the number of trainers
3.
The need to improve communications in the regions between the teachers, the Regional Reps., and the Sports Council Regional Liaison Officers.
The Regional Sports Councils' resources consist of MONEY (through regional participation grants for specific projects), INFLUENCE (brought to bear on other agencies) and TIME (in terms of sports council personnel).
To get the maximum benefit from this scheme we must all be prepared to make an effort and become involved.
The plan will be implemented regionally and it is realised that the regional priorities may vary from the national.
So if you need any help, a ‘Come and Try It Day’, publicity, help with facilities etc. contact your Regional Rep. (see Jan 1982 Q.T. Notes) She is already in contact with the regional Sports Council and during the next few months will be preparing an overall programme for the whole Region.
It is important to realise that only proposals contained in this programme will be considered by the regional Sports Councils, they will not deal with individual requests.
12.
Professional Affiliation Fee
The P.A.F. of £6 was due on 1st September.
We would be grateful if these could be sent in to the Office as soon as possible.
13.
Membership
Subscriptions for 1983 are: £1.50 per annum, O.A.P's and under 16 years — 50p per annum .
Do remember that anyone who becomes a member now gets free membership until December 31st.
This should help to encourage new members.
If you are worried that it may be more difficult next year to ‘sell’ membership, why not try raising money in class to subsidise your members.
A ‘Bring & Buy’ sale, the tea money, a Christmas raffle, H.P. (!) these are just four ideas.
If you have any others please pass them on to us.
Also do not overlook your Class Secretary, they can often put it over with much conviction, after all they are already converted!
Nobody enjoys selling membership, but it is vital, for without a healthy membership the Society will not flourish.
14.
Thanks
Thanks to all the teachers from Inner Kent who helped provide a lovely tea at the training day.
Next time tea will be the responsibility of the Outer Kent teachers with June Thomas as co-ordinator.
15.
Lost Property
The following prices of ‘property’ were left behind after training day.
A Thermos, Sandwich Box, Large Plastic Bowl, Tea Towel and Oatmeal Sweater.
Please claim from Betty Syrett.
16.
For Sale
Reel to Reel Recorder for sale including several extra reels some with Medau music on.
£10 o.n.o.
Apply to Elsie Cumming — Hildenborough 833223.
17.
Next Training Day
Saturday, 15th January 1983 at Rutherford School, Penfold Street W.1.
Footnote
The Treasurer is looking as sick as a parrot!
Can anyone help with any information about a nasty scrape to my car which happened sometime during the day at Rutherford.
White Escort Estate AND 674P (Estimated cost of repairs £80–£100)
MEDAU SOCIETY DINNER DANCE
Our next Dinner Dance is to be held at the Queen's Hotel, Church Road, Crystal Palace on Friday, 18th February 1983 at 7.15–1.00a.m.
The tickets are now on sale at £12.00 each.
Why not make up a party?
Tables will be circular and seat 10 people.
The Queen's Hotel also offer accommodation for the night at a special rate of £10 per person sharing a twin-bedded room with bathroom and including English Breakfast and V.A.T.
Please telephone 01.653.6622 for a reservation booking.
Below is an application form for the Dinner Dance tickets.
Please send me…number of tickets at £12 each.
I enclose a cheque for £…made payable to
‘Pauline Kenward’
Signed
Name
Address
Telephone No.
Please enclosed a S.A.E. 
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT QUINTIN SCHOOL ON SATURDAY 10th JANUARY 1981
1.
News of Molly
Hilary told the teachers she had taken it upon herself to send flowers to Molly on behalf of the Teachers.
Molly's brother had rung her to thank everyone and said Molly was delighted to receive them.
Molly is at her brother's home in Peterborough where she is resting peacefully but remains seriously ill.
2.
Welcome to Kay Evans and Rita Quick
Beryl welcomed Kay Evans and thanked her on behalf of everyone for finding time in her busy life to attend our training days and for the interest she always shows in all we do.
Beryl also welcomed Rita Quick and thanked her for coming to deputise for Molly at the afternoon session on Devising Display Items.
Rita is still experiencing some back trouble so we were particularly grateful to her for making the long journey from Newcastle.
3. 1981 International Year of the Disabled
Kay Evans who, because of her work with the Disabled Living Foundation, is much involved with the International Year of the Disabled.
She reported that there was a general feeling of satisfaction with the standard of publicity that the Year had received so far from the media.
Her advice to us all was ‘Let's listen, let's look and let's do’ and when organising events in 1981 to particularly bear the disabled in mind.
4.
URGENT NUMBERS ON CLASS REGISTERS
Teachers are reminded that if they have not already submitted the numbers of all their class registers to the office they must do so at once.
Also lecture demonstrations with relevant information, also Displays and Rallies.
This vitally important information is required for the Society's Annual Report, which in turn is necessary with regard to our application for Sports Council Grant Aid.
5.
Training Fees
Training fees for 1981 are now due.
These are as follows.
For those whose fare to and from the training base is £3 or less…£7.00
For those whose fare to and from the training base is £3.00 but less than £4.00…£6.00
For those whose fare to and from the training base is £3.00 but less than £4.50…£6.00
For those whose fare is over £4.50…£5.00
In addition, those attending music lessons the fee for the year will be…£5.00
Teachers who are not deemed to be attached to London Training are always welcome at £2.50 per day.
Teachers who are not actually teaching may attend at £2.00 per day.
6.
Q.T. Training Programme
Please submit your name to Beryl if you would like to teach at a training day.
In particular, see current programme, a volunteer (or two) is required for the morning sessions of the 27th June 1981.
7.
Re-Union 1980
This event was greatly enjoyed.
It was wonderful to have Molly with us.
Many thanks to the performers for repeating the programme at such short notice.
Although, primarily for Molly's benefit surely all the spectators enjoyed the chance to see it again.
Cicely wishes to thank everyone who offered items.
This year they were of a very high standard and much appreciated.
She would, however, have preferred to show a more balanced programme and hopes that in the future more teachers will offer class displays because she feels that class members prefer to see work they can identify themselves with, as well as the more advanced and unusual aspects of our work.
A reunion should cater for all levels of work and it is hoped this can be rectified next time.
As for the financial aspect of the reunion it was a tremendous success a clear profit of £1,100.
8.
Society's Annual Dinner Dance Friday 13th March 1981
To be held at the Regent Centre Hotel, Carburton Street W1.
Tickets at £8.0 can be obtained from Cicely Harris, or the office.
Please make all cheques payable to Cicely Harris.
Closing date for tickets 1st March.
Prizes or donations for the Raffle would be greatly appreciated.
Also any bottles; wine, sherry etc…
The proceeds from the Raffle help to defray the expenses of the evening.
9.
MEDAU SOCIETY GENERAL MEETING FRIDAY 20TH MARCH
The A.G.M. will be held at Rutherford School, Penfold Street, NW1 at 7.00 p.m. on Friday 20th March.
It is hoped that there will be a good attendance this year.
Please do your best to encourage your class members to come along.
Let Hilda know if you are coming along.
After the business meeting a film entitled ‘Going well over sixty’ made in conjunction with Age Concern and the Sunday Times will be shown.
10.
Forthcoming Rallies
11.
Work with the Mentally Handicapped
Beryl Smith has organised a follow-up day for all those interested in teaching the mentally handicapped.
It will be held at the Stanhope Institute on Saturday 9th May from 10.30 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. cost £3.00 for the day.
Miss Barbara Norrice, who took the earlier session at Quintin School, will be demonstrating the system taught by Veronica Sherwood.
12.
Medau Easter Course 21st–25th April 1981
Once again we will be using Avery Hill College as the venue for the 1981 Easter Course when Bedu will be teaching assisted by Society Trainers.
Application forms will be available from the office from the end of January.
14.
Dalcroze Society Easter Holiday Course
From 27th–29th April 9.45 a.m. to 5.30 p.m. each day at the I.L.E.A. Music Centre, Sutherland Street, Pimlico, S.W.1 Cost £15 for three days (excluding meals) Enquiries to the Dalcroze Society 01.455.1268.
14.
Movement and Dance Recreational Weekend
Deposit of £10 must be paid by 15th June and early application is advised.
Further information from either:
15.
Publicity
The Publicity Sub-Committee is hoping to produce a souvenir magazine as part of our 30th Anniversary and they are looking for likely candidates to help form a working party.
Please contact Molly Hammond if you feel you can help in any way with this project.
16.
Subscriptions to the Society 1981
Janet regrets that it will be necessary to raise subscriptions to the Society membership for 1981.
Individual membership £1.50 Group membership .75p O.A.P.
and special groups .15p.
Please inform your group secretaries and class members of this increase.
17.
Next Training Day Please note change of venue
The next training day will be held on Saturday 11th April at Quintin School, St. John's Wood.
18.
Thanks
Many thanks to KENT for the lovely tea provided for the January meeting.
MEDAU WHY NOT JOIN A CLASS?
Demonstration & open session
Sunday 9 March 10.30 AM–12.00 PM in the gymnasium Grangemouth Sports Complex.
Come &’ see and take part.
ENJOY RELAXATION THROUGH MOVEMENT 
THE MEDAU SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND REVENUE ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st DECEMBER 1979
I have examined the foregoing Revenue Account and Balance Sheet and certify that they are in accordance with the books and records of the Society and information and explanations given to me.
October 1981
Please keep this as a record of present prices of goods and publications available from the office.
Where it is necessary for any goods to be sent by post please make allowance for this in your remittance.
Pens 20p
Car stickers 15p
Key rings 65p
Enamel badges 65p
Red cloth badges 70p
T Shirts 2.80p
Sweatshirts 6.50p
Sweaters 8.50p
Anatomy book 50p
Breathing book 1.00p
M.R.M. book 2.50p
Music book 4.00p
In addition there are cassettes of the Thanksgiving Day at Bedford College on 2nd May 1981 available £5.00 plus 60p p&p.
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Meeting held at Quintin School, St. John's Wood on Saturday 17 October 1981
1.
Presentation of Certificates
June welcomed Kay Evans whom we were once again very pleased to have with us.
Kay then presented certificates and badges to those new teachers who had been unable to get to the June meeting.
Jane Fisk from Norfolk and Pauline Sharpe, Christine Hutchinson and Ann Weathers who were all from the London Course.
2.
Cicely Harris
A warm welcome was given to Cicely and everyone was delighted to see that she was making such excellent progress.
Her plans to move away from London meant that she was no longer able to continue as director of the Display Team and she was warmly thanked for everything she had done in the past.
She had set a very high standard for our display work and had established a tradition which we would do all we could to uphold in the future.
3.
National Display Team Future Plans and Audition
The team will continue to be run by the steering committee set up earlier this summer.
The main feature of the 30th Reunion in 1982 will be an extensive programme of displays.
The team will be working on items for this and they will also present two items at an International Festival of Movement to be held in Edinburgh next April.
An Audition for the team will be held on 5th December at Aylwin School, Wouthward from 10 a.m. — 4 p.m.
…Application forms are available from the office and should be returned by 27th November.
Please be on the lookout for talent in your classes and give serious consideration to auditioning yourself.
One whole Saturday a month will be devoted to rehearsals.
We particularly need people in their late teens — early twenties age group — to promote our young, slim image!
It might perhaps be possible to work with small groups of youngsters in their own area (one such group is working with Margaret in Surrey) and incorporate some of their work with that of the main team.
Please keep us informed if you know of any talented youngsters.
4.
Medau News
Please get copy for the January issue (details of rallies etc) in to the Office by the last week of November.
We are always short of good photographs.
It is now possible to print from coloured photographs so please help by sending in anything suitable.
5.
Advanced Class — Guildford
More members are needed for this class which is organised in conjunction with the Teachers' Training Course and is helping to support it.
It is possible for teachers and/or class members to attend individual sessions which are taken by different people each week.
For further details please contact either Margaret Charlwood or June Bascombe.
The class is held at the Bishop Riendorp School, Larch Avenue, Guildford 8.00 p.m. to 9.30 p.m.
6.
Reunion 1981 Crystal Palace
Advance purchase is essential as no tickets will be sold at the door.
Reunion 1981 (cont'd)
The following points should be borne in mind:—
i)
For the open classes participants are asked to wear Medau blue or Navy blue if at all possible.
ii)
A 10p coin is required to open a locker in the changing room.
There are not sufficient numbers of lockers to allow one per person.
Please arrange to share with someone.
iii)
Please retain your ticket stub during the event as Crystal Palace officials can at any time carry out security checks.
iv)
If you wish to invite your Principal please apply for a complimentary ticket from the office should you do this please ensure that any V.I.P. you have invited is met, conducted to their seat and taken to tea and is generally made to feel welcome.
v)
Regrettably the Crystal Palace Recreation Centre is not designed to receive persons in wheelchairs.
So we are sorry that we must restrict admittance to handicapped persons able to walk.
vi)
Refreshments will be available all afternoon so there should be undue queuing.
vii)
Those who wish to swim must use the special swimming changing room — not the main changing room.
viii)
HELP!!!
Stewards are still URGENTLY required.
Please contact Chris Markham at Eversley 734085 if either you or one of your class members can offer any assistance.
ix)
Reunion Raffle Adrienne Ring has kindly offered to organise the Raffle…
Contributions — particularly money! would be much appreciated Her number if 01.794.6395
7.
Specialist Training for Part-Time Teachers of Adults
The Advisory Council for Adult and Continuing Education has launched an enquiry into the relationship between specialist qualifications for part-time teachers of adults (such as our own Teachers' Award) and other adult teaching qualifications (such as the City and Guilds Further Education Teachers Certificate and the Stage I and II training proposed by the Advisory Committee on the Supply and Training of Teachers (A.C.S.T.T.).
In some areas local authorities have already started stage I and II courses, recommending that their teachers take them.
We have attended a meeting on this subject and are working towards national recognition of our revised Syllabus as incorporating the necessary elements but meanwhile if you can take any such courses without undue difficulty we would advise you to do so.
The A.C.S.T.T. proposals, however, are only recommendations at this stage and should not be mandatory; if you have any specific problems with individual principals or authorities please do not hesitate to contact us.
8.
Insurance
This is to remind you that insurance is available for all Teachers teaching private classes.
If you wish to obtain cover please send £5.00 to the office so that you may be added to the list.
Rallies
Please send the following details to the office in order to be covered by the Society's Public Liability Policy when running a Rally.
Date of Rally
Venue
Name/s of Teachers
Total value of any equipment to be used (approximately £3.00 a piece)
Total value of any tape recorders etc.
Loans
Q.T.'s are reminded that the Society operates an interest free loan scheme.
Details of which can be obtained from the office.
Goods
Q.T's are also reminded that it is through their efforts that class members see the range of goods we now sell (a price list is attached.
As this now forms quite a substantial part of our invoice (£900 last year) would you please try to publicise us as much as possible.
All available goods may be taken on a sale or return basis.
9.
Office clearance items
There are still a few items left for sale with regard to the office renovation:—
1 pair of lined blue/green brocade curtains (each approximately 9′ x 9′)
2 bar stools each with red seats
2 or 3 plastic trays
3 burner coffee stand (has any one a local hall that needs one for coffee mornings etc)
16mm film projector (this also would be useful to a community hall)
No reasonable offer turned down
10.
Equipment
Battells present prices are set out below
Clubs £2.35
Balls £2.50
Hoops £3.45
There are some orange balls available at £2.00 each for orders of a dozen
Battells have also pointed out that they very often receive separate orders from the same areas and it is suggested that to save on carriage etc.
Teachers should liaise with each other when ordering.
Hilda Lodge has some tambour sticks for sale.
Please contact her directly.
Swanley 63771.
10a The Society recently purchased a number of new tambours and they are available on loan to teachers from the office.
11.
News of Myrtle Mott
As many teachers know Myrtle suffered a heart attack in August.
Needless to say she has to take life as quietly as possible for some time if she is to regain her health and everyone will be pleased to know she is making good progress along these lines.
She has asked us to insert the following message
I would like to thank you all for my card with so many good-will get-well messages, the lovely flowers and the Smiths' voucher.
I hope very much to be with you all at the January meeting when I shall be able to thank you personally
End of message.
12.
Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme
Teachers are reminded that it is necessary to notify the office if they have candidates for this award.
A leaflet will be sent giving details of the syllabus.
A trainer must visit the class at the beginning of the training and then again at the end so that she can assess the candidates progress.
13.
Teaching in Leisure Centres
A request has been received from the Eastern Regional Sports Council for a list of teachers willing to teach in Leisure Centres.
The area concerned is Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire and Cambridgeshire.
If you are interested no matter where you live we would like to hear from you so that we can encourage other regions to accept Medau into their Centres.
14.
Thank you to Beryl
Jean Parmiter expressed her grateful thanks to Beryl for arranging the Q.T. days for the coming year at Quintin School.
Although the facilities are not ideal we are extremely lucky to find premises in London on a Saturday.
As many of you will have noticed from your Q.T. day programme Beryl will not be teaching this year; for some time she has taken a great interest in the Back Pain Association and has now become involved particularly at weekends in special classes for back-pain sufferers.
We wish her well in this very worthwhile work.
She is taking her usual weekly Medau classes 
15.
The New Music Book
Congratulations and a big thank you to June Bascombe and Rita Quick for the superb Music Book.
The Q.T's present were most impressed with it.
The Medau Society is very fortunate in have two such talented musicians who are able to produce a book that can help others.
16.
Monies paid to the Society
Please ensure that all money submitted, whether as cash or cheque, by hand or by post is accompanied by a clear statement as to what it represents e.g. Q.T. fees, payment for music lessons, subscriptions to the Society, donations etc. etc — because, one an amount has been credited to a certain account it cannot be transferred to another.
17.
Q.T's Fees for 1982 (see accompanying gold paper)
Training fees become payable in January.
The scale of fees has been simplified and was set out in the last Q.T. notes (gold paper again) £12 per annum for teachers living within 50 miles of their training venue £10 per annum for those outside a 50 mile radius
For those attached to the London course these fees show an increase on the fees paid in 1981, but teachers are asked to realise that £3.00 or £2.50 for a full  day's training is amazing value.
It would be appreciated if payment can be made by cheque where ever possible.
18.
Anniversary Magazine
It is hoped to produce a magazine to commemorate our 30th anniversary year.
Ideas and/or contributions for this will be welcome.
Please send to Hilda in the office.
19.
Teas at Q.T. Days
Thanks to the central London teachers for doing the teas at the October meeting and for providing some very nice home-made cakes.
A special word of thanks to Lucy Jackson, who although away had arranged for her daughter to make an enormous cake.
It was decided that this superb item should be  auctioned and the proceeds given towards raffle prizes at the Reunion.
It is the turn of the teachers in the Richmond and Hounslow area to do tea at the next meeting.
Please contact Betty Syrett if there are any difficulties in finding enough people to cope.
20.
The date of the next Q.T. Day is the 9th January 1982.
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin Kynaston School on Saturday, 10th April 1981
1.
Introduction and Thanks
As many teachers were unable to attend the Annual General Meeting of the Society when formal thanks were given and a presentation made to Hilary Weedon on the completion of her four year term of office as Chairman of the Executive Committee special thanks were given to her by Betty Syrett on behalf of the teachers.
Hilary had put far more into this office than the basic duties of a committee chairman and had presented a most favourable image of the Society and its work to all with whom she had come into contact.
She has deservedly won the respect of everyone in the field of movement and dance both for the Society and herself.
As Hilary steps down as Chairman after what has proved to be a difficult and latterly sad term of office, Betty welcomed June Bascombe, who after two years as Vice-Chairman, a vantage point from which she has glimpsed what might be involved, has bravely accepted nomination as chairman and has been elected.
We wish June every success during her four years.
June's first duty was to welcome Kay Evans as the Society's new ‘Caretaker’ President:(Kay was elected at the A.G.M. following the unanimous recommendation of the Executive Committee).
This title was Kay's own suggestion since in due course the Society would need to consider filling the place sadly empty since Molly's death.
However such an important decision was not to be taken hastily, Kay who has been associated with the Society since its inception has agreed to fill this position on a temporary basis.
June also introduced the newly elected Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee, Hilda Lodge and two of the new Committee Members, Moya Hood, a trainer in the South-West and Ruth Rolph a trainer in Norfolk.
Finally, June announced that Beryl Smith had resigned as Chairman of the Training Committee to take some sabbatical leave.
The role of chairman of this sub-committee is an arduous one and Beryl was thanked most sincerely for the diligent and conscientious way she had carried out her duties.
We are all greatly indebted to her.
Jean Parmiter was welcomed as its new chairman.
2.
Crystal Palace Reunion November 1981
Organisers for this event are still required.
Surrey were responsible for the 1980 Reunion and Kent for Crystal Palace in 1979.
Essex feel geographically rather remote from the Crystal Palace but have kindly offered to organise the 1982 event.
Although it is realised that many of those teaching in London are also associated with outer counties it was suggested that London teachers might consider taking responsibility for this year's Reunion.
Jean Glass and Betty Syrett would be prepared to co-ordinate if this were wanted and it would be appreciated if those teaching in London let either Betty or Jean or the office know if they could help.
A glance at the class list will show that there are quite a lot of London teachers and classes.
Please give this URGENT consideration and action.
3.
Teaching the mentally disabled
On 9th May a one day course will be held at Central (Stanhope) Institute, Longford Street, for all those teaching the mentally handicapped, their helpers and any other interested persons.
Barbara Norrice, who came and gave a session on teaching the disabled has agreed to staff the day.
In the morning she will be showing a film illustrating the work of Veronica Sherborne and follow it with a discussion.
In the afternoon a group of mentally handicapped people will attend accompanied by their teacher to take part in a workshop.
When this day was originally suggested 32 names were put down; so far only 12 have paid the £3.00 fee to attend.
It is hoped you will support this day as it has been specially organised in view of the proposed support.
4.
Medau Teachers' Award Examination 1981
The Venue has now been changed to St. Mary's School, Balham.
Class members are needed to act as guinea pigs for the following dates.
Friday evening 12th June Saturday morning and/or afternoon 13th June
It would be appreciated if teachers could please be responsible for getting their ‘guinea pigs’ to and from the venue.
In the past people have failed to arrive for one reason or another.
Please contact Jean Parmiter with volunteers names.
5.
Revised Programme for 27th June Qualified Teachers Day To be held at Quintin Kynaston School, St. John's Wood
Continuation of session on devising displays
As we were unable to cover any practical work in the January session it has been requested that further time be allocated.
We therefore propose to have a ‘workshop’ after lunch on 27th June, to be conducted by Rita Quick.
Anyone interested in taking part should acquire a copy of the extended notes compiled after the first session and which are available from Hilda Hewitt.
Teachers taking part will be asked to work in threes, each group being given a theme or aspect around which to devise a short combination of movements.
When all the contributions are joined together we should finish up with a representative item using a piece of apparatus.
If time and numbers permit we may be able to start a second item.
6.
New Display Team
As it is now three years since the present display team was formed the time has come for an audition to be held, this will be early in the autumn.
We therefore ask you to look to your classes for possible talent.
Class members would be most welcome in the team but few will come forward unless you as their teacher encourages them to do so.
We are especially keen to attract young people so that all aspects of Medau work can be shown.
7.
Funds in Memory of Molly
Contributions are coming in very well and Janet Rogers, our Treasurer, thanked everyone who had participated.
The funds are, of course, still open and it is appreciated that many people have already sent donations direct to the Royal Homeopathic Hospital.
With regard to the Flower Fund, it had not perhaps been made clear that it had always been the intention that ‘special occasions’ should in-clude members who were ill and/or were in hospital, special birthdays, retirements, etc.
8.
Message from Janice
Janice sends very many thanks to everyone for the lovely flowers she received while in hospital recently and thanks also to the super evening she spent at Avery Hill Easter Party.
9.
Medau Schule in Germany
Hilary assured us of the continuing interest in Medau in Britain shown by the Medau Schule in Germany and teachers will be very pleased to learn that a new movement block in Coburg is to be named after Molly.
Jochen Medau has also offered a free place at any training course to the Medau Society Chairman.
This year when June Bascome is taking advantage of this generous offer, she will be accompanied by Hilary; as Jochen has very kindly extended the invitation to include her this time.
10.
Publicity
London is to feature as the next Spotlight in the September edition of Medau News and London teachers are asked to submit suggestions to Molly Hammond by 30th May at the latest.
A new ‘Sales’ line — Sweatshirts in red or white, both with the Medau Logo in contrasting dark blue…£6.50 each on sale from Easter onwards.
11.
Summer Classes and Courses
The Dalcroze Society is holding a day course on Saturday, 6th June at the Roehampton Institute of Higher Education, Froebel Institute, Roehampton Lane, SW 15 Contact Dalcroze secretary for details:—
12.
Questionnaire
In order to plan the programme for Q.T. training 1981/2 and help various working parties planning for future development, your co-operation in completing the attached questionnaire would be very much appreciated.
All the information you can provide will be of great assistance.
Please complete and send to the office by return.
13.
Thanks
Our thanks go to the Surrey, Berks and Oxon girls for the lovely tea at the April meeting.
Tea will be provided by the S.W. London teachers in June.
Next Training Day
27th June 1981.
At Quintin Kynaston School.
Re No. 11
Summer Classes
Nine week course at the Elmbridge Centre further details from Jean Parmiter.
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin School, St John's Wood on 21.6.80
1.
Welcome
First to the new Teachers
Molly congratulated the 16 successful candidates at this year's examination, presented certificates to those who were present and welcomed them to their first training day as qualified teachers.
The new teachers are:
Next to a new Trainer
Congratulations to Moya Hood as a recently qualified Medau trainer.
2.
Peggy Secord
It was with much sadness that we received news from Molly of the sudden death of Peggy Secord's husband while they were in Italy.
Our sympathy goes out to Peggy in her great loss.
We understand that she will shortly be returning to her home in London.
3.
Medau Society Reunion
Saturday 22nd November 1980 at the 
This is to be a mainly fund-raising event, with stalls and other money making items; there will also be two open classes and displays.
Tickets to include tea will be £1.00 to members — £1.50 non-members.
The number of tickets issued will be limited to 600 and unfortunately the venue is unsuitable for children.
Surrey teachers are the overall organisers of the day and responsibility for the following stalls have been agreed by the areas shown:
In addition to the above Kent have also very generously offered to take on the Handicraft and Soft Toy stall.
Everyone, especially London classes who have no particular stall, is asked to help as much as they possibly can to fill the stalls, not only the one with which their area is associated.
The jewelry stall would, for instance, like any unwanted item of jewelry which anyone may have.
Please start collected at once.
There is also to be a Raffle and donations towards buying prizes are invited.
Please send these to the office.
Any offers of Display items direct to Cicely.
4.
Class Lists 1980/81
Teachers are asked to ensure that their entries for the new class lists are brought up to date by the end of July.
Remember that the list is now produced in two parts, recreational and specialised.
Those taking specialist classes are asked to state specialist nature of their class e.g. elderly, physically handicapped, mentally handicapped.
79/80 class lists are included with these notes where they were not personally  collected on the 21st June.
Please check to see if yours is correct for 80–81, stating clearly all that is required and also delete those no longer running.
5.
Summer Classes
Details of these were given out at the April training day and included in that days' notes.
6.
Courses Weekend Course
There will be a Movement Awareness Workshop devoted to the exploration of movement in its wider sense.
Further information from the office
Music and Movement for Groups with special needs
Staff
Pam Hook, Jack Myers and visiting Lecturers
All aspects of Music and Movement will be considered and studied individually and collectively and there will be opportunities for working with a physically handicapped group.
Ideas on the use of small apparatus and other aids will be included, also instructions on how best to assist the disabled; management of wheelchairs and a guide to disabilities will be given.
Enquiries to Pam Hook or to Jack Myers, the Head of the 
7.
Equipment
Battell's current prices are:— Clubs £2.05 Balls £1.80 Hoops £3.15 Plus V.A.T.
8.
Fees for Teachers' Further Training
There are still some teachers who have not paid their fees for training days for 1980.
These become payable in January of each year and those actually teaching are asked to pay the appropriate fee (£6, £5.25 or £4. depending on ones fares between home and Quintin School) for the four training days whether attended or not.
Those note teaching are only required to pay for each day actually attended.
£1.50 per day.
The new teachers who have just qualified will not be asked to pay fees until January 1981.
9.
City and Guilds Diploma (Further Education Teacher's Certificate)
Yet another Medau teacher has gained this award.
Congratulations to Chris Ruffle.
We know several of our teachers who now hold this award but with to ensure that we have the names of all who have achieved it.
Do please inform the office if you have taken this course and passed the examination.
We would also encourage any of you who may be thinking of starting to go ahead — in many areas the Local Authority will pay the fees for teachers already employed by them.
Contact Hilary Weedon, Enid Olding or Ann McMillan for further details.
10.
Used Postage Stamps (British and Foreign)
If you are not already collecting these for some good cause a teacher has drawn attention to the following Association which will be glad to receive them ‘British Kidney Patients Association’, Bordon, Hampshire.
11.
Birthday Flowers
Janice Glen was thrilled to receive a colourful flower arrangement on her birthday and has sent her thanks to you all through Hilda Hewitt.
12.
Item 3 April Notes
In item 3 of the April notes it was stated that the N.W. London Training Course was due to close in June of this year.
Beryl Smith wishes it to be known the venue will remain open for further training in the future.
13.
Tea
Many thanks to the Essex teachers for the fine tea they provided for us this meeting.
Teachers in the Herts.
Bed, Cambs, Bucks.
group are kindly attending to this at our next meeting.
14.
Date of next meeting
Saturday, 18th October 1980 at  
MEDAU SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN & NORTHERN IRELAND 28th ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING TO BE HELD AT RUTHERFORD SCHOOL, PENFOLD STREET, LONDON N.W.1.
AT 7.0. p.m.
FRIDAY 14th MARCH 1980
In the Chair Miss Molly Braithwaite M.B.E., M.A. President of the Society
AGENDA
1.
MINUTES
To approve and sign the Minutes of the Annual General Meeting held at Rutherford School, Penfold Street, London on Friday, 16th March 1979.
2.
ANNUAL REPORT
To receive the Annual Report for the year 1979/80, the adoption of which will be proposed by Mrs. Hilary Weedon, Chairman of the Society and seconded by Mrs. June Bascombe, Vice Chairman.
3.
ACCOUNTS
To receive the Statement of Accounts and Balance Sheet for the year ended 31st December 1979, the adoption of which will be proposed by Mrs. Jean Parmiter, retiring Honorary Treasurer.
4.
Election of Honorary Treasurer
To elect an Honorary Treasurer.
5.
Auditor
To appoint an Auditor for the ensuring year.
The Business Meeting will be followed by a panel of speakers talking on Aspects of Medau 
1.
Sheila Kennedy :— dancer, singer, actress, T.V. Announcer; a member of one of the Marion Grainger's classes.
2.
Margaret Charlwood :— Medau teacher and trainer.
3.
Leila Berg :— free-lance writer, editor, lecturer and broadcaster, well known for her work with children and in particular the urban child; a member of one of Pat Keen's classes.
4.
Hilary Weedon :— Medau teacher and trainer.
5.
Pamela Barham :— international netball player for New Zealand, lecturer in Human Movement Studies at Brisbane University, Australia; temporary member of Hilary Weedon's classes.
Questions from the floor will be invited.
Refreshments will be available during the evening.
Please inform the office if you wish to attend.
Dear Anne
Molly likes to introduce all the newly qualified teachers at the Reunion.
Is it possible you might come down?
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Meeting held at Quintin Kynaston School, London on Saturday 18th October 1980
1.
Welcome to New Teachers
In Molly's absence Kay Evans presented certificates to three of the teachers who qualified in 1980 and who were unable to attend the last qualified teachers' meeting.
We welcomed Janet Brown, Else Lynes and Wendy Middleton, all from the Surrey Course.
2.
News of Molly
Kay Evans who has been seeing Molly regularly in hospital gave us up-to-date new of her.
After getting physically very weak as the result of being unable to eat without extreme discomfort, a few weeks ago Molly was admitted to the Royal Homeopathic Hospital Great Ormond Street where doctors found and dealt with a severe restriction in her stomach.
This was, of course, the reason why eating had become almost a physical impossibility with the result that Molly was virtually starving.
Now she is able to eat again, although naturally only very little and often but already she is feeling stronger and is doing exercises to build up the muscles which had become so weak.
Molly is aware that she has cancer but she is in great heart.
She does not wish to conceal this news as she strongly believes that the mind can play a great part in overcoming such a complaint and she asks everyone to join her in positive thinking to help her to fight the illness.
Molly is remarkably cheerful and optimistic and she deserves and will undoubtedly receive all the support we can give her.
To the people who had already heard of her illness and sent her cards and good wishes Molly sends her grateful thanks.
She is full of admiration for the care and attention she is receiving at the hospital but is already looking ahead to the time when she is strong enough to go on to a convalescent home.
Best wishes, Molly, from us all.
Since the meeting, the greetings card with its enclosure signed by those present, has been taken to Molly, also flowers and toilet water with good wishes of the Q.T's.
3.
News of Kay Latto
Kay Evans also gave us the news that Kay Latto has re-married — and is now Mrs. Dan Maskell.
We send them both our very best wishes for the future.
Following the meeting a card was sent and a thank you letter has been received.
4.
New Medical Adviser to the Medau Society
Kay Evans introduced Dr. Monnica Steward as a friend of long standing.
She was in charge of the Geriatric Unit at Edgware General Hospital but will be S.C.M.O. (Adult Health) and District Officer at Basingstoke General Hospital from 3rd November 1980.
For one with such a full programme it was good of Dr. Stewart to spend the whole day with us but she had expressed the wish to see as much as possible of our work and it was a tremendous pleasure to have her with us and for so many to have the opportunity of chatting with her.
We greatly appreciate the interest she is showing in our work and will value her professional guidance.
5.
Introduction to Miss Barbara Norrice
Kay Evans was also pleased to welcome Miss Norrice, a Senior Lecturer at Keswick Training College, Norwich.
Another person with a very busy schedule, it was good of her to find time to come to speak to us on the subject of working with the mentally handicapped.
6.
International Year for Disabled People
Kay Evans who is greatly involved in work for the improvement of the quality of life of handicapped people, drew our attention to the fact that the United Nations has proclaimed 1981 as the International Year for Disabled People.
This will give us all a particular opportunity to play our part.
Watch out for more news of this in the next edition of the Medau News.
7.
Movement and Dance Liaison Group A.G.M.
Hilary announced that the Movement and Dance Liaison Group for Greater London and the South East would be having their Annual General Meeting on the 6th November 1980 at 6 p.m. at 160 Great Portland Street, London, W 1 and she hoped as many people as possible would try to attend.
8.
Q.T. Training Programme
Jean Parmiter sent her apologies for being unable to teach as arranged; she and her husband had had to go away for the weekend.
Edith Harlow had kindly agreed to teach in her place.
Beryl Smith again drew attention to the strenuous time our trainers have, called upon as they are to travel so far and having to tackle what seems to be a non-stop training programme.
To ease this strain the Training Committee have decided that more use should be made of the services of other qualified teachers to teach on Q.T. days.
Two sessions today, for instance, were taken by one teacher; another will teach at the January meeting; In addition it will be seen from the programme for the year that volunteers are wanted to teach in April and June 1981.
Please submit your name if you would like to teach.
9.
Courses
i)
Torquay November 21st 623rd There are still vacancies on this Medau weekend course but this may be because it is the same weekend as the Reunion.
ii)
Owing to the continually rising cost of attending courses in Germany and Switzerland it is suggested that a summer course should be held in July or August 1982, possibly at Green Park Training Centre, Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire.
This suggestion was well received and it seems that it would be well supported.
10.
Equipment
As equipment becomes more expensive and more teachers are taking private classes it would be greatly appreciated if teachers would let Jean Parmiter know if they have any equipment for sale or to loan or if they know of any evening institute which might be wishing to dispose of some.
11.
Re-Union 22nd November 1980 Porchester Halls at 1.30 p.m.
Arrangements are going well and the programme is taking shape.
Tickets are limited to 600 so apply soon to avoid disappointment.
Please supply the stalls which need to be stocked.
They are as follows:—
To the area concerned or to the office.
Donations are also required towards the cost of Raffle prizes.
To the office please.
Offers of help in stewarding, just half hour stints, would be appreciated.
Please ask class members and send any names to Margaret Rowland.
Twenty four hour car park almost opposite the halls.
12.
Medau Society Elections
30th November 1980 is the closing date for nominating someone to fill one of the four vacancies on the Executive Committee.
At present the Committee is formed largely of teachers; it would be good to have some class members.
13.
Medau Society Dinner Dance
Please note that the Annual Dinner Dance will be held on Friday, 13th March 1981 not 6th March as advertised.
Tickets priced at £8 will be on sale at the Reunion or can be obtained from Cicely Harris  or from the office.
Please enclose S.A.E. with your order.
14.
Insurance
Private insurance premiums of £5 due from 1st September.
If you have not renewed yours and wish to do so, contact the office without delay.
15.
Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme
Teachers who are training girls in Medau for the Duke of Edinburgh Aware are reminded that the girl's movement must be assessed by a Medau trainer at the outset; otherwise it is impossible to assess her progress.
16.
New Medau Ball
Battell's have produced a very nice new ball, in white only, in a most durable material, price approximately £2.70.
Any further information from Hilda Lodge.
17.
For Sale
Carita Leotard and Tights in Navy size 44 Price £7.00.
Contact Ida Butler.
17.
Area Teacher's Representatives
Betty Syrett the Teachers' Representative on the Executive Committee has the following area representatives through whom comments, complaints, requests etc relating to teaching, training and Medau interests in general can channelled.
If and when points come forward the group meets to discuss and decide appropriate action.
Please use this system so that we are aware of your views, problems, complaints etc. and can do what we can to help.
The present representatives are:—
It may be that you feel London might well be directed into three, having a representative for the western section covering Richmond, Hounslow etc.
Please let Betty Syrett know if you wish to put someone forward to represent this area, or if you have any other suggestions for changing the representation.
19.
Class Numbers
Your class numbers are required, please send details of number of classes and numbers in class; plus details of classes which although advertised did not actually start.
All details to Hilda at the Office.
20.
Thanks
Firstly, thank you to Jean Laidlaw for demonstrating the art of revalving balls.
Secondly, thank you to the Herts, Cambs, Beds, Bucks & Berks.
teachers for supplying and serving a very nice tea.
21.
Next Training Day
10th January 1981 at Quintin Kynaston School, when Kent will be responsible for tea.
THE MEDAU SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN & NORTHERN IRELAND
After the recent Society Elections the following people will be taking office at the Annual General Meeting on 20th March 1981.
MOLLY BRAITHWAITE MBE MA
An afternoon in celebration and thanksgiving for Molly's life and achievements will be held on Saturday 2nd May 1981 at 2.30p.m. in 
Please inform the office before 16th April if you would like to attend and enclose a Stamped and Addressed Envelope for a map and travel directions.
MOLLY BRAITHWAITE MBE MA 1909–1981
We have been approached by many members and friends who wish to contribute towards some form of memorial in thanksgiving for the life and work of our late founder and President Molly Braithwaite who died on 19th January this year.
After some discussion we have decided to open two separate funds which we hope will give everyone who wishes to make a donation a choice.
Molly was a believer in homeopathy and underwent her last operation and subsequent treatment in the Royal London Homeopathic Hospital.
She let it be known that this was a cause she would wish to be supported and therefore we intend to open a Fund for a period of six months from 1st March — 1st September at the end of which time the Society will donate the money to the hospital in Molly's name.
At the same time many people feel that a continuing Memorial Fund for the benefit of the Society would also be appropriate.
It was decided that in view of Molly's life-long love of flowers a fund which would provide for fresh flowers for Society events and special occasions would be a suitable tribute.
If you wish to support either of these ideas please send your cheque to the office made out to
The Medau Society of GB & NI (Royal London Homeopathic Hospital Fund) or The Medau Society of GB & NI (Molly Braithwaite Memorial Fund)
AGENDA
1.
OPENING REMARKS
Hilary Weedon retiring Chairman
2.
MINUTES
To introduce
a.
The new Chairman of the Executive Committee and the Society Mrs June Bascombe
b.
The new Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee and the Society
c.
The four new members elected to serve on the Executive Committee
4.
ELECTIONS OF HONORARY OFFICERS
To elect the honorary officers for the years 1981–3
a.
President
b.
Honorary Treasurer
5.
ANNUAL REPORT
To receive the Annual Report for the year 1980–81, the adoption of which will be proposed by Mrs. Hilary Weedon, retiring Chairman and seconded by Mrs. June Bascombe, retiring Vice-Chairman and new Chairman.
6.
ACCOUNTS
To receive the Statement of Accounts and Balance Sheet for the year ended 31st December 1980, the adoption of which will be proposed by Mrs. Janet Rogers, Honorary Treasurer.
7.
AUDITOR
To re-appoint Miss Dorothea Vaughan as auditor for the coming year.
The Business Meeting will be followed by a showing of the new film ‘Going Well Over Sixty’ and general discussion.
Refreshments will be available during the evening.
Please inform the Office if you wish to attend.
FURTHER TRAINING FOR QUALIFIED TEACHERS
Recently we have looked carefully at the Training Courses at present being run for Qualified Teachers.
Firstly we would like to remind you that all who are teaching are expected to participate in further training.
Courses are at present being run in London (usually at Quintin School), the South West (either at Dartmouth or Weston-Super-Mare), the North West (Cheadle) and in Edinburgh, Norfolk also run further training sessions (details for which should be obtained from the Norfolk trainers).
From 1st JANUARY 1982 the fees will be as follows:—
Those living within a 50 mile radius of the course £12 per year.
Those living outside a 50 mile radius £ 10 per year.
In addition at the London course Music lessons are available at an additional £5 per year.
These fees which are PAYABLE at the FIRST MEETING of each year cover the Four meetings held during the year and MUST be paid whether attended or not.
Those not teaching at the present time are welcome to attend on a daily basis at £2 per session.
Q.Ts. wishing to attend a course to which they are not deemed to be attached may also attend on a daily basis at £2.50 per session.
In the South West, the North West and Edinburgh class members are also welcome at £2 per day.
Would you please fill in the slip below indicating to which course you wish to be attached and return it to the office as soon as possible.
NAME
I wish to be attached to the 
(please delete as required)
THE MEDAU SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN & NORTHERN IRELAND
Notes of the Qualified Teachers' Day held at Quintin Kynaston School on 27th June 1981
Please read carefully there may be added information.
1 Welcome
June welcomed Kay Evans and thanked her for sparing time once again to attend our training day; also Rita Quick who had made the long journey south from Newcastle to assist with the training.
It now seems to be a tradition and a very pleasant one, to welcome Rita to the summer training day.
It was also good to have Cicely Harris back with us after her hip operation, a model patient it appears who has already been allowed to discard her crutches in favour of one stick.
Congratulations and good wishes were given to her.
Finally a warm welcome was extended to all the newly-qualified teachers.
2.
Presentation of Certificates
Kay Evans presented their certificates to all the new teachers who were present, congratulated them all and encouraged them to take an active part in the training days.
A cloth Medau badge was also given to each new teacher.
Those successful in the 1981 examination are as follows:—
3.
Tribute to Molly Day 2nd May
Many letters of appreciation for the afternoon had been received.
A recording had been made and cassettes were available through the office.
Price £5.00 (set of two) plus p&p
4.
Questionnaire
The response to the questionnaire about training has been very satisfactory and it has provided the Training Committee with plenty of information to work on for planning future training programmes.
5.
National Display Team
To help Cicely with the running of the team a small steering committee has been formed comprising of 
The audition planned for the early Autumn has now been postponed until after the Crystal Palace Reunion and will now take place on December 5th.
Please be on the look-out for talented class members…especially young ones!
6.
Future Training Course
It is planned to start a new training course in Central London from September 1982.
This allows just over a year to look out for possible candidates and suitable premises; with regard to the latter, teachers are asked to look out for centrally situated schools with a good hall and piano, close to mainline travel facilities.
Please submit any suggestions to the office.
7.
Membership of the Society
There has unfortunately been a drop in the number of members of the Society this year.
This is a very serious matter as, whether rightly or wrongly, it is the number of heads which impresses the Sports Council when issuing grant.
Teachers are asked to do all they can to encourage new members and old ones to re-join.
Tell class members that any one newly joining in the autumn term gets to the end of the year and  the following calendar year for one year's subscription.
It has been noticed that a few teachers have still to pay their Society membership for 1981…
This must surely be an oversight as all teachers agree that as a direct beneficiary of the Society's efforts they should contribute as members towards its work.
8.
Whitsun Course in Coburg
Hilary reported on the Medau Teachers' Whitsun Course in Coburg to which she and June had been invited by Jochen Medau.
It was very interesting to meet over 100 fully trained Medau teachers, some only recently qualified, some trained 50 years ago.
They attended the A.G.M. of the Medau Ring — the German equivalent of the Medau Society.
The Ring does not boast as many members as the Society by maybe that is not so important for them as they are not in receipt of grant aid.
Hilary and June had the opportunity to explain the work of our Society which engendered considerable interest.
On hearing about our plans for a summer course at Green Park in 1982 some 30 or so showed a positive interest in attending.
The decision to change the training system at Coburg to cover Physiotherapy and Movement instead of Sport and Movement seems a wise one as no difficulty is being experienced by the students of the new system in finding jobs whereas those holding the earlier one it is not so easy.
Hilary also reported that research is being done into the physiological and psychological aspects of breathing work and we will let you know the results that emerge from this study.
The building containing the main movement hall (gym 1) and music rooms has been named ‘Molly Haus’.
A pottery plaque has been placed at the entrance and her picture on the wall in the vestibule.
9.
Reunion at Crystal Palace 21st November 1981
Our thanks go to Chris Markham who has agreed to co-ordinate this event.
She will need much support and it is hoped that London teachers, who had first been suggested as overall organisers, will give her particularly strong backing and will take responsibility for running the Raffle.
Contributions are required from everyone towards the raffle prizes.
Money would be appreciated so that some half-dozen good prizes can be purchased.
The programme for the reunion will be on the usual lines including a display.
Offers of display items are invited, as the programme is already being devised these should be submitted immediately.
10.
Class Lists
Where a teachers' class list has not yet been brought up to date for 1981/82 her list is enclosed with these notes.
Please indicate whether it is correct for the new season by inserting ‘Correct 1981/82’ or amend as necessary and return immediately to the office sending any additional information as it is obtained.
11.
Summer Classes
12.
Qualified Teachers' Fees
A few teachers have still not paid their fees for 1981.
Kindly rectify this as soon as possible and consult Betty Syrett if you have any doubts or queries on the subject.
A great deal of thought and work goes into planning and preparing Q.T. Days and in order to ensure their success both physically and financially we would be pleased if you acknowledge and fill in the enclosed form and return it to the office as soon as possible.
13.
International Evening 16th October 1981
The Movement and Dance Liaison Group (Greater London and South East Region) are running a Folk Evening at the Little Ship club near Southward Bridge on Friday, 16th October, Dinner, live music, english folk, scottish country, international and american square dance.
Come and join in.
Details Hilary Weedon.
14.
Teas on Q.T. Days
Thanks to the two teachers from S.W. London who served tea on the 27th June under considerable difficulties — a temperamental urn and lack of support from others in their area.
We all enjoy a ‘cuppa’ and a cake after an energetic afternoon so please make sure that when your area is responsible you give your support.
Some 120 cakes or ‘pieces of’ are generally required and four people are needed on the afternoon for preparing and servicing.
Central London teachers are asked to provide tea at the next training day (17th October 1981).
15.
Date of next Training Day
Saturday 17th October 1981 at Quintin Kynaston School.
16.
Devising Display Items
Session with Rita Quick 27th June.
Would all groups please send their notes to Rita (Ponteland) as requested.
Anyone who would like a copy of the completed items please let the office know.
17.
Equipment
If you have any spare equipment which you would loan out or would like to sell — please inform the office.
GUIDANCE ON DEVISING DISPLAYS
Notes expanded from session at Qualified Teachers' Day on 10th January 1981
WHY?
Before embarking upon a display or demonstration, however formal or informal the occasion, think out why you are doing it and what you hope to achieve.
Is your objective:—
to publicise Medau?
to recruit new class members?
to entertain?
to inform and educate?
to compete?
WHERE?
First — get familiar with the setting for the display.
If it is to be in your own class hall, you have no problem.
If a strange venue and easily accessible, go and look at it, measure it, walk on it — even run, inspect the floor, note exits and entrances and position of piano, where the audience is likely to sit, check acoustics and lighting.
Measurements and floor plan alone won't convey the atmosphere, but if a personal viewing is not possible make sure you have been supplied with written details before you begin working out your item.
Very small last minute adjustments to spacing may become necessary, but if you have tailored your item to fit the plan then you are reasonably safe.
WHAT?
Be sure that the display you are mounting is at the right level for the event and that you are using appropriate material and performers.
Does it call for:—
a)
an average class display?
b)
a selected item/mass item?
c)
a lecture/demonstration?
d)
a composite programme of items?
e)
a National Display Team item?
a) Class Displays
Some teachers doubt the value of displays with participation at class levels because:—
the standard of performers will be mixed;
not all class members enjoy performing to an audience;
some class members are worried by having to remember sequences;
the class may become divided.
Other teachers take the view that working for a class item:—
improves the overall standard of the class
gives most class members more confidence and sense of achievement;
strengthens class motivation and commitment;
sharpens the teacher's coaching methods and musical performance.
THE CHOICE IS YOURS
If for you the disadvantages outweigh the advantages, an open class is one way of showing the work, particularly if you are part of an Evening Institute.
However, ‘nothing ventured — nothing gained’, and you only improve at something by doing it.
The drawbacks to class displays do exist, but they are not insurmountable if you decide that they are worth overcoming.
A class performing simple work that has been selected to show their strong point will come across better than elaborate material inadequately performed.
b) A Selected Item
For a large scale public display an audition is probably the best method of selection, leaving interested performers free to offer themselves.
In a mass item, although a high standard is looked for, the large number required may bring about a variation in levels of performance and the contents needs to allow for this (e.g. working in sections).
If a small local team is to be formed and the teacher has a good relationship with her classes she could select by invitation (e.g. a lecture/dem. calls for a small group of experienced movers).
c) A Lecture/Demonstration
The type of audience will be the main guiding factor in putting together a Lecture/Dem.
have they any background knowledge?
are they a specialist group who need particular aspects emphasised?
will they want to ask questions?
will they want to get up and join in?
how should the time be divided between lecture and demonstration? /
Use a small selected group, say between four and eight, so that the audience can focus easily on the points you are making.
One proven formula is an alteration of ‘talk and do’ or ‘listen then watch’; each aspect being first explained then illustrated by several practical examples, followed by a sequence to show the finished product.
Ideally, the Lecture/Demonstration should be followed by an Open Class to give the audience the opportunity to try for themselves.
If they already have some practical knowledge they will be itching to get on to the floor!
Individuals will approach a Lect/Dem. differently and the details will vary, but in the main it is more practical to take a piece of apparatus and say all you want to about its use before going on to the next piece.
You may need more than one sequence to cover all the points about any one piece of apparatus.
d) A Composite Programme
If you are called upon to plan a programme of independent items, such as those seen at the Reunion or at Area Rallies, consider the following points:—
the first item should be a good ‘opener’; i.e. a fairly lively confident performance;
the less experienced teams might prefer to be placed early on in the programme as it can be unnerving to be left waiting;
try to ensure that there is enough variety in style and type of item; e.g. is each piece of apparatus represented?;
you may also be able to arrange the items to make a pleasing sequence of colour schemes;
is there going to be recorded music?
Does the amount balance out the live music?
have you allowed time for changing for any performers who are in more than one item?
the final item could include all the performers if there is time and opportunity to organise it — failing that play your trump card with a really stunning item to finish.
It will be your responsibility to organise any rehearsals scheduled for the day of the performance, making sure that teams know what time their slot is and that they keep to it.
Get all rehearsals finished well before the audience begins to arrive.
Assessment of how successful an event has been depends largely on feedback, and, if possible, the organisers should get together afterwards to hear comments and take note for future reference.
e) The National Display Team
This team came into being to fulfil a need in the Society for a means of showing our work at the very best level; a group of performers who practise regularly together and have the facility to form up in teams of varying number according to the need at the time.
There is constant call for recruitment of young new members, able and willing to give time and effort to this worthwhile project.
On the coaching side we need to exploit fully our creativity and diversity of styles and encourage teachers to come forward and take a hand in contributing to the team's repertoire.
The team can be of service to you, but you in turn may well be able to offer ideas and innovations.
HOW?
Unless you've been asked to fill a longer time, aim at making your item three to four minutes in length.
The audience will stay interested and be left wanting to see more.
Decide whether you want to show variety or whether you want to develop a theme.
There should, in any case, be a wholeness to the item, even when showing variety, but sometimes it is possible to show variations on one particular technique, e.g. a travelling item.
Or you may wish to use movements that evoke a particular mood, particularly if using recorded music.
Try aiming for a beginning, a middle section and an ending.
Keep your entrance and exit positive, there are no rules about getting on and off the floor — use your ingenuity but keep it snappy if you decide to run on and off.
If you want the entrance to be part of the item, keep moving and make it flow.
The most versatile item is one that faces in all directions and is suitable for any number of performers, but if the audience is all on one side then the item must play mainly to it.
Try to include:—
changes of speed;
changes in level;
changes in direction of movement;
changes of formation;
changes of rhythm;
changes in dynamics;
movements that travel;
Make sure that changes of formation really work.
Each performer needs to understand exactly what to do.
Instruct each individual as it will vary from place to place on the floor.
Work out the LINKS very carefully.
Make the next movement grow out of the one before, particularly rhythmically.
Use the last phrase of the previous section to get smoothly into the opening phrase of the next movement.
If there is going to be a change of time signature prepare it by making a bridge passage, so that the new beat is clearly signalled and the transition is easy.
Avoid tacking on extra bits of music.
How to teach the item?
This depends on the individual.
Some like to have the item fully composed before they begin teaching others prefer to compose and teach parts, discarding and replacing as they go along until it takes shape.
Either way — be CLEAR!
When the item is starting to hang together and the class is settling dow, don't go back on your decisions.
If you MUST change something make a written note of it so that no muddles arise later.
Try to coach the item in the correct order as it can confuse the class members if they suddenly have to put it together differently.
Sometimes it is necessary to take bits out because they need special coaching, but always put them back in context.
Be THOROUGH.
If an item is coached carefully step by step in the early stages the performers are more likely to remember it for future use.
If too much is thrown at them too quickly they lose confidence.
When placing performers be aware of variations in height and build, but it is not always essential that the tall ones go at the back.
Avoid putting very short and very tall side by side.
If using partners match them up.
Less experienced people are often happier in the middle.
With a good group ring the changes — try for different effects with new faces at the front.
If you devise your item for a specific number e.g. divisible by two or four, have an alternative plan in case someone falls sick.
CHOREOGRAPHY will be influenced by the number of performers, the setting, the colour scheme and the music.
Use of two or more colours helps to bring out floor patterns and formations.
Special lighting effects, such as spotlighting one performer, or moving from group to group leaving part of the floor in darkness, all helps to add atmosphere, but, of course, is only possible with a large number and in a suitably equipped arena or hall.
However, even with a smallish group try out different formations; e.g. diagonals, curves, V-shapes, etc.
Experiment with planes and levels of movement.
Avoid fussiness — too much going on at once— too much chopping and changing about.
Establish a movement — do it long enough for the audience to get hold of it.
Sometimes make a contrast — follow a lively travelling movement, perhaps one that goes at random with a smooth sweep of movement performed in unison.
The impact of a simple regrouping can be refreshing.
LIVE MUSIC
The piano accompaniment must grow with the item.
Start in class by playing in your own instinctive style and gradually improve and fill it out.
Make it more tuneful and interesting but without losing the connection with the movement.
Let the movement be the initial inspiration and then work on the modulations at home, for these are what will help to increase the musicality of the piece.
At the performance a live pianist will prove more adaptable than anything recorded — if the performers need more time to cover the floor it's no problem.
Of course, one must also remember that a live pianist will be capable of making mistakes, so allow for some nervousness and don't get too ambitious.
Simple music played well and that really leads the class is infinitely more desirable than elaborate music that goes astray.
If your courage fails when it comes to devising and playing music try collaborating with a fellow teacher.
She may be happy to play for your item.
The accompaniment, like the item, must have a feeling of wholeness, with smooth pleasing transitions and absolute security of rhythm.
(Added percussion will help the latter).
It gives a completeness or feeling of ‘coming home’ to finish up in the key you started with.
RECORDED MUSIC
Stimulating though it can be to use an exciting orchestration working to recorded music has its drawbacks:—
The speed of playing equipment can vary considerably; where possible use your own tape recorder but make sure you have enough volume without distortion.
The class gets used to performing at a particular speed and also the movement becomes greatly disturbed if not at the right tempo.
If using a record anywhere near the performers the vibration can cause the needle to jump.
If you have taped yourself on the piano at home, make sure it will amplify well; public address systems magnify all the little noises and blemishes.
Get a good quality recording made at a professional studio, but it is fairly costly.
Watch out for copyright laws; no studio will copy a track from a record without written permission from the Record Co, and to play it on the day you may need a licence from the Performing Rights Society.
It takes much time and effort to find recorded music that is suitable as movement accompaniment.
The right choice will give inspiration to choreographer and performer alike and add to the pleasure of the audience.
Interpreting the music well takes hours of listening to discover its subtleties of phrasing, rhythm and mood; then more time should be spent on experimentation until the music and movement are so closely connected that the movement doesn't work without its music.
At all stages the movement needs to be coached from the piano, but must always stay related to the recorded music.
GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF YOUR DISPLAY AND TEAM
Brief them beforehand on what conditions to expect.
If it is a public demonstration suggest that they wear a suitably neat outfit such as a track suit.
Advise them not to bring jewelry or too much money.
If there is to be a rehearsal you may prefer them to bring a practice leotard in order to keep any specially chosen outfit for the performance.
Check the colour for lighting in case your scheme gets spoiled by wrong filters.
Use your rehearsal time profitably — the first priority is usually placing and spacing.
Get the feel of the piano — they sometimes don't respond as you expect.
Keep to your rehearsal time.
Treat EVERY demonstration as IMPORTANT.
Aim for the highest standard possible and pay great attention to detail.
Be a GOOD EXAMPLE to your team.
Remember to carry yourself well — it is so easy to slouch in an off-duty moment.
Make sure you are ‘well turned out’— a spick and span appearance soon gets the message across.
ENCOURAGE your team but be discriminating — don't say everything is lovely when it isn't — they will know when they need a little pep-talk!
Above all, make it an enjoyable experience!
A happy team will perform more confidently and will communicate it to the audience.
30th ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING To be held in the Colson Room, Francis House, Francis St. LONDON S.W.1.
at 7.30 p.m. on FRIDAY 19th MARCH 1982
In the Chair: Miss Kay Evans M.B.E.
President
AGENDA
1.
PRESIDENT'S REMARKS
Miss Kay Evans
2.
APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE
3.
MINUTES
To approve and sign the Minutes of the Annual General Meeting held at Rutherford School on Friday 20.3.81
4.
ANNUAL REPORT
To receive the Annual Report for the year 1981–2, the adoption of which will be proposed by Mrs. June Bascombe, Chairman of the Society and seconded by Mrs. Hilda Lodge, Vice Chairman.
5.
ACCOUNTS
To receive the Statement of Accounts and Balance Sheet for the year ended 31st December 1981, the adoption of which will be proposed by Mrs. Janet Rogers, Honorary Treasurer and seconded by Mrs. Kay Maskell, Chairman of the Finance Sub-Committee.
6.
AUDITOR
To appoint an Auditor for the coming year.
7.
CONSTITUTION
To consider the following amendments to the Constitution recommended by the Executive Committee (see attached)
8.
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Light refreshments will be served from 6.30 to 7.30 p.m.
Please inform the office if you wish to attend 
The following proposed amendments to the Constitution are for your careful consideration so that you can comment and vote on them at the A.G.M. on Friday, 19th March 1982.
If you would like a copy of the Constitution would you please write to the office and enclose a S.A.E.
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS
a.
Section 1 NAME at present reads: The name shall be ‘The Medau Society of Great Britain & Northern Ireland’ with the sub-title ‘for the encouragement of the Medau Rhythmic Movement, the form of movement education developed and taught by Herr and Frau Medau’.
Proposal: Section 1 to read:
The name shall be ‘The Medau Society’ with the sub-title ‘for the encouragement of Medau Rhythmic Movement, the form of movement education developed and taught by Herr and Frau Medau’.
B. Section 3 MEMBERSHIP at present reads:
a)
Individual Membership: Membership shall be open to all individual who are interested in Medau Rhythmic Movement and wish to support the aims of the Society.
b)
Group Membership: Any number of people in one locality may apply to the Society to join as a group.
Group members shall be entitled to all benefits and privileges of membership except that they will not receive individual copies of the Annual Report, information leaflets or other matter circulated to individual members.
c)
Honorary Membership: The Executive Committee shall have the power to admit to Honorary Membership of the Society any person whom they consider fit.
Honorary Members shall be entitled to all benefits and privileges of membership.
d)
Affiliation: Any other organisation may, at the discretion of the Executive Committee, be affiliated to the Medau Society on payment of an affiliation fee.
An affiliated organisation will receive all information circulated by the Medau Society but its members will not be entitled to the privileges of Medau Society membership.
Proposal: The whole section to read:
‘Membership shall be open to all individuals who are interested in Medau Rhythmic Movement and who wish to support the aims of the Society.
Categories of membership shall be as follows:—
a)
Individual
b)
Honorary
C. Section 4 FINANCE at present beginning of section (a) reads:
a) Subscriptions: All subscriptions are due annually by the end of January of the current year and shall be classed under the following categories: —Individual Members, Overseas Members, Group Members (subscriptions on a capitation basis) and Affiliated Clubs and Societies.
Proposal: Beginning Section (a) to read:
‘Subscriptions are due annually by the end of January.’
Section (c) at present reads:
(c) All monies shall be kept with the Society's Bankers, unless and until otherwise from time to time resolved by the Society in General Meeting, and all cheques shall be signed by one member of the Executive Committee and countersigned by the Treasurer or Secretary.
Proposal: Section (c) to read:
All monies shall be kept with the Society's Bankers, unless and until otherwise from time to time resolved by the Society in General Meeting.
All cheques shall be signed and countersigned by such persons as the Executive Committee shall determine.
D. Section 8 VOTING at present the beginning of this section reads:
Every individual and group member of the Society shall be entitled to one vote for each vacancy to be filled and in the case of two or more candidates receiving an equal number of votes, the Chairman of the Meeting shall have a casting vote.
Proposal: Beginning this section to read:
Every member of the Society shall be entitled to one vote for each vacancy to be filled and in the case of two or more candidates receiving an equal number of votes, the Chairman of the Meeting shall have a casting vote.