

‘IBM’ STILL STANDS FOR ‘I'VE BEEN MOVED’DRAFT, 14 Nov 90
by 
Notwithstanding dramatic changes in markets and technology, IBM claims its personnel policies are virtually unchanged.
Cultural differences between UK and US observers have masked some startling changes in processes, practices and planning, all focussed on maintaining the status quo in how IBM treats its people.
The Market as Framework?
IBM's marketplace has been changing.
IBM's market was always the big mainframe computer — but that is a shrinking portion of the computer industry now, and one even the Japanese are beginning to penetrate.
Customers are changing too.
Mainframes were bought by Data Processing Managers in the olden days; IBM could call the tunes and set the standards.
That is no longer true.
When the customers are in the boardroom, IBM still knows how to win, but cannot count on fear or brand loyalty — just applications know-how.
But when the customers are out on the street, or running specialist companies, Big Blue has a lot to learn.
Share prices dropped in the late 80s,(and are still comparatively low).
IBM had to Do Something.
Chairman John Akers stated the situation rather blandly in the 1989 annual report: ‘Rapid changes in technology and advances in manufacturing productivity have created overcapacity in both physical and human resources.
Intense competition is increasing pressure on prices, margins and profitability.’
For IBM, responses to the changing market were really fourfold:
(1)
 more revenue from software and services,
(2)
better products,
(3)
lower costs, and
(4)
more IBMers close to the customer.
So Akers, late but probably not too late, shifted the development activities from technology-driven towards market-driven — and shifted people from overhead to customer-facing.
Over the last several years 23% more IBMers are working with customers.
Akers was able to say’…
We are operating with fewer layers of management; and we have reduced overhead and indirect positions by some 50,000, while maintaining our tradition of full employment.’
Greenock, for example, is seeing more customers.
IBM's Greenock factory is Scotland's version of Valhalla and Cinderella, wound up in one.
Founded by IBM's famous Scots-Irish Watsons, Greenock foundered for its first years, until IBM learned that the best people to run a factory in Scotland were usually Scots.
Today it is one of the best automated factories in the world, with computer-controlled parts arriving at the right instant at each work station to churn out reliable personal computers (‘PCs’) for a market that is still growing.
The Introvert/Extrovert Conundrum
The IBM Greenock tour is a must for visiting businessmen.
‘They come to see how we use our own products,’ an IBMer explains.
Thus one even finds the model number prominently displayed on the check-out terminal in the Greenock staff canteen — one more example that the cobblers' children here have plenty of shoes.
Today, whether the computer is large or small, people are buying solutions to problems, in which the computer is a minor aspect.
In a ‘market driven’ world the computer is just a bit of the machinery, the engine, as it were, but not the car.
The know-how about the problem is key to the sale.
IBM was unable to know everything about everything, much as it would have liked to — so it had to learn to cooperate.
This meant
Other People sell IBM product.
IBM builds Other Peoples' equipment into its systems.
Other People develop the software.
Other People have the user  know-how .
Other People make the components and deliver them — on time.
IBM was not accustomed to depending on Other People.
The greatest change in IBM's culture, I believe, came about as the PC grew out of the typewriter in the seventies — when IBM, to achieve necessary volumes, had to let non-IBM people begin selling its PCs.
Living without full control.
That was new!
Today the company has moved on, trying to cohabit with such bedfellows as hundreds of small software firms, or investing in specialist ‘business partners’ IBM has learned to cooperate at least a little, and even sold off a few businesses — but the company continues to have an exceptionally coherent set of beliefs and behaviour patterns.
Mergers and takeovers are not within the company's experience, and are not likely to succeed in such a consistent, pervasive corporate culture.
The changing marketplace may have one other useful impact on the culture.
When people spend so much time seeing each other behave so well, they tend to become a bit intolerant of others less perfect.
One insider opines that IBM has probably lost a little of it's smugness.
‘We don't dominate the marketplace in the same way now.’
The Technology as Driving Force
IBM's choices have been ‘technology-driven’ since its inception in 1914.
In a world where few computer companies have been good computer users, IBM's increasing tendency to practise what it preaches has helped maintain its advantage.
And at least in dealings with big, IBM-like customers, this strategy pays off because IBM understands how  big , IBM-like firms work.
In the early 80s, for example, IBM decided it needed to use its own systems better to cut administration costs, make optimum use of network and computer investments, and create a basis for future developments.
The result of all this is a system called PROFS (for PRofessional OFfice System), which gives every IBMer his ‘fix’ of information.
By 1986 100% of IBM's employees had developed keyboard skills.
That means about 13,000 people in the UK, 90,000 in Europe, and they aim for all 383,000 world-wide.
The implications of a single inter-linked system are enormous!
The typical IBMer tunes to his PROFS screen from his office, his home, from a phone kiosk, even (in the case of Tony Cleaver, IBM UK's chief) from the cellphone in his car).
From a single screen and keyboard he can
view his electronic mail;
answer personal messages from friends;
check his diary;
arrange a meeting (local or even international);
look at the cafeteria menu;
find out about new strategy decisions;
scan ‘The car park will be closed this weekend for resurfacing.’;
receive John Akers' new year greeting;
check on standards or policies;
access or change his address, fax and phone number lists;
find guidelines for writing a Business Case for his pet project;
read book reviews;
enrol for in-house or outside courses;
read daily press highlights;
look at the general processes manual;
read the Personnel director's answer to a Speak-up question;
book hotels and flights for his next trip
read notes of the Department meeting he missed yesterday
check Business Conduct Guidelines;
view managers' information letters;
scan Organisation directories;
check the Organisation Database for a colleague's new position;
make quick reference to Purchasing facilities;
look at Personnel practises and policies;
read Security manuals;
write memos and reports;
etc, etc, etc.
This kind of rich diet can become addictive.
An ex-IBMer on a British Rail sleeper recently complained he could put his VISA card into a machine somewhere 35,000 feet up, and put his computer in-bleeper to the phone mouthpiece, and it would automatically dial up his E-mail and give him his messages.
(Cost-a-lot?
‘All on expenses.’)
He was rather perturbed that his in-bleeper wouldn't work on the train's radiophone.)
At first the PROFS proponents assumed 80% of use would be in-group communication.
But as soon as connection was universal and easy, communication with people outside the immediate working group skyrocketed — and with it the benefits of the expensive system.
For most companies, starting an E-mail system is like developing a television service: until there are enough people out there turning on their sets, there's no impetus or money available to make good shows and without good shows who wants to buy a telly?
So ‘manager-only’ status E-mail systems are actually starved of the information that enriches IBM's kind of PROFS.
There is clear evidence that company success is closely related to the richness of its informal human communications links.
IBM's internal networks have thus been an unwritten but real part of its winning culture.
I worried that the growth of PROFS could harm the phoning, travelling and meeting that reinforces such human networks.
IBM says PROFS is not used to replace the human contacts.
IBMers can actually use PROFS to send informal  messages more easily, and they still have plenty of training, refreshers, and travel.
Chief among the benefits is faster decisions.
PROFS expert Jim Sullivan says: ‘If your information quality is good, then if you can speed up the information flow, you can speed up the decision cycles in the company.’
PROFS has to take some of the credit (or blame) for IBM's ability to recycle its people.
Sullivan says IBM is ‘taking the benefit of the productivity’ by changing the jobs people do, and putting them into the revenue-earning areas of the company.
Fifty five percent are in sales offices now.
IBM  insiders get their equipment cheaper than customers who are sold new computers, but the insiders depend on older machines — proving once again that it's the management and training , not the technology, that makes the difference between a winning system and a white elephant.
The annual cost per employee for PROFS is about £700–800, including the network, technical support, depreciation, software etc.
That's less than the company subsidy for the North Harbour cafeteria, running around £900 per employee in 1990.
Personnel Policies as Backbone
Yes, the boss DOES eat in the canteen, at Greenock and at Armonk.
That hasn't changed in the past 20–30 years.
The single status cafeteria is one good example of IBM's sturdy, coherent personnel policies.
Most other aspects of personnel management are single-status, too, although IBM UK has gone with the national trend by providing cars for managers where their outside counterparts would merit cars.
A strong, coherent and well-administered personnel strategy is where I believe IBM's secret of success has been, is, and will continue to be.
What other company could pull itself round as radically as this in such a short time?
Others are trying, but IBM is beginning to show signs of being able to achieve it — by USING its culture, not trying fruitlessly to change it.
Culture, after all, is a collection of beliefs and assumptions and behaviours that belongs to the members, not the managers.
Respectability, one of the strongest threads in the fabric of IBM's culture, comes from its founder, Thomas J Watson Senior .
In 1914 Watson left National Cash Register under a cloud of monopoly and competitive charges that might have put him in jail.
The same year, age 40, he married a woman with strong religious beliefs, and took over a cluster of little companies that made things like office clocks.
Watson was determined that his company, rather  optimistically named ‘International Business Machines’, would be the most respectable, worthy, and successful company in the world.
He more or less succeeded.
In days when salesmen wore flash suits and spats, IBM people were directed to dress soberly, eschew strong drink, and go to church.
Then, as now, the key person was what IBM calls the ‘first-line manager’, the one who supervises the 8–10 people in a basic working group.
IBM does everything it can to enable and ennoble this basic manager.
He (often ‘she’) hires, fires (well…‘appraises’ anyway), decides the pay, and is the company's key communicator for his band of IBMers.
At the same time, old Watson understood that differences would arise between managers and managed, and a disaffected employee could do the company's image harm in the small-town American environment of upstate New York.
So he proclaimed: ‘My door is always open’.
And it was.
(That's the basic difference between IBM and other companies.)
It still is.
In any Open Door disagreement, the employee is assumed to be right unless the manager has impeccable documentation to the contrary.
In practise, the employee goes to the level he feels is appropriate often just to his manager's manager.
He can continue to appeal, or go to some other level, until he feels justice has been done.
In a year the chairman's office might deal with two or three Open Doors regarding dismissal, a few more about advancement, pay, or being moved, a couple where the employee and his manager couldn't get along, and a handful of others.
Perhaps 20 cases, for a population over 15,000 — a useful investment in making sure justice is seen to be done.
This was Watson's first known attempt to short-circuit the information filters that build up as organisations get larger.
Like Britain's Royal Family, he valued every opportunity to cut through ritual and listen to his people tell it like it was.
Open Door was ritualised a bit, inevitably, but it continued.
And other forms of two-way communication evolved, each with the same purpose, to keep the top in touch with the bottom.
' Speak-up ' gave anonymity, so anyone with a question could get it answered, either in public through the company newspapers, or privately through the trusted senior coordinator.
Twenty years ago I wrote: ‘IBM is a strict parent (especially for managers) but a good provider.
The policy with respect to pay is to be about 7 percent above the national norm (as IBM determines the norm among companies it considers comparable).’
That hasn't changed at all.
They call it Pay for Performance , and it is still the first-line manager who decides who is performing.
This could be said of IBM's personnel in general:The fundamentals haven't changed .
IBM's basic values, stated by Tom Watson Jr in 1957, are
(1)
respect for the individual, and
(2)
pursuit of excellence.
‘Respect for the individual’ still drives personnel policies, but its manifestations move with the times.
Thus they have ‘pay for performance’, with a strong emphasis on giving people the skills and tools to improve their performance.
From this, in the 60s and 70s, they developed individual appraisal and counselling , which has evolved and become more open.
This improvement in ‘A&C;’ is one  discernible change — for the better.
A few IBM personnel people used to hope it would become more helpful ‘C’, less gimlet-eyed ‘A’.
Today it seems to me they have achieved this.
Anyone doing less than well will hear about it long before the annual A&C; session.
Instead, they have in place systems that literally force the manager to move around the table during the A&C; session to sit with the employee and scan the organisation for individual development opportunities.
This includes an Employee Development Plan, even an Employee Preparation form, all with  sign=offs and grandfather reviews and follow-ups.
‘It really is more open,’ an IBM personnel man says.
‘The employee development side has more focus and emphasis now.’
The IBM employee gets at least five days training every year.
He or she is expected (and expects) to drive his or her own development plan.
If the manager signs off the employee's plan as reasonable, then it follows that the manager has to help make it come true.
He (or she), in turn, is appraised from above and woe betide him if he (or she) has given his (or her) subordinate only lip service!
Respect for the individual implies equal opportunity for women and minorities — and IBM has set some good examples.
Twenty years ago they had Patricia Roberts Harris, a black woman lawyer, on the main board.
There are occasional unconscious barriers, as in many high-tech organisations, but IBM doesn't have to have an official Equal Opportunities Manager, and that is probably a good sign.
They say their selection policies are robust — though the numbers can vary.
IBM always did go for the best, aiming for the long term.
IBM's attrition rate is very low — about 2% at Greenock, which nonetheless chose about 200 new people last year.
The UK average is similar.
The fast growth in the sixties gave an ‘age-bump’ that has been a bit of a problem, with about a third of the IBM population between 40 and 50 now, and a steady rise in the average age in this ‘young men's business’to about 38 in 1989.
IBM's famous opinion survey is alive and well, running every second year, as it has for more than 20 years.
The content changes with time, but there are some core questions, ‘so we can track trends,’ says Gerry Boyle, Communications Manager at Greenock.
In essence, the survey asks IBMers:
What do you think of IBM?
What do you think of your manager?
What do you think of our personnel policies and how they're working?
What do you think of training…education…development.
Salary and rewards?
Recognition?
Employee communications?
Some of the new questions concerned smoking.
As a result of employee opinions, IBM changed its policy, and now people at Greenock smoke in designated areas only.
(The stats show more smokers per capita at Greenock than at many other IBM sites.)
For last three years the opinion survey has been on line on PROFS.
Employees can E-mail the results back.
The system was carefully designed for confidentiality, and everyone has a separate ID for the survey.
‘You CANNOT trace a reply to an individual,’ according to Jim Sullivan.
The response is encrypted as it is sent, and responses come back faster than pre-PROFS.
‘We get flash reports within days now.’
When the opinion survey asked employees whether they preferred it on paper or on-PROFS, 95% chose on-screen.
They have been aiming for 100% participation in the survey, but used to get 90%.
Since it went on PROFs the response rate is up to 98%.
Easier access is probably the reason, especially for travelling IBMers.
IBM's recognition budget has changed with the times.
Each first-line manager has direct authority to give anyone in his group up to about £60.
Originally this was in whatever form the manager thought best, flowers for the wife, gold pen with motto, etc.
Over the years it has settled down to the equivalent of ‘dinner for two’, thus about £60 in 1990 in Greenock.
But even recognition can be ritualised.
The employee now gets a form signed by his manager.
He then takes it to the bank and gets the money, to spend as he chooses.
Employee communications is one of IBM's strong suits, based on regular team meetings conducted by the first-line manager with his team.
The manager gets support in a number of ways.
At Greenock, for example, with 2500 employees, IBM has six people in employee communications.
They watch over a multitude of well-managed channels:
 Notice boards 
Speak-Ups
Site newspapers or magazines
Videos
Speeches and presentations
etc etc etc.
IBM's  notice boards are always classy.
Greenock's are among the most handsome I've seen, each one ‘owned’(some by veritable dragons who guard them watchfully).
Every notice is up to date, attractive, perfectly aligned on the purpose-built tacky surface.
The place is peppered with awards and mottos , an approach to life that dates back to the elder Watson, but would be recognised by any Japanese factory manager.
Greenock's lobby has in large brass letters the same motto that adorned the key IBM building in New York City in the thirties: ‘World Peace Through World Trade.’
You walk down the halls and see posters:
‘Our Quality is in Our Hands.’
‘Quality IS Our Business.’
The personnel man has seven awards or competence certificates and two fulsome farewell parchments framed on the walls of his office.
Personnel is running lean these days, as the company tries to become smaller and fitter.
Personnel used to be full of cells of specialists, in education, admin, communication, and so on.
Three years ago they went through a ‘cultural revolution’ like Mao's in China: Personnel apparatchiks were sent out into the field to become generalists, with only dotted lines back to their personnel masters.
The standards stayed high, but the sense of utter control seems lighter.
It is useful to remember that IBM has virtually no unions.
In a 1977 vote  initiated by ASTMS at Greenock, 13,000 voted against union representation, and only 44 employees were for it.
One manager with experience in the Clydeside shipyards told me: ‘We're union free because people trust the managers.
They have good careers, and they feel treated fairly.’
A 1988 survey by Tony Dickson and others at Glasgow College and Strathclyde University found that IBM employees had no aversion to unions — just felt they didn't need them.
The accessibility of their first-line managers was an important factor in people's attitudes.
The Full-Employment Policy in 1990
The full employment policy has been a cornerstone of IBM's culture.
John Akers wrote in the 1990 annual report: ‘We believe that the returns — in the loyalty, flexibility and productivity of IBM employees — continue to be a competitive advantage for the company.’
Its justification may have shifted slightly, from ‘belief’ to ‘competitive advantage’, but the cornerstone is still standing.
(I detect  a subtle shift towards more emphasis on individual's ‘choice’, including choice to leave.)
If you are going to maintain a full employment policy you have to do your manpower planning with consummate skill.
And you can't afford to be too closed to the outside world.
IBM was one of the first to develop the idea of' core' employees , though this concept is not stated as a policy.
A few years ago one could begin to glimpse a series of ‘cushions’ as IBM began to bring in more consultants, more temps, more part-timers, more student projects.
At the same time, more IBMers were encouraged to look at the outside via secondments or community links .
Both were managed well.
The best IBMers were sent out in the seventies on secondments, then seen to come back into promotions.
At a time when managers in other companies worried about being ‘out of sight, out of mind’, the IBMer had his Career Manager to keep him in view.
And IBM, like Xerox and a few others, encouraged any employee to spend up to 10% of his time on community activities of his choice.
This was and is a strong motivator for most IBMers, though no one ever discerned an IBMer's workload being reduced by 10% as a result.
As Akers points out, the outside change has been dramatic.
‘But there has been no change to the full employment policy.’,
a personnel man contends stoutly.
‘The outside world perceived it as ‘a job for life’, but people inside know it means you have EMPLOYMENT as long as you like.
That implies flexibility, in terms of skills, training, and even location.’
The papers have been full of IBM's headcount reduction, taking 10,000 people out of the US business during 1990.
Total restructuring costs of about $2.4 BILLION were written off in the fourth quarter of 1989.
Akers contended this would reduce IBM's ongoing cost and expense rate by about $ 1 billion a year.
(Thus shareholders will get about $ 1 per share extra earnings in 1991.)
The world-wide the population of IBMers dropped from 407,000 in 1985 to 383,000 in early 1990, with the US population at 206,000, down from 243,000 in 1985.
The numbers might have been much more dramatic but for IBM's long-term manpower planning, and some lessons learned from experience, like how to use  cusions .
IBM went through a similar tough patch in the early seventies (when the ‘Open Window’ began to encourage early retirement at 55).
‘Full Employment’ might mean only one alternative job assignment, and that one in Denver, but stoic IBMers went where they were sent, and did what was needed.
They and the company survived.
They expect to do so again.
How does IBM slenderise?
Attrition is low, and they don't want to stop recruiting, but they certainly slowed down the intake.
And not everyone is hired into a ‘job for life’(or ‘as long as he wishes’).
In recent years IBM has introduced four-year ' term contracts ' for some graduate entrants, like a commission in the service, to give fine training and work experience to people who will expect to move on at the end.
(There is presumably no reason IBM can't, like the services, make new offers to those it particularly wants to keep after the first time.)
Another cushion comes in part-time workers (about 400 in 1989), at least half of them women who were coming back part-time from a career-break scheme.
The company makes it quite clear that giving younger people career opportunities may mean moving older employees down the status ladder.
This was not so blatant 20 years ago, but many managers even then said they were ‘looking downhill’ from their 40s on.
Special offers sweeten the pot for those who wish to depart.
In the US in 1986 when they announced a voluntary retirement incentive (‘VRI’ in their parlance), 13,000 IBMers grabbed it; then in 88 when IBM consolidated US manufacturing and headquarters, another 7,500 went.
VRI in a few European locations accounted for about 2000 departures in 86 and 87.
Voluntary early retirement now starts at 53, but there are few takers at that age.
Special packages, like Skillbase in the UK, may speed the outflow eventually.
Then IBM trains the living daylights out of everyone left in the office, and moves many out into the front lines.
The IBMers who remain aren't making as much fuss as the outsiders looking in; many are enjoying new challenges, finding new career opportunities.
Certainly, they are more accustomed to moving.
‘IBM stands for ‘I've Been Moved’,’ was one of my chapter headings in the early seventies.
(That's gained a more recent wrinkle: ‘IBM stands for In Between Marriages,’ says one veteran.
Divorce was pretty rare in the seventies in IBM.)
American employees have always been more willing than Europeans to move a few thousand miles to follow a job, or take a better one.
Even so, employee mobility is diminishing, worldwide, as people realise their loyalty to an employer is not always a guarantee of job security, and quality of life takes a higher focus for many.
Like every other company, IBM has certainly encountered more ‘sticky– situations, where the individual chooses to stay put because of the wife's job or the children's school.
However, the corporate culture, and the practices that back it up, have at least three features that encourage mobility:
The prevalence of assignments for development, coupled with the belief that being moved is A Good Thing, a reward for virtue.
Everyone who goes on assignment has a Career Manager, someone back at home base chartered to keep the assignee informed, happy, plugged-in — and to make sure he (or even she) comes back to a suitable job.
Most IBM cluster sites have someone local who helps families settle in, get the gas turned-on and the phone installed, not to mention introducing the family to the local social activities among IBMers.
Greenock has about 120 people out on assignment.
This includes about 60 talented young graduates and engineers (what most companies might call the ‘A list’) who now have a stint out on the front line,.
‘If we don't keep selling, we don't have any business,’ says a manager.
Akers called it –the largest retraining and redeployment program in IBM's history.’
World-wide, over 60,000 IBMers were retrained and reassigned to new jobs since 1987; more than half switched from overhead HQ, admin, or distribution jobs into sales, systems engineering, programming, and other ‘useful’ jobs.
About 50,000 overhead jobs have gone, 11,000 from headquarters staffs alone.
Then there's the half-way house.
IBM might not like the idea, but the exit-consultancy idea was actually pioneered about a decade ago by NatWest, and Rank-Xerox had it's own form of in-house/out-house consultancy.
‘People who may want to leave the business, often have skills we need,’ an IBM personnel man explains, ‘so we have an  org called Skillbase.
They can go to work for Skillbase, and we guarantee minimum 90 days a year work for about 40% of the previous base pay.’
Skillbase members have to be ‘available’ at least 9 months of the year — but IBM counts management and technical training into that 9 months.
And Skillbase markets their skills to other organisations as well, calling it ‘executive leasing’(or for highest positions ‘interim management’— perhaps a term that could be applied to Sir Len Peach's stint at the NHS).
163 IBMers have joined Skillbase in Britain since it started in July 90.
IBM has invested £200,000 in the organisation, for a 40% equity stake.
IBM in the US recently announced a management leveraged buyout of the Lexington Kentucky keyboard factory.
They set up a wholly-owned subsidiary called Information Products, which is now in discussion with an outside venture capital company which will take a major shareholding.
Employees in Lexington will become employees of the new company — if they choose to stay there.
 Otherwise they can retire, or move to other IBM plants.
EVERYTHING IS VOLUNTARY Everyone who wanted to continue working for IBM is working for IBM.
It may be only outsider skepticism that leads me to see a subtle, probably subconscious new emphasis on the word ‘choice’.
‘You have employment as long as you wish with IBM’, they say.
It seems to me they used to refer to ‘employment for life’.
The development of PROFS (100% hands-on by 1986) certainly contributed to IBM's ability to start moving people out of‘above branch’ admin and support positions in 1987.
Someone analysed the competition: How many calls did the customer get from DEC, HP, etc?
It turned out he had less from IBM!
Now he gets more — and marketing has 23% more of IBM's employees.
New Models for Education and Training
Moving is development in IBM — and to bring that full circle, the depth of well developed IBM people has demonstrated itself in the company's extraordinary ability to get so many thousand people into new jobs, even in new places.
‘In Europe, as well as the US, you have to be willing to learn,’ says an IBMer.
In the UK, it's been ‘back to the field’, as it has world wide.
This means a lot of new jobs.
It's exciting.
And it implies an enormous investment in training.
(IBM never did and probably never will do anything without proper training, planned in from the  beginning .
‘Training is always crucial,’ says the IBMer.
‘More than ever now.
It's one of our key strategies to make sure we're competitive in education and training.
Greenock, for example, spent over £4 million in the last four years in education and training.
John McLelland, Greenock's former manager, is credited with new education achievements in Scotland.
Needing a flexible, well-motivated workforce, he looked at the Japanese educational profile.
Japan has 55% grads, vs IBM 30%.
McLelland developed a plan to take Greenock to 55% by 1994 — by sending a quarter of his employees to university!
They identified areas where IBM wanted people to develop: they wanted computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) know-how ; they wanted engineers to have business skills; they wanted people in manufacturing areas to have higher skill levels; they wanted to increase the flexibility of the organisation.
So they scanned the local horizon and set up agreements with Strathclyde for management skills, Napier Poly for plastic skills, Paisley College of Technology for Materials skills, and so on.
This University of Spango Valley had several significant features:
1.
They send lecturers to the plant one afternoon a week to teach.
No travel, No fees.
IBM pays.
2.
There are no prior educational requirements — it's all OPEN ENTRY.
Without having been to college or tech or university, an IBMer at Greenock can take an MBA.
The company convinced the academics that ‘equivalent professional experience’ should be viewed as equal to a first degree.
The first graduates in 1991 will earn such degrees as
MBA
MSc in CIM
MSc in Plastic Moulding Technology
HNC in Manufacturing
HND in Materials Sciences
The last three didn't exist until IBM needed them.
Like every other IBM policy, this one administered very uniformly.
Communications Manager Gerry Boyle is a good example, doing his MSc in Human Resource Management at Strathclyde with project on the effects of shift working in high-technology manufacturing.
Similar local developments and open entry are being negotiated at other IBM locations but Greenock was proud to be first.
Management development is perceived to have more power, and more presence in Greenock, according to Jim Seizes, who is in charge of management development.
What's changed?
It is institutionalised.
It is not just A Good Thing, but seen as an important part of the business.
At the same time they have re-examined ‘respect for the individual’, and focussed back on the manager's role in developing trust, justice, helping employees take ownership of their jobs.
They have trained-in a succession of concepts over the years: decision making, then situational leadership, and then contingency theory.
That approach enabled IBM's rapid assimilation of quality ideas, then the Peters and Waterman ‘Managing Excellence’ programmes (which were, after all, based on observations of IBM to a considerable, if un-acknowledged, extent).
‘Management development and Quality joined forces and achieved real fusion,’ says Jim Seizes.
Thus they could move on to running ‘Quality as a Business’, and more recently ‘Post Zero Defects’.
The current management training theme is ‘Management of Change’, with a ‘Six Sigma’ approach (well beyond the ‘Three Sigma’ultimate one used to learn in statistics)— putting real emphasis on how they're going to achieve defect-free products.
To maintain the management culture, new ideas are thus injected into the company through new-manager training, the key course for first-time first-line managers.
Thence it moves into existing management training — and every manager gets at least five days a year about managing people, in addition to the five days a year basic training that every IBMer is supposed to have.
So, unlike most companies, IBM can guarantee that a new concept is going to reach the entire management population within a year — and IBMers are sufficiently motivated to want to catch up if they hear there is something new coming.
A Decade — or so — of Quality
‘Look, ma, no hands!’
These incredibly difficult organisational changes look easy when IBM does them.
In Management and Machiavelli Tony Jay noticed IBM's ‘ten-man hunting band’, a basic element of its strength.
That hunting band had weekly meetings, a well-trained manager, clear objectives — so it was pretty easy to turn it into a Quality Circle in 1980.
From there no trouble evolving to Total Quality Management around 1985, to Just In Time manufacturing in the later 80s.
Each shift required great energy, but (compared to other large  companies' efforts) all were nearly natural developments of existing momentum.
And now?
The new corporate watchword is ‘Market-Driven Quality’.
This seems to be a practical five-part programme, defined with chairman John Akers's full involvement, and driven by an executive who reports direct to Akers.
The initiatives?:
(1)
define market needs better,
(2)
eliminate defects,
(3)
reduce product cycle times,
(4)
increase employee participation, and
(5)
implement common measurements.
Behind the slogans and awards, they will probably make pretty sound progress on all those fronts.
Pharmacy Survey Responses
27 responses as of 31 March — delayed due to distribution difficulties.
Key findings
The responses reveal a rather worrying lack of communication, with a resulting lack of trust.
People perceive a lack of openness .
Only 14% mention the supervisor as a source of information, yet most report they have weekly meetings.
The most severe problem area, in the charts, seems to be a lack of clarity about the job itself — and a related lack of information needed to do the job (46%, compared to 70% for the Unit as a whole.)
These come from supervisors.
Teamwork scores are low (57% v 78%).
People feel consulted about decisions that affect them, and they say suggestions are encouraged.
Fewer than average feel informed about the Unit, or believe it wants their views — these, too, are measures of line management communication.
61% mention staff meetings as a source.
Unit Headlines and  notice boards are also high, as are external media sources.
Recommendations
The Pharmacy would do well to consider implementing the suggestions from staff members for intra-department communication, both formal and informal.
Make sure supervisors are well informed and have proper training to hold their own staff meetings effectively.
If supervisors are included in regular management meetings they should be more effective communicators.
Make all meetings, including management meetings, more transparent and open by asking a member to take a few ‘bullet-point’ notes, and post these meeting notes, hand-written, immediately after the meeting.
They make a useful, non-bureaucratic record over time, they keep people who couldn't attend informed, and they reassure people that there aren't secret proceedings.
Review the staff meetings schedule to make sure everyone is able to attend regularly.
Get rapid responses to queries people raise in their staff meetings.
Feed back through supervisors.
Are there problems with the distribution or content of Hospital News?
The charts:
The charts on the following pages show the Pharmacy responses compared to those for the Unit as a whole.
There are three charts:
The work itself
Line management communication
Unit communication (as filtered through the line management)
The keywords on the bottom of these three charts refer to the survey statements (enclosed).
The charts entitled ‘One-way channels’ and ‘Two-way channels show where people say they currently get their information; the ‘Supervisors and Grapevines’chart compares your department results regarding these two channels with results from a few other departments.
Pharmacy write-in comments
Comments about Trust status and job security have been included in the central report for the Unit Management Board.
I could do a better job if I knew more about…
hospital/unit strategic plan
movements in the dept
the ‘hidden agenda’ of management
management's plans for the dept
when they make changes
service developments in own dept and others
the working of the system
suppliers, eg bacteriology porters
performance appraisal 2
customer experiences
the areas I needed to improve on — ie, more mentor meeting.
what was expected of me and encouraged
ICSIS
new computer systems recently implemented
We have good communication between departments…
some departments.
The unit tries to get the views and thinking of people who work here…
only senior management
I expect communication to improve as a result of this survey…
hopefully
I don't think it could be much worse in this dept
My department needs better communication with…
wards
doctors and nursing staff
internal and external colleagues & customers 
porters
supporting labs — clinical chem, bacteriology
other clinical support services, eg laboratories, other paramedical depts
other departments 2
its own members 4
everybody 2
The thing that would most improve communication here is…
more info from dept head.
people communicating together from all levels
communication from the top
recognition that the recipient is the best person to decide what information is appropriate to himself.
All information should be disseminated.
an openness, frankness which prevents rumours occurring.
honesty and a reduction in passing the buck
common sense
a redesigned department which ensured that all staff were in contact with each other— not hidden in offices or separate sections of the department.
A department rest room would help this.
some sort of PR exercise where every dept could have a day where they made presentations and/or gave talks about services their dept provides, eg outside log cabin, or in nurse's home, or a dept open day if possible.
physio day, haematology day, pharmacy day?
more social facilities to improve informal relations at grass roots
team briefings
discussion
more informal meetings, with positive outcomes.
I attend regular ward meetings or staff meetings…
work part time, go home before meetings start
regular meetings at specified frequency about to be organised
weekly 21
seldom 4
The Survey Statements:
The work itself:
Clarity:
I am quite clear what is expected of me in my job.
Feedback:
I get enough information to tell how well I'm doing.
Achievement:
My work gives me a feeling of achievement.
Job info:
I have the information I need to do a good job.
Write-in:
I could do a better job if I knew more about 
Line management communication:
Thanks:
Supervisors usually thank you for a job well done.
Advocacy:
Employee criticisms and concerns are passed up the line to department and directorate management.
Suggestions:
I feel free to make suggestions.
Teamwork:
My group has a good sense of teamwork.
Mgr asks:
My views are taken into account in decisions that affect my job.
Write-in:
The thing that would most improve communication here is 
Meetings:
I attend regular ward meetings or staff meetings: weekly, monthly, quarterly, seldom, never (write-in).
Unit communication:
Informed:
The unit keeps me fairly well informed.
Unit asks:
The unit tries to get the views and thinking of people who work here.
Trust app:
I have enough information about the unit's trust application.
Survey:
I expect communication to improve as a result of this survey.
Inter-dept:
We have good communication between departments.
Write-in:
My department needs better communication with 
Communication channels:
Actual:
I get useful information about the unit from 
Prefer:
I would prefer to get information about the unit from 
Believe:
You can usually believe the information you get from 