

COMPUTERS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Computer software and copyright
IDEA/EXPRESSION AND NON-LITERAL COPYING
Copyright does not give a monopoly in ideas; what it does is to prevent a person from copying or otherwise capitalizing on tangible expressions of ideas made by others.
Copyright protects expression not idea.
Therefore, in principle, it is quite acceptable to write a novel about a secret agent in the style of Ian Fleming as long as it does not contain copies of parts of James Bond novels.
The late Ian Fleming did not have a monopoly in tongue-in-cheek, humorous adventures about secret agents, but a novelist might commit the tort of  passing-off if he changes his name to Ian Fleming or uses the name James Bond or the 007 code in his novel.
Copyright protection, however, does not extend to ephemeral things such as skeletal plots for novels or ideas for computer programs unless and until they are recorded in some form or another and, even then, it is the ideas as expressed which are protected, not the underlying concepts.
A literal copy of a computer program infringes copyright if made without the consent of the copyright owner.
However, copying is not necessarily limited to duplication of substantial parts and it is possible to copy a computer program in a wider sense.
For example, the structure, flow and sequence of events expressed in a computer program may be copied and, if a different computer programming language is used, the listing of the second program will look dissimilar to the listing of the first program.
Should the use of one program to assist with the writing of a second program in such a way be within the ambit of copyright protection even though the codes of the two programs look dissimilar?
In other words, should copyright extend to non-literal elements which are not directly perceivable?
This question is of such fundamental importance because, if answered in the negative, copyright protection for computer programs would be considerably weakened.
The United States of America has progressed much further than the United Kingdom has in determining this question but the basic legal principles are the same: copyright protects expression but not idea.
Nevertheless, expression goes beyond the immediate literal form.
For example in the United Kingdom case of Glyn v Weston Feature Film Co. [1916], in which it was argued (unsuccessfully) that a film infringed the copyright in a novel, it was acknowledged that copyright can extend beyond the literal text of a book to the dramatic scenes and incidents contained within it.
Idea/expression in the United States
Because expression may exist at various levels of abstraction (for example, in the program's structure) the courts have to be able to distinguish between idea and expression.
This has not proved easy and the following trilogy of United States cases give an indication of the development of tests which may be applicable in the United Kingdom (United States law has no binding effect on the United Kingdom courts but it may be of persuasive authority, particularly in the field of computer technology).
In Whelan Associates Inc. v Jaslow Dental Laboratory Inc. [1987], the programs being compared were designed to assist with the administration of dental laboratories.
The same person was involved in the development of each program but they were written in different computer languages, the first was written in EDL and the second, attempting to infiltrate the micro-computer market, was written in BASIC.
Thus, there was no substantial literal similarity between the listings of the two programs.
(In United Kingdom law, as we have seen, a translation of a computer program from one computer language to another infringes copyright as an adaptation.)
The United States Court of  Appeals (3rd circuit) distinguished between idea and expression by reference to the purpose of the program.
The purpose of a utilitarian work is the idea of the work whereas everything pertaining to the work which is not necessary to the purpose is expression.
If there are several ways of achieving the desired purpose, none of which is necessary to the purpose, those ways are expressions and, consequently, protected by copyright.
The purpose of the original program in Whelan v Jaslow was to assist in the running of dental laboratories.
Because there are several different methods which could be employed to achieve that same purpose, the structure of that original program was not essential to the purpose and, hence, the structure was expression and not idea.
The purpose itself, being the idea, was not protected by copyright; it is quite acceptable for others to write programs to help with the running of dental laboratories.
In this case the structures of the two programs were similar, the programs had a similar look and feel even though written in different computer programming languages and this, coupled with the fact that the same person had been involved in the two programs, raised a strong presumption that there had been copying and, hence, an infringement of copyright.
The distinction between idea and expression has been applied in the context of screen displays.
In the "Pac-Man" computer games the maze and dots were deemed to be idea, being necessarily dictated by the program function, but the "Pac-Man" and "ghost monsters" characters were considered to be expression as different graphical representations could have been used.
Another important case involved the spreadsheet program Lotus 1-2-3 and a compatible spreadsheet program called VP-Planner.
In Lotus Development Corp. v Paperback Software International (1990), the defendant claimed that he had not copied the Lotus program code but had used a similar menu system to achieve compatibility (especially with respect to spreadsheet files and macros) and to enable people to change to VP-Planner from Lotus 1-2-3 without requiring re-training.
The similarities between the programs were the menu command system (two-line moving cursor menu) and the grid system (letters and numbers arranged in a "rotated L" ).
It was held that the defendant had infringed copyright by copying the two-line moving cursor menu.
Various spreadsheet programs used different menu systems showing that the system used by Lotus was expression and not idea.
However, there was no infringement of the rotated "L" grid as this was idea, it being almost inevitable that a spreadsheet program would use such a system.
These two cases, although subjected to criticism, seem to strengthen copyright protection notwithstanding that the "look and feel" test is not always easy to apply in practice.
However, evidence of different structures in other programs designed to perform the same function would assist the plaintiff who argued that the structure of his program was protectable expression and not unprotectable idea.
Nevertheless, in a major reversal of policy, the "look and feel" test in Whelan v Jaslow has been strongly disapproved of in the United States Court of Appeals, 2nd circuit, in the case of Computer Associates International Inc. v Altai (1992).
The defendant had produced a program called "Oscar" , a job scheduling program for controlling the order in which tasks are  carried out by a computer.
It incorporated a common interface component allowing the use of different operating systems and this part had been added by a former employee of the plaintiff who had a similar program and interface.
The plaintiff's former employee was very familiar with the interface element (known as "Adapter" ) which was part of the plaintiff's "CA-Scheduler" program and had even been allowed to take a copy of the "Adapter" source code home whilst working on it.
When the plaintiff issued a summons and complaint, the defendant re-wrote "Oscar" , using different programmers in an effort to avoid infringing the plaintiff's copyright in "Adapter" .
The plaintiff still proceeded even though the defendant had agreed not to challenge an award of $364,444 damages in respect of the earlier version of "Oscar" .
The trial judge held that the later version of Oscar did not infringe the "Adapter" copyright and the plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeals which confirmed the decision of the trial judge.
In a far-reaching judgment, the Court of Appeals laid down a new test for the determination of the question of non-literal copyright infringement, that is, whether there has been an infringement of copyright in non-literal elements such as program structure.
The test requires a three-step procedure as follows: Abstraction — discovering the non-literal elements by a process akin to reverse engineering, beginning with the code and ending with the program's ultimate function.
The designer's steps are retraced and mapped.
This produces structures of different detail at varying levels of abstraction.
Filtration — the separation of protectable expression from non-protectable material.
Some elements will be unprotected being idea, dictated by considerations of efficiency (therefore necessarily incidental to idea), required by external factors (scenes a faire doctrine), or taken from the public domain.
These elements are filtered out leaving a core of protectable material (this is the program's "golden nugget" ).
Comparison — a determination of whether the defendant has copied a substantial part of the protected expression — whether any aspect has been copied and, if so, an assessment of the copied portion's relative importance in respect of the plaintiff's overall program.
Of course, this test only applies to non-literal copying and the actual code remains fully protected against direct (literal) copying.
However, this new test is likely to significantly reduce the strength of protection for program structure, menu command systems and interfaces.
In many cases, it is submitted that, after the process of filtration, there will be no "gold nuggets" left, that is, no protectable expression to go forward to the process of comparison.
It remains to be seen what effect this case will have on copyright litigation in the United States (the judges in the Court of Appeals recognized that their test would be difficult to apply and would need further case law before its application could be predicted with any certainty).
Even more interesting is the effect, if any, on copyright law in the United Kingdom and other common law countries such as Australia and New Zealand, although it should be noted that the previous test in  Whelan v Jaslow has not had any notable judicial successes in the United Kingdom even though it has been used in argument on frequent occasions.
Copying in practice
Will copyright law be developed by the courts to prevent the marketing of "lookalike" computer programs?
Obviously, if a company makes a new type of computer program which proves to be very successful, other companies will want to bring out their own versions of that type of program in order to gain a share in the market created or stimulated by the first program.
Essentially, copyright law does not prevent this as long as the original program is not copied or adapted.
Even if copying extends to the structure and other non-literal elements of a program this should not prevent competitors bringing out programs to perform similar functions.
A line must be drawn somewhere and the following hypothetical examples, involving two software companies Acme and Zenith, indicate where it might be drawn.
Acme developed a program to record and monitor drug dosages to hospital patients and Zenith, shortly afterwards, brought out a similar program.
1.
Zenith did not know of the existence of Acme's program — no infringement of copyright.
2.
Zenith knew of the existence of Acme's program but had not seen it in use — no infringement of copyright, the function of the program is idea, not expression.
3.
Zenith had seen Acme's program in use and decided to write a program to fulfil the same purpose, that is, to monitor drug dosages.
Zenith did not refer to Acme's program further than this and Zenith developed its own methods of performing the purpose.
The structures of the two programs are different in many respects and where they are similar this is the result of coincidence only or because they are constrained by the function — no infringement of copyright.
4.
Zenith buys a copy of Acme's program.
Zenith cannot see the source code because the copy is compiled (in object code), but by using the program extensively, Zenith gets a good insight into the workings and structure of Acme's program and, based on this insight, Zenith writes its program (obviously without using a source code listing of Acme's program).
Zenith's knowledge of Acme's program is no more than a competent user would achieve — possible infringement of copyright because the structure of Zenith's program is determined by Zenith's familiarity with the structure of Acme's program which Zenith copies indirectly, although the Computer Associates test, discussed above, might reduce protection.
5.
Zenith disassembles Acme's program and re-writes parts of it to make its program, perhaps using a different computer language — definite infringement of copyright (the act of disassembly itself will constitute an infringement of copyright).
The "decompilation" exception is unlikely to apply here (see later).
6.
Zenith employs an ex-programmer of Acme who is familiar with the program; this person writes a program for Zenith using copies of listings and flowcharts that he retained.
Qualitatively substantial parts of the program code are incorporated in the new program — definite infringement of copyright.
7.
As 6. above but the ex-programmer of Acme has not retained any materials from his previous employment; he simply uses what he can remember — possible infringement of copyright.
The last example lies in a difficult area and is tied up with questions relating to be the law of confidence and restraint of trade.
Ex-employees frequently cause problems because of the difficulty in reconciling their continuing duty to their ex-employer with the need to be able to obtain other employment.
If the ex-employer is not allowed to make use of anything at all from his past experience, he may well be virtually unemployable because what he has done previously is an integral part of his skill and expertise.
This question will be considered further in Chapter 6 on the law of confidence; at this stage it needs to be noted that an ex-employee will be able to make use of his skills and what he remembers as long as these are not genuine trade secrets.
In terms of writing computer software, a program to automate an existing manual process will probably not be considered a trade secret.
If company B writes a program independently and, by chance, it turns out to be very similar to a program written by company A, there is no infringement of copyright because there has been neither copying nor adaptation of A's program and both A and B will have a copyright in their respective programs.
A substantial similarity between programs, however, can suggest that one has been copied from the other and this can shift the burden of proof to the defendant, especially if there is something else to support the view that copying may have taken place, such as access to the original program by the defendant, see L.B. Plastics Ltd. v Swish Products Ltd. [1979].
This means that instead of requiring the plaintiff to show that copying had taken place, the defendant will have to show that he did not, in fact, copy the plaintiff's work and such a shift in the burden of proof can be exceedingly onerous to the defendant.
One approach to the question of copying was suggested by the Court of Appeal in Francis, Day & Hunter Ltd. v Bron [1963], a case concerning an alleged infringement of an old song entitled "In a Little Spanish Town" .
For copying to be proved, the test is as follows: a) there must be a sufficient objective similarity between the two works (an objective issue — that is, would the "reasonable man" consider the two works sufficiently similar), and b) there must also be some causal connection between the two works (a subjective question but not to be presumed as a matter of law merely upon proof of access).
It is possible to infringe copyright by subconsciously copying a work, although this is probably more relevant to the music industry than the computer industry.
Thus George Harrison's song "My Sweet Lord" was alleged to have infringed  an earlier song "He's so Fine" , but it is thought that the evidence required to support this proposition would have to be quite strong.
Taken to its logical conclusion this might encourage software developers to adopt a "clean-room" approach, denying access to existing software by the programmers and analysts in an effort to try to prevent accusations of copying.
In most cases, this would not be realistic given the likelihood that any skilled programmer would already have a wide knowledge of other software products.
Even if it is feasible, there is no guarantee that this would provide a defence to an infringement action.
In the New Zealand case of Plix Products Ltd. v Frank M Whinstone (Merchants)[1986], the defendant asked his designer to design a kiwifruit pack without talking to others in this field and without looking at existing packs.
Although there was no direct copying it was held that the copyright in the plaintiff's packs had been infringed through the medium of the New Zealand kiwifruit Authority's specification for packs and the court also seemed to accept the possibility that copyright can be infringed through a verbal description.
New Zealand copyright law is very similar to United Kingdom law, although, in the United States, it would be likely that the design features indicated in the specification would be considered to be an unprotectable idea.
The implications of indirect copying (expressly covered by the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, s.16) are serious for the software industry and care must be taken to avoid such a claim.
There is even a case for deliberately making elements in a computer program (including non-literal elements) different to the equivalent part of competing programs if this does not compromise the functionality, usability and attractiveness of the program.
Even if copyright protection of computer programs is developed by the courts to become stronger, the Act does contain safeguards.
By section 144(1), as a result of a report of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, the Secretary of State may grant a licence as of right if the public interest would be prejudiced; for example, if the owner of the copyright in a unique computer program refuses to grant licences on reasonable terms.
So, if a company has a virtual monopoly in a particular type of computer system, charges an exorbitant price for it and the Commission prepares a report to the effect that this situation is against the public interest, anyone will be able to apply for a compulsory licence to use the software.
The licence fee and other terms of the licence will be decided by the Copyright Tribunal, a body set up to administer licensing schemes.
By section 66 of the Act, the Secretary of State may also order that rentals of computer programs are to be treated as being licensed by the copyright owner subject to payment of a reasonable royalty.
It is unlikely that either provision will be needed but the fact that they exist may help to prevent undesirable practices developing with respect to computer software.
EXCEPTIONS TO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT
When it was decided to classify computer programs as literary works for copyright purposes, the usual exceptions to copyright infringement applied.
The  Act contains a great many exceptions called the "permitted acts" , for example, fair-dealing for research or private study or for criticism, review or news reporting.
In order to provide for uniform protection of computer programs throughout the European Community, a Council Directive on the legal protection of computer programs was published in 1991 (91/250/EEC).
United Kingdom law was already well developed and complied with most (if not all) of the Directive's provisions.
However, because some aspects of United Kingdom law were somewhat vague and ill-defined (for example, the meaning of fair-dealing) it was decided to tighten up some of the exceptions to copyright infringement, the necessary changes to the 1988 Act being made by the Copyright (Computer Programs) Regulations 1992.
Three particular issues were addressed: the right, under certain circumstances, to "decompile" an existing computer program a right to take necessary back-up copies a right to copy and adapt including for error correction.
These three important exceptions to copyright infringement are described and examined below.
It should be pointed out that the previous law probably covered most of the acts.
For example, fair dealing for research purposes might have allowed decompilation in some circumstances and implied licences might have been appropriate in some cases involving error correction and back-up copies.
One further point is that, in addition to statutory defences to copyright infringement, there is a defence of public interest, for example, if it is in the public interest that a program listing is published.
This might apply to code used by "hackers" to penetrate computer systems because publication would assist managers of computer installations in their attempts to combat computer hacking.
Decompilation of computer programs
 "Decompilation" is used in a wide sense and defined in section 50B as converting a copy of a computer program expressed in a low-level language into a version expressed in a higher-level language and extends to copying incidental to such conversion.
The restricted act of making an adaptation includes decompilation and infringes copyright unless allowed by the new decompilation right.
The normal fair dealing provisions apply otherwise.
By section 50B(1), a lawful user (being a person having a right under a licence or otherwise to use the program, s.50A(2)) may decompile the program if necessary to obtain the information necessary to achieve the interoperability of any independently created program with the decompiled program or other program.
In other words, it is permissible for a lawful user to decompile or disassemble a computer program to determine its interfaces if this is a necessary step in creating a new program which will interoperate (interact) with that or some other program.
Typically, a software developer might want to write a word processing program which will be compatible with another company's  spreadsheet program so that data and files can be passed between the two programs.
Figure 3 shows this.
This form of compatibility is certainly desirable and should not cause any great concerns, unless the spreadsheet company was hoping to make its own compatible word processor in the future.
However, there may be a loophole and that is that once the compatible interoperable program has been created there seems no reason why the interface details cannot be subsequently used to create competing, replacement programs as long as there is not a substantial copy made of the code in the original program, as indicated in Figure 3.
The Act, as amended, attempts to deal with this situation by making the use or supply of the information for any other objective, or in the development, production or marketing of any computer program substantially similar in its expression to the original program, an infringement of copyright (s.50B(2)).
However, re-use of interface details will not necessarily result in a substantially similar expression and, in the example in Figure 3, the expression (program listings and structure) may be quite different.
Interface details may be qualitatively insubstantial, after all the program is a spreadsheet program, not an interface program, and may be written in different code to achieve the same purpose.
In practice, these provisions will be very difficult to apply but the preamble to the EC Directive may give some assistance as it talks about the European Community being fully committed to the promotion of international standardization.
The only other proviso is that the creation of the second spreadsheet program should not have been in the contemplation of the licensed user when decompiling the original program, otherwise the permitted objective of decompilation might be compromised.
Furthermore, the decompilation right does not apply if the information required has been previously readily available (s.50B(3)); for example, the interface details have been published or made available at reasonable cost.
A further point is that there is no need to rely on the right unless the decompilation is carried out to a substantial part of the original program (there is no infringement to excuse otherwise).
The decompilation right cannot be taken away by terms in a licence agreement, any such term being unenforceable at law (section 296A).
Back-up copies of computer programs
It is essential that back-up copies of computer programs are made.
A back-up copy will be needed if the original copy of the computer program becomes damaged or corrupted in any way.
The original may be physically damaged if a cup of coffee is spilt over it or the magnetic impulses on the disk representing the program may be destroyed or altered by exposure to a strong magnetic field.
The original may become contaminated with a computer "virus" .
If a computer program has been obtained for use in a commercial environment, whether it be a word processing package, accounts system or spreadsheet, the chances are that the original will fail at the worst possible moment.
If a back-up copy is available a potential disaster can be averted and the urgent report or whatever can still be completed on time.
The Act, as amended, makes specific provision for the making of back-up copies of computer programs.
Before the amendments made by the Copyright (Computer Programs) Regulations 1992, there was no such provision although the courts may have been prepared to imply an appropriate term into a software licence where the making of a back-up copy was reasonably necessary to the use of the program in question.
Of course, many software companies make express provision for the user to make a back-up copy.
It is common for the installation instructions to ask the licensed user to make a copy of the program first and use this as the working copy, placing the original disks in a safe place in case the working disks become damaged or corrupted in some way.
Section 50A states that copyright is not infringed by a lawful user making an additional copy of a computer program for back-up purposes if doing so is necessary to the lawful use.
This right cannot be taken away by any terms in a licence agreement but there may be some difficulty with deciding when making a back-up copy is truly necessary.
It might not be so if a licence agreement includes terms to the effect that the licensor will himself make a further copy available to the licensee in the event of failure of the original copy.
The Act recognizes the possibility that back-up copies may have been made.
Section 56 deals with transfers of works in electronic form and the position with respect to copies which are not transferred along with the original software.
This is best described by way of an example.
A business, Acme Ltd., obtains a word processing package (WORDY); the licence agreement allows the making of one back-up copy.
Acme uses WORDY and makes two copies of it, one for back-up and one for use on another computer.
Two years later, Acme decides to obtain some new computers and a more powerful word processing program.
It looks at the WORDY licence and sees that the licence does not prevent the transfer of the package to someone else.
Acme assigns its licence to use WORDY to the Zenith Co. and transfers the original copy of the program plus the single back-up copy.
By section 56, Acme was permitted to transfer the software because there were no express terms in the licence agreement prohibiting this, but it should have transferred all copies of WORDY.
By section 56(2), the copy it has retained is treated as an infringing copy and could leave Acme liable to the owner of the copyright in the word processing  programs.
Additionally, because Acme made two copies instead of the one permitted under the licence agreement, it was in breach of that agreement and, depending on the terms in the licence dealing with breach, may find that the licence was brought to an end and that the purported transfer to Zenith is void.
Miscellaneous exceptions and error correction
By section 50C, a lawful user is permitted to copy or adapt a computer program providing that it is necessary for his lawful use and not prohibited by the agreement regulating the use (for example, a licence agreement).
Section 50C(2) provides a specific example of when this may be necessary, that is, where it is for the purpose of error correction.
A licence agreement may specifically prohibit error correction so that all this provision does is to raise a presumption in favour of the lawful user.
For example, if disassembling a computer program in order to correct errors is necessary to the lawful use and there are no express terms prohibiting this, then it can be done without infringing copyright.
Again, the meaning of "necessary" may be at issue but the important factor is that the presumption can be and, in many cases, probably will be cancelled out by express terms.
A number of software companies are reluctant to allow licensees or third parties to modify programs.
For example, the modifications could be carried out badly, resulting in unfavourable publicity for the software company.
Section 296A(1) also makes any term or condition in an agreement void in so far as it purports to prohibit or restrict the use of any device or means to observe, study or test the functioning of a computer program in order to understand the ideas and principles underlying any element of the program.
This reinforces the idea/expression dichotomy but is unlikely to be welcomed by software producers.
It would, for example, excuse the form of reverse engineering used in the Dyason v Autodesk case (measuring the electrical signals passing between the dongle and the computer program).
The exceptions apply to new programs and programs in existence before 1st January 1993 (the commencement date for the new regulations).
But agreements and terms or conditions in agreements entered into before 1st January 1993 are unaffected.
For example, a term prohibiting making a back-up copy in a pre-1993 agreement will not be made invalid by reason of the changes brought about by the regulations even if the making of a back-up copy is deemed to be necessary to the lawful use of the program.
EMPLOYEES AND FREELANCE PROGRAMMERS
The author of a work is the first owner of the copyright in the work.
An exception which applies to literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works is where the work is made by an "employee in the course of his employment" , in which case the employer becomes the first owner of the copyright in the work (section 11(2)).
This raises the following questions: who is an employee? what is the position regarding freelance computer programmers and consultants? what is the meaning of "in the course of employment" ?
The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 does not specifically define these terms but states that "employed" , "employee" and "employer" and "employment" refer to employment under a contract of service or apprenticeship (section 178).
The question of ownership of computer programs written by freelance staff will be considered first.
Freelance staff
It is not always easy to identify when a person is an employee and when he is not; various tests have evolved and some concern questions of "control" .
These tests include whether the "employer" can tell the person what to do, when to do it and how to do it; does the "employer" provide the person with time for holidays, sick pay or a pension?
Does the person have to correct unsatisfactory work in his own time and at his own expense?
Who pays income tax?
In many cases the question will be answered by looking at the terms of the contract between the parties although a description of the parties as "employer" and "employee" is not conclusive.
In many cases, freelance staff, hired to perform a particular task such as writing or modifying a specific computer program, will be deemed to be self-employed.
The consequence of this is that the copyright in any program so written will, prima facie and in the absence of any agreement otherwise, belong to the freelance programmer.
It is essential, therefore, when employing freelance staff, or anyone else who is not employed on a permanent contract of employment, to make contractual provision for determining ownership of copyright.
The organization hiring the programmer or consultant may want to own the copyright so that it can exploit the resultant program itself, or it may simply want to prevent its competitors from obtaining a copy of it.
In either of these situations the contract should specifically state that the ownership of the copyright belongs to the organization and not to the programmer and, furthermore, there should be a written assignment of copyright, signed by the freelance programmer.
Of course, the fee charged will probably be greater as a result because the freelance programmer might have envisaged making use of the program elsewhere; he may know of other businesses which would be interested in what he produces.
On the other hand, if the hiring organization does not itself contemplate commercially exploiting the software or preventing others from using it, then it is important that a term is included in the contract granting a licence for the continued use of the program.
If the contract is silent on such matters, the freelance programmer may later decide to test his ownership of the program by offering it to others, or worse still, claim that, as owner, he will permit the continued use of the program only on payment of a licence fee.
These difficulties may arise especially when the program in question turns out to be more useful and successful than the parties  originally envisaged.
There is a danger that a freelance programmer will try to hold his client to ransom if he later realizes that the value of the software he has produced is out of all proportion to the payment he received for writing it.
Unfortunately, not all "freelance staff" are self-employed and some are employed by an agency.
In this case the same precautions apply and it is even more important to deal with ownership of copyright otherwise the agency (as employer) could turn out to be the ultimate owner of the copyright.
The employee and the course of employment
As regards persons who can safely be classified as employees, their employers cannot safely assume that they will own the copyright in everything produced by those employees.
For example, if an employee writes a computer program to help with his work but he is not employed as a computer programmer, his job is not to write computer programs and an employer cannot necessarily assume that he owns the copyright in that particular program.
A lecturer normally owns the copyright in any book or article he writes because he is primarily employed as a teacher and not as a writer of books and articles, even though his employer may encourage this.
A person employed as an accountant who writes a computer program to help with the production of financial accounts will own the copyright in that program if he wrote it in his own time, using his own equipment.
Initially, this may create no problems because the accountant may have been motivated by interest and a desire to improve his own efficiency at work but problems could arise later if the accountant moves to another firm or discovers that his program is commercially viable.
If an employer is faced with the situation where an employee has, in his own time and using his own equipment, developed a useful computer program, then the employer should immediately try to reach agreement as regards questions of ownership and use of the programs with the employee concerned, rather than allowing the program to be used without such agreement.
If an employee has produced a computer program outside the normal course of his duties, but has used his employer's equipment or done it during the hours of his employment, the ownership of copyright is more difficult to predict, although it is more likely that the employer will be treated as owner.
But, even here, it is wiser to seek agreement at the outset rather than leave matters until there is some disagreement about the continued use or the exploitation of the program.
Employers should consider the introduction of, or extension of, a "suggestions" scheme to include computer programs or systems written by staff who are not employed to do this, with effective rewards and suitable provisions as regards ultimate ownership.
PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES AND INSTRUCTION SETS
A computer program is written using a specific computer programming language.
Languages vary enormously from the basic instruction set of the central processing unit to "fourth-generation" languages and languages used for  programming logic.
A great deal of skill, imagination and effort goes into the design of a new programming language and the development of new languages will be encouraged if some form of protection is afforded to them.
However, the exercise of rights in languages could seriously interfere with the licensing and distribution of computer programs and databases.
In principle, there is a strong argument for saying that programming languages are ideas and, as such, cannot be protected by copyright.
Therefore a person who writes a program in COBOL infringes no copyright in the process of writing the program.
There is an analogy with natural language and it would be ridiculous to suggest that writing an article or report using "Esperanto" infringed any copyright subsisting in the language.
Of course, making an unauthorized copy of an Esperanto– English dictionary would infringe copyright, if only that subsisting in the typographical arrangement.
The European Council Directive on the legal protection of computer programs recognizes that programming languages, at least to the extent that they comprise ideas and principles, should not be protected by copyright.
Given that this is so one might wonder wherein lies the incentive to create a new language.
The answer lies in the fact that, usually, the program, once written, can only be run in a computer if it is converted into object code whether temporarily, using an interpreter program, or permanently, using a compiler program.
The licensing of these interpreter and compiler programs, together with appropriate documentation describing the syntax, semantics and use of the language, is the method by which financial reward is usually sought.
These programs are, of course, protected by copyright.
However, the obsession in the United States of withholding copyright protection from ideas including features of programs dictated by function might have the drastic effect, if taken to its logical conclusion, of robbing interpreter and compiler programs of copyright protection.
Some languages and program development tools (languages in a wide sense including expert system shells) require "run-time" licences to be acquired before application programs and systems may be distributed.
These generally permit the copying and distribution of a cut-down version of the language, tool or shell sufficient to run the application.
A computer's instruction set represents a language at its most basic level and, at this level, it is nearest to idea and, when used to write small programs, it has been argued that there is a merger of idea and expression in which case protection will be denied.
This happened in the United States case of NEC Corp. v Intel Corp. (1989) where it was held that Intel's microcode programs were dictated by the instruction set of the microprocessors and, as there were no alternative ways of expressing the ideas incorporated, reverse analysis of the microcode programs did not infringe copyright.
However, it was also accepted that such programs could be protected if not dictated by idea.
In the United Kingdom, the question of copyright protection for an instruction set was considered in Microsense Systems Ltd. v Control Systems Technology Ltd. (1991).
The plaintiff made traffic control systems and a controller for pelican crossings, these being programmed using a set of  mnemonics (a set of three-letter symbols) and these were also used to monitor the controllers.
The defendant made similar controllers and used a total of 49 of the plaintiff's mnemonics arguing that there was no copyright in them because, once the functions had been decided, there was no room for skill and labour in devising the mnemonics.
This was an interlocutory hearing so no final decision was taken but the judge thought that there was an arguable case that the list of mnemonics was protected by copyright because of the work in designing the controller in the first place.
This seems to contradict the NEC v Intel case although, being an American case, it is obviously not binding on the United Kingdom courts.
However, the defendant's argument that the list was effectively idea reflects the desirability of standardization in traffic controllers as, otherwise, there could be catastrophic mistakes.
DATABASES
Databases are generally protected by copyright, usually as literary works.
A database containing information relating to bibliographic references including abstracts will be a literary work as will a database such as LEXIS containing the full text of legal cases and statutes.
Each case and each statute will be a literary work in its own right.
If the database comprises data representing three-dimensional articles, for example a database of co-ordinates describing sculptures or industrial designs, that database may be considered to be a collection of artistic works so represented or to be a literary work as a compilation.
The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 describes such a database as a type of design document (section 51) representing an artistic work or design as appropriate.
Section 51 applies where an article is made to a design recorded in a design document and suppresses copyright protection unless the design is for an artistic work or typeface.
In the United Kingdom most databases will have protection providing they are the result of a modicum of skill, labour or judgment.
The threshold for copyright protection in the United Kingdom is low compared to some other countries.
For example, German copyright law requires a work to be a personal intellectual creation (German Copyright Act 1965, as amended, section 2(2)).
This would appear to be a higher standard than that required in the United Kingdom where copyright law has developed in a pragmatic rather than principled manner.
Some examples might be useful at this stage.
Consider a database comprising details of a company's customers.
The information stored includes names and addresses of existing and potential customers together with details of the customers' operations and views on the customers' credit worthiness, payment facilities, discounts, etc.
This database will be protected by copyright because it has required skill and judgment in the design of the structure of the database (that is, number and type of fields and their lengths) and in the selection of the information to be entered.
Thus the structure and the information are forms of expression for copyright purposes.
This should be contrasted with a database containing simply the names and addresses of current customers because there is no selectivity or judgment (or very little) in the decision as to what should be included and relatively little skill in designing the structure of the database.
This would be similar in principle to the Cramp v Smythson [1944]case discussed earlier in this chapter in which copyright was denied to a simple diary because the commonplace nature of the information left little room for judgment in the selection and organization of the information.
If a database is the result of a great deal of effort alone with little judgment in the design of the database or in the selection of material (for example, a telephone directory stored in a computer database or a directory of postcodes) it is debatable whether it will attract copyright protection.
Traditionally, United Kingdom law has been generous and compilations of non-original matter have been protected providing that some judgment at least has been expended in its making (see Macmillan & Co.
Ltd. v K & J Cooper (1923) discussed earlier).
However, the "sweat of the brow" principle, affording copyright protection to works which are the result of labour only, has recently been rejected in the United States Supreme Court in Feist Publications Inc. v Rural Telephone Service Co.
Inc. (1991) in which it was held that the "white pages" in a typical telephone directory are not protected by copyright because of a lack of creativity, not owing their origin to an act of authorship.
The court did, however, recognize that a compilation of facts could be the subject of copyright because the author has to choose which facts to include and in what order to place them.
It also held that the "yellow pages" section was protected because of the presence of original material.
It is suggested that this is approximately in line with United Kingdom law, that even considerable effort alone cannot confer copyright on an otherwise uncopyrightable work.
Database structure has been mentioned as potentially protectable but in Total Information Processing Systems Ltd. v Daman Ltd. [1992], it was held that the field and record specifications as expressed in the data division of a COBOL program were not protected because, in this form, the information did not form a substantial part of the computer program as a whole.
It is submitted that this approach is wrong and that it would be better to consider the database structure as a form of expression in its own right and not as part of the computer program.
This would accord with common-sense because, in many cases, a great deal of work involving skill and judgment is expended in the design of database structure.
Of course, as recognized by the judge in the above case, if the structure is dictated by function then it can be said to be an uncopyrightable idea although, often that will not be so; there will be a variety of potential structures possible.
In an earlier case, Computer-Aided Systems (UK) Ltd. v Bolwell (1989), the mere fact that a new program had file compatibility with an earlier program written by the same people failed to impress the judge who considered the plaintiff's application for inspection of the defendant's program to be nothing more than a "fishing expedition" .
There was no evidence of copying and the two programs were written in different languages, the original being written in  COBOL, the latter one being written in a fourth-generation language called PROGRESS.
The structure of the databases in terms of input and output formats must have been identical or similar but this did not seem to be sufficiently argued, instead the plaintiff concentrated on an argument that the structure of the two programs must have been similar.
Protection of database structure requires further legal consideration and development by the judges.
In the meantime, database designers can strengthen the chances of protection by retaining copies of layouts and specifications for databases on the basis that anyone copying the structure of their database indirectly infringes the copyright subsisting in these materials, subject to them not being dictated by function.
The Commission of the European Communities has prepared a proposal for a Council Directive on the legal protection of databases with a view to harmonizing this area of copyright law throughout the European Communities (92/C 156/03).
The Draft Directive describes a database as: a collection of works or materials arranged, stored and accessed by electronic means and the electronic materials necessary for the operation of the database such as its thesaurus, index or system for obtaining or presenting information.
It does not extend to any computer program used in the making or operation of the database, though the distinction between program and system for obtaining or presenting information will be difficult to draw, particularly in the context of fourth-generation language databases.
The Draft Directive provides for copyright protection for collections which, by reason of their selection or arrangement, constitute the author's own intellectual creation (similar to the German standard for copyright protection generally).
However, for databases which fail to come up to that standard a new right to prevent unfair extraction is proposed.
The normal period of copyright will apply except for the right to prevent unfair extraction which will last for 10 years.
It is likely that this draft Directive will become a full Council Directive requiring compliance by Member States before too long.
Although protection of databases is reasonably effective (there may also be issues of breach of confidence if parts of a database are used or published without permission), it may prove difficult to decide when the database was created, especially if it is subject to continual modification.
It is clear that insubstantial changes will not give rise to a new copyright (or right to prevent unfair extraction) but what is the position when a database has changed considerably from its original form but this has happened incrementally over a period of time?
If the database contains pre-existing original works normal rules apply.
For example in a database containing the full text of literary works, each work will be protected in its own right and the duration of protection for that work will be based on the life of the author plus fifty years, or in the case of an Act of Parliament (subject to Crown Copyright) 125 years from the end of the calendar year during which it was created, and not from the time it was entered into the  database.
Even if a database contains pre-existing works, it can be considered to be a new work of copyright if it is the result of selection and judgment.
Making an unauthorized copy of a substantial part of such a database will infringe the copyright in the database and in any of the original materials contained in that substantial part.
DEVICES TO OVERCOME COPY-PROTECTION
Some computer programs are marketed in a form that makes them difficult to copy.
Almost inevitably, devices and software designed to overcome these attempts at copy-protection soon appeared on the market, to the intense irritation of the software industry.
A distinction must be made at this stage between things which can be used to make unauthorized copies of programs, but which also have legitimate uses (for example, computers with two disk drives and cassette players with twin tape decks) and things specifically designed to overcome copy-protection such as software to be used to copy other software which has been copy-protected.
Where a device or software has lawful uses, it would obviously be unsatisfactory to ban its sale.
The music industry tried to interfere with the sale of twin cassette music centres in CBS Songs Ltd. v Amstrad Consumer Electronics plc [1988], on the basis that, by the sale and advertising of these machines, Amstrad were inciting the public to infringe copyright.
The fact that the machines made by Amstrad had other legitimate uses, such as making copies of the purchasers' own music or of works not protected by copyright, was important, even though it was obvious that the largest use would involve copyright infringement.
However, there can be little sympathy for firms who make devices or software deliberately designed to permit the copying of works which are copy-protected.
The whole raison d'être of these devices and software is to enable copy-protection to be overcome.
By section 296 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, devices or means specifically designed or adapted to circumvent copy-protection of works issued to the public in electronic form are controlled by treating the making, importation, sale or hire, possession in the course of business, etc. of the devices or means as an infringement of copyright.
Furthermore, publishing information to enable or assist the circumvention of copy-protection is similarly treated.
The use of the phrase "device or means" should be wide enough to cover both hardware devices and software methods designed to overcome copy-protection.
Computers with dual disk drives and twin tape cassette machines are not caught by these provisions because they are not "specifically designed or adapted to circumvent copy-protection" .
Similarly, normal copying programs which come with a computer operating system are within the law because they are designed to be used legitimately, to take back-up copies of programs and data files.
Indeed, such programs will usually fail to copy computer programs which are copy-protected.
A difficulty with this provision is that it is enforceable only by the person issuing copies of the copy-protected work in question to the public, and the person making, importing, selling or hiring, etc. the device, means or information knows or has reason to believe that it will be used to make infringing copies.
It is arguable that the opportunity should have been taken to deal with this matter by way of criminal penalties.
However, there has been a move away from copy-protection because it is troublesome to customers who, not unreasonably, wish to take back-up copies of important programs.
Indeed, the Copyright Designs and Patents Act now contains a specific right to make a back-up copy if necessary to the lawful use of the program concerned, section 50A.
LATEST "LOOK AND FEEL" CASE
On 19 February 1993, the High Court handed down an important decision in the case of John Richardson Computers Ltd. v Flanders & Chemtech Ltd.
The case is the first example of an English court directly applying the test in the United States case of Computer Associates International Inc. v Altai (1992)(see page 26).
In the Richardson case, both parties develop and market computer programs used by pharmacists for the purpose of producing labels for prescriptions and stock control.
In 1982, the plaintiff developed a program for the Tandy computer.
He had engaged a programmer to help.
In 1983, the defendant joined the plaintiff's company as an employee to write an equivalent program, having the same look and feel, for the BBC computer.
This was written in machine code.
In 1986, the defendant left but did further work for the plaintiff as a self-employed consultant and, as such, the defendant rewrote the program in assembly language.
An Irish company approached the plaintiff asking for a new version of the program suitable for the Irish market.
The plaintiff was not interested but said that the defendant could do this work as long as the resultant program was not marketed in the UK.
The defendant wrote the program in QuickBASIC for the IBM computer.
At around the same time, the plaintiff was working on an IBM version of his program for the UK market.
When the defendant started to market his IBM version in the UK, the plaintiff sued for infringement of copyright in his BBC program.
Being written in different programming languages, there was no literal similarity between the programs.
The judge considered the non-literal elements of the programs and identified similarities.
He then considered the reasons for the similarities, in particular whether they had been copied and, if so, whether they represented a substantial part of the plaintiff's program.
He found this to be so in relation to line editor, amendment routines and dose codes.
The judge left it to counsel to submit suggestions for appropriate relief for the limited infringement of copyright.
In some respects, the decision strengthens copyright protection for computer programs.
It reinforces the need for ex-employees to be very careful not to use non-literal elements from programs they have written for previous employers.
Computer-generated works
The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 expressly recognizes that works produced by or with the aid of a computer are worthy of copyright protection.
Such works were protected before the 1988 Act but there were difficulties in determining the identity of the author of the work for copyright purposes.
Random numbers selected by computer for a newspaper competition called "Millionaire of the Month" were held to be protected by copyright in Express Newspapers plc v Liverpool Daily Post & Echo plc [1985].
Arguments that there was no human author and, consequently, the lists of numbers drawn by the computer were not protected by copyright were rejected by Whitford J. who said that such a claim was as silly as saying that a pen could be the author of a literary work.
The human expertise in computer-derived works could be found to reside in the programs which produced the lists of random numbers.
In works produced by or with the aid of a computer, human skill can be found either in the person who enters information into the computer to produce the output or in the work involved in writing the program used or a combination of both.
Section 178 of the Act defines a work as "computer-generated" when it is generated by a computer in circumstances such that there is no human author of the work.
Section 9(3) states that, in the case of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work which is computer-generated, the author is the person by whom the arrangements necessary for the creation of the work are undertaken.
This will generally mean that the person who has control of the computer will be the author of any computer-generated work.
These two definitions are tautologous when taken together: a computer-generated work is one created in circumstances such that there is no human author but if we attribute authorship to a human it cannot be computer-generated.
The only way round this dilemma is to determine authorship after the creation of the work but this seems illogical.
Normally, creation and authorship are coincident in time.
The approach taken in the Act can lead to difficulties because, in many cases of works produced with the aid of a computer, it will not be possible to say with any certainty whether the work has a human author.
At one end of the spectrum a work will be produced using a computer as a tool, just as a writer uses a pen or a typewriter, whilst at the other end the computer will produce its works with little or no direct human effort.
Neither of these situations should cause any great difficulty; but in between these two extremes lie a great many types of work which are the result of a modest amount of human input and classifying such works will not be easy.
In order to consider this question  further, works which involve computers in their production will be categorized as follows: works created using a computer, works created by a computer, and intermediate works.
In these cases "computer" means a programmed computer.
WORKS CREATED USING A COMPUTER
Examples of works which fall into this category are: documents produced using a word processing system; CAD (computer aided designs) such as plans for a house or a new car body panel; music written using a program designed to assist with the composition of the music (as opposed to a program designed to write music); and an accounts report produced using a spreadsheet program.
In all these cases, the person operating the system is using the computer to achieve the results that he wishes to obtain.
The programmed computer is merely a tool which allows the operator to use his creativity and imagination to the fullest extent and efficiency.
Such works are not computer-generated, the skill and expertise (or at least the greatest part of these) derives from the user of the system.
Word processed documents, drawings and music, etc. produced using packages which facilitate the making of these works are protected by copyright as original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works in their own right.
The person using the system provides the expertise necessary for the making of the work and is, for copyright purposes, the author of the work.
That expertise may be applied directly or indirectly; for example, a person writing a report may draft it out on paper and then hand it to a word processor operator who enters it into the computer.
In these circumstances, the author is not the operator but the person writing the report.
It is similar to the process of amanuensis in which a person dictating a letter will be the author of that letter, the person who writes the dictation down is merely his agent.
The person who wrote the computer program used to assist in the creation of the types of works described above has no rights in the work because, although the programmer may control or influence the format of the finished work, he has no control or influence on the content.
The fact that many works in this category may be produced directly on a computer before any other tangible form exists presents no serious problems because these works will exist, in terms of copyright protection, the instant they are recorded; that is, as soon as they are stored on a computer disk or printed out on paper.
WORKS CREATED BY A COMPUTER
These works, which may be literary, dramatic, musical or artistic, are those in which there is "no human author" (section 178).
This implies that the direct  degree of human intervention in the making of the work is minimal.
Examples include: the automatic generation of weather forecasts by a computer communicating with satellites, the selection of lists of random numbers for a competition or for the Premium Bond draw, programs which produce artistic designs or music automatically, being based upon a set of rules built into the program, a program designed to simulate some particular environment, such as climate, monetary systems, battle scenarios, etc.
Many of these systems operate with no human effort or skill apart from switching the equipment on and checking that there is sufficient paper in the computer printer or plotter and so on.
The human operator has very little or no control over the format or content of the output produced by the computer.
The author of such a work is the person who makes the arrangements for the work to be created.
Therefore, if a business organization buys and installs computer equipment and software to produce such works, that business organization will be regarded as the author and, as a result, the first owner of the copyright in the work.
The Act contemplates non-human authors as, by section 154, an author can be a qualifying person if, inter alia, it is a body incorporated in the United Kingdom, such as a limited company.
In the case of an unincorporated body, such as a partnership, the partners will be considered to be the joint authors of the work.
Because a company can be an author of a computer-generated work, there has to be a special rule for determining the duration of copyright in such works and the copyright expires at the end of the period of 50 years from the end of the calendar year in which the work was made (section 12(3)).
Interestingly, and controversially, the Act appears to ignore the skill and expertise of the person or persons who wrote the computer program used to generate these works.
It could be argued that the computer programmer whose skill lies behind the computer output should have some recognition of authorship.
However, this could cause difficulties because a person obtaining a computer program would expect to own the copyright of anything produced using the program, and any provisions sharing the ownership of the copyright between the user and the programmer could result in an undesirable fetter on the subsequent use of information and reports generated by the computer.
The owner of the copyright in the computer program, suddenly realizing that he has rights with respect to the output generated from using the program, might attempt to interfere with the subsequent use of that output in the hope that he will be able to negotiate a fee for his permission.
A concept, as yet untested in the courts, is that there is no such thing as a computer-generated work; that is, a work without a human author.
After all, the argument that a list of numbers drawn at random by a programmed computer had no human author was rejected, as we have seen, in the Express Newspaper case.
The approach adopted by the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act is a utilitarian one but it does not reflect the reality of the situation by failing to  recognize that all computer output is the result, albeit in many cases the indirect result, of human skill and effort.
It would have been better if the programmer's skill was recognized making him the author or joint author of "computer-generated" works.
The practical difficulties resulting from this could be assuaged by raising a presumption that ownership of copyright would lie with the licensee, the ultimate user, of the computer program, subject to any agreement to the contrary.
INTERMEDIATE WORKS
These works lie in the area between computer-generated works and works made using the programmed computer as a tool.
The content of the output produced is the result of the skill and effort of the person using the computer and the skill and effort of the person who wrote the computer program and/or the person who produced any database used.
There are many examples of these intermediate works, such as a specialized accounting system for a particular type of business, builders' estimating systems, or a music synthesizer designed to produce music from a basic framework of notes entered by the user and expert systems.
A great deal of specialized software falls into this category where the skill required to produce the finished results is contained partly within the program, the remainder being provided by the user of the computer system.
In some systems, the skill may come from more than two sources.
For example, consider a computer system designed to be used to estimate the cost of building work.
The system itself will comprise a suite of computer programs, which include routines to provide analyses and breakdowns of the costs derived, and a database of standard prices, based on sets of resources and performances.
The person using the system to work out the cost of a building brings a substantial degree of skill by deciding whether the standard prices are applicable, and if not, by building up new prices and entering them into the database.
As Figure 4 shows the resulting computer output has three sources of expertise, that of the programmer, of the persons responsible for developing the database of standard prices, and of the person using the system.
Who is the author of the finished work?
Because the person using the system brings an amount of skill to the task, it would not be unreasonable to suggest that he is the author.
Indeed, the user has the most direct link with the finished product and has ultimate control but may, nevertheless, rely to a great extent on the programs and information contained in the database.
It could be argued that the finished work is created in part by human author and is part computer-generated.
Alternatively, all three persons, programmer, database developer and user, might be considered to be joint authors.
In the absence of any clear guidance in the Act and until we have judicial precedent which explains the meaning of "computer-generated" , it is important that contractual provisions are made to cover the ownership of rights in the output of such intermediate works.
In some cases, because all the persons involved are employees of the company   developing and using the software, there will be little difficulty, but if outsiders are involved at any stage, terms should be inserted in contractual agreements dealing with ownership and use of the computer output.
The same applies to expert systems, a fortiori.
These computer systems, which are intended to emulate the thought processes, analytical reasoning and advice of experts, contain a great deal of skill and expertise within the systems themselves.
An expert system, in basic terms, contains three main elements: a knowledge-base (rules and facts provided by experts), an inference engine (a computer program which manipulates the knowledge-base and applies it to a particular problem) and a user interface to make the system "user-friendly" and to provide explanations of the reasoning adopted and advice given by the expert system.
When an expert system is used to produce some advice or a report, the expertise underlying the output comes from the following sources: the experts who provided the knowledge, the persons (sometimes called "knowledge engineers" ) who refined the knowledge and formalized it so that it could be installed in the knowledge-base, the persons who wrote the inference engine and the user interface (or adapted existing ones), the user of the system.
The user of the system provides expertise because he will have to understand and respond to the system, he will have to interpret the questions asked by the system and to know what the scope and limitations of the system are.
At this stage, most if not all expert systems cannot be used by naive users; a reasonable general knowledge of the area of expertise covered by the system (its knowledge domain) is essential if the output produced is to be taken seriously, just as the scope, limitations and difficulties presented by a new piece of legislation can only be predicted with any certainty by a lawyer and, even then, not always correctly.
What will the law make of the output of expert systems when it comes to deciding the authorship and ownership of that output?
To argue that it is computer-generated and has no human author runs counter to common sense.
To say that the user of this system is its sole author might be convenient but is unrealistic.
To attribute authorship to the experts and knowledge engineers who developed the knowledge base is unsatisfactory because they cannot predict  how the system will be used and what responses will be made by the user; they have no control over its use.
In reality, all the persons listed above are the joint authors, in differing proportions, of the output resulting from the use of the system.
However, it must be said that, if the courts follow this interpretation, it will lead to all manner of complications regarding the commercial use of expert systems and other "intermediate" systems.
Although the courts might be willing to imply terms, for example that the licensee or "purchaser" of such systems owns the copyright in any output, it is obviously more sensible to recognize the difficulties associated with this part of the Act and to make suitable contractual provision for ownership (as opposed to authorship) of computer output.
The law of confidence is concerned with the protection of secrets whether they be trade secrets, secrets of a personal nature or concerning the government of the country.
The fundamental rationale underlying the law of confidence is that it can prevent a person divulging information which has been given to him in confidence, on an express or implicit understanding that the information should not be disclosed to others or otherwise used by the recipient of the information.
Alternatively, if the information has already been disclosed or used, damages may be awarded against the person divulging or using the information.
The roots of the law of confidence lie in equity and it is almost entirely case law.
It is given statutory recognition in the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, section 171 of which states: nothing in this Part [the part dealing with copyright]affects…the operation of any rule of equity relating to breaches of trust or confidence
Although of older pedigree, the modern law of confidence developed in the nineteenth century and then lay relatively dormant until the middle of the twentieth century.
It soon became clear that breach of confidence was actionable per se, and did not require a contractual relationship between the parties.
An important case, Prince Albert v Strange (1849), helped to establish this area of law and concerned etchings made by Queen Victoria and her consort, Prince Albert.
The Queen and Prince made etchings for their own amusement, intended only for their own private entertainment, although they sometimes had prints made to give to friends.
Etchings were sent to a printer to make some impressions and someone surreptitiously made copies which he passed on to the defendant who intended to display them in an exhibition which the public could attend on payment of an admission charge.
It was held that relief would be given against the defendant even though he was a third party.
He had argued that the prints were not improperly taken but it was said that his possession must have originated in breach of trust, confidence or contract and, therefore, an injunction was granted preventing the exhibition.
The law of confidence can be a very useful adjunct to other intellectual property rights.
Copyright protects the expression of an idea, but the law of confidence is wider and can protect the idea itself.
In Andersen Consulting v CHP Consulting Ltd. (1991), a case concerning a dispute about maintenance of computer software by third parties, it was said that confidence is frequently used in connection with copyright material as it is: of course notorious that copyright protects only the expression of ideas and does not protect the idea itself
The law of breach of confidence can supplement copyright and patent protection especially in the early stages when there is nothing tangible or substantial enough for copyright or patent to protect.
Additionally, confidence can be useful for certain types of secrets for which other rights are inappropriate such as the recipe for Coca-Cola or a secret research technique or industrial process.
A good working formula for the application of the law of confidence was laid down in Coco v A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd. [1969], by Megarry J. (as he then was).
This involved a moped engine designed by the plaintiff who entered into informal negotiations with the defendant; no contract was executed.
Megarry J. held that the defendant owed the plaintiff an obligation of confidence (although he doubted the confidential quality of the information) and said that, apart from contract, an action for breach of confidence will require three elements: 1.
The information must have the necessary quality of confidence about it.
2.
The information must have been imparted in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence.
3.
There must be an unauthorized use of that information to the detriment of the party communicating it.
The third of these elements is self-evident, but the first two require further discussion.
QUALITY OF CONFIDENCE
To be protected by the law of confidence, the information must have a quality of confidence about it.
If the information is commonplace or is common knowledge to a group of persons (for example, it is well known to computer programmers) or to the public at large , it cannot be confidential; instead, it will be considered to be in the public domain.
Often, it will be obvious if the information is or is not confidential.
The concept of confidentiality was considered in the case of Thomas Marshall (Exports) Ltd. v Guinle [1976], in which the defendant, who was the managing director of the plaintiff company, resigned half-way through his 10 year service contract to set up a rival business.
The information involved sources of supply and the names of officials and other contacts in Europe and the Far East.
Megarry VC found for the plaintiff and he said that four elements were necessary in testing for confidential quality: 1.
Release of the information would injure the owner of the information or benefit others.
2.
The owner must believe the information to be secret and not already in the public domain.
3.
The owner's belief in 1.
and 2. above must be reasonable.
4.
The information must be judged in the light of usages and practices of the particular trade or industry concerned.
To come within the scope of the law of confidence, the information does not have to be particularly special and, as in the above case, ordinary and mundane information can be the proper subject matter of confidence as long as it is private to the person who has compiled the information, even though others could gather similar information if they took the trouble to do so.
In this way, the law of confidence prevents others from gaining benefit from the work of the person who accumulated the information in the first place.
As a result, a great deal of material related to the running of a business will fall within the ambit of the law of confidence.
Examples of information relevant to computers which may be the subject matter of confidence include: Ideas for a new or improved computer system, hardware and software.
Details of existing computer systems as would be known by computer analysts or programmers or even users of the system.
In terms of users, the system would have to be uncommon in some respect.
Lists of customers or sub-contractors and associated information; for example, what services they perform, what their credit rating is.
A high proportion of information stored in computer databases is confidential.
A company's strategy for future research and development, production and marketing.
OBLIGATION OF CONFIDENCE
An obligation of confidence will not be imposed on everyone.
A person who is given confidential information and is unaware of its confidential nature (and has no reason to be aware) will be able to use the information freely.
This is a major weakness of the law of confidence as it is largely ineffective against innocent third party recipients of the information.
For example, if A tells B something in confidence and B (without A's permission) passes the information on to C, who has not been told that it is confidential and the circumstances are such that an obligation of confidence cannot be imputed to C, then C will be able to use the information freely although B himself can be prevented from using the information or divulging it further.
However, it may still be possible for A to obtain an injunction against C in respect of future disclosure or use by C if the information has not yet entered the public domain.
C will not, of course, be liable for any acts that he may have carried out innocently before notification that B had divulged the information in breach of A's confidence.
Obviously, an obligation of confidence can arise by express agreement; for example, where a freelance computer programmer is engaged to carry out some work under a contract which contains a term stating that the programmer will not use or divulge details of the client's business.
An obligation of confidence may also be implied by the courts where there is a duty of good faith as in the relationship between a client and a solicitor or patent agent or bank manager.
Another situation where the obligation will be imposed is where a person discusses his ideas with business organizations with a view to the commercial exploitation of those ideas; for example, if a computer analyst has an idea for a new computer system and discusses that idea with software houses interested in developing and marketing the system.
Employees
The employee/employer relationship is a special case and may be governed by express terms, as incorporated in the contract of employment, or implied terms or both.
Generally, the duty of confidence owed by ex-employees will be less than for current employees who should always act in their employer's best interests.
A present employee must respect the confidentiality of his employer's information even to the extent that he should not pry into information he has been told not to look at.
In Denco Ltd. v Joinson [1991], an employee who had a right of access to certain information in his employer's computer system used another employee's password to gain access to other parts of the computer system, something he was not entitled to do.
It was held that the employer was entitled to summarily dismiss the employee for this unauthorized use of the password.
Ex-employees have to make a living and much of the ex-employee's skill will involve what he learnt whilst in his previous employment, thus providing the courts with a dilemma.
In many cases, to complicate matters, there may be an overlap with copyright law.
However, the courts have developed rules for resolving the conflict which strike a reasonable balance between the interests of employee and employer alike.
When there are no express terms, the employer will not be protected to any great extent.
If the ex-employee remembers details of some of the previous employer's customers, there is nothing to stop him using this information.
Of course, it would be different if he deliberately memorized the customers' names or made a copy of them.
In the absence of an express confidentiality term in the contract of employment, it was said in Printers and Finishers Ltd. v Holloway [1965]that there would be nothing improper in the employee putting his memory of particular features of his previous employer's plant at the disposal of his new employer.
Even if there is an express term the employer would have to show that the information was over and above the employee's normal skill in the job and amounted to a trade secret.
In Northern Office Microcomputer (Pty) Ltd. v Rosenstein [1982], a South African case, the problem of where to draw the line was considered.
In this case, a computer programmer developed a computer program which was similar to one he had written for his previous employer.
The case involved copyright matters in addition to the law of confidence and is notable in that the court recognized that computer programs were protected by South African copyright law as literary works.
The trial judge agreed that the computer programs were protected by confidence but said that the protection should be of a limited nature.
Although the defendant programmer would not be allowed simply to  copy the programs in question, he would not be required to "wipe clean the slate of his memory" because to do so would unduly restrict his use of his own training, skill and experience.
There would be nothing, in principle, to prevent an ex-employee computer programmer writing a similar program by the exercise of his own mental effort provided he did not simply plagiarize his previous employer's program.
To some extent, an important factor is the computer program itself, whether it is a commonplace program, carrying out mundane operations, or whether it is designed to do something novel, whether the purpose of the program can be said to be in the nature of a trade secret.
In many cases, the employer's "trade secrets" may be no more than the result of the application by an employee of his own skill and judgment, but if the employee was engaged specifically to produce that information then it can still amount to a trade secret.
But, if the material is commonplace, there would be nothing to stop an ex-employee deriving the same or similar material again as long as he did not simply copy his employer's material.
In such circumstances, all that would be protected would be the employer's "lead time" , the advantage of getting his product to the market place first.
An important case laying down principles which can be applied to the employer/employee relationship was Faccenda Chicken Ltd. v Fowler [1986].
The employer's business was supplying fresh chickens and it was alleged that the employee had made wrongful use of sales information such as customers' names and addresses.
The employer's action failed, but the following guidelines were laid down: 1.
If there is a contract of employment, the employee's obligations were to be determined from the contract.
2.
If there were no express terms, the employee's obligations would be implied.
3.
Whilst still in employment, there was an implied term imposing a duty of good faith.
This duty might vary according to the nature of the contract of employment but would be broken if the employee copied or deliberately memorized a list of customers.
4.
The implied term imposing an obligation on the employee after the termination of his employment was more restricted.
It might cover secret processes and trade secrets.
5.
Whether information fell within this implied term to prevent its use or disclosure by an ex-employee depended on the circumstances, and attention should be given to the following: a) the nature of the employment, b) the nature of the information, c) whether the employer stressed the confidential nature of the material, d) whether the information could be easily isolated from other material the employee was free to use.
An ex-employee is thus allowed to make use of his own memory of the work he has carried out in his previous employment unless it involves genuine secrets or is covered by an express term in the contract of employment.
Computer  programmers and analysts will be allowed to make use of programming techniques and skills which they have learnt and which have become part of their own skill and experience, unless there is something very special about them or they have expressly agreed not to make further use of them.
However, a very restrictive express term which tries to prevent an ex-employee making use of mundane skills will be likely to be struck down by the courts as being in restraint of trade.
The same fate will await any terms which restrict the ex-employee's future employment prospects to any great extent; for example, a term which states that a computer programmer cannot work for computer software companies in the United Kingdom for five years following the termination of his employment.
Such restrictive terms will be upheld by the courts only if they are reasonable, such as when a computer programmer working for a bank agrees not to work for another similar bank within a five mile radius for the first year following the termination of his employment.
It is not easy to lay down a simple formula based on time and geographical area as each case will turn on its own facts.
For example in Office Angels Ltd. v Rainer-Thomas (1991), it was held that a covenant precluding an ex-employee from opening an employment agency anywhere in an area only within 1,000 metres radius of the previous employer's agency for a period of only 6 months was unreasonable as the area included most of the City of London.
The Court of Appeal also confirmed that, where such a covenant was ambiguous, the narrower construction should be taken.
Computer hackers
A computer hacker is a person who gains access to a computer system without permission.
Computer hackers pose a serious threat to the security of computer systems and some of the activities in which they engage are potentially criminal in nature.
These activities are fully discussed in Chapter 21.
However, computer hackers might also be liable under the law of confidence, depending on the circumstances.
If a hacker gains access to confidential files stored on a computer, it is just possible that the law of confidence might be used to prevent the hacker from making use of the information assuming, of course, that the hacker can be identified.
In many cases, information stored in computer systems is highly confidential.
It might, for example, concern medical records, credit-worthiness or employment details.
But will an obligation of confidence attach to a computer hacker?
The case of Prince Albert v Strange, discussed earlier, suggests that an action might lie in breach of confidence even if the information was obtained surreptitiously.
The court in that case was quite happy to imply an air of confidence even though it was not possible to say how the confidential information (that is, the prints taken from the engravings) came into the defendant's hands.
It could only be assumed that the prints were obtained in a clandestine manner.
In principle, this is very similar to the position of a computer hacker.
A hacker must know that there is a strong possibility that the information he accesses will be confidential and, therefore, he will be fixed with an obligation of confidence.
If the information turns out to  have a quality of confidence, then there is no reason why the hacker cannot be sued for breach of confidence if he uses that information or discloses it to others.
If the information is accidentally overheard or intercepted in circumstances where the owner of the information utters it or transmits it by insecure means (for example, by telling someone in a crowded room or by transmitting the information by a public telecommunications system) an obligation of confidence might not be imposed on the person obtaining the information in this manner.
In Malone v Metropolitan Police Commissioner [1979]information overheard during an authorized telephone tapping operation by the police was not disclosed in confidence.
However, the law on the matter of unauthorized interception of information is not clear.
The Law Commission recommended codifying the law of confidence and its report, Breach of Confidence (1980, Cmnd. 8388), contains a draft breach of confidence Bill.
Clause 5 of the Bill would impose an obligation of confidence on a person who improperly acquires information by using or interfering with any computer or data retrieval mechanism, a welcome clarification.
However, there has been no resulting legislation along these lines and it is unlikely that such action will be taken in the foreseeable future.
REMEDIES FOR BREACH OF CONFIDENCE
The most important remedy for breach of confidence is an injunction preventing the use or disclosure of the information.
If the information has been divulged to sufficient people so that it can be said to be no longer confidential, an injunction will not be of any help; it would be like locking the stable door after the horse has bolted.
But, if this has happened and the information has been used to the detriment of the person to whom it "belongs" , damages will be available against the person responsible.
As an alternative to damages, an account of profits may be available and this may be more advantageous to the plaintiff, especially if the defendant has made substantial profit from his use of the information.
Being an equitable remedy it is discretionary and the plaintiff must have "clean hands" and have acted promptly in enforcing his rights.
An example of the use of this remedy is the case of Peter Pan Manufacturing Corp. v Corsets Silhouette Ltd. [1963], which involved the use of confidential information, after the expiry of a licence agreement, in the manufacture of brassieres.
The plaintiff asked for the whole of the profits on the brassieres but the defendant said that the account of profits should only be based on the profit resulting from the wrongful use of the confidential information; that is, the profit relating to the parts of the brassieres incorporating the confidential information.
The difference between the two sums was substantial and the plaintiff was awarded the higher sum because the defendants would not have been able to make the brassieres at all without using the confidential information.
It can be seen that the law of confidence is very useful at an early stage when ideas are being formulated and discussed.
Although the law of copyright gives some protection at this stage by protecting plans, specifications and notes, the protection does not extend to the ideas behind them.
Confidence is particularly important during the development of inventions before they are granted patents because a patent will be refused if details of the invention have been made available to the public, as we shall see.
In the computer industry, as with any other, ideas have to be discussed with various persons and organizations with a view to raising finance and granting licences to use or make the resulting invention or copyright work.
Many licences for the use of patented inventions include permission to use "know-how" , the confidential information needed to use the invention to best effect.
Some licences may be purely for know-how where there is no patent involved.
In most circumstances, during negotiations, an air of confidence will be implied but it is sensible to stress confidentiality; for example, by stating that the information is confidential and must not be disclosed to anyone else without permission.
Patent law
A patent is a very desirable form of intellectual property because it gives the owner a monopoly in an invention, enabling him to exploit the invention for a number of years to the exclusion of other people (subject to provisions designed to prevent abuse of the monopoly granted).
Like copyright, patent law has a long history and has developed as a means of protecting innovation which has a benefit to innovator and public alike.
Inventors are encouraged to invent and investors are more likely to provide finance if a monopoly right is available for inventions.
Society reaps a benefit because the invention will eventually fall into the public domain and because, in the meantime, commercial enterprise is stimulated.
There are two types of patentable invention, a product invention and a process invention, and it has been said that an invention is a new way of making something old or an old way of making something new.
A patentable invention could relate to a new piece of computer hardware such as a new mouse, new type of output device such as a more efficient flat screen or new form of storage medium or it could be a new way of making integrated circuits or flat screens.
There have been many patent applications for computer hardware and other electronic materials; for example, the invention of the printed circuit board, transistor and integrated circuit have all been patented.
Sometimes other forms of protection may be available such as design law or copyright.
If the "invention" fails to meet the rigorous standards required for patentability, these and other forms of protection may still apply.
For example, a new layout of components on a printed circuit board may be protected by the design right even if there is no inventive step for patent purposes.
Fundamentally, the inventor (or more usually, the employer of the inventor) applies for a patent to the Patent Office in London, whether the inventor wants a United Kingdom patent or one which extends to other countries as well.
If the application is successful, a patent will be granted for four years initially and may be renewed, annually, up to a maximum of twenty years from the date the application is filed (the priority date).
The renewal fees become progressively steeper throughout the life of the patent and most patents do not run the full twenty years.
Obtaining a patent is a complex, expensive and lengthy process and the services of a patent agent are desirable because the drafting of the application and the specification is extremely important as regards the future scope of the patent.
Until the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, only a registered patent agent or a solicitor could act for gain as agents for persons seeking patents, but now anyone can do this as long as he does not describe  himself as, or hold himself out to be, a "patent agent" or "patent attorney" .
However, in view of the complicated nature of the process, the person applying for a patent would be well advised to satisfy himself as to the ability of his agent.
In some circumstances, it may be preferable simply to keep the idea secret and rely on the law of confidence; this costs nothing and there is no requirement that the invention must eventually fall into the public domain.
Examples of the effectiveness of this approach are the recipes and processes used in many familiar drinks and foodstuffs such as Coca-Cola and Kentucky Fried Chicken.
However, in many cases, the invention cannot be kept secret, especially if articles made to the invention are to be marketed commercially or if a large number of employees know of the invention, in which case a patent is the only realistic solution.
The ponderous patent application process seems to be unsuited to a fast- moving technology as it can take several years from initial application before a patent is finally granted.
However, the monopoly granted extends back to the priority date, which is the time from which damages can be assessed should the patent be infringed, although legal proceedings cannot be commenced until the patent has been granted.
For example: Priority date 1st August 1988 Infringement commenced 1st July 1989 Infringement ceased 1st January 1991 Patent formally granted 1st February 1992 The patent owner will be entitled to damages based on the period of infringement (1st July 1989 to 1st January 1991) but cannot bring a legal action for damages against the infringer until after 1st February 1986.
An interlocutory injunction, preventing further infringement, may be available before that date.
The filing date is normally (for a first application) known as the priority date.
This is the date at which the novelty of the invention is tested against the "state of the art" .
From the priority date, the patentee normally has up to 12 months to apply for patents in other countries.
Such later applications will refer back to that original priority date.
The main legislation is the Patents Act 1977 which was passed to bring United Kingdom patent law in line with the European Patent Convention (EPC) to which the United Kingdom is a signatory in addition to other European countries such as Belgium, France, Germany, Holland, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, etc.
The EPC is not a European Community Institution although the European Patent Office (EPO) will administer the proposed Community Patent Convention, providing a community-wide patent system, when it comes into force.
This is unlikely to happen in the immediate future.
In addition to the Patents Act 1977, there are a number of rules dealing with details such as registration procedure, fees and the setting up of a Patents County Court in London.
Previously, all patent litigation, other than hearings before the Comptroller, was dealt with in the Chancery Division (Patents Court) of the High Court.
The new Patents County Court provides, hopefully, a speedier and less expensive way of pursuing smaller claims.
Not all ideas are capable of supporting a patent.
The Patents Act 1977 lays down several requirements which must be satisfied before a patent can be granted and, furthermore, certain things are specifically excluded from patentability.
The basic requirements for the grant of a patent will now be explained with reference to computer technology, followed by a consideration of the exclusions and their impact, especially with respect to computer software.
BASIC REQUIREMENTS
The basic requirements for the grant of a patent are stated in section 1(1) of the Patents Act 1977 as follows: A patent may be granted only for an invention in respect of which the following conditions are satisfied, that is to say— a) the invention is new; b) it involves an inventive step; c) it is capable of industrial application; d) the grant of a patent for it is not excluded by subsections (2) and (3) below…
The exclusions referred to in d), which include computer programs, will be considered later but first the interpretation of the first three conditions will be examined because, if any one of them is not satisfied, a patent cannot be granted.
NEW INVENTION
The word "invention" is not defined in the Act but its meaning is really a matter of common sense and it can be used in a fairly wide sense.
It is obvious that a patent should not be granted for anything which is not new, which is already in the public domain, otherwise the grant of the patent could make illegal an act which was previously legal.
For example, if a business has been making integrated circuits by a special process for several years but has failed to apply for a patent, another business, wishing to do the same type of work, will be refused a patent on the grounds that the invention is not new.
If a patent were to be granted to the second business, it could prevent the first from using what it has already been using for some time.
If a patent were to be granted, such prior use is a defence to an infringement action, by section 64, and could also invalidate the patent if challenged unless such use had not made the invention available to the public.
Section 2 of the Act expands on the meaning of "new" and says that an invention is new if it does not form part of the "state of the art" ; this expression comprises all matter which has been made available to the public in the United Kingdom or elsewhere, by written or oral description, by use or in any other way.
Matters contained in prior patent applications are also included.
The  inventor must resist any temptation he might have to publish details of his invention before the first filing date (the priority date), otherwise he could inadvertently add his invention to the state of the art and anticipate his own invention.
Similarly, the inventor must be careful when discussing his invention with potential manufacturers and the like and the law of confidence is very important at this stage.
However, if details of the invention are disclosed by a person acting in breach of confidence or who has obtained details unlawfully, that disclosure will be disregarded in determining the state of the art.
As technology advances and the pool of knowledge in the public domain grows, it is increasingly difficult to devise something which is absolutely "new" .
Indeed, it is not an easy task to find out if the invention has been anticipated and is already part of the state of the art, given the massive world-wide volume of published work, and it is possible that a publication which anticipates the invention will not be discovered.
If that material is subsequently found and shows that the invention was not new when the patent was applied for, the patent is in danger of being revoked.
A number of patents may be on shaky ground as far as novelty is concerned if sufficient time and effort were expended on trying to trace anticipatory materials.
INVENTIVE STEP
By section 3 of the Patents Act 1977 an invention involves an inventive step if it is not obvious to a person skilled in the art.
This test, known as the "notional skilled worker test" , takes account of the complexity of technology, hence the reference to a skilled person rather than the ubiquitous "reasonable man" , so often used as a benchmark by judges.
The reason is that a great many "inventions" would not be obvious to a layman but would be to someone who knew something of the technology involved.
It has been accepted that the "skilled person" may be a team of highly qualified research workers such as a team of analysts and computer programmers.
When it comes to applying the test, the skilled person is not endowed with any inventive faculties himself, a somewhat artificial premise, but to hold otherwise would mean that virtually all inventions would be obvious and not patentable.
 "Obvious" has no special meaning but is judged by looking at the invention as a whole and considering the entire state of the art.
Whether the invention is obvious is a question of fact and commercial success is a factor which can be taken into account.
In Technograph Printed Circuits Ltd. v Mills & Rockley (Electronics) Ltd. [1969], a case involving a patent for a method of making printed circuits, Harman J. said: It was objected that in fact it was not until ten years after the invention was published that it was commercially adopted…and it was argued from this that it was not a case of filling a long felt want.
I do not accept this argument.
In the years immediately following the war, manufacturers could sell all the machines they wanted using the old point-to-point wiring and had no need to trouble themselves with anything better.
Computer technology spreads into all sorts of other technologies and this may lead to patentable inventions, even though the computer technology itself is not new, if the application of the technology is new.
In principle there is nothing to prevent the application of well-known technology to a particular problem being the proper subject matter of a patent.
This may not be obvious if there has been a major problem and a solution has evaded many attempts to reach it.
Here the commercial success of the invention is a useful guide, so in Parks-Cramer Co. v G.W. Thornton & Sons Ltd. [1966], the invention was a method of cleaning floors between rows of textile machines.
There had been many unsuccessful attempts to find a satisfactory solution but none of them, unlike the present invention, actually worked.
Essentially, all the invention consisted of was an overhead vacuum cleaner which moved back and forth between the textile machines and which had attached to it a long vertical tube, reaching almost to the floor.
It was argued that this was obvious because every competent housewife knows that dust can be removed from a floor by the passage of a vacuum cleaner.
This argument was rejected and the patent was held to be valid as the many unsuccessful attempts by inventors to find a solution coupled with the immediate commercial success of the present invention denied the possibility of a finding of obviousness.
The courts have to draw a line somewhere when it comes to obviousness although it is difficult to lay down hard and fast rules.
It is clear, however, that there must be a sufficient inventive step and merely taking two older inventions and sticking them together will not necessarily be regarded as an inventive step.
INDUSTRIAL APPLICATION
Another requirement for the grant of a patent is that the invention must have an industrial application but this is widely defined by section 4 of the Patents Act 1977 which states that the invention must be capable of being made or used in any kind of industry, including agriculture.
The need for industrial application shows the practical nature of patent law, which requires that the invention should be something which can be produced or that it relates to some sort of industrial process.
Examples of refusal on the grounds that the invention does not have an industrial application are rare, but one example is provided by Hiller's Application [1969].
This case concerned an improved plan for underground service distribution schemes for housing estates; that is, the layout of the gas, sewerage and water pipes and electricity cables.
It was held that this could not constitute a "manner of manufacture" (the phrase used instead of "industrial application" prior to the 1977 Act).
Therefore, if someone develops a new form of layout for the components in a computer or a new configuration for printed circuit boards, these are unlikely to be granted patents.
However, the layout of components and the configuration of a printed circuit board may be protected by copyright through any drawings which have been made indicating the layout or by the design right.
The copyright in the drawings will give a remedy against  anyone who copies a particular layout, but the protection will not extend to the concept behind the layout.
Methods or principles of construction are excluded from the design right.
A new form of layout cannot, without more, be said to be capable of industrial application.
EXCLUSIONS FROM PATENTABILITY
Several things are excluded from the scope of patent law.
Section 1(2) of the Patents Act 1977 contains those which can generally be classified as coming within the scope of copyright law or the law of confidence and, in that context, computer programs are of particular interest.
(Section 1(3) concerns things which might encourage offensive, immoral or anti-social behaviour or new varieties of animals or plants.)
Section 1(2) of the Act states that the following are not inventions for the purposes of the Act:(a) a discovery, scientific theory or mathematical method;(b) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever;(c) a scheme, rule or method for performing any mental act, playing a game or doing business, or a program for a computer;(d) the presentation of information; but the foregoing provision shall prevent anything from being treated as an invention for the purposes of this Act only to the extent that a patent or application for a patent relates to that thing as such (emphasis added)
Note that the above exceptions only apply to the extent that a patent relates to that thing as such.
This means that these particular things mentioned in the above list of exclusions can be protected by patent indirectly if they are part of a patent application which includes other elements which are patentable in their own right.
For example, a computer program to control the temperature of a furnace cannot be patented (it will, of course , be protected by copyright).
But if an application is made to patent a computer-controlled furnace it may well succeed and be granted a patent.
The exclusion from patent of computer programs reflects international trends.
Copyright is seen as the proper vehicle for the protection of computer programs although, when the current Patents Act was passed in 1977, it was far from clear whether copyright did protect computer programs.
Even before the 1977 Act, computer programs were not generally patentable per se, but there have been cases, both in the United Kingdom and in the United States, where computer programs have been granted patents indirectly, usually as being part of a piece of machinery or an industrial process.
In Gever's Application [1970], data processing apparatus was arranged to work in a certain way associated with punched cards inserted into it.
The purpose of the apparatus was to file world trade marks in such a way that they could be easily produced to check for similarity and prior registration.
The patent application, which concerned a piece of machinery which functioned in a  certain way because of the punched cards, was allowed to proceed.
The cards were described by the judge as a "manner of manufacture" because he thought that a punched card was analogous to a cam for controlling the cutting path of a lathe.
This was distinguished from a card which merely had written or printed material on it, intended to convey information to the human eye or mind, and not meant to be ancillary to some machine by being specially shaped for that purpose.
However, because of subsequent technological developments, integrated circuits, magnetic disks and tapes and optical character readers now are used to enter information into a computer or to store the programs which control the computer.
The analogy with a mechanical process no longer rings true and it is unlikely that this case will be followed.
In another case, Burrough's Corporation (Perkin's) Application [1974], computer programs controlled the transmission of data to terminals from a central computer (a communications system).
The system, including the computer programs, was held to be the proper subject matter of a patent because the programs were embodied in physical form; they were "hard-wired" , permanently embedded in the electronic circuits of the equipment.
In many respects the significance of the physical form of a program, whether hard-wired on a silicon chip or stored on magnetic disks, is an irrelevance and should not affect patentability.
The distinction between modes of storage and their effect on patentability was considered recently in Gales Application [1991], concerning an application for a method of calculating square roots by program instructions contained in a ROM chip.
The Comptroller of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks rejected the application but the applicant's appeal to the Patents Court was allowed by Aldous J. who said that the claimed invention related to a product (the ROM chip) and was, therefore, patentable.
He then said that the program would not have been patentable had it been stored on a floppy disk.
This decision would have had the effect of making a software designer's choice of storage medium crucial to the question of patentability but it was, fortunately, quickly overruled in the Court of Appeal where Lord Justice Nicholls said: It would equally be nonsense if a floppy disc [sic]containing a computer program was not patentable that a ROM characterised only by the instructions in that program should be patentable
The Court of Appeal's decision conforms with common sense and the simple expedient of hard-wiring a computer program should not, per se, make the program patentable.
Something else must be present such as a technical effect.
Technical effect
Two alternative approaches have been made to the question of the patent protection of inventions which include a computer program.
The first is that the patent application should be considered without the contribution of the excepted thing.
For example, if a machine includes a computer program it is then a question of whether the machine, without taking the computer program into  account, adds anything to the state of the art.
Does the machine, ignoring the computer program, meet the requirements for patentability?
If the only novel and inventive step concerns the computer program itself, then the machine as a whole is not patentable.
The case of Re Merrill Lynch, Pierce Fenner & Smith Incorporated's Application [1988]illustrates this approach.
The invention related to an improved data processing system for implementing an automatic trading market for securities.
The system received and stored the best current bids, qualified customer buy and sell orders, executed orders as well as monitoring stock inventory and profit.
The Principal Examiner of the Patent Office rejected the application for a patent and the appeal against his decision was dismissed.
On appeal to the Patents Court, it was held that where an invention involves any of the excluded materials in section 1(2), the proper construction of the qualification in that subsection requires that the Patent Office inquires into whether the inventive step resides in the contribution of the excluded matter alone.
If the inventive step comes only from the excluded material, then the invention is not patentable because of section 1(2).
The judge, Falconer J. said that the novel and inventive effect must reside outside the computer program even though it may be defined by the program.
In a further appeal to the Court of Appeal (Merrill Lynch's Application [1989]) the approach of Falconer J. was rejected and that taken by the European Patent Office, as described below, was approved.
However, the Court of Appeal still confirmed that the application in Merrill Lynch was not patentable but on the grounds that there was no technical effect, the operation being entirely software based.
In Vicom Systems Incorporated's Patent Application [1987], a different approach to that of Falconer J. was taken.
This case concerned an application to the European Patent Office (EPO) and the invention was a new digital image processing system, the process steps being expressed mathematically in the form of an algorithm.
It was held that this claim was allowable.
It was said that if a claim is directed to a technical process which is carried out under the control of a program (whether implemented in the hardware or the software), then the claim cannot be regarded as related to a computer program as such.
It is an application of the program for determining the sequence of steps in the process and it is the process for which protection is sought.
In the present case, the subject matter of the invention was the practical application of a computer program, the technical effect resulting from the operation of the programmed computer and not the computer program itself.
The EPO's approach has been followed and approved subsequently by the English courts.
In Genentech Inc."s Patent [1989], it was held, inter alia, in the Court of Appeal that a patent which claimed the practical application of a discovery did not relate to the discovery as such and was not excluded by section 1(2) of the Patents Act 1977 even if the practical application might be obvious once the discovery had been made.
Gale's Application [1991], discussed above confirms this as the correct approach.
Whilst a patent will be refused for a computer program simpliciter (or any of the other exceptions in section 1(2) for that matter) it will be allowed if the  purpose of the program is to bring about some practical effect and it is that effect which is the subject matter of the patent application.
The subject matter should make a technical contribution to the state of the art.
It has been argued that a special, hybrid type of right should be introduced for computer programs; something between a patent and copyright.
Such a right would give a monopoly in the program, thus protecting the underlying ideas more effectively than copyright, but the right would last for a shorter period than a patent, say 5 or 7 years maximum.
However, given the developments both in the United Kingdom and elsewhere over the last few years, it is now unlikely that this course will be taken.
The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 confirms this forcibly by its clear inclusion of computer programs in the literary work category of works protected by copyright.
INFRINGEMENT, DEFENCES AND REMEDIES
A patent is infringed if a person does one of certain things in relation to the invention in the United Kingdom without the permission of the proprietor (owner) of the patent.
Section 60 of the Patents Act 1977 defines what does and what does not constitute infringement.
The nature of the infringement depends on whether the invention is a product (for example, a new type of computer printer) or a process (for example , a new method of making integrated circuits).
If the invention is a product, the patent is infringed by making, disposing of or offering to dispose of, using, importing or keeping the product.
Similar provisions apply to a process; for example, using the process infringes but, additionally, the patented process may be infringed by using or disposing of, etc. any product obtained directly from that process.
Another difference between products and processes relates to the knowledge of the infringer.
For a process, knowledge that a patent is being infringed is required.
However, "knowledge" is used in a special way and a person can still be deemed to have the requisite knowledge if it would be obvious to a reasonable man that a patent was being infringed.
There is no requirement for knowledge as regards a product and, therefore, in the absence of a defence, liability for infringement is strict.
A patent is also infringed if a person supplies or offers to supply some other person with any of the means, relating to an essential element of the invention, for putting the invention into effect.
Knowledge is required in that the person supplying knows, or it is obvious to a reasonable man, that those means are suitable for putting the invention into effect and that person so intends.
This "supplying the means" infringement is useful as it applies to persons who supply products in kit form.
For example, if a person supplies a computer in kit form which, when assembled, infringes a patent, then the supplier of the computer kit infringes the patent even if he is just a middle-man as long as he has the requisite knowledge.
This prevents a possible loophole in patent law such as where a person imports components made in a foreign country to be sold as a kit.
The person assembling the kit computer will not be liable under patent law, however, if he assembles and uses the computer privately and for non- commercial purposes.
To give a practical example of infringement, consider the following situation: An inventor A has invented a new type of computer "chip" and a new process which will be used for making those chips.
He has taken out patents for the process and for the chips.
B finds out about the process and decides to build a similar process for making these computer chips.
B asks C to supply equipment which is essential to the process.
B then makes some computer chips and sells them to D, a trade supplier.
The position is: B, if he knows, or it would be obvious to a reasonable man, that the process was patented, has infringed the patent for the process.
Even if B had no actual knowledge it would be most likely that he would be fixed with knowledge on the basis of the reasonable man test.
(Patent specifications are available for public inspection — would a reasonable man check first?)
B has infringed the patent for the computer chips even if he did not know or could not be expected to know of the patent.
C has infringed the patent for the process if he knows, or it would be obvious to a reasonable man, that the equipment he supplied was suitable for putting the process into effect and the equipment was intended to do so.
D infringes the patent for the computer chips, regardless of knowledge.
The fact that some infringements do not require any form of knowledge may seem unduly harsh, but knowledge is required for some of the remedies and the situation is not as inequitable as it might appear, bearing in mind the need to protect the patent.
There are certain defences or exceptions to infringement; for example, if the act is done privately and for non-commercial purposes or for experimental purposes (on the basis that the proprietor's interests are not harmed by such use).
There are other, unusual defences, but these are outside the scope of this book.
Of more importance is whether, if someone has "copied" an invention but has introduced some minor changes, the patent has been infringed.
What is the scope of the patent?
To determine whether there has been an infringement, the specification and, in particular, the claims for the patent must be looked at and interpreted to find the limits of the patent.
Although judges tend to interpret Acts of Parliament and legal documents literally (unless this leads to an absurd result), patent specifications are interpreted purposively; that is, in line with the presumed intention of the persons who wrote them.
In Catnic Components Ltd. v Hill & Smith Ltd. [1982], the plaintiff obtained a patent for a load bearing lintel, the main strength of which came from a vertical metal rear face.
The specification and claims in the patent referred to rear face as being vertical.
The  defendant made a similar lintel but with a rear face inclined at 6 degrees from the vertical.
The House of Lords, by interpreting the word "vertical" to mean "vertical or nearly vertical" held that the patent had been infringed.
The important feature was the metal face, the purpose of which was to support the load.
This approach is in line with common sense and prevents others from flouting patent law by changing details of an invention whilst retaining the underlying principles involved and is justified on the basis that patent specifications and claims are directed to technical people, not lawyers.
It also shows the different scope of patent law compared with copyright law, because patent law can protect purpose whereas, generally, copyright law cannot.
A patent, once granted, can be revoked if it is subsequently shown to fail to meet the requirements for patentability; for example, that it was not novel on the priority date or does not have an inventive step, or if it was not granted to the person entitled to it.
The fact that a patent has been granted by the Patent Office is not conclusive proof that the invention has satisfied all the requirements and the discovery of a prior publication disclosing the invention can result in the patent being revoked.
Often, a person sued for infringement of patent will attack the validity of the patent.
As far as the alleged infringer is concerned, this can be a useful ploy as the proceedings will be drawn out and the proprietor of the patent will be put to extra expense in defending his patent.
However, although the validity of patents is frequently brought into issue by defendants, only a handful of patents are revoked each year.
The remedies available for infringement of patent are injunctions, delivery up or destruction of infringing articles, damages or an account of profits.
Damages and accounts of profits are alternatives.
If the defendant proves that he was not aware and had no reasonable grounds for supposing that the patent existed, then neither damages nor accounts of profits are available.
If a product carries the word "patent" or "patented" or similar, this does not automatically mean that the defendant knows of the patent unless the number of the patent also appears on the product concerned.
This enables anyone to look up and inspect the patent specification to determine its scope.
MISCELLANEOUS
Certain other provisions contained in the Patents Act 1977 are worthy of brief mention.
An invention may be potentially very beneficial but might also destroy or seriously undermine an existing business; for example, a car engine that does 200 miles to a gallon, or an everlasting light bulb.
To prevent the proprietor sitting on his patent, deliberately failing to use it, section 48 of the Act allows any person to apply for a compulsory licence under the patent, after the expiry of three years if, for example, the patent is not being worked or some abuse is being made of the patent monopoly such as if the product is not being made available at reasonable terms.
An employee who, in the course of his employment, has made an invention which belongs to his employer may be awarded compensation to be paid by the  employer if the patent is of outstanding benefit to the employer (section 40).
This provision is seldom used, perhaps because reasonable employers reward such employees sufficiently well so that they do not apply for compensation.
Trade marks and passing-off
TRADE MARKS
Marks have been used to identify the makers of goods for thousands of years.
Individual marks become associated with a particular product and with the quality of that product.
As regards the value of a trade mark to a manufacturer, two factors are important: the buying public's familiarity with the mark and their experience of reasonable quality or value for money in the past associated with the mark.
A trade mark which is used with a successful product is of tremendous value to the owner of the mark and he will want to prevent others from using the mark or a similar one to capture some of his trade.
The Trade Marks Act 1938, following previous legislation, serves two main purposes: first, to protect the goodwill and reputation which a trader has built up around the mark involved and, secondly, to prevent the public from being deceived into buying inferior goods in the belief that they are made by another manufacturer.
A manufacturer, trader or person who makes goods or provides a service may register a mark for one or more classes of goods or services.
This will give the owner of the mark a monopoly in the use of that mark in the classes under which the mark has been registered.
There are a total of 32 classes of marks for goods (for example, chemicals, electrical goods and scientific apparatus, vehicles, clothing, fancy goods and smokers' articles) and 8 classes for services (for example , advertising and business, insurance and financial, com- munications and miscellaneous).
If anyone else uses the mark, or one deceptively similar, in the course of trade without the owner's permission, that person can be sued for infringement of trade mark.
There may also, depending on the circumstances, be a criminal offence committed, as mentioned in Chapter 23.
The remedies available to the owner of the trade mark are the usual ones of injunctions, damages or an account of profits as an alternative to damages plus removal of offending marks.
The infringing articles may be ordered to be destroyed if the offending marks cannot be removed.
In the computer industry, the power of trade marks can readily be seen as, in a relatively short space of time, names such as Apple computer, IBM, WordStar, Lotus 1-2-3 and BBC computer have become household names.
Trade marks are especially important in a fast-moving industry and it is very comforting to buy goods with familiar names when so many products and businesses come and go in rapid succession, as happened with microcomputers in the early 1980s.
A familiar name or mark is very influential as many who buy computer hardware and software will look for a product which is likely to be of reasonable quality and will be supported  in years to come.
There have been few examples of trade mark infringement in the world of computers as most counterfeiters and software pirates have used different names or marks; for example, copies of the Apple computer imported into Australia were called the "Wombat" .
Other Apple lookalikes have been called "Pineapples" and "Microprofessors" .
Perhaps this is a testimony to the effectiveness and relative straightforwardness of trade mark law.
WHAT IS A TRADE MARK?
Section 68(1) of the Trade Marks Act 1938 (the interpretation section) defines a trade mark as: a mark…used or proposed to be used in relation to goods for the purpose of indicating, or so as to indicate, a connection in the course of trade between the goods and some person having the right either as proprietor or registered user to use the mark, whether with or without any indication of the identity of that person.
Thus, a trade mark shows a link between certain goods and the owner or user of the mark.
Originally, trade marks could only be registered in respect of goods but the Trade Marks (Amendment) Act 1984 extended the registration of trade marks to services such as banking and laundries.
Computer bureaux fall within the miscellaneous category of services.
 "Mark" is defined by section 68 of the 1938 Act as including: a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, name, signature, word, letter, numeral or any combination thereof.
However, a brand, heading, label or ticket cannot be a service mark.
A "brand" simply means a mark made by a hot instrument such as a branding iron applied to cattle.
The definition of marks is very wide and everyone is familiar with many examples of different types of mark.
For example, the stylized Cadbury signature, the Apple logo and the JPS monogram.
Registered trade marks are often printed with a tiny circle containing a letter "R" to signify their status as registered trade marks and to warn would-be imitators.
Even the shape and colour of an article have been held to be acceptable as trade marks.
For example, in Smith, Kline and French Laboratories Ltd. v Sterling Winthrop Group Ltd. [1976], it was held that coloured capsules for drugs could be registered as trade marks.
However, an application for the Coca-Cola bottle was refused registration in re Coca-Cola Co."s Application [1986].
THE REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTERING A TRADE MARK
There is a distinction in the Act between Part A and Part B marks.
More stringent rules apply to Part A marks which require that the trade mark must be  "adapted to distinguish" the goods of the owner of the mark from goods of other traders.
Part B marks must be "capable of distinguishing" the proprietor's goods from those of other traders.
Registration in Part A is more desirable in that the protection offered is stronger.
Application is normally made for Part A and Part B registration might be granted if there is some doubt about the mark.
Section 9 of the Trade Marks Act 1938 sets out five categories for Part A marks: a) names, business or individual; b) signatures of applicant or predecessor; c) invented words; d) a word having no direct reference to the character or quality of the goods and not being a geographical name or surname; e) any other distinctive mark.
Additionally, these marks must be "distinctive" ; that is, they are: adapted to distinguish goods with which the proprietor…is or may be connected in the course of trade from goods in the case of which no such connection subsists.
OBSTACLES AND OBJECTIONS TO REGISTRATION
By section 12(1) of the Trade Marks Act 1938, a mark will be refused registration if it is deceptive; that is, if it is identical to or so similar to another mark already registered that it is likely to lead to confusion.
Another form of deception is if the mark creates a misleading impression in another way about the goods involved (section 11).
The objections may be made either by the Registrar himself or an objector, such as the owner of a similar mark.
Similar to another mark
This is only a bar to registration if the first mark is registered in respect of "the same goods or description of goods" .
It is acceptable to use the same name as someone else if it is used for a different class of goods or services to the ones for which the first mark is registered.
However, there may be an action in passing-off if this is likely to cause confusion in the eyes of the buying public.
For example, it may be permissible to use the Apple logo for brandy (providing it has not been registered against the wines and spirits class) and there would be little danger of the public thinking it had anything to do with the computer company.
However, if the logo were used by a computer bureau, although there may be no infringement of trade mark (unless the Apple logo had been registered in miscellaneous services class), there would probably be an action in passing-off because many people might think that the computer bureau was somehow connected with the computer company.
Examples of marks turned down on these grounds are: HUNTSMAN — earlier mark SPORTSMAN (both cherry brandy) An application showing a picture of three pigs was refused because of a prior word mark THREE PIGS BRAND (bacon)
However, in Coca-Cola Co. of Canada Ltd. v Pepsi-Cola Co. of Canada Ltd. (1942), it was held that PEPSI-COLA was not too close to COCA-COLA because the suffix COLA was a word that had become common and descriptive of a type of beverage; that is, a generic word.
Creating a false impression
This should not present any major difficulties in the context of computers, although a dating agency which wanted to use a service mark "COMPUTADATE" but did not have a computer might fall into this category.
Examples of marks refused on these grounds include DAIRY GOLD for a synthetic margarine and JARDEX for a poisonous disinfectant when there was already a meat extract called JARDOX.
Exception — honest concurrent use
An exception to the rules concerning deceptive marks is contained in section 12(2) of the 1938 Act.
This applies where two companies have used identical or similar marks for at least five years or more in all honesty and have built up goodwill in ignorance of the use of the mark by the other company.
Even though one is registered, the second may be accepted for registration, especially if there is little danger of confusion between the two.
Applications for registration of a trade or service mark are made to the Trade Mark Registry and the services of a trade mark agent may be helpful.
The fees for registration are relatively modest (presently just over £160) but this must be multiplied by the number of classes for which registration is required.
Initially, registration is for 7 years and may be renewed, ad infinitum, for further 14 year periods.
Many trade marks first registered under the Trade Marks Act 1875 are still in use, testifying to the importance of trade marks, including Britain's No.1 trade mark, the BASS red triangle mark.
INFRINGEMENT
The proprietor of a trade or service mark has the exclusive right to use the mark in relation to the class or classes of goods or services against which it is registered.
Anyone else using the mark or one nearly resembling it in relation to the same class or classes infringes the mark.
Section 4 of the Trade Marks Act 1938 is the main provision dealing with infringement and its language has been described by a past Master of the Rolls as being turgid and diffuse.
However, for most purposes, infringement is easy to determine.
Where the difficulty lies is in relation to "comparative advertising" ; that is , where one trader advertises his goods by reference to another trader's goods.
In Compaq Computer Corp. v Dell Computer Corp.
Ltd. [1992], Dell advertised their computers with a photograph showing their computer and a Compaq computer with both makers' names (including the word "Compaq" , a registered trade mark) and the price of the machines.
The plaintiff, Compaq, sued for trade mark infringement, passing-off and trade libel.
It was held that there was a clear infringement of the Compaq trade mark, although it was accepted that it was arguable whether it should have been accepted for registration because of its phonetic similarity with "Compact" , an everyday word.
Nevertheless, the court granted the plaintiff an interlocutory injunction even though the plaintiff had previously engaged in comparative advertising.
Although comparative advertising is fairly common, it rarely results in legal action.
For a Part B mark, no injunction or other relief is available to a plaintiff if the defendant can show that the use complained of is not likely to deceive or cause confusion or taken as indicating a connection in the course of trade between the goods and the person having the right to use the mark (section 5).
This is why registration in Part A is preferable although it is the defendant who carries the burden of proof.
PASSING-OFF
In many ways, the law of passing-off is a common law version of trade mark law.
It protects business goodwill and safeguards the public from deception by giving a right of action against anyone who tries to pass off his goods or services as those of someone else.
One trader might try to "cash in" on the goodwill and reputation of another trader by dressing up his goods in such a way that they look like those of that other trader.
There is a large overlap between trade marks and passing-off and it is not unusual for a legal action to involve both passing-off and trade marks.
The law of passing-off is particularly useful if there is no registered mark to be infringed; perhaps a trader or manufacturer has used a mark for several years without registering it as a trade mark.
The mark may fail to qualify for registration or the act complained of might fall outside the scope of trade marks; for example, if it relates to the format of an advertising campaign.
The following example shows the application of passing-off.
A computer retailer has been operating for three years under the name of "COMPUTER EQUIPMENT SALES" and has a chain of stores in the South of England.
The retailer has acquired a reputation for low prices and efficient service.
Recently, another retailer has opened a store in the South of England and uses the name of "COMPUTER EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE" .
Neither names are registered as a trade mark; in fact the names would be refused registration because they are too descriptive of computer retailing generally and would make it difficult for other traders to describe their business activities.
As there is a danger that people will be confused and might buy from the second retailer thinking that they are buying from the other, he should be able to obtain an  injunction preventing the second retailer from continuing to use the name he has chosen.
If the first retailer has only been in business a short time before the second retailer opens his store then it is unlikely that anything can be done.
This is because there has not been sufficient time to build up goodwill connected with the name and, hence, there is little danger that the public will be confused.
Similarly, if the second trader's store was in North Wales, it would be unlikely that the first trader's business would be affected, unless his goodwill extends to there.
BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR A PASSING-OFF ACTION
Before the plaintiff can suffer the type of damage caused by passing-off, he must have a reputation associated with goodwill.
He must be able to show that his name, mark, get-up or something else which is distinctive about his business will be associated with his goods by the public.
If a trader has just started in business he will not succeed in a passing-off action but a newly registered trade mark has immediate protection.
However, the necessary reputation could be obtained relatively quickly by an intensive advertising campaign on national television.
The ingredients necessary to a successful passing-off action were described in Erven Warnink Besloten Vennootschap v J Townend & Sons (Hull) Ltd. [1979].
The plaintiffs made a liqueur called advocaat which came to be well known.
It was made from brandewijn, egg yolks and sugar.
The defendants decided to enter this market and they made a drink called "Keeling's Old English Advocaat" which was made from Cyprus sherry and dried egg powder, an inferior but cheaper drink.
This captured a large part of the plaintiff's market in the United Kingdom.
It was held that, because of the reputation the plaintiff's product had gained, it should be protected from deceptive use of its name by competitors even though the goodwill was shared by several traders.
There was a misrepresentation made by the defendant calculated to injure the plaintiff's business or goodwill and an injunction was granted in favour of the plaintiffs.
Lord Diplock laid down the essentials for a passing-off action: 1) a misrepresentation 2) made by a trader in the course of trade 3) to prospective customers of his or ultimate consumers of goods or services supplied by him 4) which is calculated to injure the business or goodwill of another trader and 5) which causes actual damage to a business or goodwill of the trader by whom the action is brought.
Most of these points are self-explanatory but the first one, the misrepresentation, requires further discussion.
THE MISREPRESENTATION
The misrepresentation is not necessarily limited to an exact copy of the name or "get-up" .
It may be sufficient if it imputes a quality in something which applies to an already well-known product, an important factor being whether the public will be deceived.
In deciding this it is not necessary to consider whether members of the public who are knowledgeable about the product are deceived, it may be sufficient if members of the public who have very little knowledge of the product concerned are likely to be deceived, see J. Bollinger v Costa Bravo Wine Co.
Ltd.
(No.2)[1961], where an injunction was granted to prevent the use of the name "Spanish Champagne" .
As mentioned earlier, a misrepresentation does not have to be confined to a name or mark.
The tort of passing-off is wide enough to encompass other descriptive material such as slogans and visual images associated with an advertising campaign if this material has become part of the goodwill of the plaintiff's product.
The test is whether the plaintiff has acquired an intangible property right for his product deriving from the distinctive nature of this material which is recognized by the market.
In applying the test, the courts have to bear in mind the balance between the plaintiff's investment in the product and the protection of free competition.
In one respect, Lord Diplock's judgment is misleading.
He spoke of the misrepresentation being calculated to injure.
This suggests that passing-off must be deliberate.
However, this is not necessary and innocence is not an absolute defence although it may influence the decision or the remedies granted.
COMMON FIELDS OF ACTIVITY
If the traders in a passing-off action operate in different fields of activity, it will usually be assumed that there is less danger of confusion and thus less danger of damage to the plaintiff.
For example, in Granada Group Ltd. v Ford Motor Company Ltd. [1973], the GRANADA television group could not prevent the Ford Motor Company calling one of their cars a Ford GRANADA; the court held that there was no danger of confusion because of the different fields of activity; namely television and cars.
However, in Lego U.K. Ltd. v Lego M. Lemelstrich Ltd. [1983], the Lego company, which makes children's construction kits comprising coloured plastic bricks, was granted an injunction against the manufacturers of coloured plastic irrigation material preventing them using the name "Lego" as part of the description of the material.
The plaintiff was able to show that there was a real danger of confusion and damage to their reputation and goodwill.
There is no copyright in a fictitious name and an action in passing-off is unlikely to be of much help if the defendant uses that name in relation to different goods or services.
The test, as always, is whether the public is likely to be deceived by the use of the name and in applying this test it is important to consider the fields of activity involved; do both parties operate in the same or  different fields?
In the past, judges have not assumed that the public have a detailed knowledge of character merchandising.
An example is provided by the case of Wombles Ltd. v Wombles Skips Ltd. [1977].
Wombles are fictitious animals from a TV series noted for their cleanliness, and for cleaning up litter and putting it to good use.
The plaintiff company owned the copyright in the books and drawings of the Wombles and their main business was granting licences so that manufacturers, in return for a fee, could use the Womble characters to promote their goods.
They granted one such licence for waste paper baskets.
The defendant formed a company to lease builders skips for rubbish.
After considerable thought and remembering the Wombles' clean habits, he decided to call his company Wombles Skips Ltd.
In finding for the defendant, the court held that there was no common field of activity and, therefore, no danger of confusion.
However, some judges do seem prepared to accept that the public are now more aware of character merchandising and there may be a change in this aspect of passing-off before too long.
REMEDIES FOR PASSING-OFF
Remedies available are injunctions, including interlocutory injunctions, and damages.
An account of profits may be available as an alternative to damages.
The damages are assessed by considering the harm done to the plaintiff's reputation associated with goodwill and the lost sales of the plaintiff's product as a result of the passing-off.
The most desirable remedy is an injunction, preventing the other person or business from continuing to use the disputed name or style.
TRADE LIBEL
An action related to passing-off is trade libel, sometimes referred to a malicious falsehood.
This is the commercial equivalent of defamation and an example is where a person publishes untrue information concerning the quality of a trader's goods.
In terms of computer technology trade libel would occur if someone falsely claimed that a particular software dealer was trading in pirated software or was in financial difficulties or if a software house's products were defective or would not operate on a particular make of computer.
Of course, the information must be false and must be published or stated maliciously.
This means made without good cause or excuse and could extend to a reckless statement.
In Compaq Computer Corp. v Dell Computer Corp.
Ltd. [1992], discussed earlier in this chapter, it was held that there was an arguable case of trade libel because the computer systems compared were materially different and the representations as to price were misleading and not justified.
In Joyce v Sengupta (1992), the Vice Chancellor said that essential ingredients for an action in trade libel were falsity and malice.
Proof of financial loss was also required, subject to the relaxation in Section 3 of the  Defamation Act 1952 (that is, where the offending words are calculated to cause pecuniary damage and are published in writing or other permanent form).
Designs
Designs are relevant to computer hardware and semiconductor products (discussed in the following chapter).
Computer equipment may be designed in such a way that it is aesthetically pleasing as well as functional, there may be something novel about the design which falls short of the scope of patents.
Examples of these are: an attractive outer case for a computer monitor, a useful case for computer disks with built-in carrying handle, a desk for a computer or a new shape for a portable computer.
A considerable amount of effort may have been expended on the design of such items and their components so that they perform their intended function efficiently or are visually attractive.
It is right that such effort should be rewarded and this is the purpose of design law which applies to new or original shapes or decorative features.
Unfortunately, this area of law is far from straightforward and the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 has done little to simplify matters.
To add to the confusion, there are now two forms of right relating to designs; one is subject to registration, the other not.
Registered Designs are provided for by the Registered Designs Act 1949, amended by the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
The Design Right was introduced by the 1988 Act.
The history of designs and their relationship with copyright is an interesting study in its own right and in many cases an original design was capable of dual protection under the 1949 Act as a registered design and, through any drawings of the design, under the Copyright Act 1956 (as amended) as an artistic work.
The duration of copyright protection was limited to 15 years if the design was registrable; that is, it was new and had eye-appeal.
However, many functional designs were protected through the artistic copyright subsisting in drawings of the design for the full term of life of author plus 50 years.
Drawings are prepared for most designs and drawings are protected by copyright as artistic works, irrespective of artistic quality.
Before the 1988 Act, anyone copying a design would infringe the copyright in a drawing made for the design even though that person had never seen the drawing, because making a three-dimensional copy of a two-dimensional work infringed the copyright in the latter and vice versa.
The only proviso was that a layman would be able to recognize the one from the other.
For example, in British Leyland Motor Corp.
Ltd. v Armstrong Patents Co.
Ltd. [1986], the defendants made replacement exhaust pipes for the plaintiff's cars by copying the shape and dimensions of the original pipes, a process known as "reverse engineering" .
The plaintiffs claimed that the exhaust pipes made by the defendants infringed the copyright in the original drawings of the exhaust systems, although the defendants had not  seen the drawings.
This argument was accepted by the House of Lords but their lordships refused to allow the plaintiffs to assert their rights under copyright law.
They said that car owners have an inherent right to repair their cars in the most economical way possible and, for that purpose, are to have access to a free market in spare parts.
Until the 1988 Act, all a person had to do to gain copyright protection for a design was to make a drawing of the design in such a way that the design could be recognized from the drawing (as long as the design did not relate to a spare part).
However, the overlap between designs and copyright has been eroded by section 51 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 which states that it is not an infringement of any copyright in a design document or model recording or embodying a design for anything other than an artistic work (or a typeface), to make an article to the design or to copy an article made to the design.
In this context, "design" has the same definition as it does for the purposes of the design right and a design document includes a drawing or other documents such as specifications, photographs and data stored in a computer.
This means that industrial designs must either fall within the design right or be registered as a design to be protected unless they are copies of artistic works; for example, sculptures.
It is no longer possible, in most cases, to rely on copyright in any drawings or computer data relating to the design.
Many of the intricacies of the law of designs have little relevance to computer technology and a complete discussion of the rights is outside the scope of this book.
The following description of the two forms of right is thus necessarily brief and the emphasis is on computer equipment rather than attempting to give a detailed account of design law.
REGISTERED DESIGNS
Section 1 of the Registered Designs Act 1949, as amended, defines registrable designs as being:…features of shape, configuration or ornament applied to an article by any industrial process, being features which in the finished article appeal to and are judged by the eye.
This is concerned with aesthetic aspects and it is not sufficient that the article simply looks pretty or pleasing but the eye-appeal of the article should be such that persons acquiring or using the article do so because of the appearance of articles made to the design.
By section 1(3), a design shall not be registered if the appearance of the article is not material; that is, if aesthetic considerations are not normally taken into account to a material extent by persons acquiring or using articles made to the design.
In addition, to be registrable, the design must be new (section 1(2)).
Examples are a new shape of coffee cup or a new transfer pattern applied to plates or attractive and novel computer furniture and with such objects the appearance of the object is important to a person buying  it.
Even if a person is buying desks for computers or word processors for an office, the appearance of the furniture is a major factor influencing the choice.
However, an attractively designed computer is less likely to fall within the scope of registered designs because a person buying a computer is more interested in the performance of the computer; its appearance is not important to a material extent, although it must be acknowledged that the Design Registry and the courts took a fairly liberal attitude prior to the changes to the 1949 Act and are likely to continue to be generous in this respect.
Certain things are excluded from registration such as a method or principle of construction or features of shape or configuration dictated solely by the function the article has to perform, or which depend upon the appearance of another article of which it is intended to form an integral part.
Methods or principles of construction are verging on patent law, whilst eye-appeal resulting from function, or from fitting with another article are excluded because it is an indirect effect.
The proprietor (owner) of a design is the author, the person who created it, unless the author is acting in the course of employment or has been commissioned, for money or money's worth, to create the design.
If the design has been generated by a computer in circumstances where there is no human author, the person making the arrangements is treated as the proprietor of the design.
The right lasts for 5 years initially from the date of registration but may be renewed in 5 year stages up to a maximum of 25 years.
There are some transitional arrangements to cope with designs which had been registered on or after 12th January 1988 but prior to the more rigorous standards now applicable (that is, prior to 1st August 1989) and which would fail to be registrable subsequently.
Those design registrations are limited to a maximum of 10 years.
Other designs registered prior to 1st August 1989 are limited to 15 years.
The proprietor of a design is given certain exclusive rights in relation to articles embodying the design (for example, making or importing such articles for trade or business purposes or selling or hiring them).
A person infringes by doing any of these acts without the licence of the registered proprietor.
There are other infringements such as making anything to enable articles to be made or doing anything in relation to a kit.
Remedies available include injunctions, damages and orders for delivery up or destruction of infringing articles.
THE DESIGN RIGHT
Like copyright, this right is automatic and does not depend on registration but, unlike registered designs, there is no requirement for the design to have eye-appeal, although if it does, it is not barred from protection as a design right.
The result is that the design right will apply to both functional and aesthetic articles and, hence, there is an overlap with registered designs.
The potentially longer duration of registered designs is the main reason why a design which lies in this overlap should be registered.
The design right does not apply to designs recorded (or having articles made in respect of them) prior to 1st August 1989.
A "design" in the context of a design right is, by section 213 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, an original design being the design of any aspect of the shape or configuration (whether external or internal) of the whole or part of the article.
This definition is not too dissimilar to that relating to registered designs.
The design right applies to all manner of industrial designs whether functional or not.
A design must be original and section 213(4) states that a design is not original if it is commonplace in the design field in question at the time of its creation.
It has been held in C & H Engineering v F Klucznik & Sons Ltd. [1992]that this requires a two-stage test.
First, is the design original in a copyright sense; that is, did the design originate from the author?
If the answer is "yes" then it must be determined whether the design is commonplace (at the time of its creation).
The design must, therefore, be the independent work of the designer which was not commonplace in the relevant field when created.
As with registered designs, there are exceptions to design right protection.
The first exception, a method or principle of construction, is common to both rights.
The second exception is subdivided into features of shape or configuration of an article which: i) enable the article to be connected to, or placed in, around or against, another article so that either article may perform its function (the "must-fit" exception), or ii) are dependant upon the appearance of another article of which the article is intended by the designer to form an integral part (the "must-match" exception).
These exceptions are significant for manufacturers and suppliers of spare parts.
The former part of the exception applies to "functional" spare parts which have to be a particular shape to fit another article.
An exhaust pipe for a car will fall into this exception.
Any piece of computer equipment which has to be fitted to some other equipment, such as a replacement "card" (printed circuit board containing integrated circuits) which has to be a certain shape, or have a certain type of connector, in order to fit into a computer will also fall into the first part of the exception.
This exception is directed at rationalizing the British Leyland case and it allows for the fact that persons who buy items of equipment may need replacement parts in time and should be able to obtain spare parts in a free market at reasonable cost.
If a design right monopoly were to be granted to spare parts, manufacturers of cars, washing machines, computers, etc. would be able to control the supply and price of spare parts and might be tempted to charge exorbitant prices.
The second part of the exception would apply to spare parts such as replacement body panels for cars where the design is dictated by the appearance of the car but it is unlikely that many computer spare parts will fall into this category.
An example of computer equipment which falls into the "functional" exception (i.e. the first part of the exception) is a soundproof box for a printer (acoustic hood).
The shape of the box is determined largely by the shape and  size of the printer and the box is placed around the printer so that it can perform its function of reducing the decibel level emanating from the printer.
The "appearance" exception (that is, the second part of the exception) could only apply if the soundproof box and printer, when taken together, could be considered to be an integral unit.
Generally, there is a small overlap between designs and copyright; for example, a design for a one-piece printer hood made by a process involving casting might be protected as a sculpture (which includes a cast), which is a category of artistic works.
However, if there is such an overlap, section 236 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 removes design right protection, leaving copyright as providing the only legal remedy against unauthorized copying.
Surface decoration is another exception because this lies clearly within the scope of registered designs.
With registered designs, the person creating the design is known as the author but, and for no explicable reason, the person creating a design which is subject to a design right is known as its designer.
The owner of a design right is the designer unless he creates the design in the course of his employment or has been commissioned to create it.
There is no requirement for the commissioner of a design to have paid money or money's worth to be the owner of the right (unlike a registered design).
A computer-generated design belongs to the person making the arrangements necessary for the creation of the work.
Design right lasts for 15 years from the end of the calendar year in which it was first recorded in a design document (which includes storage in a computer) or an article was made to the design, unless articles have been made available for sale or hire within the first five years in which case the right lasts only a further 10 years.
The result of the provisions relating to duration is that the owner of the right can only have a maximum of 10 years to exploit the design commercially.
This period will be reduced if the owner fails to market articles made to the design within the first five years.
Effectively, and in a commercial sense, the right lasts for 10 years with the owner being given a five-year breathing space within which to bring articles made to the design to the market place.
The right is further diluted because licences are available as of right during the last five years.
This means that anyone can exploit the design during its last five years subject to the payment of a royalty to the design right owner.
Failing agreement of the terms, the Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks will settle the terms.
Infringement occurs when a person makes articles to the design or makes a design document recording the design for the purpose of enabling such articles to be made.
This covers identical articles and articles substantially to the design.
There are also secondary infringements where a person "deals" with infringing articles, for example, by importing, selling or hiring.
Remedies for infringement are as for copyright but there are no criminal penalties for secondary infringements.
In C & H Engineering v F Klucznik & Sons Ltd. [1992], the defendant claimed his design right in a pig fender, a three-sided box structure, had been infringed.
The "original" part of the design was a round bar welded around the top.
Aldous J. said the question of infringement involved an  objective test through the eyes of a person to whom the design is directed (in this case, a pig farmer).
There was no infringement here because the plaintiff's and defendant's articles were not exactly or substantially the same.
Although a design can relate to a part of an article, it seems that the whole article must be looked at when deciding infringement.
Semiconductor products
Integrated circuits, commonly known as "silicon chips" or, simply, "chips" , are of tremendous importance to the computer industry.
Without the miniaturization that they bring, the powerful personal computer of today would have remained an impossibility.
Integrated circuits are made from layers of materials by a process which includes etching using various "masks" (templates) which are made photographically.
Alternatively, electron beam machines are used.
The simplest integrated circuit consists of three layers, one of which is made of semiconductor material.
A semiconducting material, in terms of its ability to conduct electricity, is one which lies between a conductor such as copper and an insulator such as rubber.
Examples of semiconducting materials include silicon, germanium, selenium and gallium arsenide.
A wafer of semiconductor material is coated with a layer of silicon oxide (an insulator) and the electronic components (for example, transistors) are made by chemically doping the semiconductor material with impurities through holes etched through the oxide.
Finally, an aluminium coating is applied which is partly evaporated using a mask, leaving behind the interconnections between components formed in the semiconductor layer.
The patterns formed by the processes of etching and/or evaporation of the conductor make the electrical circuitry of the integrated circuit.
These patterns represent the circuit design.
The processes involved in the making of integrated circuits fall within the province of patent law and the first patents for integrated circuits were filed in the late 1950s, the most important one being developed by Noyce of the Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation in 1959.
Licences were readily available and in 1961 the first chips were available commercially.
Now that the early patents have expired and much of the know-how lies in the public domain, it is essential that the considerable effort that goes into the design and development of new integrated circuits is protected.
New types of integrated circuits are unlikely to be patentable for lack of novelty because many are simply more efficient or miniaturized forms of well-known electronic circuits.
SEMICONDUCTOR DESIGN RIGHT
One view was that integrated circuits were protected by copyright through drawings or photographs as most of the masks used in the manufacturing process were produced photographically and would be protected as photographs.
However, this was uncertain because of the requirement in the  Copyright Act 1956 for a non-expert to recognize the circuit as being a three-dimensional reproduction of the drawings or photographs.
As a result of an EEC Directive (Legal Protection of Topographies of Semiconductor products (87/54/EEC)), the Semiconductor Products (Protection of Topography) Regulations 1987 were laid before Parliament and came into force on 7th November 1987.
These regulations gave a right (called a "topography right" ) in the layout of an integrated circuit.
However, with the advent of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, it was decided to replace these regulations with an amended version of the new design right by the Design Right (Semiconductor Regulations) 1989, which came into force on 1st August 1989.
The new right, referred to hereinafter as the "semiconductor design right" , draws heavily from Part III of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 which deals with the unregistered design right but with some differences as far as semiconductor topographies are concerned (see Chapter 9 for a general description of the design right).
The manner in which this has been done is most inept and we now have the situation where some sections of the 1988 Act are different depending on whether they are being applied to semiconductors or other designs.
References below to the 1988 Act are to the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 as it applies to the semiconductor design right.
The 1989 regulations are similar to the 1987 regulations in several respects; for example, it is the topography of a semiconductor which is protected being, by regulation 2, a design which is either:(a) the pattern fixed, or intended to be fixed, in or upon (i) a layer of a semiconductor product, or (ii) a layer of material in the course of and for the purpose of the manufacture of a semiconductor product, or (b) the arrangement of the patterns fixed, or intended to be fixed, in or upon the layers of a semiconductor product in relation to one another .
A semiconductor product is defined as: an article the purpose, or one of the purposes, of which is the performance of an electronic function and which consists of two or more layers, at least one of which is composed of semiconducting material and in or upon one or more of which is fixed a pattern appertaining to that or another function.
These definitions are not very helpful being somewhat tautologous but despite that it is fairly plain that all original integrated circuits will be covered by the regulations.
If the description of integrated circuits given earlier is now considered, it can be seen that the requirements are met; there are two or more layers (usually three), one layer is made of a semiconducting material and a pattern is fixed upon it for the purpose of performing an electronic function.
Normally, the ingenuity which requires protection is in the circuitry represented by the patterns formed by the conducting materials, but the regulations are wider in the sense that they will apply in situations where the ingenuity lies not so much in the horizontal patterns themselves but in the vertical arrangement of layers.
Incidentally, the printed circuit boards commonly found inside most electronic equipment, ranging from transistor radios to computers, are not protected by these regulations because, although comprised of layers (usually two), neither layer is made from semiconductor material.
The board is made of insulating material and a conductor which is etched away leaving the circuitry to which electronic components are later attached by solder.
Generally, however, printed circuit boards will be protected, through their preparatory drawings, by copyright.
Alternatively, they could be considered to be protected by the design right as a configuration when all the components are mounted onto the board.
A single electronic component such as a silicon diode or a transistor is not protected because it possesses no topography within the meaning of the regulations.
To be protected, the semiconductor topography must be original and it is not original if it is commonplace in the design field in question at the time of its creation (section 213 of the 1988 Act).
 "Original" is liberally interpreted in copyright law; however, the requirement that the topography is not commonplace is likely to lead to a much narrower interpretation (see the discussion of C & H Engineering v F Klucznik & Sons Ltd. in the previous Chapter).
Additionally, there are qualification requirements based on the citizenship or domicile of the creator (or his employer or commissioner) of the topography or the person by whom and country in which semiconductors containing the topography are first marketed.
These qualification requirements are wider than with other unregistered designs and there are also reciprocal arrangements with several non-European Community countries such as the United States, Switzerland and Japan.
One reason the 1989 regulations were passed was to satisfy the United States as to the protection offered in the United Kingdom, otherwise there might have been some doubt as to whether topographies derived from the United Kingdom would have been afforded protection in the United States.
Ownership of the semiconductor design right is dealt with by amending section 215 of the 1988 Act.
The first owner of the right is the designer unless the design is created in pursuance of a commission or in the course of employment in which cases the commissioner or the employer respectively are the first owners of the right, subject to any written agreement to the contrary.
If the right arises by reference to the first marketing of the article, such as where a semiconductor topography is designed by a Brazilian in Brazil but is marketed in the United Kingdom by an importer, then the importer will be deemed to own the semiconductor design right.
By section 215 of the 1988 Act, the designer is the person who creates the design and in the case of a computer- generated design, the designer is the person by whom the arrangements necessary for the creation of the design are undertaken.
The recognition of computer-generated topographies is a useful improvement on the 1987 regulations.
The semiconductor design right is, by section 226(1) of the 1988 Act, the exclusive right to reproduce the design by making articles to that design or by making a design document (which includes data stored in a computer) recording the design for the purpose of enabling such articles to be made.
A person doing either of the above infringes the right whether he does it in relation of the whole or a substantial part of the topography.
There are important exceptions to infringement connected with research, non-commercial or educational purposes.
The regulations have one very unusual effect in that it is permissible to make a reproduction of a topography for the purpose of analyzing or evaluating that topography or the concepts, processes, systems or techniques embodied in it by section 226(1A) of the 1988 Act.
Furthermore, by section 226(4), it is not an infringement of the semiconductor design right to create another original topography as a result of such analysis or evaluation or to reproduce that other topography.
Therefore, a form of "reverse engineering" is positively encouraged allowing the knowledge gained from an inspection of an existing topography to be used as the basis of a new topography.
In practice, a limiting factor will be the requirement for the new topography to be original and not commonplace.
On reflection, this exception is probably justified on the grounds that to provide otherwise might inhibit innovation in this very fast-moving field where the existing technology is being built upon all the time whilst property rights still subsist in that existing technology.
However, this runs counter to basic principles of intellectual property rights; such an activity with respect to a copyright work would probably infringe copyright because any derivative work would contain a copy of a substantial part of the first work.
It will really depend on how the word "substantial" is interpreted in terms of the semiconductor design right.
For the reverse engineering provisions to have any real effect, the word "substantial" would have to be interpreted in a quantitative sense which would run counter to copyright law.
If an infringement of a topography right also infringes copyright, the semiconductor design right is suppressed leaving remedies to be pursued under copyright law only, by section 236 of the 1988 Act.
However, regard must be had to section 51 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 which removes from the scope of copyright infringement the making of articles to designs recorded in design documents (or embodied in models) unless the design is for an artistic work.
It is highly unlikely that semiconductor designs will be considered to be artistic works.
Design documents include drawings, photographs and computer data and the effect of section 51 is to remove copyright protection from semiconductor topographies leaving the amended design right with its limited duration as the only form of legal protection, apart from the law of confidence which will protect until, at least, the semiconductor products are made available.
Compliance with the EEC Directive, following pressure from the United States, has had the opposite effect to that intended; it has significantly reduced protection in the United Kingdom.
The duration of the semiconductor design right depends on if and when the topography is commercially exploited.
Normally, by section 216 of the 1988 Act, the right endures for 10 years from the end of the year in which it was first commercially exploited (anywhere in the world).
However, if the right is not commercially exploited within 15 years of the creation of the topography, the right expires 15 years from the time the topography was first recorded in a  design document or the time when an article was first made to the design, whichever is the earlier.
These rules mean that it might benefit the owner of a topography right for him to sit on that right until such a time as it can be exploited to its full potential as long as this is done a reasonable period before the 15 years have expired.
However, given the speed of development in the industry this is unlikely to be a great advantage as there is a danger that the product will be obsolete before it has been exploited.
As with the unregistered design right as it applies to other articles, the semiconductor design right is automatic and does not require registration.
Bearing this in mind (and the same applies to the unregistered design right generally and to copyright works) it is worthwhile keeping good records of the development of the topography so that the date it was created can be proved in a court of law.
This is to prevent a copier claiming that he was the first to develop the topography in question.
By regulation 9 of the 1989 regulations, licences of right are not available in relation to semiconductors as they are with other designs (such licences are normally available in the last five years of a design right).
REMEDIES FOR INFRINGEMENT
Remedies for infringement are as for the design right generally and are injunctions, damages and accounts of profits "or otherwise" (section 229 of the 1988 Act).
Additional damages are also provided for as they are for copyright infringement and the unregistered design right generally.
Orders for delivery up and destruction are also available.
In the case of innocent infringement (if the defendant did not know and had no reason to believe that the semiconductor design right subsisted in the article) damages are not available although other remedies may be, such as an account of profits.
Secondary infringement, for example, where a person imports or deals with infringing copies of semiconductors does not apply if they have already been marketed in the United Kingdom or any Member State of the European Community by or with the licence of the owner of the right or other person entitled to do so.
This means that someone importing or dealing with infringing copies does not infringe the right if semiconductors incorporating the topography in question have already been lawfully sold or hired within the Community.
Of course, there may still be an infringement resulting from the making of the semiconductors.
International implications and summary
INTERNATIONAL IMPLICATIONS
Bearing in mind the international nature of business, the territorial scope of intellectual property rights is a serious issue to those creating and developing computer hardware and software.
Some forms of intellectual property rights fare better than others when it comes to their subsistence and enforcement in other countries.
With the United Kingdom membership of the European Community, it is to be expected that there should be some degree of harmonization with our European trading partners and recent legislation in the United Kingdom has been influenced by this.
For example, the Patents Act 1977 went some way towards achieving compatibility, and the consolidation of moral rights in copyright law, which is a traditional European concept, reinforces the move towards European trading unity.
However, on a world-wide scale there are many difficulties, and some countries, notably in the Middle East, fail to appreciate the significance of intellectual property.
World-wide legal protection of invention and innovation is still a long way from being realized, although countries which include the major producers and users of intellectual property have strong laws protecting the same.
Copyright is subject to two international conventions by which reciprocal protection is granted between members.
The conventions are the Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention and the United Kingdom is a signatory to both.
This means that any work of copyright protected under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 is also protected in all the countries which are members of these conventions which includes most of the major developed countries.
In some of these countries, a copyright notice is required and it is for this reason that the familiar copyright symbol © is used.
To be valid the symbol must be shown with the year the work was created and the name of the copyright owner, though alternatives to the symbol are allowed such as the unabbreviated word "copyright" .
The territorial scope of patent protection is determined by the application procedure.
The applicant may apply for a United Kingdom patent, a European patent to be granted for three or more countries under the European Patent Convention or a "world-wide" patent for one or more of the member countries under the Patent Co-operation Treaty.
The more countries for which patent protection is sought the more expensive the operation becomes but the expense may be worthwhile if it is intended to exploit the invention internationally.
At the moment, trade marks may be registered in individual countries but there are  moves to develop an integrated European system although this will present difficulties as the same or similar marks may already be registered in different countries by different proprietors.
Some areas of intellectual property discussed in this Part of the book have little, if any, international scope and are restricted to the United Kingdom.
Prime examples are the law of confidence, as demonstrated by the failure to prevent the publication of the "Spycatcher" book in Australia, the tort of passing-off and, as yet, the new design right.
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY LAW AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Computer technology and its use has attracted much interest from the European Community (EC).
We have already seen the effects of Directives on computer software copyright, semiconductor products, data protection, safety and product liability.
In the field of intellectual property the EC has ambitious plans for further harmonization of rights throughout the Community and, ultimately, the development of Community-wide rights.
In these respects, the EC has taken a very proactive role, guided by the importance of the single market which cannot effectively exist if intellectual property rights vary from one Member State to another or if they can be used to restrict the free movement of goods.
The EC has also taken on the role of policing the exercise of these rights through the Commission and the European Court of Justice, taking its brief from the provisions of the Treaty of Rome 1957 concerning free movement of goods and services, restrictive trade agreements and abuses of dominant trading positions.
A full description of the work of the EC in relation to intellectual property is outside the scope of this book but the main provisions and effects are summarized below, including mention of the future implications.
Harmonization and community-wide rights
Copyright: there are proposals for the following provisions harmonizing law throughout the EC: protection of databases (see Chapter 4) introduction of a rental and lending right protection of satellite transmissions
There has also been a proposal to increase the term of copyright to the life of the author plus 70 years, although this had been subject to some controversy within the EC.
Patent law: there has been, for some time, a proposal for a Community Patent (CPC).
Unlike the European Patent Convention, which effectively gives a bundle of national rights, the CPC will introduce a unitary system applying throughout the EC.
It is likely to be administered by the European Patent Office.
Trade marks: harmonization is imminent and a Directive has been issued requiring compliance by 1st January 1993 (Council Directive to approximate the laws of Member States relating to trade marks (89/104/EEC)).
At the time of writing, the UK Parliament has not progressed beyond a draft Bill.
There are also plans for a "Euromark" although this is unlikely to be enacted in the immediate future.
The Euromark will exist alongside national trade mark systems.
Design law: law in individual Member States is quite different and the EC intends a two-pronged effort; first to harmonize national laws and then to introduce Community-wide design rights.
Two forms of design right are proposed, one subject to registration, the other right being unregistered but only lasting for three years.
At the time of writing a Green Paper has been produced by the Commission in order to obtain feedback from interested parties.
EC competition law
One of the main aims of the EC is to remove internal barriers to trade.
The European Economic Community Treaty (Treaty of Rome 1957) imposes obligations and provides rights effective upon and in the United Kingdom by virtue of its membership of the EC.
The EC Treaties are given direct legal effect in the United Kingdom by virtue of section 2 of the European Communities Act 1972.
In terms of the exercise of intellectual property rights, the following provisions of the Treaty of Rome are important: Articles 30–36, promoting the free movement of goods Article 85, prohibiting restrictive trade practices Article 86, preventing the abuse of a dominant market position.
These provisions apply only inasmuch as trade between Member States is affected.
Although EC law recognizes the existence of intellectual property rights it may interfere with the exercise of those rights if this offends against the Treaty.
For example, the proprietor of a patent may wish to be selective about markets and grant licences to work the patent to different organizations in different Member States under different conditions.
This would have the effect of segregating and splitting the market and would be likely to attract the attention of the Commission, particularly if one of the licensees objects (perhaps the one having the least advantageous terms in its licence agreement).
The application of the Treaty provisions to actual cases has led to the development of the following principles: Exhaustion of rights: where the right owner has put articles into circulation (directly or with his consent) he cannot subsequently use his rights to prevent further dealings in respect of those articles.
Parallel importing: where articles have been put into circulation by or with the consent of the right owner, he cannot use his rights to prevent the subsequent import into another EC country even though he may be selling  those articles to himself in that other country.
This removes any temptation to sell articles at different prices in different Member States.
Restrictive trade practices provisions obviously control price-fixing agreements and other abuses by cartels but they also control licensing agreements; for example, where the proprietor of a patent attempts to impose onerous terms on the licensee.
Also covered are agreements to "pool" (share) intellectual property rights such as patents and know-how.
There are exemptions under Article 85(3), either block exemptions (several have been declared) or individual exemptions.
Abuses of dominant positions might include demanding excessively high royalty rates or refusal to grant licences but being in a dominant position, per se, does not conflict with article 86.
In Volvo AB v Erik Veng (UK) Ltd. [1989], the plaintiff claimed that the defendant had infringed its registered design for front wings for Volvo 200 series cars.
It was held that, although refusal to grant licences did not amount to an abuse as such, it could so do if refusal was arbitrary or if prices were fixed at unfair levels or if the right owner stopped making spare parts.
But this would be so only if trade between Member States was liable to be affected.
SUMMARY
The law has developed, somewhat slowly it might be claimed, to take account of computer technology and to protect ideas and innovation concerning the technology.
However, the importance of such protection has been recognized by U.K. legislators and the judiciary and, as a result, computers and computer software are reasonably well protected from counterfeiting and piracy.
The civil remedies available to owners of intellectual property rights have been supplemented by criminal sanctions, showing the seriousness with which Parliament views these matters.
Certainly, without strong protection, the computer industry would seem a poor area in which to invest, and foreign investment and the resulting jobs created would be lost to the United Kingdom.
Although this area of law is diverse and complex, it should be noted that, frequently, these various rights overlap and several different rights may each serve a purpose during the life of a product from inception to marketing.
For example, in the case of a new piece of computer equipment, the law of confidence is all important in the early stages as it is being developed and evaluated.
Then, as specifications and drawings are produced, the law of copyright comes into play and gives parallel protection.
When a patent is granted in respect of the equipment, the law of confidence drops from the scene to be replaced by patent law and, possibly, trade mark law if a registered mark is to be used with the equipment.
This parallel and overlapping protection is all the more relevant in the computer industry.
For example, imagine that a new computer has been designed.
It is to be sold with and includes software which is "hard-wired" (firmware) resident on integrated circuits inside the computer in addition to software on magnetic disk.
The computer has a new type of keyboard and an attractive design embossed on the monitor case which also carries the manufacturer's stylized name.
The following rights may be relevant to this computer system: Patent Being new, the computer may incorporate some new and patentable inventions Copyright The software on disk and the programs stored on the integrated circuits (firmware) and all accompanying documentation are protected under copyright law Semiconductor The topography of the integrated circuits Regulations containing the firmware Trade Marks The stylized name may be registered as a trade mark Registered Design The embossed pattern may be a registered design Design Right The new type of keyboard may fall within the scope of the new design right
Key aspects to be remembered with respect to intellectual property rights are the importance of confidence, especially concerning employees and potential business partners, the usefulness of keeping a documented record of the development of an idea or invention so that its origin can be verified and the value, sometimes unexpected, of making drawings.
Finally, although the legal enforcement of intellectual property rights is an expensive business, delay or dalliance can be disastrous and the possibility of obtaining some legal remedies, such as interlocutory injunctions, may be prejudiced.
There follows a list of practical suggestions concerning ways in which the protection of intellectual property rights can be maximized.
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS
Copyright
1.
Those writing and developing computer software should distribute the computer programs in object code form only.
Consider embedding the names of programmers or the company name within the program code; this can be extremely useful evidentially if a software pirate denies copying.
Software, as it is written and developed, can be deposited with an independent person (for example, a bank manager or solicitor or the Stationers' Company) who can verify important dates such as when the software was first written and when it was modified.
Contractual arrangements should be made with respect to freelance workers and the ownership of the copyright in anything they produce.
2.
Users of software should confirm that they may make back-up copies of any programs they have acquired.
If back-up copies are permitted under any licence agreement, the number of back-up copies made should not exceed  that agreed to.
Licensees of software should not assign or transfer their rights if the licence agreement prohibits this.
If the agreement allows assignment conditional upon certain matters being complied with, it is essential to make sure that these conditions are met.
Software users should operate secure and efficient housekeeping systems to reduce the danger of unauthorized copies being made of programs.
3.
Software developers and users of software should clarify any doubts concerning the ownership of any output produced by the use of the computer system in question.
Confidence
4.
An air of confidence must be maintained during negotiations between those with new ideas for software, computer systems, etc. and potential manufacturers, investors and the like.
5.
Confidence can be reinforced by contractual provision in respect of employees and freelance workers.
6.
It is essential that any ideas and development work concerning a possible future patent application are kept absolutely secret and confidential.
Patent
7.
The use of an experienced Patent Agent is highly recommended if a patent application is being considered.
8.
Although a patent is a very powerful form of intellectual property, it is worth considering whether the invention involved can be kept secret indefinitely as an alternative to seeking a patent.
9.
It may now be easier to obtain a patent for an invention which includes a computer program despite the apparent exception of computer programs from the scope of patent law.
It needs to be borne in mind that the computer program will be protected by copyright law regardless of the patent situation.
Trade marks and passing-off
10.
Distinctive names or marks are very powerful marketing devices.
Those manufacturing or marketing computer software or hardware are advised to register a distinctive name or mark as a trade mark and not to rely on the law of passing-off which requires an established reputation.
Computer bureaux and other persons providing computer services for payment can now register a service mark.
Design law
11.
Although this is a complex area of the law and subject to much speculation as regards the various overlaps between artistic, aesthetic and functional  designs, if a design has been made which has some degree of eye-appeal, an application for registration should be made.
12.
Manufacturers and distributors of spare parts for computer equipment must familiarize themselves with the "must-fit" and "must-match" exceptions and their scope.
Computer contracts
Contracts for the acquisition and use of computer hardware and software are dealt with in this Part.
Many such contracts are not sale contracts as such but are licence agreements; this is particularly so with respect to computer software where the owner of the rights subsisting in the software grants licences to customers, giving them permission to use the software in return for a licence fee.
For these agreements, the existence and scope of intellectual property rights are of fundamental importance.
For example, the acts restricted by copyright may form a substantial part of the licence's subject-matter.
Following the introductory chapter, the fundamentals of the law of contract are discussed and related to computer technology.
Liability issues related to defective hardware and software are discussed and it should be noted that, in some cases, liability is not dependent upon the existence of a contractual relationship.
In subsequent chapters, particular types of computer contracts are described; contracts for the writing of computer software, "off-the-shelf" software licences, agreements between software authors and publishers and, finally, hardware contracts.
Where appropriate, other areas of law are discussed such as the law of tort and consumer protection law.
Chapter 18 contains a checklist of terms normally to be found in contracts concerning computer hardware and software.
Introduction to computer contracts
Contracts for the acquisition of computer equipment and software present special problems, many of which flow from the unique nature of computer technology.
For example, we cannot see or touch a computer program running in a computer, all we can do is experience its effects through a peripheral device such as a monitor or a printer.
It may be possible to read a listing of a computer program and perhaps make some sense of it but, certainly to many of us who have to use computer programs, they take on a quasi-mystical nature as they are, after all, intangible.
It is the difficulty in coming to terms with the nature, effects and implications of computer equipment and software that is a direct cause of many of the contractual problems associated with computers.
The case of Brownton Ltd. v Edward Moore Inbucon Ltd. [1985]provides an example of the financial implications of misunderstandings between the parties to a contract involving computer systems.
A firm of commodity brokers sought advice from a computer consultant on the installation of a computer system.
The consultant recommended a particular system which was installed in 1978.
Unfortunately, the system never worked properly, was quite inadequate for the broker's needs and was eventually scrapped.
The consultant had charged over £66,000 for his work and the computer system had cost in the region of £75,000.
The broker claimed damages, for breach of contract, of over £250,000 based on the wasted expense and the difference in price between the system obtained and a new system that would be capable of doing the work.
Later, the broker submitted better particulars and claimed that an alternative computer system capable of carrying out the work would cost in excess of £1,100,000.
Eventually, a settlement of around £300,000 was reached.
An hypothetical example can further illustrate the difficulties.
A company wants to install a computer system in one of its departments which has previously had to use slow, laborious (but reliable) manual methods.
The initial decision to do this is probably based on some vague notion that a computer system will increase efficiency, or perhaps because all its competitors have installed computer systems.
The company may already have a mainframe computer with a data processing department and the manager might suggest that some potentially suitable software packages be evaluated and that obtaining a ready-made package should be considerably less expensive than writing one from scratch.
The first problem is to decide how the available packages should be evaluated and by whom.
The people in the company who will have to run the system, the manager or director in whose department the system will be installed ought to be involved in the selection process, but such people are  unlikely to have much knowledge of computers and computer software although they may be familiar with word processing and spreadsheet systems running on microcomputers.
The data processing manager and other computer professionals, either within the company or brought in from outside as consultants, will have an important contribution to make to the decision.
But, although they will have an intimate knowledge of computers, they will probably not have a deep knowledge of the particular application of the proposed software.
Their priorities will differ.
The computer people will want to know how the software will fit in with their portfolio of software, whether it will require additional computer equipment, how well it will be maintained, how portable it is and so on.
There may follow a lack of communication and understanding between the computer professionals, the legal advisers, the ultimate users and the supplier of the software resulting in the purchase of a system which is cumbersome, does not provide all the information the users now realize they would have liked and which runs far too slowly to be of any practical use.
The software company which supplied the package is not unsympathetic but claims that it was just not given clear and sufficient guidance as to what was expected of the software.
The software company may even suggest that the problems will be overcome if new and more powerful equipment is obtained.
An allegation that the problem lies with the client's own computer installation might be difficult to refute.
It is at this stage that the contract is carefully examined, perhaps for the first time, and the company obtaining the software realizes, too late, that as far as it is concerned, the contract is little more than worthless and does not provide adequately for the situation.
The client might refuse to make the final payments and the ensuing legal struggle is predictable.
Data processing personnel and independent computer consultants must educate department heads and legal advisers as to the implications and dangers involved in acquiring computer equipment and software.
Departmental heads and legal advisers, for their part, must be prepared to ask questions of their computer advisers and, even more importantly, to listen to the answers.
The point of the above story is to demonstrate the importance of the parties knowing precisely what is to be expected in terms of performance and the standards required.
The role that the equipment or software is intended to fulfil must be clearly identified and quantified, a comprehensive and precise specification must be drawn up.
The lack of, or defects in, the specification are probably at the heart of most disputes resulting from the acquisition of computer equipment and software.
The importance of choosing the most appropriate hardware and software should not be underestimated and, as a corollary, a contract which provides a reasonable and fair machinery for identifying responsibilities and resolving disputes needs to be negotiated.
A mistake in the choice of equipment or software coupled with a poor contract can be disastrous for a purchasing company.
The problems are not all one-sided, however, as it may be that a supplier of equipment or software has to fall back on contractual remedies.
If the acquiring company refuses to provide, or is incapable of providing, clear  instructions, if it refuses to accept and/or pay for the equipment or software, if it tampers with the programs, misuses them and allows employees to copy them freely, the supplier will need to take action.
The company making the acquisition will need to decide: how the contract can protect it if the equipment or software fails to perform as it should; about maintenance and training; what to do if the software or hardware infringes a third party's copyright or patent.
One thing is clear, whatever form of contract is used, and that is that great care must be taken in drafting the contract.
Judges will normally interpret contracts strictly and will use certain principles when it comes to resolving inconsistencies and ambiguities.
If a contract is silent on a particular matter, judges will usually imply terms and try to give the contract business efficacy.
It is certainly very unwise to use a form of contract designed for one jurisdiction in another, even though both have similar legal systems.
In Andersen Consulting v CHP Consulting Ltd. (1991), ex-employees of the plaintiff set up in business on their own account, providing maintenance for the plaintiff's computer programs.
The plaintiff argued that a term in their licence agreements prevented maintenance by third parties.
Mr Justice Harman refused to grant an injunction in favour of the plaintiff and strongly criticized the use of an American contract which he described as having odd and inept phrasing.
The contract should have been drafted to take account of United Kingdom law, it was simply not good enough to make a few modifications to an American form of contract.
In the next chapter, the basic legal consequences of computer contracts will be described.
The nature of the contract, contractual and tortious liabilities and the use of exclusion clauses will be considered.
Then, individual terms which may be found in various types of computer contracts will be discussed in subsequent chapters with a view to avoiding the disasters that await the unwary.
Balanced, fair and thorough negotiation is the key to a smooth running contract and all the relevant contractual terms and mechanisms should be considered and agreed before the parties become committed to the contract.
Fundamentals of computer contracts
NATURE OF THE CONTRACT
Hardware or software?
It is not always easy to separate hardware and software and this fact has been demonstrated on several occasions in the courts.
For example, in Dyason v Autodesk Inc. (1990) there was much confusion as to whether a "dongle" , a device required to be inserted into a computer before a program would operate, contained a computer program and in Gale's Application [1991], the trial judge (erroneously) drew a distinction between a program on disk and one hard-wired into a ROM chip.
Such confusion is largely a result of the difficulty many lawyers have when dealing with a highly technical field such as computer science but it does not stop there.
Even if the technological aspects are fully understood, the application of the law to them may still perplex.
Although there is some common ground and some similarity in other provisions, contracts for hardware and software are governed by different legal rules.
Computer hardware, if it is sold, will be subject to the Sale of Goods Act 1979 whereas an agreement for specially written ( "bespoke" ) software will be within the scope of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982.
There are other differences, for example, as regards the statutory controls over exclusion clauses.
This simple distinction is not always easy to apply in practice because hardware equipment often incorporates software and the contractual position of "off-the-shelf" software is far from clear.
Nevertheless, the classification in terms of the legal nature of the transaction is important and the author's suggested approach is to look at the predominant purpose of the transaction.
That is, did the person acquiring the subject-matter think that he was obtaining hardware or software?
Consider a person purchasing a new motor car.
This is a "good" and the transaction is clearly subject to the Sale of Goods Act 1979, section 2(1) of which states:…a contract of sale of goods is a contract by which the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a money consideration called the price.
The whole purpose of the transaction is to transfer ownership in the car.
But suppose the car is faulty and that fault is traced to a computer program installed in the electronic ignition system.
The purchaser would still expect, rightly, to be  able to obtain a remedy from the seller under the Sale of Goods Act even though he has not obtained ownership of the copyright subsisting in the computer program.
After all, the buyer wanted to own a car not a computer program.
Therefore, a contract to purchase a computer is a sale of goods contract notwithstanding the inclusion of computer software embodied within the computer.
If other software is provided (often referred to as "bundled" ) that will usually be subject to a separate, collateral licence agreement.
Contracts for the acquisition of software alone cannot be sale of goods contracts; the title to the software is not normally transferred nor is a computer program a good.
The only proviso is that, as far as manuals, disks and packaging are concerned, we might have a collateral sale of goods contract.
However, the predominant nature of the contract is the provision of a service, the function of the software being the service in question.
This is so even if the copyright ownership is transferred, that is, if the agreement is an assignment and not simply a licence.
Software
The most common method of acquiring computer software is by way of a licence which is granted by the software publisher to the person or company acquiring the software, giving permission to use the software in return for the licence fee, the "price" .
The licence may be for a fixed, perhaps renewable, period of time or there may be no mention of duration, in which case it can be assumed that the licence will last as long as the software is subject to copyright protection.
The software publisher will prefer to grant a licence because he will want to retain the copyright in the software and be free to grant licences to others.
The licence may be exclusive which means that the software publisher cannot grant licences to others in respect of the software; but, more usually, the licence will be non-exclusive so that the software publisher will be free to grant licences to anyone else he wishes to.
An exclusive licence will be appropriate between an independent software writer and a software publisher who undertakes to market the programs on behalf of the writer; this type of arrangement and its contractual implications will be examined in Chapter 16.
Sometimes, ownership of copyright will be transferred and this form of transaction is called an assignment of copyright.
The special nature of computer software and the fact that software is usually acquired by means of a licence have several legal implications.
To begin with, the Sale of Goods Act 1979 does not apply to computer software.
This Act is very important in the commercial world; in addition to being a very comprehensive regulator of contracts of sale it implies important terms into contracts such as requirements that the goods must match their description, be of merchantable quality, be fit for their purpose and that the seller has the right to sell the goods.
But "goods" are defined by section 61(1) of the Act as including: all personal chattels other than things in action and money.
It seems unlikely, even if the copyright is transferred with the computer programs, that an intangible computer program resident on a magnetic disk or in a computer chip is a personal chattel, because copyright is a "thing in action" like company shares or a money order, to be contrasted with the more tangible "things in possession" such as motor cars or computers.
Copyright is thus excluded from the definition of goods.
In any case, a licence cannot be a sale of goods contract as there is no transfer of property.
The result of all this is that the terms contained in the Sale of Goods Act which are implied into a contract for the sale of goods will not apply to a computer software contract.
This is unfortunate as these implied terms are a very useful weapon for the buyer and, in the case of consumer sales, the implied terms cannot be excluded or modified at all.
In non-consumer sales the implicated terms can only be so excluded or modified if the terms purporting to do this are reasonable in accordance with the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 sections 5 to 7.
Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982
The Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 implies terms into contracts under which the property (ownership) in goods passes, and also into contracts for the hire of goods and contracts for services.
Some of the terms implied are similar to those implied by the Sale of Goods Act.
Examples of contracts governed by the Supply of Goods and Services Act are hybrid contracts, that is, those which involve part services and part goods such as a contract for the painting of a portrait.
In this particular instance the service is the actual act of painting, the goods are the canvas and frame.
The Act also governs a contract purely for services, such as a contract for a haircut.
Has the Sale of Goods and Services Act any relevance for computer software contracts?
As far as "goods" are concerned, the situation is the same as with a sale of goods contract because the definition of goods excludes things in action of which copyright is an example.
The 1982 Act will be relevant, however, if an independent computer firm or a programmer is engaged to write a computer program as this should come within the meaning of "service" .
The draftsmen of the Supply of Goods and Services Act elected not to attempt to define "service" , probably in deference to the very wide variety of services offered both to consumers and to businesses.
So there is good reason to believe that a contract for writing a computer program will fall within that part of the Act dealing with the supply of services, sections 12 to 16.
The fact that goods such as manuals and floppy disks may also be transferred does not prevent the contract from being a contract for the supply of services (section 12(3)).
Expert systems and other types of software which provide advice could, arguably, be construed as supplying a service and thus fall within the ambit of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982.
If this view is taken by the courts, bearing in mind that "service" is not defined in the Act, it will result in the appropriate terms from the Act being implied into a contract for the supply of such computer software systems.
The dealer who supplies an expert system may be deemed to be supplying a service (that is, providing the advice available from the system) even though others, such as the experts who  provided the knowledge used in the system and the makers of the system, are responsible (in a non-legal sense) for how the system operates.
This is because section 12(1) of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 states that a "contract for the supply of a service" means:…a contract under which a person ( "the supplier" ) agrees to carry out a service.
It may sometimes be difficult to determine the identity of the supplier where computer software is obtained off-the-shelf.
For example, if an expert system is obtained from a dealer is he the supplier or is it the company which made the expert system?
In other words, who is the contracting party?
Two possibilities exist.
Either the contract is between the person acquiring a copy of the system (the "acquirer" ) and the dealer or it is between the acquirer and the software company in which case the dealer acts as the company's agent.
The answer to this is of crucial importance because of the doctrine of privity of contract; only the parties to a contract can sue on it.
If the expert system turns out to be defective the acquirer will need to know who is liable.
Apart from contract law there may be liability in negligence which does not depend on a contractual relationship and may even extend to others involved in the development of the system such as the experts who provided the knowledge contained in the system.
If a dealer has been asked to supply a suitable expert system it is possible that, by doing so, he carried out a service.
By supplying expert systems, the dealer has enabled the advice giving service to be performed and in some respects it is similar to the position where a supplier sub-contracts all or part of the work.
The customer relies on the dealer to provide a suitable and effective system and, consequently, there is a duty on the dealer to select and recommend an adequate system (see Stewart v Reavell's Garage [1952], discussed in Chapter 14).
Therefore, dealers marketing expert systems should satisfy themselves as to the veracity and reliability of these systems and their suitability for particular customers.
Dealers may also wish to consider including appropriate and reasonable exemption clauses in their supply contracts with respect to advice-giving computer systems.
The dealer, as agent for the software company, is a more likely interpretation if the acquirer specifies the system he wants.
Of course, the fact that there will, invariably, be a licence agreement with the software company reinforces the view that the dealer acts as an agent to bring about the contract between the software company and the acquirer.
However, the legal position is far from clear and there is a lack of authority on this point.
The situation is much simpler where software is written for and at the request of a client.
This is a straightforward service contract between the client and the software developer and is covered by the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982.
What are the terms implied by the Supply of Goods and Services Act?
Section 13 implies a term that the supplier, if acting in the course of business, will carry out the service with reasonable care and skill.
This restates the previous position at common law, that a person who holds himself out as being  prepared to carry out a service is expected to exercise a level of skill that could be expected of a reasonably competent member of the relevant trade.
Therefore, if a firm engaged to write a computer program fails to measure up to the standards that would normally be expected from able computer programmers and the program turns out to be sub-standard then, prima facie, the firm will be liable in contract.
It does not matter that the firm's employees tried their best, the question is: does the program meet this objective standard?
Another term implied by the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 concerns the time for performance.
Again, this only applies to suppliers acting in the course of business, although a similar term would be implied at common law.
Section 14 states that, in the absence of an agreed time for performance or an agreed formula to determine the time for performance, the supplier will carry out the service in a reasonable time.
The Act also says that what is reasonable is a question of fact; that is, it depends on the facts of the case.
The case of Charnock v Liverpool Corporation [1968]gives an example of an unreasonable time.
The defendant garage was liable in damages because it took eight weeks to repair a motor vehicle when a normally competent garage would have taken about five weeks.
A contract for the writing of computer programs should have detailed provisions about completion times and all section 14 does is to provide a net to catch those instances where there has been an oversight.
What is a reasonable time will depend on the nature of the programs and their complexity, taking into account the time required for testing and acceptance.
Section 15 of the Act states that, unless the contract fixes the payment or a method of calculating payment, the supplier will be paid a reasonable amount.
Usually, the contract will mention the fee, but this provision might be useful if the supplier takes on additional work at the request of the other party and no mention is made at the time of agreement of the charge for this extra work.
It means that the supplier cannot, much as he might like to, charge an unreasonably high price.
Hardware
As far as computer equipment (hardware) is concerned, this may be purchased outright or hired.
If purchased then the Sale of Goods Act 1979 will apply and the usual terms involving merchantable quality, fitness for purpose, etc. will be implied into the contract, subject to any valid exemption clauses.
If the supplier goes beyond the mere supply of the equipment and carries out some work such as assembling and installing the equipment, the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 will apply, as discussed above.
If the contract is for the hire of the equipment, then the Supply of Goods and Services Act will apply, whether or not installation or other services are provided by the supplier.
An agreement which is described as a lease or a rental is essentially a contract of hire and a hire agreement is one under which the possession of the goods passes to the other party but the property in the goods (the ownership) remains with the supplier.
 "Hire" does not include hire purchase agreements which are covered by the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 which implies similar terms  into the contract as does the Sale of Goods Act 1979.
The relevant provisions in the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 regarding hire agreements include implied terms about the right of the supplier to transfer possession of the goods, that the goods must correspond with their description and implied terms about quality and fitness for purpose (sections 7 to 10).
These terms are mostly very similar to the equivalent ones in the Sale of Goods Act.
BREACH OF CONTRACT
If a party to a contract is in breach of one or more of its terms, the remedy depends on the status of the particular term or terms which have been broken.
The aggrieved party may want to repudiate (cancel) the contract and recover any money he has paid out as well as any other expenses.
Alternatively, he might prefer to hold the other party to the contract but would like some compensation for the breach and if the breach concerns a minor term this is usually the better solution.
However, the injured party does not always have a free choice as the law lays down rules determining and limiting the scope of remedies.
Traditionally there are two types of terms in contracts, these are "conditions" and "warranties" .
The distinction is important because breach of a condition gives the other party the right to repudiate the contract and claim damages.
For example, consider a contract to deliver a computer by "the 1st June at the latest" .
If the machine has not been delivered by that date, the buyer can treat the failure to deliver as a breach of a condition and he can cancel the contract as time for delivery is usually construed as being a condition; see Hartley v Hyams [1920].
Additionally, the buyer can claim damages which would be equivalent to the difference in cost of buying another similar computer elsewhere and any other expenses and losses he has been put to as a direct consequence of the breach, with the proviso that he mitigates his losses, that is, he keeps them to a minimum.
The buyer may have wanted the computer to expand his business and he will be able to claim the resulting loss in profits, provided the seller knew or should have known of this; that is, it was in the reasonable contemplation of the parties.
On the other hand, a breach of warranty allows the aggrieved party to claim damages only.
The contract is still in force and must be completed by both parties.
They must both perform the remainder of their agreed duties under the contract.
For example, if a supplier has agreed to deliver a computer system and the contract states that the terminals are to be a deep yellow colour but, instead, he delivers a computer with lemon coloured terminals, this will amount to a breach of warranty unless there is some special reason why the deep yellow colour was specified.
The buyer will be entitled to damages only and he will still have to pay the purchase price of the computer, although he may be able to set-off a sum representing the damages.
Damages are assessed on the basis of the damage naturally arising from the breach and in the contemplation of the parties.
In the example given, the damages would be little more than nominal.
In Koufos v C. Czarnikow Ltd. [1969], a ship was chartered by sugar merchants to transport a cargo of sugar.
The shipowners knew that there was a sugar market at the port of destination but did not know that the merchants wanted to sell the sugar immediately on its arrival.
The ship deviated from the agreed voyage and arrived about 10 days late and in the meantime the price of sugar had fallen and the merchants lost over £4,000.
It was held that this loss should be recoverable from the shipowners because they should reasonably have contemplated that the delay would have resulted in a loss.
The shipowners knew there was a commodity market at the destination and that prices would be liable to fluctuate so that any delay could lead to a diminution of the value of the cargo.
Unfortunately this does not appear to work the other way; the shipowners would not be entitled to any share in a windfall profit if the market value of the cargo increased dramatically and was sold for much more than if it had arrived on time.
How does the basic principle that damages are based on the losses that were within the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made work in the context of computers?
Suppose that you run a computer bureau and carry out ordinary data processing work.
You decide to expand the business and buy a more powerful computer to be delivered by a certain date.
You tell the supplier that you need the computer to carry out some additional data processing but neglect to inform him that you are negotiating a very lucrative top secret government contract on the basis of having the new computer.
If the computer is delivered late, then you would be entitled to damages based on the loss in profits in the normal course of business but you would not be entitled to anything should you lose the government contract.
This is simply because the supplier did not know, and could not reasonably be expected to know, of this potential contract.
A buyer should therefore consider informing a supplier of all the uses to which the equipment or programs will be put, especially if they are unusual.
Innominate terms
The distinction between conditions and warranties is not always clear.
Sometimes a contractual term lies in a grey area between the two.
If the term is broken, then it will be classified in the light of the facts surrounding the breach and it will depend on the facts as to whether the breach goes to the root of the contract.
If it does then the term will be effectively promoted to the rank of condition with all that that entails, otherwise it will be classed as a warranty.
These intermediate terms are called "innominate" terms and their nature is determined retrospectively, after a breach.
The case which paved the way for this approach was Hong Kong Fir Shipping Co.
Ltd. v Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha [1962], in which it was held that a term implied in a hire contract for a ship that it must be seaworthy was such an innominate term.
The nature of the breach determined the nature of the contractual term.
For example, if the ship had a 5 degree list and was badly leaking it would be totally unseaworthy and this would be a breach of a condition enabling the hirer to repudiate the contract.
However, if the breach concerned some trifling defect, perhaps a mere technicality, which could be put right very quickly and easily, the term would be classed as a warranty.
For example, if a word-processing program is acquired which is claimed by the supplier to be a "professional package" and it does not have a built-in thesaurus, this might be considered to be a breach of warranty.
It cannot be truly said that the breach goes to the root of the contract if the program has all the other usual features normally found in powerful word processing systems.
However, if the package does not include features such as right-justification and block editing facilities this would be more serious and could make the system virtually useless in a business environment.
Such a breach would go to the root of the contract and would be a breach of a condition, giving the person acquiring the program the right to cancel the contract and recover the cost of the system plus any direct losses.
This way of looking at terms and not deciding their status until there has been a breach is very useful as it gives a welcome degree of flexibility to contracts, although it could be criticized for introducing uncertainty.
There may be some terms however which are obviously conditions, for example, if the contract is for the delivery of a particular make of computer, and the seller attempts to deliver a different make altogether, this would clearly be a breach of condition.
What sort of terms in computer contracts could be described as innominate terms?
Suppose that a contract is made for the provision of a network to link individual computers together, a term in the contract stating that the network will support at least 16 microcomputers.
If there is a small degradation of performance when 15 or more machines are in use but otherwise the network is fine, this might be regarded as a breach of warranty.
On the other hand, if it turns out that the network fails when more than 7 machines are in use, the term would be regarded as a condition.
Sometimes a term can start as a condition, become a warranty and then revert to a condition.
In Rickards v Oppenheim [1950], the defendant wanted a body built on his Rolls Royce chassis and he agreed that the plaintiffs (from whom he had purchased the chassis) could use a sub-contractor to do this specialized work which should have been completed in March 1948.
The work was not complete by that time, and although time for delivery is usually a condition, the defendant did not cancel the contract as he was entitled to do, but continued to press for delivery, thereby waiving his right to cancel.
In the end the defendant gave an ultimatum.
He said that the car must be ready by 25th July 1948 or he would refuse to take delivery after that date.
The car was not ready by that date, so the defendant bought another car elsewhere and claimed back the price he had paid for the chassis.
It was held that when time for delivery is of the essence of a contract for the sale of goods (that is, a condition) and after the stipulated time has elapsed the buyer waives his right to cancel by pressing for delivery, converting the term into a warranty, he may later give notice setting a reasonable deadline, once again making the time for delivery a condition of the contract.
It is common to find provisions for late delivery and late payment included in contracts.
The contract might state that the supplier will pay £150 per week if he delivers late, or that the buyer will pay interest at 0.75% above the current  base bank rate, should he be late in making payment.
Pre-determined damages, known as liquidated damages, are frequently found in contracts.
 "Liquidated" simply means that the damages or the method of calculating them are fixed and agreed.
Liquidated damages are to be distinguished from a penalty.
Liquidated damages are a genuine pre-estimate of the loss resulting from the breach, whereas a penalty, which might be out of all proportion to the loss suffered, will not be enforced by the courts.
The stipulation of liquidated damages for breach of a particular term contradicts the possibility of that term being a condition; therefore, terms backed by liquidated damages will usually not be regarded as conditions, unless the scale of the breach is considerable.
In practice, many terms will be innominate terms, in which case it will only be possible to determine whether breach of the term allows a party to repudiate the contract in the light of the actual facts of the breach.
Provisions concerning the performance of a computer system, how fast the programs work in practice, the degree of compatibility with other equipment are likely to be innominate terms.
Provisions which will probably be conditions from the beginning deal with aspects such as the time for delivery and the description of the actual computer concerned.
Time for payment is usually treated as being a warranty unless the contract states otherwise or the circumstances suggest a different interpretation; see, for example, section 10(1) of the Sale of Goods Act 1979.
By its very nature, when delivered, bespoke software often contains errors and it may be some time before they can all be traced and corrected.
It is a brave software producer who claims that his software is error-free.
The contractual position was considered in Saphena Computing v Allied Collection Agencies (1989).
A contract for writing some programs was terminated whilst there were still errors in the programs.
The Court of Appeal accepted that software was not a commodity that was handed over once and for all and that it would usually require testing and further modification.
It would not, therefore, be a breach of contract to deliver software that might, initially, have a defect in it.
Usually, the supplier would have a right and a duty to correct the errors within a reasonable time.
In this particular case the client, who had a copy of the source code, could carry out error correction himself but, because he had brought the contract to an end, the supplier would cease to be liable for unremedied defects.
MISREPRESENTATION
If you are negotiating with a salesman with a view to acquiring computer software, he may make statements regarding the software and its performance.
It is not unknown for a salesman to describe the product in glowing terms and you would expect him to highlight the best features.
Sometimes, he can go too far; he may be anxious to make a sale and make statements which are simply untrue in an effort to try to induce you to buy the product.
Some statements are so wild that no-one is expected to take them seriously; these are sometimes referred to as salesman's "puff" .
Examples abound from the secondhand motor  trade; for example, an ageing car may be described as being "immaculate" .
Such statements are not to be taken seriously and the courts would not support a case brought on them.
Less wild statements, however, if untrue may give rise to remedies.
The standing of the statement needs initially to be determined and it may be elevated to the rank of contractual term if the courts consider on the facts that this was the intention of the parties.
If this happens then normal contractual remedies are available to the aggrieved party if the statement turns out to be untrue.
If the statement does not become incorporated into the contract it is said to be a representation; something said in the course of the negotiations leading up to the contract itself.
It may well induce the other party to conclude the contract, in which case a remedy may be available on the basis of misrepresentation if the statement turns out to be untrue.
Obviously, if the party to whom the representation is made knows that the statement is untrue he will not have any remedy.
He has entered into the contract with his eyes open to the true facts; the statement itself will not have influenced him.
There are three forms of misrepresentation: fraudulent, negligent and innocent.
If the representation has been made fraudulently or recklessly (not caring whether or not it is true), then at common law the remedy of rescission is available (setting the contract aside as if it had never been made at all), together with a right to recover any money laid out.
Fraud may be difficult to prove, the person making the statement may simply say that he honestly believed, at the time he made it, that it was true.
The Misrepresentation Act 1967, as amended by the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, made the situation more satisfactory.
Rescission is the standard remedy for misrepresentation but this may cause hardship, therefore, in the case of negligent or innocent misrepresentation, a court may award damages in lieu of rescission by Section 2 of the Misrepresentation Act.
This is important because rescission is an equitable remedy and as such will only be ordered by the courts if the aggrieved party has acted promptly.
Formerly if the aggrieved party had already accepted the goods, the very fact of acceptance would mean that rescission would not be available.
Imagine that a company buys a computer.
It is important that this computer is directly compatible with its existing equipment and the supplier confirms in good faith, before the contract is made, that the computer is compatible although the contract itself is silent on the matter.
Some weeks after accepting delivery and paying for the computer, it is found that, although the computer works well in every other respect, it is not compatible with the company's other machines and cannot reasonably be made so.
Before the 1967 Act, the company acquiring the computer would have no remedy for this innocent misrepresentation, unless it was deemed to be a contractual term, as it would be too late to have the contract set aside.
Now the courts would be likely to award damages instead which might be considerable in our example.
The better approach would have been for the company to insist that an express term was inserted into the contract to the effect that the computer to be acquired must be compatible with the existing equipment.
NON-CONTRACTUAL LIABILITY FOR DEFECTS
If a person suffers loss or damage as a result of a defect in some product, whether it be hardware or software, one or more of the following areas of law might provide a remedy:
contract law of negligence negligent misstatement product liability
The basic principles of contractual liability have already been discussed and can often provide the simplest route to a satisfactory remedy.
However, because of the doctrine of privity of contract, only the parties to a contract can sue upon it.
If the aggrieved person is not in a contractual relationship with the person responsible for the loss or damage, other areas of law must be looked to for a remedy.
There have been a number of occasions when defects in software have had very serious implications.
The term "safety-critical" is applied to software (and hardware) which is used in situations involving risk to life and limb.
For example, in 1992 it was discovered that around 1,000 patients at a North Staffordshire hospital had received incorrect dosages of radiation therapy because of an alleged fault in a computer program.
Later that same year the London Ambulance's new computer system failed dramatically throwing the ambulance service into chaos and, possibly, resulting in a number of deaths caused by the consequential delays in getting ambulances to their call-out destinations.
Defects in computer equipment and software can cause all manner of damage.
The failure of flight control systems, nuclear power station systems and defence systems could result in major loss of life.
The same could be true of software used to design buildings and vehicles.
Defects in other systems might result in financial loss only such as where an expert system is used to provide financial advice.
The fact that organizations developing or supplying software or manufacturing and distributing hardware could be liable for the consequences of failure requires them to consider means of reducing or limiting liability and, whilst practical measures such as quality control and testing are of vital importance, regard must be had to the legal position regarding defects.
Each of the three non-contractual areas of law imposing duties and liabilities is considered below.
Negligence
Negligence is part of an area of law known as tort.
It imposes legal liabilities on a person who has acted carelessly.
Under certain circumstances a person will be liable to another for failing to exercise a required duty of care.
In the case of consumer goods, such as a table lamp, if the negligence of the manufacturer causes them to be defective, then the person injured as a result will be entitled  to damages.
A claim in negligence does not depend on the presence of a contract, so if the person injured is someone other than the buyer, that person can still sue.
The buyer also should be able to sue on the basis of breach of contract if the item is defective and fails to comply with implied terms such as those concerning merchantable quality and fitness for purpose.
To be able to sue in negligence, three essential ingredients must be present; they are: a duty of care owed to the injured party; a breach of that duty of care; consequential loss, that is, loss which is a direct and natural result of the breach of duty of care.
The landmark case on negligence is Donoghue v Stevenson [1932], in which the plaintiff had been bought a bottle of ginger beer by a friend in a cafe.
The bottle was made of opaque glass so that the contents could not be seen.
The cafe owner poured part of the contents into a glass which the plaintiff drank.
The plaintiff's friend then poured out the rest of the contents and a decomposed snail flowed out of the bottle.
The plaintiff suffered shock and severe gastro-enteritis as a result of the revolting sight and the fact that she had already swallowed some of the ginger beer.
The plaintiff could not sue in contract because she was not a party to the contract; it had been her friend who had bought the drink.
But, nevertheless, the House of Lords held that a manufacturer who sold food or medicine or the like in containers of a nature that the distributor or ultimate purchasers or consumers could not discover the defect by inspection is under a legal duty to the ultimate purchaser or consumer to take reasonable care that the article is free from defect likely to cause injury to health.
This duty of care is owed to any person who might be contemplated to be injured by the act or omission of the manufacturer (the "neighbour" test).
Negligence can be thought of as an early form of product liability and has developed over the years to its present wide scope, although this is tempered to some extent by the growth of insurance.
What is the significance of the tort of negligence as far as computers and software are concerned?
Although it is unlikely that decomposing snails will be found within the workings of computers, it is possible to come across computer "bugs" ; and there may still be some further nasty surprises.
At first sight it may seem unlikely that computers and computer software could kill or cause serious injury, but negligent liability does not stop at personal injury but extends to damage to property.
Computer equipment runs on electricity so there is always the danger of electrical shock and, if this results from negligence, there is a strong possibility of an action in negligence.
But what if a large passenger aircraft has to be fuelled ready for flight?
A computer program is used to calculate the amount of fuel required; this is based on information such as the number of passengers, the weight of baggage, the flight distance and prevailing winds, etc.
Then because of a hitherto undiscovered "bug" in the computer program, less fuel is loaded than required, with the result that the aircraft runs out of fuel over mid-Atlantic.
It is possible that the company writing the computer program was negligent in its  testing of the program.
The total size of the claims resulting from such an incident might well be enormous, even though the computer program itself may have only cost a few hundred pounds.
The fact that an action in negligence lies without the need for a contract is important both for computer program writers and manufacturers of computer equipment.
If a program is licensed by a publisher, the program author could be liable in negligence even though he is not a party to the licence agreement.
In the case of computer hardware, a person suffering loss or injury as a result of the negligence of the manufacturer will have a claim in negligence against the manufacturer regardless of the fact that the equipment was bought from a dealer.
There are limitations, however, to the scope of the law of negligence and, as mentioned above, certain ingredients must be present.
A person writing a computer program, or a company manufacturing computer equipment will not necessarily be potentially liable to the world at large in negligence; they will be liable, however, to those whom they could contemplate being adversely affected by any negligent act or omission of theirs.
A further limiting factor is that the plaintiff bears the burden of proof; he has to show that the defendant was negligent and this is not always easy to do.
There may be an exception if the event causing the injury or damage could only be reasonably explained by assuming there had been negligence.
This is known to lawyers as res ipsa loquitur, that is, "the thing speaks for itself" .
If you are hit on the head by a pot of paint whilst walking under a ladder you would not be asked to show the precise act of negligence that caused the paint to fall; it goes without saying that someone had been negligent.
This is the exception, however, and normally the plaintiff must prove the negligent act or omission.
Even if negligence is proved, the amount of damages awarded may be reduced if the plaintiff has contributed in a causal sense to the negligence.
If a computer has been badly made and is an electrical hazard then, if the person who has been electrocuted had tampered with the machine, the damages awarded may be reduced in proportion to the extent of his contribution to the accident.
Fortunately, death or personal injury resulting from the use of a computer is a rare occurrence, but other forms of loss or damage might be more common; for example, in a business context where a computer may be used to assist with decision-making, there is a strong probability that a financial loss will be blamed on the computer.
However, an action based solely on economic loss is unlikely to succeed under the normal law of negligence.
It may be possible in such a case to base an action on negligent misstatement instead.
Negligent misstatement
It is in terms of expert systems or other items of computer software designed to provide advice that the potential for liability for negligence takes on special significance.
If the system is used to derive advice for a professional to use in the execution of his duties, the ultimate recipient of the advice may find that he has a right of action against the professional or the system developer (or even  the independent experts and knowledge engineers engaged by the system developer).
The leading case on tortious liability for negligent advice, referred to as negligent misstatement, is Hedley Byrne & Co.
Ltd. v Heller & Partners Ltd. [1964].
In that case, the House of Lords concluded that a bank giving information as to the liquidity of one of its own customers to another bank so that the latter could show the information to one of its customers could be liable to that customer, even though the first bank did not know the identity of the second bank's customer, the ultimate recipient of the information.
The fact was that the bank giving the reference must have appreciated that the information would be shown to a customer of the other bank and this was sufficient to satisfy the "neighbour" test.
Therefore, the required relationship exists where one person holds himself out as an expert and gives advice which is intended to be taken seriously and acted upon even though no contractual relationship exists.
This could have the effect of making the persons and organizations responsible for the creation of expert systems liable to the ultimate consumers of the advice generated.
The experts who provided the rules and facts used by the system, the knowledge engineers who formalized the knowledge, the programmers and analysts responsible for designing the inferencing and interface programs could find themselves liable if the advice generated by use of the system is incorrect.
There are, however, two factors which might negate or reduce liability.
First, although the people involved in the development of the system are directly responsible for the performance and accuracy of the system, they have little control over the way the system will be used or interpreted.
Unlike a simple bank reference where the significance and use of the information provided is fairly obvious, the advice obtained from an expert system depends on the interaction between the system and its user.
As expert systems are designed for use by persons who have some general understanding of the knowledge domain, it is reasonable to assume that the user will take at least some of the responsibility for the output obtained.
However, a professional such as a general medical practitioner who has to seek the advice of a specialist consultant will find it difficult to verify and validate the advice of the specialist and this is true also of expert systems which contain knowledge beyond that of the user of the system.
The second point is that, in the Hedley Byrne case, the bank providing the advice was able to escape liability because it had printed a clear disclaimer on the information excluding legal responsibility for the advice.
However, the use of a disclaimer will be effective only if it is clear and unambiguous and drawn to the attention of the person relying on the advice.
Figure 5 shows the potential liability (tortious and contractual) with respect to incorrect advice derived from a defective expert system.
It assumes that the experts and knowledge engineers are consultants to the software company and not its employees (this will be a common arrangement in practice).
The person using an expert system to advise a client will be potentially liable under the laws of contract and negligence.
Liability will not be avoided simply because the system has a fault and the same principles apply here as in the case of conventional computer software.
It might be important to consider whether it   would be reasonable for the person using the system for the purpose of advising others to rely on the system's output.
In relation to the exercise of a profession such as medicine, the fact that a person has acted in accordance with practice which is recognized as proper by a responsible body of persons skilled in that profession means that there has been no negligence.
Consider an expert system designed to recommend financial investments which is used by a responsible body of financial advisors.
If a particular financial advisor uses the system to recommend an investment to a client, the advisor will not be negligent if the system was used in a reasonable and satisfactory manner, even if the advice turns out retrospectively to be bad.
The problem is that until such time as a particular expert system is used by a sufficient number of practitioners (sufficient to be classed as a responsible body), anyone using an expert system is taking a chance should the advice turn out to be wrong although it must be stressed that the fact that advice is wrong does not inevitably and conclusively mean that there has been negligence.
In Whitehouse v Jordan [1981], the House of Lords confirmed that an error of judgment does not automatically indicate negligence, it depends whether the error would have been made by a reasonably competent professional man professing to have the standard and type of skill that the defendant held himself out as having.
If the person using the expert system does not have the degree of skill and knowledge contained in the system he should make this clear to the client and obtain his agreement prior to using the system.
The advantage of negligent misstatement over normal negligence claims is that it can be used where the loss has only been economic, although it is not restricted to this.
Product liability
Related to negligence are the product liability provisions contained in the Consumer Protection Act 1987.
Under the Act, an ultimate consumer can claim against the producer of a defective product regardless of the lack of a contractual relationship between the consumer and the producer and without having to show the basic requirements for an action in negligence.
Part I of the Act deals with product liability and stems from the Council of European Communities Directive on Product Liability, 1985 (85/375/EEC).
A "product" is defined by the Act as being any goods including electricity and includes a product comprised in another product whether a component part or a raw material.
A computer would therefore come within the meaning of product but computer software will be outside the scope of this part of the Act.
The producer of a defective product is liable for damage resulting wholly or partly from that defect.
Distributors and retailers selling "own brand" goods can be liable if they can be said to be holding themselves out to be the producer.
If a person imports a product, in the course of business, into a country belonging to the European Community from outside the Community in order to supply the product to another, then that importer will be regarded as the producer for the purposes of determining liability by section 2 of the Act.
This might have implications for the many companies which import computers made outside the European Community especially the "clone" importers who affix their own name to the equipment.
If one of these machines is defective and someone is injured as a result, then the importer/distributor will be liable under the Act, apart from any remedies available against him under contract.
The Consumer Protection Act also makes a supplier liable if he fails to identify the producer within a reasonable time, having been asked to do so by the claimant.
A defect is defined by reference to the expectation of safety in the product and this relates to property damage as well as death and personal injury.
A computer with an exposed unearthed metal chassis would fall short of the expectation of safety.
There are certain defences available, an important one of which is the "state of the art" defence.
This means that the defect is judged in the light of the scientific and technical knowledge at the time the product was under the control of the person seeking to rely on the defence.
This particular defence was optional in the EC Product Liability Directive but has been adopted in the United Kingdom; it seems sensible because standards of safety change over time and what might seem perfectly acceptable now might be considered grossly unsafe in a few years time.
The development of the motor car is an excellent example of these shifting standards and expectations.
Computers, especially microcomputers and terminals with monitors, have been claimed to be harmful to the health of the operator because of radioactive emissions although at the present time there does not appear to be any conclusive proof that a real danger to health exists.
If, however, a definite association were to be found between the occurrence of skin cancers or miscarriages and the continued use of computer monitors, then computer manufacturers and importers who continued to make or sell equipment giving  off such dangerous emissions would be liable under the Act.
There may also be implications under the Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act 1974 if an employer persists in requiring his staff to use such machines.
The producer would have to consider fitting some device such as an ionization screen to absorb the rays and, in the absence of a technological way of overcoming the problem, they might be forced to withdraw the product until such time as a solution could be found.
The product liability provisions contained in the Consumer Protection Act came into force in 1988 and, although it is a little early to be certain, the implications and effects of these provisions could be quite enormous for all manufacturers including those making computer equipment.
Thus, if a computer accessory manufacturer makes a device improving the safety of computers, this might imply that computers not fitted with such devices fall short of the expectation of safety.
At the very least, a manufacturer should be constantly watching for such developments in the industry which might shift the threshold of the expectation of safety.
By section 5 of the 1987 Act, the liability covered by Part I of the Act extends to: a) death or personal injury, b) damage to or destruction of any item of property (including land) other than the defective product itself (there is a lower threshold of £275 before a claim can be made) provided that the property; i) is the type normally intended for private use and consumption, and ii) it is used mainly for the private use or consumption of the person claiming.
Therefore, in dealings between businesses, the product liability part of the Act will only apply to defective products causing death or personal injury.
As far as property damage is concerned, the provisions are really aimed at the consumer market, so, if you buy a home computer as a Christmas present for your uncle and because of a fault it catches fire and causes £1,500 of damage to his house, then your uncle will have a claim under the 1987 Act against the manufacturer of the computer for the damage to the house and furniture.
Personally, you may have a separate claim against the retail outlet because the computer was not of merchantable quality under the Sale of Goods Act 1979.
EXEMPTION CLAUSES
An exemption clause is one which excludes or restricts the liability of a party who is in breach of contract.
Exemption clauses can be sub-divided into exclusion clauses and limitation clauses.
An exclusion clause gives the party relying on it total exemption for the breach whereas a limitation clause limits liability to a specified amount.
An  example of an exclusion clause is where a supplier totally excludes his liability under the contract for late delivery if this is caused by circumstances beyond his control such as industrial action.
An example of a limitation clause is where a supplier of computer software limits his liability for faulty software to the licence fee he has received for that software.
When people draft contracts they are usually keen to limit or exclude their liabilities and yet wish to ensure that the other party was absolutely bound to perform his part of the contract.
Such one-sided contracts were fairly common in the past (they are by no means extinct now) particularly in circumstances where there was an inequality of bargaining power.
An ordinary individual buying a product from a supplier who had a monopoly in the product had little choice but to accept the terms imposed on him or manage without it.
A golden principle in contract was "freedom of contract" meaning that the parties should be free to agree whatever terms they wished.
This doctrine was acceptable where two powerful companies were negotiating a contract in a free market, but contractually weaker persons suffered.
However, over the years, Parliament and the courts have intervened to mitigate the harshness of the situation and certain terms are now implied into sale of goods and similar contracts, whilst exclusion clauses have been disapproved of by the courts, especially if such clauses are demonstrably unfair.
The courts developed techniques to limit the effects of exclusion clauses, including the interpretation of an ambiguous clause to the disadvantage of the party seeking to rely on it.
For example, in Andrews Brothers (Bournemouth) Ltd. v Singer & Co.
Ltd. [1934], the plaintiff ordered a new Singer car from the defendants.
When the car was delivered it was found to have done some 550 miles.
The defendants sought to rely on an exclusion clause which stated that liability for terms implied by statute was excluded; one of these terms was that goods must comply with their description.
The contract, however, repeatedly described the car as a "new Singer car" .
It was held that, because the car was referred to in the contract as a new car, this was an express term and since the exclusion clause sought to exclude liability for implied terms only, the defendants were liable.
The exclusion clause was of no effect for this breach of an express term.
The plaintiff was awarded £50 in damages.
Exemption clauses are also controlled by statute.
The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 limits the extent to which liability can be excluded or limited for breach of contract, or for negligence, or under the terms implied by the Sale of Goods Act 1979 and other legislation containing similar provisions, such as the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982.
Sections 2 to 4 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act apply to contractual terms or notices which attempt to exclude or restrict liability for negligence and breach of contract.
For example, business liability for death and personal injury resulting from negligence cannot be excluded or limited at all by section 2(1) and, in the case of other loss or damage, liability can only be excluded or restricted where the term or notice purporting to do this satisfies a test of reasonableness; section 2(2).
Section 3 of the Act prevents exclusion of liability arising from a breach of contract where the injured party deals as a consumer, or on the other's written standard terms of contract.
There are also other provisions to prevent a party claiming he is entitled to render a contractual performance substantially different from that  which was reasonably expected from him, or rendering no performance at all, of the whole or part of the contract.
By Schedule 1, paragraph 1(c) of the Act, the provisions contained in sections 2 to 4 do not extend to any contract: so far as it relates to the creation or transfer of any right or interest in any patent, trade mark, copyright,…or other intellectual property.
A software licence does not grant an interest in the copyright but gives permission to use the software.
It is debatable whether this permission can properly be described as a "right or interest" in the copyright; if it can be so described then sections 2 to 4 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 do not apply to software contracts and this is the most likely interpretation.
Other important provisions of the Unfair Contract Terms Act relate to the implied terms under the Sale of Goods Act and similar legislation; these will apply to computer hardware but will be largely irrelevant as far as computer software is concerned because computer software does not come within the definition of goods.
Therefore, the Unfair Contract Terms Act is helpful as far as contracts for hardware are concerned but has little relevance for software contracts.
Before the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 came into force, the courts developed, somewhat erratically, the doctrine of "fundamental breach" as a way of curbing the worst excesses of exclusion clauses.
Pinnock Bros. v Lewis & Peat Ltd. [1923]concerned a contract for the purchase of copra cake.
When delivered, it was discovered to be poisonous because it had been contaminated with castor oil.
It was held that it was not copra cake at all but a substance quite different to that contracted for and, because of this, the sellers could not rely on an exclusion clause purporting to exempt them from liability.
Later, it was said that where there had been a fundamental breach of contract, that is, if one party fails to carry out his part of the bargain at all or attempts to render a performance totally different from that contemplated, then that party could not rely on an exclusion clause (see Karsales (Harrow) Ltd. v Wallis [1956]).
However, recently, the courts have taken a more laissez-faire attitude to exclusion clauses and fundamental breach on the basis that the parties should be free to agree that there should be no liability under the contract even for a fundamental breach, if that was their desire, see Photo Productions Ltd. v Securicor Transport Ltd. [1980].
This case concerned the law before the implementation of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, but the impact of this Act on exclusion clauses was in the minds of their lordships.
Nevertheless, the doctrine of fundamental breach may still have some utility when it comes to controlling exclusion clauses in contracts which do not come within the scope of the Unfair Contract Terms Act.
Section 8 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act provides that a clause in a contract which purports to exclude or restrict liability for misrepresentation will only be effective if it satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
The burden of proof is on the person seeking to rely on the clause.
If a computer salesman claims that the computer he is selling will run a particular software package and this claim turns out to be untrue, it will be for the company selling the  computer to show that any exemption clause it hopes to rely on passes the test of reasonableness.
The test is laid out in section 11 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 which requires that the term be: fair and reasonable…having regard to the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made.
This is a nebulous requirement which also applies to some of the other provisions in the Act.
It gives the courts scope to be flexible and to take the facts of a particular case into account.
Some indication of the court's approach was given by the decision in George Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd. v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd. [1983].
The plaintiff bought cabbage seed from the defendant for £192.
The seed was defective and the resulting crop was little better than useless.
The loss to the plaintiff, a farmer, was in the order of £61,000.
When sued, the defendant claimed to be liable only for the cost of the seed because of a clause in their contract to that effect.
Lord Denning (it was his last case) said that the term was not fair and reasonable in the circumstances, although he did say that this was a borderline case.
Important factors were: Farmers had no way of knowing or discovering that the seed was defective.
The defendant seed merchant could have insured against the risk of defective seed but it was unlikely than an individual farmer could so insure.
The defendants had not relied on the clause but had reached a negotiated settlement in similar prior cases.
It was likely that the seed merchant or their Dutch suppliers had been negligent.
In a subsequent appeal to the House of Lords, the Court of Appeal's decision was affirmed.
To complete this discussion of exclusion clauses it should be noted that, by section 7 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, liability for defective products under Part I of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 cannot be excluded or limited by any contract term.