

Selling history in the schools and colleges of the 1990s
Ron Brooks
The definition of what constitutes an effective history teacher is not fixed and immutable.
It must inevitably reflect the aims and objectives of the history syllabus and the age in which they operate.
In the era of the first national curriculum, which came to an end in 1926, both the history syllabus and the task of the history teacher were defined in six lines.
History should include the lives of great men and women and the lessons to be learnt therefrom, and in the higher classes a knowledge of the great persons and events of English History and of the growth of the British Empire.
The teaching need not be limited to English or British History, and lessons on citizenship may be given with advantage in the higher classes.
The effective teacher of history was the person who could elicit clearly the moral messages to be gleaned from studying the lives of the great and the good; the age demanded that this should be interpreted mainly within an imperial context with the emphasis upon citizenship and service.
There was no need to sell the subject, constituting as it did, a core element of the compulsory curriculum.
History sold itself in the schools of interwar Britain.
Even after the first national curriculum was quietly abandoned, elementary schools remained under the general regulations of the Board of Education, which meant in effect, continuing to teach history.
The secondary school regulations drawn up in 1904 stipulated that "not less than 4½ hours per week must be allotted to English, Geography and History" .
The dropping of the detailed prescription of hours a few years later did not disturb history's dominant position among the core subjects of the liberal, grammar tradition.
Only querulous pupils and awkward governors at interviews asked for some justification for studying it.
However, therein lay both history's strength and its weakness.
After the demise of the first national curriculum, the priority given to history in schools was dependent upon the continued dominance of the liberal academic tradition in education.
When the second national curriculum was being formulated in the 1980s, this tradition was in retreat.
The Labour Prime Minister, James Callaghan, attacked it in his Ruskin  College speech in 1976 and successive Conservative governments in the 1980s poured resources into technical and vocational education.
The decline in the position of history in many of our schools is signified by the fact that it failed not only to be ranked as a core subject in the National Curriculum reinstated under the Education Reform Act of 1988 but was struggling hard for its survival on the list of foundation subjects as schools in the early 1990s tried to pour the National Curriculum quart into the school timetable pint pot.
Even the strenuous attempts made by historians over two decades to make their subject more relevant to the needs of late twentieth-century Britain seemed to be overshadowed by the debate over empathy.
As the following brief extract from a newspaper article at the beginning of the 1990s shows, history led the descent of the humanities from its secure position in the first national curriculum to the point of possible abandonment during the implementation of the second.
To those who hold the view that "the more liberal a subject is, the more useless it is" , history must have appeared as the jewel in the non-utilitarian crown.
The history teacher as publicist and salesperson
HISTORY TEACHING "COULD BE DROPPED" 
by John Clare, Education Editor
History could be dropped from the national curriculum because of "all the ink being spilled" over how it should be taught, 18 eminent historians claimed yesterday…
The 18 included, on the Right, Sir Geoffrey Elton, former Regius Professor of modern history at Cambridge, and Lord Blake, the historian of the Conservative party; and on the Left, Prof. Eric Hobsbawm and Dr Raphael Samuel.
(The Daily Telegraph, 20 June 1990)
Many history conferences in the 1970s and 1980s took as their theme the defence of the subject.
As the headline suggests, it will no longer be sufficient in the 1990s to mount a defence.
The effective teacher of the 1990s must be the skilled publicist and salesperson if the subject is to survive the new age of market forces.
A strategy based simply upon warding off attack will be inadequate to guarantee its survival.
Teachers must be prepared not only to defend their subject but positively to advance its cause in a hostile climate if history is going to stand a chance of surviving.
The effective teaching of history requires first and foremost a healthy environment in which to flourish.
A marginalised position on the school timetable with dwindling numbers of pupils and the possible threat of enforced merger with other subjects will not provide that.
The history teacher must sell the subject in a highly competitive and possibly unfriendly market place  as never before.
Teachers in the independent sector have long been used to doing this.
Teachers in state schools must adopt some of these selling techniques if history is to flourish in the state sector.
With the publication of the interim and final reports of the National Curriculum History Working Group in 1989 and 1990 "the history debate" finally went public, no longer being confined to in-house shareholders; that is to teachers and students.
History is no longer a limited partnership or enterprise between these two groups.
It is now History plc.
The 1988 Education Reform Act and earlier legislation has altered entirely the political context in which history teaching operates.
Parents are now full shareholders, no longer limited to voting by proxy through giving their children advice about subject choice.
They have a full say in selecting schools for their children, on governing bodies where the allocation of resources is decided, and whether or not a school should opt out of local authority control, a decision which could affect the status and position of history in a school.
Directly and indirectly, they have a great deal of influence over curricular matters.
The meetings of the new shareholders of History plc may well be stormy; some indeed may wish to wind up the company or favour a merger with other subject areas to preserve its share of a declining pupil market.
Some, who have experienced only the old-style rote learning of facts and dates, may well believe that the subject is already educationally bankrupt and will take a great deal of persuading that history is not only educationally solvent and viable but is vital to the balance and well-being of the curricular economy of the 1990s.
The problem is that many shareholders and the public at large may not appreciate that the nature of the history business has changed.
History plc no longer deals in the old bankrupt stock of rote learning.
Historical literacy today encompasses a wide range of skills as well as the acquisition of and understanding of knowledge.
History plc is not in the theme park business, that is the immediate and shallow enjoyment of a series of short-lived and random experiences.
Pupils soon grow weary of a parade of historical topics selected solely because they appear to have a popular appeal or relevance.
Hitler's Germany taught solely as a series of brutal persecutions and bloody deeds soon galls.
Such an approach is history without integrity.
The crux of the Final Report of the National Curriculum History Working Group was stated in its introduction (point 1.3): 1.3 To have integrity, the study of history must be grounded in a thorough knowledge of the past; must employ rigorous historical method — the way in which historians carry out their task; and must involve a range of interpretations and explanations.
Together, these elements make an organic whole; if any one of them is missing the outcome is not history.
This idea of historical study as the rigorous combination of knowledge and method is central to any defence of a key position for history in the curriculum of the 1990s, and may best be summed up in the term "historical literacy" .
But a key problem for those wishing to engage in such a defence is history's poor image.
It is often seen as a subject with very limited aims, usually the acquisition of knowledge and information about ages remote from our own, and whose teaching is restricted to dictated notes, copying from textbooks and rote learning.
The preface to any argument for giving history an important position in the school curriculum of the 1990s must be an examination of the way in which history has developed into a multi-skilled discipline which has immense relevance to the general and vocational education of students.
In short, the value of history as a school subject must be constantly and publicly argued because:(1) history may lose out in any modification to the National Curriculum;(2) in the implementation of the existing national curriculum it may be marginalised in the scramble for resources and timetable space;(3) a rigorous projection of the value of the subject is important to the well-being of the school in the face of competition from other schools and possible closure;(4) students have a choice at Key Stage 4 and in the sixth form and it is essential for the integrity of the subject that single-subject history should have a good representation at both levels;(5) above all history has much to offer to the student of the 1990s.
Developing positive attitudes and approaches
This chapter suggests a three-stage approach to promoting history in our schools.
The first stage is to develop wholehearted, positive attitudes and approaches to selling the subject in the curricular market place of the 1990s.
The second is to develop the promotional materials which can assist in conveying the main, general arguments for teaching history.
The last stage is to elaborate the case carefully for presentation to specialist audiences whether they be parents, students, employers, governors or other interested groups.
While history teachers would wish to eschew the more brash sales methods they may nevertheless welcome some guidance on appropriate methods and strategies for promoting their subject.
The inclination of historians may be to begin with their stock-in-trade, the arguments, but this is unlikely to be the best starting point for many, especially those who are new to the profession.
What the experienced communicator recognises is that the effectiveness of what is said is as dependent upon how it is said and perceptions and impressions others  have of the person presenting the argument as it is upon the quality of argument itself.
From school to university level students often choose subjects to study and options within a subject on the basis of their own (or other people's) emotional response to the teacher.
Impressions and perceptions are not dispassionate.
In schools, in particular, the emotional response of students may well outweigh rational argument when it comes to selecting subjects to study.
The preferences of individual students may be determined in whole or part by the collective feeling about the teacher rather than about the subject itself.
This may be no less true of the views of parents, employers and school governors who will respond initially to the presenter not to the argument.
The first task then is not to examine the arguments themselves but to consider those aspects which will assist a favourable response to the arguments.
Avoid "role modelling" for the successful models are rarely what they appear.
Taking on a new persona is in any case impossible but it is possible to adopt and adapt some of the methods of effective presentation which others employ.
Positive attitudes: some basic considerations
Be yourself
Classroom teaching is about communication.
Teachers have already developed considerable expertise within the classroom to provide a good basis upon which to build effective communication outside.
Develop your own strengths
He or she may argue that the task is impossible, because you are not skilled enough or because you have never tried to sell the subject to other than students before.
Ask yourself why they hold such negative attitudes.
Could it be that your success may remove much of the justification for their having done nothing, often for many years?
Look critically at the views of the staffroom cynic
Think about how history can be promoted as a school subject, instead of jumping straight in with a myriad of reasons why it can not.
People who think negatively are often proved right.
If they think that they can't achieve a goal, they can't.
Develop a positive approach
A majority will do but even less will be acceptable on some occasions.
Do not let failure to please all dent your self-confidence when it is really impossible to do so.
Don't believe that you can convince everybody at once This applies in your efforts to convince others, but don't be dour.
Some humour can be a valuable aid.
Be enthusiastic
Be receptive to feedback from your audience and be willing to reduce the length and detail of argument if interest and attention begin to drift.
Introduce new material (e.g. examples of students' work) at sag points or more often just listen to what others have to say.
Be receptive to feedback
Those whom we seek to persuade have certain expectations of teachers.
In a buyer's market we ignore these at our peril.
One expectation is that we should look like professionals.
What we say will count very little if we look wrong to the particular group or individual to whom we are talking.
Personal appearance matters
Two further points when devising and implementing aims:(1) give adequate scope to show your skills;(2) put yourself in the position of those making the decisions from which you hope to benefit.
What are their main concerns and how can you best meet them?
What back-up materials will you require to persuade them (e.g. exam results, students' work, textbooks)?
Promotional materials: their value, design and use
Much of the argument for teaching history can best be conveyed in attractively designed departmental brochures.
These have several advantages.
(1) They show the history department to be forward thinking and concerned about its students and their varied interests.
(2) They allow students to play a part in their design and content, thus providing valuable consumer perspectives.
Student participation in the project including its costing and possible in-school publication also provides a valuable learning experience.
(3) They enable the department to include particularly attractive features, e.g. photographs of students engaging in GCSE fieldwork or involved in other historical activities.
(4) They provide basic information in advance of meetings with interested parties.
(5) They provide a basis for discussion and elucidation at meetings so that they appear less like lectures to convey information and more like collaborative discussion.
But many of the advantages of using brochures can be achieved only if two types are produced, a general brochure conveying basic information and general argument and specialist brochures targeted at particular groups, e.g. parents, parent-governors, governors, local employers and of course potential students.
General brochures may well include:(1) a statement of the learning experiences which history courses offer.
These may relate generally to vocational skills to impart the idea that history and vocationalism are not antithetical.
Perhaps a brief reference to some of the careers in which former students have found historical skills and knowledge useful would not go amiss.
History is not taught just to produce future generations of history teachers and history graduates!
(2) course descriptions which indicate particular areas of interest;(3) the staff, their interests and teaching methods;(4) photographs highlighting special features which show students at work;(5) course results;(6) other departmental activities and involvements;(7) cross-references to specialist brochures.
The specialist brochures should be designed to elaborate on particular features for particular consumer groups, and may contain more diagrammatic and other illustrative material to do this.
The increased costs of including a greater number of photographs and other illustrations in the specialist brochures may be offset in part by the fact that fewer of this type are required.
The specialist brochures should have a suitable front page which relates to the interests of the target group.
However, brochures may be of varying kinds and history found within them in a variety of guises.
The following are two examples from brochures in the early 1990s which were distributed to parents and local businesses, and were even to be found in doctors' and dentists' waiting rooms.
They used no more than two sides of A4 to provide a basic outline of courses, being part of a large information pack.
The following general curricular statement can be modified to suit a school's needs.
Example One: a general brochure
Promotional materials: their use in overcoming misconceptions
One of the problems confronting a teacher who wishes to present effective arguments for maintaining or expanding the teaching of history in a school or college is the way in which many people perceive the subject.
Those who were educated prior to the mid-1970s may well believe that history has little to contribute to education in the 1990s because they believe it still to be predominantly concerned with narrative chronology with much copying down of dictated notes.
As such people may well be school governors it may be best to preface specific arguments with a brief exposition of modern developments in the teaching of history.
This can be done with one of the most attractive arguments at the teachers' disposal, students' work; a contrast can be made with the kind of work which students undertook in the 1960s and 1970s, an example of which is included in Figure 1.2.
This may be introduced by some initial reference to earlier ideas about history teaching.
Such a presentation could thus be structured as follows:
1.
History teaching at the time of the first national curriculum in the 1920s
The history syllabus as defined in the first national curriculum which ended in 1926:
History, which should include, in the lower classes, the lives of great men and women and the lessons to be learnt therefrom, and in the higher classes a knowledge of the great persons and events of English History and of the growth of the British Empire.
The teaching need not be limited to English or British History, and lessons on citizenship may be given with advantage in the higher classes.
Points for emphasis: Content: predominantly British.
British often seen as synonymous with English.
Setting: usually imperial, with history taught as a pageant of the greats.
Aim: emphasis upon the responsible citizen, and the idea of service.
Points for developments with audience involvement: how far did the content and aims of history teaching in the 1920s differ from those of their school days?
2.
History teaching in the 1960s: a typical lesson
See figure 1.2 opposite.
3.
Changes in the study and teaching of history since 1970
The third set of presentation materials could be examples of your own pupils' work which show how the aims and objectives of history teaching have changed considerably since the 1960s and 1970s.
Before turning to the individual arguments for teaching history it would be worthwhile emphasising the professional integrity of history teachers.
The broadening of aims and objectives has not been a sudden panic measure to the market forces of the 1990s but has been part of a professional and careful reassessment which has been in progress since at least the late 1960s.
The following list of skills and abilities taken from Educational Objectives for the Study of History written in 1971 by Jeanette Coltham and John Fines bears out this point.
The Coltham-Fines list of skills and abilities involved in the study of history (1971)
1.
Vocabulary acquisition.
Since history is a discipline of a highly verbal nature, a grasp of its terminology is obviously an important objective, contributing to achievement in all aspects of its study…
2.
Reference skills.
These are required for obtaining, checking and retrieving specific facts and pieces of information, particularly but not entirely from secondary sources…
3.
Memorisation.
The retention of some of the information encountered cannot but be expected…
4.
Comprehension.
The behaviour referred to here is that required in the first stages of an encounter with any new material.
It is the result of examination at the surface or literal level — attention to the immediately observed features without any depth of cognitive treatment — resulting in an understanding of the general nature of the material.
5.
Translation.
The material of history is available in a variety of forms and the ability to turn information received in one form into some other form…
6.
Analysis.
As the heading of the category indicates, the cognitive behaviour intended here is that of separating a whole into its elements or component parts…
7.
Extrapolation.
In this cognitive behaviour, what is already apprehended is used as a taking-off point for some idea which is rooted but not present in the evidence being examined.
 "Since I know this, then it might be that…" is the kind of thinking involved, and it represents a more positive and adventurous mental behaviour than that of comprehension…
8.
Synthesis.
The "putting together" signified by the heading to this category is a skill which may be needed at all or several stages of study, from the formulation of plans or an enquiry up to the creation of a product…
9.
Judgement and evaluation.
The practice of any judging or evaluating behaviour implies the use of some frame of reference; a conscious comparison has to be made between features of the material and a criterion or criteria…
10.
Communication skills…the products of study of history can take a variety of forms.
Each different form requires the mastery of its specific skills if, as is surely the object of the enterprise, the product is to be available and to communicate to all who may be interested.
The final stage in preparing the ground for the elaboration of particular arguments for specific groups is to put forward the broad arguments presented by the National Curriculum History Working Group in their formal report in April 1990.
Extract from the final report of The National Curriculum History Working Group
The purposes of school history 1.7 We consider that the purposes of school history are: i) to help understand the present in the context of the past.
There is nothing in the present that cannot be better understood in the light of its historical context and origins; ii) to arouse interest in the past.
History naturally arouses curiosity, raises fundamental questions, and generates speculation; iii) to help to give pupils a sense of identity.
Through history pupils can learn about the origins and story of their family and of other groups to which they belong, of their community and country, and of institutions, beliefs, values, customs, and underlying shared assumptions; iv) to help to give pupils an understanding of their own cultural roots and shared inheritances.
No standard, uniform culture can be imposed on the young in so culturally diverse a society as exists in Britain, yet much is shared in common.
Although questions about the origins and nature of British culture are complex, school history can put shared inheritances in their historical context; v) to contribute to pupils' knowledge and understanding of other countries and other cultures in the modern world.
Education in British society should be rooted in toleration and respect cultural variety.
Studying the history of other societies from their own perspectives and for their own sake counteracts tendencies to insularity, without devaluing British achievements, values and traditions; vi) to train the mind by means of disciplined study.
History relies heavily upon disciplined enquiry, systematic analysis and evaluation, argument, logical rigour and a search for the truth; vii) to introduce pupils to the distinctive methodology of historians.
Historians attempt to construct their own coherent accounts of the past by the rigorous testing of evidence which is often incomplete; the skills involved in doing this have benefits beyond the study of history; viii) to enrich other areas of the curriculum.
History draws on the record of the entire human past; it is a subject of immense breadth which can both inform, and draw upon, other areas of the curriculum; ix) to prepare pupils for adult life.
History gives pupils a framework of reference, opportunities for the informed use of leisure, and a critically sharpened intelligence with which to make sense of current affairs.
History is a priceless preparation for citizenship, work, and leisure.
It encourages pupils to approach them from angles not considered by other subjects or forms of study in the curriculum.
Elaborating the case for history for specialist audiences
The promotional materials outlined in stage two were concerned largely with general changes in the aims and methods of history teaching.
Increasingly, however, teachers of history are expected to present their case in greater detail, and often to audiences of specialists such as employers or educationists.
They need therefore to elaborate the case for history with such audiences in mind.
This is the third stage in promoting the subject.
The final part of this chapter offers guidance on how this task can be approached.
The argument for balance and breadth
There is a danger that the problems of finding sufficient timetable space for the key stages of the core subjects will weaken two basic principles of the National Curriculum, balance and breadth.
By the time that Key Stage 4 of history is introduced in 1994 with the first  reported assessment in 1996 there is the possibility that its position as one of the main elements providing balance and breadth will be undermined by lack of an adequate number of hours for teaching the subject.
One of the key arguments in defending its position on the school timetable must be the 1988 Education Reform Act itself which should not be lost sight of among the more immediate problems of implementation.
It states that the curriculum should be balanced and broadly based, and should
(a) promote the spiritual, moral, cultural, mental and physical development of pupils at school and in society; and
(b) prepare such pupils for the opportunities, responsibilities and experience of adult life.
Two things are worth emphasising in this connection.
First, it reiterates and extends the list of central purposes of the curriculum as outlined in the 1944 Education Act; secondly, it establishes the priority of individual and social needs over the economic, the needs of pupils as pupils rather than as future wage-earners.
While history has much to contribute to the employability of young people it also has, without establishing a rigid dichotomy, much to contribute to personal and social education.
The words of Sir Keith Joseph, Kenneth Baker's immediate predecessor at the DES, and an architect of the National Curriculum are worth quoting in this context.
One of his basic beliefs was that, In the study of history, and nowhere else, the chief objective is to enable pupils to gain an understanding of human activity in the past and its implications for the present.
History is essentially to do with personal development in that it takes as the object of study the roots and origins of groups and those of individuals and examines how they have changed over time.
It provides in Sir Keith's view the evidence for understanding what we were and thus of what we are.
This could be developed by reference to the following arguments:(1) History is a social necessity.
(2) History is one of the essential elements of a humane education in that it informs us about man in his various activities and environments and thus helps us to understand our fellow human beings.
(3) A knowledge of history equips us to deal with the vast range of problems confronting the contemporary world.
(4) History has a vital part to play in helping pupils to understand shared attitudes.
To quote Sir Keith: "One of the aims of studying history is to understand the development of the shared values which are a distinctive feature of British society and culture and which continue to shape private attitudes and public policy.
But values are shared only in a broad sense.
We disagree among ourselves about much, and that is as it should be in an open society.
And it is not only values that are broadly shared.
There is, in our society, also much shared understanding and shared knowledge."
It is possible to add several other arguments to the list of those which focus upon the realisation of group (a)(on page 16) National Curriculum aims.
These relate particularly to a pupil's "mental…development" .
(5) History is part of a sound general education in that it develops communication skills, as well as literacy, numeracy and graphicacy.
(6) History assists intellectual development in that it depends on rational argument and discussion, and provides practice in the skills necessary to argue a case.
It assists critical judgement and the systematic presentation of a variety of arguments.
The citizenship argument
Popular education developed in the wake of the extension of the franchise.
It is perhaps not surprising, therefore that from the early days when the state became involved in the education of the masses one of the principal aims of the curriculum enunciated by successive Presidents of the Board of Education, Ministers of Education and Secretaries of State for Education has been that of the preparation for citizenship.
Sir Keith Joseph echoed the view of his predecessors and successors when he declared in 1984, "History, properly taught, justifies its place in the curriculum by what it does to prepare all pupils for the responsibilities of citizenship." 
History has been seen by politicians of all parties as being vital to informed citizenship.
The importance of shared values, not in a narrow sense, has been a constant theme of generations of educationists and politicians.
Often the emphasis on shared values has been at its greatest in time of war or other national crisis.
It was thus all the more interesting to see Sir Keith outlining the importance of citizenship as an aim of any agreed curriculum in the relative tranquillity of the 1980s.
He defined shared values in the 1980s in the broadest sense, But I maintain not only that it is valid to speak about shared values in that sense, but also that it is that commonality that defines us as a society.
It is mercifully the case that almost all the people of this country subscribe, in general terms, to the values of liberty for the individual under the law, and believe that this liberty is least insecure in a parliamentary democracy.
Clearly, there is more to being an informed citizen than an understanding of fixed shared values.
The history teacher ought to go beyond the generalities of support for parliamentary democracy and liberty to help young people understand the changing nature of society, with its changing patterns of employment and unemployment, its multi-cultural and multi-ethnic nature with the changing status of women, and the ways in which moral attitudes and beliefs are being affected by science and technology.
However as the open society is one which confronts its citizens with choices, it would be helpful in an age which emphasises skills to spell out to target groups the "skills contribution" which effective history teaching can make to education for citizenship.
These are of course the history teacher's daily stock in trade, often taken for granted but when we are publicly called upon to justify the spending of taxpayers' money on our subject, the most obvious may well be one of the strongest arguments for the teaching of history to all young people to the age of 16.
At the heart of the study of history is the question, "How do I know this is true?" 
This question immediately brings history into the field of skills, including discussion, the examination of assumptions, and the justification of conclusions with evidence.
Such skills are essential to the maintenance of an open society.
The very language which historians use raises questions about value judgements ( "rising" or "rebellion" , "terrorist" or "freedom-fighter" , "massacre" or "conquest" , etc).
History, taught effectively, imposes the obligation to examine subjective reactions, especially our own, through employing the academic rigour of the historians' method.
However, this, of necessity, raises questions about issues which are controversial and politically sensitive; it is these issues which will confront the future citizen.
The argument from leisure
In an age where employability is the keynote the idea of educating for leisure may seem an anathema; however, even job application forms ask questions about leisure interests, presumably on the grounds that it tells employers something about potential employees.
To young people who are concerned more with the immediate needs of finding employment than with their leisure interests as adults, this argument may well be a powerful one.
However, the general argument about the need to develop a range of leisure interests is also an important one for teachers to deploy.
A small minority may find jobs in the heritage industry, but all may well find general references to historical interests useful in that section of job application forms labelled "general interests" .
All can benefit, to a greater or lesser extent, from being introduced to history as a potential leisure interest.
This may simply mean a better understanding of historical sites, including those abroad  in this age of mass foreign travel; it may lead to active participation of an archaeological nature; it may mean a better guide by which to judge or understand the paperback or so-called "historical novel" or the historical play on television.
One thing is certain in an age of commercialism, history is a very saleable commodity.
The study of history can help to create a more discerning or aware market which can distinguish the more superficial theme park approach from the more rigorous attempts at historical reconstruction, as can be found in places such as Coalbrookdale and York.
Of equal importance is the ability to understand what can be seen at some historical sites where there is little attempt at historical reconstruction to assist understanding — perhaps a burial mound in the middle of a field or a ruined castle.
Creating an informed awareness of the historical environment as part of a broader programme of historical literacy must rank high in the order of the aims of history teaching.
Increasing job opportunities and opening doors
The history teacher should not shy away from the contribution which the study of history can make to the vocational and technical education of young people.
It is worth emphasising that the technical and vocational aims and objectives are not simply by-products of history teaching and study but are an essential part of the historical method.
Indeed, so integrated are such aims that, as the previous sections have shown, the so-called "vocational argument" is difficult to distinguish from others.
However, in an age which demands the separate definition of the vocational argument it would be unwise to merge all the arguments in favour of teaching history.
Some thirty years ago the Henniker-Heaton report on Day Release made several pertinent observations about vocational training and education.
In particular it distinguished two forms of such training and education: We stress the range of educational provision that is relevant to vocational training in the broadest sense and to the developing needs of young people.
Vocational education is often thought of as the acquisition of knowledge and skills directly applicable to the job; but in most posts what is required is not so much the acquisition of a skill as progressive development in the fields of human relations, of judgment, and of general educational standards.
These are important over a wide range of ability and level of work.
There are many posts of such a nature, for example, in junior grades in retail employment, among operatives in industry, and at all supervisory and managerial levels.
History has much to contribute to vocational education in both its narrower and broader definitions.
Its variety of evidence demands that students have a broad familiarity with literary and statistical sources.
The communication of the results of historical enquiry requires the  effective use of basic skills of graphicacy, literacy and numeracy.
With the development of computer-based resources, many schools are now able to offer a full computer-across-the-curriculum approach to teaching.
It would be appropriate at this point for teachers to provide examples of students' work and the resources they use.
However, the Henniker-Heaton emphasis of "the progressive development in the fields of human relations, of judgment" is one which the history teacher could accept as having a high priority in history teaching.
But how do we know that it is vocationally advantageous to study history or to put it the other way round, that to study history is not vocationally disadvantageous?
The answer to this may well be found in the careers taken up by history graduates.
If it is vocationally disadvantageous to study history at school, it must be vocationally suicidal to study the subject at university.
But this is not the case as Figure 1.3, a diagram illustrating careers taken up by history graduates, shows.
Studying history at university extends the range and depth of skills relevant to the workplace without closing doors.
It explodes the myth prevalent among pupils at school that history graduates mainly become history teachers.
At school and university level history helps to keep career opportunities open while providing a valuable training in vocationally valuable skills.
The spectrum of jobs history graduates enter has widened and is widening.
Eyebrows were raised when history graduates began to enter the police force, accountancy, insurance, banking and large retail organisations but these, like many other occupations, need versatile people capable of managing change.
Any campaign to attract students to history should emphasise how its study can open many doors while closing few.
Historical study is rigorous.
It also encourages people to become articulate, especially through group discussion, and places great emphasis upon the basic skills.
As Figure 1.3 shows, those who study history are eminently trainable for a wide variety of occupations.
History in the National Curriculum
The effective teacher of the 1990s cannot simply be the skilled, classroom practitioner; the evolution of the National Curriculum and the dominant consumer ideology mean that history teachers should be as careful and professional in the presentation of the case for history as they are in their curricular activities.
This may well mean developing the range of presentational skills which have been part and parcel of effective classroom teaching for generations.
In particular, this may mean the preparation of promotional materials for specifically targeted groups, including students, parents, governors and employers, but it will mean the careful enunciation of arguments for particular groups.
In any case it is not unreasonable to expect history teachers to justify    publicly to tax-payers and rate-payers why money should be spent on teaching history.
It is also important to be able to make out a continuing and convincing case to young people.
History students who appear to be confused about why they are studying the subject do little to encourage others to study it as a full GCSE subject or at an advanced level.
Convinced students make good ambassadors for the subject, whom even governing bodies (often including their parents) cannot ignore.
An effective platform for history should not shy away from the argument about increased employability, but it should place this argument within the twin contexts of specific skills and general skills and abilities.
At the end of the day it will be extremely difficult for a teacher of history to be and remain effective if the subject is marginalised in the curriculum and the teaching groups dwindle in number.
History teaching in the primary school (Key Stages 1 and 2)
Beginnings — National Curriculum History at Key Stage 1
The recommendations of the National Curriculum working groups on History in England and Wales stressed the importance of history for all pupils.
For the first time, every pupil at Key Stage 1 is expected to cover some history (see Box 1).
Before the introduction of the National Curriculum, very little history was studied in the majority of infant schools.
At the same time, it must be stressed that the work of John Fines, Sallie Purkiss and Joan Blyth, among others, had publicised the fact that excellent historical work was certainly feasible at infant level.
A Department of Education Survey of primary education commenting on the teaching of history in 1978 highlighted the absence of history teaching at infant level "in any form" : "In first schools the subject is now wholly non-existent." 
The situation had improved only slightly by the end of the 1980s.
An HMI survey in 1989 confirmed"In the majority of schools history was underemphasised in the curriculum…
In two out of three infant schools history received little or no attention."
Young children have a very real need to place themselves in time and in a wider social context, and at a very basic level they need to explore the past before they were born and to begin to share the collective human memory.
As a man without memory and self knowledge is a man adrift, so a society without a memory (or more correctly without recollection) and self knowledge is a society adrift.
Arthur Marwick
Understanding the past is a developmental process.
While younger pupils cannot be expected to have great depth of understanding and indeed will not reach a mature conceptual level of historical understanding until their mid-teens, none the less the initial building bricks in the process can be laid from the very beginning of the pupil's school career.
Teachers of history will be helped in this process by children's natural curiosity and their need to explore and understand the world around them.
History as a method of enquiry is particularly suitable for the primary school where the pupil-centred, enquiry based approach has such an important role.
Children…are not vessels waiting to be filled up with knowledge, but rather active seekers of solutions to problems.
The teacher in the infant school can start by capitalising on the interests and the innate curiosity of the children aged 5 or 6.
Young children's appetite for stories can lead to the introduction of some stories of a historical nature into the curriculum.
Young children's natural curiosity and need to investigate the things around them, will lend itself to historical work investigating historical artefacts and simple historical evidence, and using oral history, asking questions of older members of the community.
Above all the teacher at Key Stage 1 should capitalise on the known and familiar world of the child, by concentrating on home, family, school, and the local area, and on themes closely related to the child's own experience.
The programme of study at Key Stage 1
Although the history unit prescribed for Key Stage 1 is untitled, its subject matter is essentially "the Past" .
This programme of study begins to introduce young children to the concept of "the Past" .
The "otherness" of the past (the contrast between life today and life in the past) is something that will come into sharp focus.
History at Key Stage 1 can fit easily into topic work.
The programme of study for Key Stage 1 is unstructured and content-free.
This is an advantage which allows the teacher full freedom to respond to local circumstances.
However the lack of any structure may initially pose problems for teachers who have not covered history before.
The teacher could begin with the child's own brief life history, moving on to the history of their family.
Alternatively work could begin by looking at how time can be measured.
Whatever approach is  adopted, much of the work will be based on the child's own direct experience.
Much of the work in the first two years of school will concentrate on looking backwards at the relatively recent past (life 50–80 years ago), using oral history, photographs, objects, and looking at the locality, the family, home and school.
Earlier periods will be introduced mainly through stories, pictures and artefacts.
Children between 5 and 7 also need to begin to distinguish between reality and fiction.
Understanding time
The best starting point for understanding time and its measurement will be the children's own experience and the landmarks in their own very short life such as birthdays, going to school, the birth of brothers and sisters, etc.
Family history and the history of the local community offer logical extensions of this process.
At Key Stage 1 teachers should work backwards from the present (before I was born, 20 years ago, 50 years ago, 100 years ago etc., relating this to different generations of parents, grandparents, great-grandparents).
Initially generational time ( "When my grandfather was a little boy; when my grandmother's mother was a little girl" ) will be far more meaningful than dates.
But generational time can gradually lead on to an appreciation of dates and time-lines.
For example, topic work with time as its theme could offer scope for looking at ways in which we measure time, and would have many cross-curricular possibilities (see Boxes 2 and 3).
Learning how we measure time is something that could link effectively with cross-curricular work on telling the time, learning about the calendar and the seasons.
Gradually children learn to give precision to events, and, through mastery of the simple mathematics involved, begin to work out dates and construct time-lines.
While very young children can differentiate the past from the present, many have considerable difficulty in differentiating between two periods in the past, or giving precision to the concept of chronology.
They need to progress from "a long time ago" to a more precise appreciation.
Joan Blyth suggested sequencing as one approach to chronology.
Initially young pupils were asked to decide whether one thing came before or after another, without reference to precise dates.
At a later stage dates were introduced, leading on to consideration of centuries and the reference points that we measure time from, BC, AD, and so on.
In spite of much previous research to the contrary, the last ten years have shown that young children can begin to develop a sense of time…
By the age of 9, children should be able to cope with the concept of about 1,000 years in time.
Time-charts and time-lines should become important visual aids.
Some teachers or museum educators have interpreted the idea of a time-line quite literally, stringing a washing line across the classroom and encouraging children to peg on key dates and photos, pictures and sometimes objects in chronological sequence.
Understanding time: the transition to Key Stage 2
Limitations in children's understanding of time need to be considered when delivering National Curriculum History.
The transition from Key Stage 1 to the more structured and prescribed history curriculum for Key Stage 2 needs particularly careful handling.
Stories and legends may have offered some sort of introduction to the more distant past, but it may well be necessary to use one of the school designed local history units as a "bridging" unit to work backwards in time, in a series of leaps, in order to bridge the chasm between history within living memory (which will have been the natural focus for much work at Key Stage 1) and distant periods such as the age of Ancient Egyptians or Romans.
One of the thematic optional units (perhaps even taught backwards) could serve the same purpose.
Some teachers might even choose to teach the entire history syllabus by working backwards from the present.
Whatever method is adopted, there should be regular reference to time-charts or time-lines.
Methods and techniques at Key Stage 1
Stories and history teaching
Interest in the past is often fired by one imaginative experience or story well told
Young children have a natural appetite for stories.
Storytime is a regular feature in the school timetable, and stories about the past can slot naturally into this framework.
The distant past can be introduced through stories.
Myths and legends can also be introduced at storytime.
However, it is also important to begin to distinguish what is real from what is fictional.
"Is it true?
Did it really happen?
Was X a real person?"
These are questions which pupils should be encouraged to ask.
In order to ensure that the history requirements are fully covered there should be follow-up discussion and questioning.
Questions that will help to develop a historical approach will include: Why did he say that?
What happened when she did that?
Is this true?
How long ago did this happen?
What were things like then?
Why did they have to do their cooking on a fire?
This need not detract from the magic of listening to a story or require any re-scheduling of the traditional story hour.
For example storytime might take place at an established time towards the end of the school day, but in a follow-up session the next day questions could be asked to see how much they remember of the story, or one child could be asked to retell the story they heard yesterday (see Boxes 4 and 5).
As well as listening to historical stories and talking about historical stories, young children should also be encouraged to re-tell stories in their own words.
Pupils may well find this difficult at first, but it is a skill that will come with practice.
It offers a check that pupils have understood the salient points.
The fact that different pupils will highlight different features in retelling a story will help children to   appreciate that there can be different versions of an event and help to ensure coverage of Attainment Target 2.
Utilising the help of visiting students or parents and helpers to listen to pupils retelling stories can be very constructive.
Another useful extension of telling and retelling stories is the technique of telling only half a story leaving the pupils themselves to determine what happened next.
The potential of this ingenious device was ably demonstrated by John Fines.
Working with a group of trainee student teachers and a class of 6 year olds, he began a graphic story of  a fictional medieval knight living in a castle who could not be bothered to lock the postern gate one dark, cold, rainy night.
The class had to complete the rest of the story themselves.
Of course, robbers got in and stole his jewels!
In the follow-up work, which continued for several weeks, the class worked on the design of castles inventing all manner of ingenious devices to prevent unwanted intruders or attackers getting in, went on a site visit to a castle, produced drawings and models and carried out a great deal of oral work, all inspired by the original story.
Oral history at Key Stage 1
Oral history has an important role at Key Stage 1.
It is particularly useful at a stage when pupils have very limited reading skills.
Projects like "How Granny and Grandpa used to live" can be extremely rewarding.
The "granny" or "grandpa" , of course, does not have to be a relative, but can be any elderly person.
One great advantage of oral history is that pupils can carry out interviews themselves.
Practitioners like Sallie Purkiss have stressed the importance of preparing in advance a checklist of the topics pupils want to cover and the questions they want to ask, even though, in the interview itself, children need not adhere rigidly to the list.
Because older people often relate events to "When I was six" rather than to a given date, there is a need to build up a framework of background dates and information (a time-line) about the person interviewed and his family, and the places he or she has lived in.
The class may also need to know about important background dates like the date of the Second World War, and so on.
Oral history can be a means of helping pupils to build up a meaningful framework of chronology for the last 80 years.
In addition to its value for historical purposes, and the fact that it involves learning through doing, the practice of oral history offers many bonuses in respect of personal and social skills (especially the skill of learning to listen).
Teachers can also capitalise on visitors who are prepared to come into school to talk to the class.
People who have helped could also be invited into the school at the end of the project to see the results of the children's work.
When carrying out interviews, artefacts or old photographs can sometimes provide useful stimulus.
Showing an old photograph or object to an elderly person may be a means of jogging the memory, or breaking the ice, and may well prompt them to reminisce.
The elderly person interviewed may take a delight in explaining to the children exactly how certain things were used or how they worked.
It is also likely that interviews will generate further material (old photographs, or old objects), which may be loaned to the school for the duration of  the project.
All material received should be carefully labelled with the owner's name and returned with a thank you (which can be written by the children) when the project ends.
Using artefacts
At a time when the child's reading ability is extremely limited the use of historical artefacts provides an important strategy for history teachers.
An artefact from the past can be used to engage interest and awaken curiosity.
Objects can be used in a whole class session or in group work.
Many fairly recent objects can be found at home, bought cheaply in second-hand shops or borrowed from local people.
Often pupils will bring to school some object from home.
Since much of the work at Key Stage 1 will centre on quite recent times, such artefacts will not usually be rare or valuable or difficult or expensive to obtain.
Museum loan services can also be useful, and visits to the local museums can be extremely valuable.
Many museums providing an education service will offer object handling sessions.
These allow close and direct contact with a limited number of artefacts.
Some museum education services also loan items.
Small touches like presenting objects wrapped up, or putting them inside a "feel bag" and asking pupils to guess what they are can add spice to the exercise.
Pupils should have opportunities to handle and investigate objects for themselves at close quarters.
A lesson focused on artefacts will probably begin with observation, gathering simple information about the object, noting its characteristics, what it is made of, how it is put together, and so on.
This may include drawing the object, an exercise which in itself encourages very close observation.
 "How was it made?" is a very important question which may sometimes lead on to experiment or to further research.
From this pupils can go on to consider what this tells us about society in the past.
Sessions with historical objects will require pupils to examine the artefact closely for clues about how it was made.
They may speculate about how it may have been used and what it was for, and perhaps begin to consider how old it is, whether it is genuine or a replica.
The look and feel of the object may be important.
For example, examining an old iron horse-shoe could give rise to many lines of enquiry (see Box 6).
Comparing artefacts
More in-depth work may involve comparing two or more objects, noting differences, asking questions and discussing.
For example, pupils could be shown a simple solid flat iron, a box iron with a   separate iron shoe, and an electric iron.
(These might be available from a museum loan service or there might be opportunities to see and handle these during a museum visit.)
They could be asked to guess which was the earliest, and to give reasons for their choice.
They could discuss which would get cold most quickly, which would stay hottest longest and why.
They could compare the weight of the irons and investigate what they were made of, or look at the energy source they needed and the implications of this — the electric iron is not much use without an electricity supply!
They would begin to appreciate the problems of daily life in the past without modern labour-saving equipment, and appreciate just how long it took to do even simple tasks.
Children will also begin to classify (…two of the irons are similar because they both could be heated on a fire…), and they can be encouraged to make and test hypotheses (for example, how did they heat the flat iron?
In the fire?
But would it not get covered in soot and spoil the clean clothes that had just been washed?
Perhaps then they heated it in an oven, or on a hot griddle?)
Obviously pupils need to move out from the objects to the people and society to which they belonged.
They need to come to appreciate the changes that electricity has made to people's lives.
One visiting history adviser looking at a display of old washing equipment got the infants to explain by picking up and examining an old flat iron, looking for the flex and asking "But how did they plug this in?" 
By pretending not to understand, he got the group of pupils to explain to him exactly how it worked and why they had to use devices like this in the past.
Links with the past
Artefacts can often awaken a natural curiosity which offers links with people in the past who may have made, owned or used the object.
Doing history does require an imaginative leap, and contact with real evidence from the past can often assist in this process.
History is after all primarily about people.
Pupils can continually be encouraged to ask simple questions to make this link.
Who made it?
Who owned or used it?
Where has the object been?
What might the object have "seen" in its existence?
How many people have owned or handled this object?
What has happened to it in the course of its life?
Every object has its own "story" .
Sequencing activities
Sequencing two or more objects to decide which came first is a strategy which is often used, although caution is necessary here.
Later does not always mean better.
And different objects might be owned and used by different groups of people.
Pupils should be asked to say why they think one object might be earlier in date than another.
They can be encouraged to consider alternative explanations.
For instance, pupils might be asked to decide whether an object belonged to a wealthy or a poor person, whether it was an everyday object or kept for special occasions.
Again they would be expected to give reasons for their decision.
They might be asked to match a series of objects with pictures of different periods or different people (see Figure 2.1)
Artefacts — If only they could talk!
Infants still occupy a world that is part fantasy and magic, and they readily accept the idea of talking animals and talking objects.
This might be successfully exploited by exploring the past from the viewpoint of the object under scrutiny.
As well as activities such as observing, measuring, drawing, describing or using the artefact, time needs to be programmed in for creative and imaginative responses — telling the tale of a battered Victorian penny, the hands it has passed through, the articles it has bought, for instance.
An artefact can offer a door into another age.
Children themselves might be asked to write or tell the tale of a boot, the story of a lost ear-ring, or the possible life-story of a tiny piece of cloth in a patchwork quilt seen at the museum.
Storytime too could capitalise on earlier work done using artefacts.
Objects offer a way into the past.
The simplest things in the hands of a good storyteller can awaken interest.
One student teacher, carrying out a project on food, had done a great deal of oral history work and used pictorial sources.
She had also brought to school an old milk-can and other artefacts.
Pupils would no doubt be intrigued to learn how the milk-can was used to fetch milk from the farm, or filled up from a churn on the milkman's cart.
They could compare that with the way our milk is delivered in bottles today, or sold in cartons or plastic bottles in the supermarket.
This milk-can also offered a suitable focus for storytime.
The story was inspired by a small milk-can which was dented and had a bent handle.
The retired milkman, from whom I had borrowed the can, told me that the dent was the result of an accident with a bicycle.
I therefore told the story of how the milk can got its dent.
(Elizabeth Bouchier, PGCE student at Manchester Polytechnic.)
Looking at picture material
Discussing pictures is another valuable exercise that can help to develop skills of observation and inference.
At Key Stage 1 pupils are often strongly attracted by pictures of people.
Drawing their attention to small details can be important too.
Children also need to develop a specialised vocabulary so they are able to describe fully the features they find.
To describe a castle they need to learn to use words like moat, turrets, battlements, keep, arrow slits, gatehouse, drawbridge, portcullis, etc.
Output of work at Key Stage 1
Output of work at Key Stage 1 will often be through means other than writing.
Some written work will certainly be done, but the "expected word count" will be small.
Infants are still developing their writing skills, and assessment will be through observation and discussion rather than through written exercises.
The class teacher will be assessing pupils' achievement across a range of subjects, and will have a very good idea of the child's progress and development.
Often an effective assessment activity will involve the synthesis of previous learning and understanding, though history will offer some important cross-curricular opportunities for developing language work and reading and writing.
Oral work
Far more will be done through oral work, describing, explaining, hypothesising, suggesting, imagining, and so on, and also through role-play, model making, drawing and painting, and telling stories.
Indeed the value of one-to-one contact or discussion in small groups means that it can be extremely valuable to capitalise, whenever possible, on outside sources of help — classroom assistants, visiting parents, other adults and visitors, as well as visiting groups of teacher training students, who can make an especially valuable contribution.
Young children need contact with adults, and need frequent opportunities for oral work.
It is possible, too, to capitalise on topical events, like holidays, Christmas etc.
One group at Christmas time invited some elderly people into their school to talk about Christmas when they were children.
Artwork and model-making
There will also be output through model-making, and through drawing and painting or craftwork.
Learning in the primary school is seamless and activities in history will merge naturally into work in art, technology, drama, and so on.
Three-dimensional work can be particularly effective and young children can achieve some remarkable things using simple materials like cardboard, paint and plasticine.
One class, after looking at an old muster roll and hearing how men in their county were called up to fight in the militia, made a cut-out army of 150 cardboard soldiers.
Another class, after talking to an elderly lady about life before electricity, reconstructed a kitchen range out of cardboard, and found artefacts, such as an old kettle, saucepan, wooden chair, and so on, to add to the realism.
Children were then able to sit in front of their range dressed up in old fashioned costume and role-play.
It offered a stimulus to further drama work.
Many groups will make models of their village or their high street as it was in the past.
After listening to an eighteenth-century description of their village and its green, one class made a model of the village green as it was about 1790.
Role-play and drama
Role-play or drama also has an important place in history teaching with young children.
The work of Dr Fines and colleagues has been important in this field (see Box 7).
Role-play might carry on a topic begun through the use of stories.
Role-play can also introduce more than one viewpoint, allowing a start to be made in empathy work and investigating points of view, even at the age of 6 or 7.
Role-play and drama can be important.
So too, is re-enactment in a historical setting.
The "living history" sessions offered on site by the Education Officers at many museums and historic buildings can provide particularly rewarding experiences for this age group, stimulating the imagination, through sight, touch, smells, and so on, and helping them to experience "what it was like to live in the past" .
This could form the climax to work done in class.
At a small cottage in Wales, for instance, which was once home to the famous Welshman David Lloyd George, pupils as young as 6 come for living history sessions in the simple cottage kitchen.
Wearing old-fashioned clothes which help them to imagine what it was like to live in the past, they help with simple tasks like carrying in water or logs for the fire, or helping to measure out and mix the ingredients for oatcakes or Welsh cakes which are then cooked on a griddle on the open fire.
The scent of wood smoke or burning peat, the smells of home baking, the sight of a lighted candle, are all things which make a sharp contrast with life in the present day, and which help to bring the historic building to life.
It is a simple exercise, but one which offers a tangible link with the past.
Concept based teaching in the primary school
In the past one accusation sometimes levelled against much primary school history has been that work is insufficiently "historical" in approach.
History in the primary school therefore presents the paradox of some fine work, which is set in an uncertain curricular pattern, and is too rarely part of a firm curriculum plan.
One of the benefits that has emerged from the National Curriculum exercise has been to highlight the need for strategic planning of the history curriculum at all Key Stages, to ensure balance, coverage of a range of different periods and topics, and the adoption of a number of different approaches.
The second important factor that has been highlighted is the need for progression.
As well as having a structured approach to content, there is also a need for a structured approach to concepts.
Much of the thinking about teaching historical concepts has developed from the work of J.S. Bruner in the early 1960s.
The influence of Bruner has been to encourage teachers to define certain organising concepts which underpin the methodology of a subject.
Bruner also suggested that one or more of these key ideas or concepts should always be present in any learning strategy.
Teachers are also indebted to Bruner for the model of the spiral curriculum, in which pupils revisit the key concepts of the subject regularly, though often under the fresh guise of new content.
As concepts are revisited, understanding should become gradually less simplistic, acquiring greater sophistication, and ultimately (though not in the primary stage) more abstract.
One aspect that has been somewhat modified by further curriculum development projects, has been the implication that pupils were not receptive to certain ways of thinking until certain stages in their development.
One of the most exciting suggestions to emerge from the research of the Schools Council History project, and in later research into primary history teaching methods, has been the idea that certain, concept-based methods of History teaching can lead to pupils reaching certain levels of historical understanding at a rather earlier stage than had previously been thought possible.
Since the early 1960s, considerable debate has taken place in educational circles about the nature of history as a discipline.
Indeed by the end of the 1980s, a significant degree of consensus had been reached over the organising concepts behind the historical approach.
The School's Council Project "Time, Place and Society, 8–13" had highlighted a concern with change and continuity, similarity and difference, causation, and time, together with a respect for evidence, empathy or understanding, and hypothesis.
Brian Scott has also emphasised that concept-based work was quite feasible in the primary school (see Figure 2.2):?
We are…at a point where we can work on the basis that many of our pupils in primary education are capable of undertaking high level thinking skills, progressive, incremental concept formation and rule learning.
All this will be possible so long as the materials…possess the qualities of being first hand, sensory, within the pupil's experience, limited in quantity, and making human sense.
Scott also suggested that in addition to carrying out some exercise or activity focused around one of the essential concepts, pupils should be given the opportunity for reflecting on the thinking processes they have gone through.
There needs to be a concern with process as well as product.
Pupils need to consider the way they approach the past, and to tease out key factors such as evidence, reasons, hypotheses, facts, opinions, criteria for reaching judgements, and so on.
Teaching concepts
The Schools Council History Project in defining an approach for history in the secondary school identified certain key "historical" concepts, or ways of approaching the past.
These included:(1) change and continuity;(2) similarity and difference;(3) cause and consequence.
It was found that these organising "historical" concepts could be applied just as usefully in the primary school (albeit in a less sophisticated form).
Now they are in fact encapsulated in Attainment Target 1 in the National Curriculum levels of attainment scheme.
The first two will probably receive most attention at Key Stage 1, the third should certainly be introduced by the beginning of Key Stage 2.
Concept-based history may start at infant level with the concept of change.
Through oral history (questioning older people), and by using other resources such as old photographs, or artefacts, pupils can begin to investigate life as far back as 50 to 80 years ago.
They will become aware that they live in a world that is changing all the time, and that older people in their lifetimes have often lived through some major changes.
This can be demonstrated by exploring suitable topics at Key Stage 1, such as changes in the home, clothes, transport, things that are very close to the child's own experience.
At Key Stage 2 pupils will go on to look at further examples, such as work or leisure, and changes over a longer timespan.
Concepts of similarity and difference can be naturally developed from this starting point.
Pupils will at first no doubt compare and contrast the past and the present.
Gradually too they can be made aware of differences within a particular society in the past.
Not all  people had exactly the same experiences or the same viewpoint.
Slowly pupils will begin to distinguish different periods in the past,(though this may be difficult at first), learning to ask "when" and "for how long" , and so on .
At Key Stage 2 this process will be developed further, for example by looking far more closely at aspects of change, and tracing out the way that some things changed.
Finally, pupils can be encouraged to ask "why" and "how" .
Why were things so different then?
How did things get to be the way they are today?
What motives did people have for their actions?
What was the effect of certain decisions?
An awareness of cause and consequence can begin to develop.
This type of enquiry will particularly benefit pupils from age 7 onwards.
Developing children's historical thinking: the questioning approach
It is often stated that young children are in the concrete operational stage of development and that their experience of the adult world and their ability to understand are restricted.
Recent research such as that by Peter Knight of St Martin's College, Lancaster, however, has suggested that the technique of bombarding pupils with "Why?" questions, as well as feeding them historical information, might actually stimulate the earlier development of their historical thinking.
In an experiment he taught the same period to two groups.
With one group (the control group) he adopted a basically factual approach.
The other group (the "Explanation" group) took the same time to cover the same materials.
However I badgered them with the question "Why?" 
They still had to grasp the facts but they were also prompted to explain them: Why revolt?
Why be a monk?
Why build (and then replace) earth and wood castles?
His research suggested that while the "Explanation approach" had little impact on infants, the technique did yield measurable benefits with 7 to 9 year olds.
The questioning technique can be used at primary level, at first in quite a simple way, but one which can be developed, through worrying at a topic, hypothesising, attacking it from different angles, throwing in a bit of extra information or another piece of evidence, and seeing the effect they had, asking further questions.
Badgering the pupils with questions
This approach could be adopted in introducing aspects of the unit "Invaders and Settlers" .
For example, when dealing with the Vikings, a teacher might start with an account of the first Viking raid on Britain: Never before has such a terror been known in Britain.
Nor did anyone ever imagine that such an attack could be made from the sea.
Look at the church of Saint Cuthbert, spattered with the blood of the priests of God; all its treasures stolen.
This holy place is plundered by pagans.
or he or she could start with a Viking place name or a reference to a Viking raid in their own area.
How did the people here feel when they heard of the raid?
What did they think of the Vikings?
What effect did the Viking raids have?
Alcuin, the man who described the first attack, thought they were terrifying and wicked.
But then he was a monk, and it was the monasteries that were attacked most.
(Why was that?)
But what about the Vikings themselves?
Why did they come on raids and why did they burn and steal?
Did they need the plunder?
What sort of countries did they come from and what sort of life did they lead?
Did Britain have things that their own countries didn't?
Perhaps if we could find out more about where they came from, we might be able to say why they came.
Why else might they have gone raiding?
For excitement?
Or as a way of getting rich quickly?
It was the young people often who travelled abroad.
Was it a way of showing they were grown up?
And what did Vikings back home think about the raiding?
Did they think it was wrong to kill and steal, or did they think it showed what good fighters they were?"
 "Badgering" the pupils with questions is a good description.
But the class needs to be allowed plenty of time to formulate a reply.
Alternative explanations need to be canvassed, and then explored and discussed.
Suggestions and hypotheses will need to be tested against the evidence Strategies need to be worked out to try to find the answers.
At times the class will be sent away to get information or look for more evidence.
 "How do we know" will be at the heart of any enquiry.
The teacher must also be prepared to follow up lines of enquiry started by the pupils.
Sometimes a teacher may play devil's advocate, or give the class some dilemma that they have to solve or explain: Why did the Romans decide to invade the island of Britain?
It's much harder conquering an island.
(They'd have to get all their armies and horses across.)
Why didn't they just stop at the sea?
But they didn't, so why did they want to come to Britain?
Questions like these dealing with real people with real motives and posing problems, can slowly help to develop understanding.
Asking questions, and prompting with further questions, can actually push the process of enquiry forward in a way that can provide strong motivation, and which puts the pupils in the driving seat (see Box 8).
Teaching the evaluation of evidence
There seems to be a fair consensus that from 8 years onwards the teacher can begin to develop historical enquiry and the effective use of evidence in a meaningful way.
Hilary Cooper, teaching 8 year olds how to interpret evidence using historical concepts, made significant progress with one group.
 "Key thinking processes in history revolve around the interpretation of different kinds of evidence, often using specialised concepts" .
The class in question carried out a project on the Celts and the Iron Age, using a range of evidence both from archaeology and from written accounts of the Romans.
One key feature of her method was to differentiate between (1) what we know;(2) what we can guess or infer;(3) what we do not know;(4) what we would like to know in order to carry the enquiry further.
National Curriculum history at Key Stage 2
National Curriculum history is being introduced in stages in all state schools in England and Wales.
When fully implemented, all pupils during particular stages of their school career will have to cover certain prescribed historical periods and topics, with due regard being given to the achievement of the three history attainment targets.
Unlike some other National Curriculum subjects, the attainment targets are skills-based, rather than content based, and could be delivered through any theme or programme of study.
Content is covered separately in the programmes of study for the various Key Stages.
Planning
All primary teachers need to familiarise themselves with the requirements for history at Key Stage 2 (see Boxes 9 and 10).
Whole school planning will be needed to decide when particular core units will be covered, and how the optional units and school designed units will be slotted in.
All teachers could usefully participate in an initial brainstorming exercise, sharing ideas and strategies, and perhaps suggesting some local sites or resources.
All teachers can contribute even though they may not themselves be teaching the course.
Ideas about cross-curricular links and the possibilities for topic work can also be shared.
Some of the prescribed topics may not at first seem particularly appealing, especially if they have not been covered in school before, but avenues can be explored for presenting them in an interesting way.
Once suitable site visits or useful resources have been identified, the topic will usually begin to appear more interesting, and preparation of strategies and schemes of work can begin.
The National Curriculum orders for each study unit need to be turned into meaningful and workable schemes of work and class activities.
The history requirements could be delivered in a number of ways, as the topics or prescribed elements within a unit of study could be introduced in any order and not all topics need be covered in the same depth.
It is probably best to begin with the focus statement in the introduction to each history unit, and ensure that the work done takes account of this.
Planning need not necessarily start with detailed consideration of the content of a history study unit.
It could well start with a close look at the available resources for the period or topic, and these may determine the course of work, the order in which topics are introduced and the learning activities carried out.
The list of prescribed topics may look formidable, but not all need to be covered in depth.
Primary pupils often work best on the in-depth study, so some selected topics for which resources are plentiful can be given exhaustive coverage.
Other topics may be covered perhaps by stories, or by a video, or possibly through work with a time-line, or an outline session.
Exemplary material suggested in the interim history reports can be examined, and similar examples may be found that relate to the local area.
At the initial planning stage there is probably no need to worry too much about the three attainment targets.
Good historical practice will usually ensure that the attainment targets are covered many times over in the course of the work.
Once a plan of action has been worked out, then an audit can be made to ensure all requirements will be covered.
If something does not appear to have been covered, for instance work on interpretations of history (Attainment Target 2), then some extra activity to cover this can be included in the scheme of work.
It may need no more than a discussion session, or a change of emphasis introduced at an appropriate point to allow this to be covered.
In a study of the local area, for instance, it is Attainment Target 2 that often poses the most problems.
Comparing two different accounts of the place, for instance, or an adverse traveller's account and a hotel advertisement persuading people to stay there might lead to a discussion on interpretations in history.
A check should also be run to ensure that political, economic, social and cultural aspects (the PESC elements) have been covered.
Some topics will inevitably lean more towards some of these elements than others, but a balance should be achieved over the whole of Key Stage 2 (hence the need for whole school planning for history).
Each core unit should also aim to cover all four PESC elements and all three attainment targets.
A site visit is often a valuable device to ensure all the required aspects are covered (see Chapter 4 for more on this).
Resources: the economic use of limited teacher time
Resources may offer the key to planning of the scheme of work.
Resources already within the school should be identified.
Resources in the locality (sites, museums, specialists), etc. should also be listed.
Further resources may need to be accumulated, and this should be regarded as an on-going process, with useful material being added whenever opportunities arise.
A resource box can be built up for each history unit.
Books, copies of documents, maps, diagrams, pictorial material, slides, and, where relevant, video, tapes and software can all go into the box.
Teacher's notes on the strategies and scheme of work followed can be added once the course is running, together with ideas for activities and exercises, checklists of historical questions, and any assessment material.
The local area will be a most important resource and notes can be included about possible sites, buildings, museums, and so on.
Literature about other possible site visits elsewhere, and notes on useful material in museums or museum loan collections, etc., can also be accumulated.
Your local archives office or local studies centre may have useful material, and may offer workshops, inset courses or other opportunities to create teacher produced resources.
The schools library service may provide a bibliography on the topic, while library loan services for schools can deliver collections of books on the topic under investigation.
The teacher may not instantly use all of this material, but the aim should be to build up a growing collection of useful    resources which will remain the property of the school and which can be handed on to any teacher, or supply teacher who has to teach the course.
Old textbooks should not be thrown away, since they may have material (sources, illustrations, diagrams) that at least can be used in a "cut and paste" session to produce new teaching material.
The local secondary school may also have some resources, for courses and topics no longer studied at Key Stages 3 and 4.
As well as material to be directly used by pupils, the box could include books and articles that may be helpful to the non-specialist teacher of history.
Teachers from different schools may be able to share ideas and develop joint stategies or joint resources, working through cluster groups or during in-service courses.
Teachers in a cluster group might share the work of producing teaching materials or assessment materials.
A group of small schools in one rural area, studying the topic "Ships and Seamen" , not only pooled their efforts in collecting resources, and contacting various agencies, but also shared the costs of coach hire for a site visit to a maritime museum some distance away.
Groups of teachers in a cluster group or consortium may be able to arrange joint in-service courses at museums or archive offices, or historical sites.
One teacher in a cluster group could take special responsibility for history and might carry out liaison, sharing the fruits with other teachers.
The history specialists in the secondary school for the area may also be able to offer advice, especially as pupils from the catchment area will ultimately be going on to the secondary school.
Schools should also capitalise on any specialist help that is available.
Specialists and "experts" can be invited into the school to contribute on a range of subjects.
At Key Stages 1 and 2, these might include someone from the local archaeological unit, the museum or archives or a local historian, especially someone used to speaking to young children.
Reviewing a Key Stage 2 unit
After teaching a unit an assessment should take place.
Where strategies were successful this should be noted.
Weaker parts of the course may need to be improved, or alternative strategies or materials trialled (see Box 11).
Further resources may need to be developed, perhaps by a team of local teachers.
The interests of the pupils themselves may also lead up different avenues from year to year, and a wide range of resources will help the teacher to respond effectively.
Cluster groups of schools could conduct a joint review, sharing their experiences.
The history curriculum for Key Stage 2: core and optional units
At Key Stage 2 although there are chronological periods of study which must be covered, and a choice of thematic units, there is a wide degree of flexibility.
Core and optional units do not have to be studied as discrete units or in a set order.
Thematic optional units which span several historical periods can be "deconstructed" , broken down into different periods to form special studies which might be followed alongside the appropriate core unit, or used as bridging units to link one core unit with the next.
Detailed guidance has been given by the Curriculum Councils for history which will not be repeated here.
Schools could work forwards or backwards in time (though it is expected that at all times there will be reference to time-lines, and time-charts, and that attention will be given to the question "when did this happen in the past?" ).
Arguments can be put forward for either approach.
Working backwards in time from the present day offers a natural development of the approach used at Key Stage 1.
On the other hand, since the early periods of history involve greater use of material evidence (artefacts, archaeology, and so on), rather than written evidence, there is a lot to be said for tackling this in year 3, when the child's reading abilities are limited.
Older pupils with a more developed reading level will be able to make far better use of the wealth of documentary sources for the Victorian or twentieth-century periods.
A bridging unit for Key Stage 1 and Key Stage 2: "Writing and printing" 
Links between the units need careful consideration.
If a chronological approach is adopted, there will almost certainly be a need for a bridging unit between Key Stage 1 and Key Stage 2.
Schools have the freedom to do two school designed history units on topics of their own choice, and some schools may decide to use one of the school designed local history units to form an introductory bridging unit between Key Stages 1 and 2.
Alternatively, one of the thematic optional units could be selected for the same purpose.
There may be a similar need for some bridging unit to link Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 3, and discussions between secondary schools and the primary schools within a particular catchment area may prove useful.
A thematic optional unit which spans two different periods might offer a valuable bridge between two core units.
An example — "Writing and printing" 
The optional unit "Writing and printing" could form a useful bridging unit.
In addition this unit could offer an excellent introduction to the use of evidence and to the key question "How do we know?" 
Lead in: Pupils could look back on their own experience of learning to read and write, and discuss why literacy is so important in our society.
Learning activities: Work could include some of the following activities, not necessarily in this order.
The limiting factor will be the time available.
The topic could easily fill an entire term.
(1) Investigation of the beginning of writing in different societies: e.g. the ancient Egyptians and hieroglyphics, or sign language used in some early Scandinavian rock carvings.
Pupils could convey messages to each other by inventing their own sign language.
(2) Looking at different sorts of writing materials: papyrus, parchment, paper, inscriptions on stone, Roman inscriptions.
(3) Visit to a graveyard, parish church, memorial or to the local museum to investigate and record inscriptions on stone.
Pupils might make stone rubbings to take back to school.
(4) A visit to the local record office.
This visit will also serve as an introduction to written records and their importance for history.
Here pupils may be able to look behind the scenes at how documents are stored.
They can see and handle parchment and paper.
The visit will also generate a bank of copies of handwritten and printed material which will form the basis for many hours work in class later on.
(5) Illuminated manuscripts.
An in-depth study of the production of hand-written illuminated manuscripts by medieval monks.
Pupils find out about the life and work of the monks.
They look at examples of illuminated manuscripts, and investigate how they can be used as evidence for life in the Middle Ages.
The classroom becomes a Scriptorium for the day.
Children, dressed as white monks in improvised sheets, work (in total silence!) on the production of illuminated manuscripts.
They pause at intervals for prayers, and so on.
A messenger arrives and announces a Viking attack on a nearby monastery!
The "monks" record this in their chronicle.
Another messenger tells of the death of a lord who gave a lot of money to the church.
The monks record this.
(This will later form a starting point for a discussion on interpretations of history.)
(6) Printed records.
Pupils listen to a story about Caxton and the printing press
Pupils compare and contrast an illuminated manuscript and an early printed page and list the advantages and disadvantages of each.
Pupils learn about how a printing press works.
A retired printer is invited into school to talk to the children.
Pupils work on the examples of printed material, posters, newspapers, books, and so on they collected from their visit to the archives, and look at design and style.
Pupils spend an afternoon cutting potato prints or lino prints and printing from these.
(7) New production methods today.
Pupils look at modern computerised methods of printing and prepare their own news-sheet on computer using a simple newspaper software package.
This unit on writing and printing could form a very useful bridging unit either between Key Stages 1 and 2 or between two core units.
It should be introduced as a discrete unit, as it would tend to lose its focus if broken up into sections and "nested" within core units.
However there are many links with core units.
Inscriptions on stone could link with the core unit on Roman Britain.
There are also links with later units, with the early church in the unit on invaders and settlers, and with the dissolution of the monasteries in the unit on the Tudors and Stuarts.
There would also be many useful links with printed evidence for later periods.
There is even a link with the optional non-British unit on Ancient Egypt.
Cross-curricular approaches
There is no doubt that the Key Stage 2 history proposals represent the greatest challenge, and the greatest break with past practice in many primary schools.
Previously the majority of schools adopted topic work and a cross-curricular and thematic approach.
Many teachers may be reluctant to abandon this method of working.
Indeed, in order to squeeze all the required National Curriculum subjects into the available time, a cross-curricular approach may be essential.
Different schools will adopt different solutions.
A variety of teaching approaches may offer the best solution.
Some at least of the History requirements may be delivered through cross-curricular topic work.
Links between subjects may be sought for to enable a thematic approach or topic work to continue.
In this case, schools must ensure that the history requirements are properly covered and that the history attainment targets are addressed.
One of the chief criticisms of much topic work done in the past was that insufficient consideration was given to historical objectives, and that the needs of history were sometimes submerged.
In other cases, a history-driven approach may be pursued, occupying perhaps half a term's work, during which other prescribed National Curriculum subject requirements could also be covered.
It is important too that the National Curriculum does not become a strait-jacket.
Tried and tested methods should not be abandoned.
Motivation is all important to produce the high quality work of which primary pupils are capable.
Children need time to experiment, to learn, to discover for themselves, to talk about what they have found and share experiences.
In the learning process, they need time too to follow enquiries of their own choice even if at times this may involve exploring avenues not directly relevant.
It is also vital to allow time for full creative responses (see Box 12).
Schools will still want to capitalise on topical events, and special celebrations.
For example the opening of a new road, bridge or tunnel might be the spur for an investigation of older forms of communication in the area.
Even if this does not strictly fit into the history framework, teachers will want to build on such events, or, alternatively, they might perhaps form the basis of a "once only" local unit.
Remember, too, that some of the general topic work or work done in other subject areas may well offer a historical component.
A class doing a study on "water" , for instance, might need to give some attention to the history of water supplies in their area, or to look at past epidemics of cholera and typhoid, to prove that clean water is vital for good health.
They might look at how people managed before having piped water and at how piped water and sanitation have led to changes in the home.
(Houses now have bathrooms and inside toilets, instead of a garden privy or a toilet at the bottom of the yard.)
History work is wider than National Curriculum History, and in many respects learning at primary level is seamless, rather than compartmentalised.
Four approaches to National Curriculum history at Key Stage 2
1.
The time-line A time-line could offer an organising structure for the whole history course at Key Stage 2.
A three- or four-dimensional time-line may be used, covering local, regional (English, Welsh, Scottish, Irish), British and International events.
Prescribed themes can be introduced in any order but whatever is studied in history is constantly related to the time-line (see Figure 2.5 for one example).
The time-line also offers useful cross-curricular links.
Scientific discoveries and inventions, art and music, and so on can also be "nested" on the time-line.
Pupils using early photographs as one of their sources for instance, may want to put the invention of photography onto their time-line, and this could be linked with experiments and science work on the behaviour of light.
Tudor composers or Elizabethan playwrights can be added to the time-line for the unit on life in Tudor and Stuart times.
2.
Topic work
Certain common linking topics or themes may be chosen for humanities-driven work.
In one school a number of "themes" were identified: homes, school, religion and the Church, trade, and communications (roads, seafaring).
These were general "humanities- driven" themes offering useful cross-curricular links.
Some of the   themes (the home, school) also offer useful links with common themes at Key Stage 1 (see Figure 2.6 for further details).
These themes also formed a linking mechanism between the history core and optional units (as well as providing cross-curricular opportunities).
Two or three of these general themes offered a focus for work on each of the units.
For instance, in SU3 (Study Unit (History Curriculum, Wales)) homes, communications, religion and trade offered a focus for in-depth work.
History elements were introduced under this organising thematic structure, and checks were made to see that all the requirements for history (the focus statements, the prescribed content, the attainment targets, and so on) were being fully met.
If anything could not easily be covered through this thematic approach, it was covered discretely, through a story, or watching a video, or in a separate activity.
Many other humanities elements and some maths, science, technology and language requirements, and some art and music, were also covered through the same thematic approach.
It was initially envisaged that the work would last for about half a term, but provided that most other subject requirements, were also being met, the "thematic-driven" approach could have encompassed a full term's work.
3.
The investigative approach: asking historical questions
If the questions that are asked are of the right kind, then an investigative approach to a topic will automatically ensure that the history attainment targets are met.
A number of questions which focus on "historical concern" can be identified.
These key questions offer a lead in to the investigation of a topic (see Figure 2.7).
4.
The history-driven approach
In a unit on the Romans and the Roman empire, for instance, many of the language attainment targets might be covered (describing an attack on a hill fort; writing a letter home from a Roman soldier at the front on life in Britain, discussion work involving speaking and listening, and so on ).
Language work can also be covered through drama or role-play (a speech by a Roman general encouraging the troops, an argument between a Celt and a Roman over whether the conquest of Britain was a good or a bad thing).
Maths work arising naturally from    the unit might involve simple computation using Roman numbers, and calculations related to the topic — e.g. how much labour and materials would be needed to complete a Roman road or fort, how long the work would take, and so on.
Science (force) and technology might be introduced by, for instance, getting pupils to design and build a machine to hurl stones to attack a hill-fort, or cooking Roman recipes (effects of heat on different substances).
Indeed a site visit to a Roman fort could be given spice by letting the pupils try out their machines on site.
Some geographical targets might be covered, locating historical sites on a map using a grid, and planning marches for the Roman army on a topographical map, which would involve understanding of landforms and contour lines.
Whatever organising method is adopted, there should be an audit, both during and after the course, to ensure that all the requirements have been met.
If it is found that certain elements have not been covered, then activities can be devised to ensure that they receive attention, or, if necessary, certain elements can be taught discretely.
If certain prescribed content is found to have been omitted, this could be covered, perhaps by a "broad-brush" / "outline treatment" through a story, video or outline session.
History teaching at Key Stage 2.
Methods and resources
The basis of good primary practice
A number of factors are integral to good primary practice.
Fundamental is the need to relate whatever is studied to the child's own experience, and also to awaken motivation and stimulate enquiry.
This can be achieved by a variety of teaching strategies, which could include:(1) starting from the local area;(2) using resources related to the locality;(3) finding a local example of the general theme;(4) use of a "topical peg" , some current event of interest from which work can proceed, or with which analogies can be drawn;(5) the enquiry-based approach;(6) encouraging "learning through doing" ;(7) capitalising on something a pupil has brought into school;(8) capitalising on an out-of-school visit;(9) inviting a visitor into the classroom.
The need for local resources
Pupils at Key Stage 2 will be introduced to a wider range of sources and resources than at Key Stage 1.
With improvements in reading skills, written documents and books will become far more important, though artefacts, pictures, stories, and oral history remain central.
All teachers of history at Key Stage 2 need to develop links with their local archives service, which offers a storehouse of local material.
To the primary teacher "teaching resources" mean far more than the school textbook.
Resources for learning also include the local area, the environment, the countryside and the townscape, museums and historic buildings and their collections, the extensive range of local material offered by local record offices, or the local study centre, or reference library, as well as pictures and artefacts brought in from home, reminiscences of family members or the elderly, interesting visitors to the school and many other things (see Box 13).
The primary teacher can draw upon many of these to provide a lead in to a topic, or to develop a theme or push forward an enquiry.
Often the teacher will search for analogies or local examples, to introduce a general history topic.
Even a reference to some current event close to hand can offer a lead in to a topic.
The building of a new stretch of dual carriageway nearby might offer a lead into the building of the Roman road network across Britain.
Building on Key Stage 1
In many cases pupils at Key Stage 2 will use the same kinds of resources as were used at Key Stage 1, though they will be using them  in a more sophisticated way.
Use of oral history, for instance, should not be restricted to Key Stage 1.
All age groups will benefit from using oral evidence.
But at Key Stage 2, oral evidence could be complementary to written forms of evidence, and the two could be compared.
Oral evidence, it will be found, is a useful counterbalance to more "official" sources.
An elderly person's reminiscences about his or her schooldays might be contrasted with reports in an official log book, or an education report.
It also provides a more personal viewpoint.
Artefacts too are equally useful at Key Stage 2, but skills can be developed further.
Pupils could investigate change by examining a series of articles of different dates, and discussing why changes occurred.
In Wales for example where HSU 3 (History Study Unit (History Curriculum, England)) consists of the core unit "Early peoples, Celts and Romans" , on a museum visit or using material from a museum loan collection, the class might compare a flint scraper and the remnants of an iron knife blade, and look at the importance of the discovery of metals, and the differences it has made to people's lives.
They could discuss the problems of skinning an animal, or scraping skins to make leather using only stone tools.
They could be asked about the improvements that metal tools could bring, Through discussions like these, pupils should be brought to realise that what people could do in the past was often limited by their technology.
At Key Stage 2 it is important to begin to relate artefacts studied to a wider social context.
Attention will move from the object to the people who made and used it.
After examining an iron age metal object, pupils could investigate and discuss the great social and economic changes that the discovery of metal must have entailed.
Anyone, almost, could pick up a stone or work a piece of flint to use as a tool, but making metals was a far more skilled job.
It needed cooperation.
They had to find and dig or mine the iron ore.
Then they had to smelt the ore.
To do this they would need lots of wood or charcoal.
(Perhaps they despatched certain people to chop down the trees and make the charcoal?
And what effect would cutting down all these tree have on the environment?
There would be less forest and more open land that could be grazed or farmed.)
After the rough ingots of metal had solidified, a smith would need to work the metal and hammer it out, or perhaps he would make moulds and pour the molten metal into the shaped mould.
Certain people with special skills (metal workers) would be very important.
And of course people who had metals would have an advantage over groups who did not know how to produce metal.
Perhaps they would trade metal for other things, like food, furs, horses, cattle, or slaves?
The people who possessed the skills to make metal might not need to work at producing their own food — someone else could grow food for them.
And of course metal could also be used to make weapons.
Metal weapons might have been better than earlier weapons.
So the groups that owned metal might perhaps conquer and enslave other groups.
These sorts of points could be brought out by oral work, or through role-play.
Pupils at Key Stage 2 will also benefit from listening to stories.
In the above example a useful way of introducing the theme might be through a story about the (accidental) discovery of how to make metal.
Turning the "heap of evidence" into a meaningful account
Much primary school investigation begins with the local area.
Published histories of every town or village or suburb are in many cases non-existent, so frequently primary pupils are by necessity plunged into the world of do-it-yourself local history.
Often instead of reading about their local history from the printed page, they are required to piece together from an assortment of contemporary evidence (old maps, photographs, log books, census returns, directories, evidence from local buildings, and so on) a coherent picture of what their settlement was like in the past.
Far from being a restriction this is a positive advantage.
It can help to develop historical enquiry skills and can accustom pupils from an early age to handling and evaluating and synthesising historical evidence.
Beginning local studies — the school designed unit
Every school at Key Stage 2 is expected to do some local history.
Schools must design their own local units to take account of local circumstances and special interests.
The following suggestions are exemplary only, and they are based upon a concentric approach starting with the school.
The school
Many local studies begin with the history of the school.
County archives can often supply copies of material such as school log books and other education records, old school textbooks and copy books, photographs, plans, newspaper accounts, and so on.
This material can often be supplemented by school photographs, school reports and other material from local residents who were former pupils.
Their reminiscences about their early school days can be recorded, or they can be invited into school to talk to the pupils.
An event such as a school centenary can often produce a wealth of material from the local community.
Some museums offer Victorian classrooms where pupils can dress up and experience Victorian schooling methods.
Some museum loan services may offer examples of such things as writing slates and slate pencils or steel-nibbed pens and old inkwells and sample pages from old copybooks, to allow pupils to try using these old writing materials.
The High Street
A project on the high street of a town or village might be the basis of one of the school-designed history units.
This is a topic with great potential for cross-curricular work.
(Linking with geography, to give just one example, could involve using maps, making plans, studying the functions of different buildings and uses of land, looking at the different jobs done by people today, and perhaps even carrying out a traffic census or statistical survey.)
For history work it involves pupils instantly in using evidence (Attainment Target 3) as they search for clues about the high street in former times,— looking at building frontages (especially the part above the shiny modern shopfront), hunting for coal-holes, lamp brackets, investigating letter boxes and many other things, measuring the width of the street in different places.
Further pictorial and documentary evidence will help to fill in the picture later.
Understanding of change (Attainment Target 1) will grow as the enquiry progresses.
Nor need this remain a purely local study.
Goods sold in the shops can lead out from the immediate locality to the mills, workshops and factories of the industrial revolution, and indeed Empire produced goods will introduce a world horizon.
The wider world will also demand attention as pupils are encouraged to find out why the changes took place (cause and consequence Attainment Target 1).
Starting with fieldwork
Another strategy is to begin with fieldwork.
At a school in Kent pupils beginning Key Stage 2 were taken on an exploratory tour of a certain street.
The task they were set was to decide which were the oldest buildings in the street.
This apparently simple exercise raised all sort of issues and problems.
 "How do you know how old it is?" 
Pupils had to construct criteria for "oldness" , and create hypotheses.
The exercise required the class to observe the building very closely, and to examine such things as building materials and styles very carefully.
Of course such an exercise generated a great deal of discussion, and heated argument.
It also threw up confusions.
Houses with black oak timbers were old, they decided, but they were confused by mock-Tudor black and white timbered buildings of the interwar period.
One result of the exercise was that pupils urgently needed further evidence.
Only early photographs and documentary and other materials could begin to resolve some of the arguments and questions and it was at this point that material from the archives, old maps, early photographs, traveller's descriptions, census records, trade directories, window tax or hearth tax assessments, and so on could be meaningfully introduced to children hungry for further knowledge.
The history of the town or village: turning history on its head
The history of the pupil's own town or village is also a highly popular  topic in the primary school.
Rather than trying to start in the depths of prehistory, when local material may be scarce, or difficult to interpret, a better approach may well be to begin in the present and work backwards.
In this way cross-reference can be made to work already done at Key Stage 1.
Pupils might begin by examining their area about 50 years ago.
This has the advantage of involving pupils in oral history work, which may lead to the loan of photographs, documents or artefacts.
Further documentary material can be sought from the county archives service, and museums also may offer relevant material.
At Key Stage 2, with older pupils, the enquiry can easily be pushed back to the Victorian Age, when pupils are now faced with the "problem" that all the people who lived at that time are now dead.
To resolve the dilemma they must piece together the sort of documentary and pictorial evidence that is usually plentifully available for the nineteenth century.
Fieldwork in the town or village or the high street can also yield good results.
This topic also offers useful links with geography and other subjects.
Going back in time
With earlier periods evidence will inevitably become more scanty and more difficult in nature, but pupils will be better equipped to handle it with their experience of using evidence.
What can be found will inevitably vary according to the area under study and the survival of evidence, but it may be wise to capitalise on whatever special feature the particular settlement has to offer, perhaps an old building, church or archaeological site.
Pupils may well need to look beyond the immediate local area, the further back they go, though starting with an example not too far away can still be useful, and allows for field visits.
The teacher may wish to introduce pupils to evidence from archaeology, and perhaps from aerial photography.
The local area, of course should be a springboard not a straitjacket, and pupils need to be encouraged to move out from their locality to see it in a wider context, to compare it with other places, and above all, whatever period is under study, to begin to understand why the changes they have documented took place.
Moving out from the local area
Although the local area will often be the natural starting point for many topics, even for the core history topics, it is very important that primary pupils be encouraged to look beyond the local area at the wider scene.
A number of approaches can be employed to assist this process.
Some topics may offer their own inbuilt links.
Often focus on a theme such as transport, or trade and communication may well provide the link to the wider context that is needed.
With the Roman Empire, for instance, Roman roads could offer a valuable link between Roman  features in their own locality and the experiences of Roman rule elsewhere.
In a study of the Vikings, pupils might begin with the Vikings in their own area, but could go on to use the computer simulation "Raiders" , putting them in the role of Vikings deciding where and how to attack the British Isles.
Indeed the Vikings, Viking ships and Viking trade routes are topics that can widen horizons to encompass the whole of Europe, the Middle East, Iceland, Greenland and north America.
Pupils could be asked to compare and contrast their own area with another different area.
This will encourage focus on similarity and difference, as they look at population, industries, the patterns of settlement, different types of buildings, and so on.
An urban area could be compared with a rural area.
An area in England could be contrasted with the experience in Wales or Scotland.
Many pupils go on field courses, and the area they visit could form a focus for contrast with their own home area.
Getting the pupils to tackle a completely unfamiliar area, after they have sharpened their skills nearer to home can offer a valuable means of assessing how well they have mastered various skills of historical enquiry.
Pupils often respond positively to a challenge, and there is the advantage of something completely new.
There could also be possibilities for fruitful links between primary schools in different areas of the country.
The process of sharing information about their own area with another school will also encourage valuable skills of communication, presentation and cooperation.
Information technology could play a useful part here.
Not only are there the possibilities offered by electronic mail in communicating with the other school, but classes might put their information onto the computer and exchange data disks.
Schools can make use of video or educational broadcasts, to extend study to the wider world.
Schools broadcasts have an important role to play here.
Computer software packages and simulations offer another possible approach.
These media are also useful for introducing pupils to sites that are some of the best of their kind.
Not every school will be able to travel down to Portsmouth to see the wreck of the Mary Rose for themselves, but they could watch a video about the discovery and raising of the wreck, and carry out a computer simulation to search for the wreck.
Developing historical skills
While it has been demonstrated by the work of Piaget and others that, at primary school age, children's understanding functions at the concrete operational stage, more recent research in primary history has tended to suggest that children's "historical" thinking can be developed and encouraged by certain teaching techniques.
In particular, it has  been suggested, it is important to bombard pupils with questions, particularly with questions of the "why" and "how" type, in addition to the "what" type and comprehension type of question.
Even at the primary level, key historical concepts such as cause and effect, similarity and difference can be developed by intensive questioning.
Young children have great difficulty in handling more than one set of variables at a time, so there is a need for a fair degree of simplification.
Often concepts of similarity and difference can be best encouraged by starting with a simple "now" and "then" comparison.
Pupils begin by contrasting the period in the past with their own experience today, using familiar topics like homes or the family.
However by Key Stage 2 pupils should be encouraged to compare different elements in the past — the differences between the Celtic and the Roman armies, for instance, or the lifestyle of the Celts and the changes that the Romans introduced to Britain.
Pupils also need to recognise that the past was often very different from the present, and avoid the error of a "Flintstones" approach to history (cavemen watching television, and so on).
Indeed "spot the deliberate mistake" is one technique that might be used on occasions — a plastic object might be included in a collection of Victorian bric-à-brac, for instance, and the pupils would be required to explain that plastic had not been invented then.
Skills of handling and evaluating evidence can develop over time.
At first it may be sufficient simply to ask "How do we know?" 
Whatever topic or period is under study, pupils can be introduced to many of the varied sources of evidence.
Much of this evidential material will have an emotive quality which can help to increase motivation and interest.
(A yellowed parchment document with its faded handwriting, for instance, really can convey a sense of age!
The   past becomes suddenly real.)
The thrill of seeing or touching something really old on a museum visit can be extremely important (see Box 14).
Learning to substantiate statements about the past by reference to evidence is of great importance.
— "We know that the first bicycles looked like that because they've got one in the museum." 
More sophisticated evaluation of evidence will certainly be developed in the secondary school, but a start can be made.
The upper classes at Key Stage 2 when asked how they know can begin to make reference to census records, or old maps or photographs to "prove" the truth of what they claim.
Top juniors are capable of beginning to detect differences between two pieces of evidence, if it is presented at a simple language level, and even bias and attitudes to events.
This is especially true if a piece of evidence with a very strong and obvious bias is used, or if two contrasting views of the same event are chosen and the pupils encouraged to compare the two.
For the unit on Victorian Britain, for instance, they might compare the evidence of an employer or factory owner to a Royal Commission with the testimony of one of the workers.
Discussion to emphasise key concepts has a very important role to play.
Drama and re-enactment at Key Stage 2
Living history approaches, allowing children to dress up and experience activities carried on in the past can be extremely successful in the primary school.
Many museums and historic sites now arrange these sort of sessions.
English Heritage, for instance, can offer a range of activities at different sites.
Using information technology at Key Stage 1 and 2
Even at Key Stage 1, it is possible to make use of information technology for history.
The use of concept keyboard touch screens, or use of a "mouse" rather than the computer keyboard, has opened up many exciting possibilities.
Using a simple authoring programme like Touch Explorer Plus, a teacher might employ information technology to prepare a class for a site visit.
They might even use the computer to print out some simple questions to use on site.
Pupils at Key Stage 2 will be extending their computer skills, and it is important that part of the history course is delivered through computers.
At Key Stage 2 pupils will make far greater use of databases.
Indeed, they will often create their own databases to record information collected on museum visits or site visits or through fieldwork.
Collecting information to input onto a database could offer a very valuable means of "taking something back to the classroom" from a field visit or museum visit for this age group (see Figure 2.8).
Many of the simpler commercial software simulations will be usable with this age group.
Simple simulations of archaeological excavations like Dig are particularly useful.
At Key Stage 2 pupils can also begin to make use of viewdata compilations of simple written sources, provided that the material is presented at an appropriate language level.
Often use of the computer source-base can generate activities.
Pupils could interrogate a data disk holding a collection of source material on the Vikings, for instance, to find out where the Vikings travelled on their voyages and why.
From this they could create a map of the Viking world, using different symbols for settlement, raiding, trading activities, exploration, etc.
This exercise would also offer valuable cross-curricular links.
Working towards a goal or climax
Children's motivation can be maintained during a project if they are working towards some culmination of the activity.
This might be a display for others to see, a school open day when work is displayed to outside visitors, going on a site visit, bringing in a special visitor to view what has been produced, taking part in a play or pageant, or  recreating something like a Victorian school day, or some other event, or compiling a class book to hold the results of their work.
It is important for a project to have a definite goal and for the pupils to feel something has been achieved.
Often this will also encourage important skills of presentation and communication (see Box 15).
Varied learning strategies?— a final check
Are you giving your pupils varied experiences, teaching strategies and activities?
Activities and methods
(1) Fieldwork in the locality of the school; a visit to a historical site or historic building; a visit to a museum.
(2) Whole class teaching sessions. (3) Contact with the teacher or other adults individually; in a small group.
(4) Carrying out individual work.
(5) Working in pairs.
(6) Working in a group.
(7) Classwork using primary sources written documents of various kinds; old photographs or engravings; other sources.
(8) Handling or analysing statistical data.
(9) Looking at art, architecture, inscriptions or statues, etc. (10) Working with a map or atlas.
(11) Reading a book.
(12) Doing reference work, e.g. work in a library or an archive or local history centre.
(13) Writing creating; descriptive; narrative.
(14) Telling or retelling a story.
(15) Making a presentation to the class or to a group.
(16) Discussion in a group; in pairs; with the whole class.
(17) Using a computer interrogating a database; consulting a viewdata programme; carrying out a simulation of some kind; inputting data onto a database; using word processing packages to produce written work for history; using a computer to generate barcharts, graphs, etc. (18) Watching video or film.
(19) Listening to a tape recording.
(20) Listening or talking to a visitor or outside "expert" .
(21) Performing or listening to period music.
(22) Taking part in historical reconstructions or re-enactments. (23) Interviewing and tape recording people, e.g. elderly people.
(24) Surveying and measuring.
(25) Examining an artefact or object.
(26) Drama work, role-play. (27) Problem solving activities.
(28) Sketching, or painting, or making annotated drawings.
(29) Using a camera, video or tape recorder to record something.
(30) Reading historical fiction, or poems or literature.
(31) Debate.
(32) Conducting a "trial" of some historical character.
For further discussion: history at Key Stage 1
A starting point in history at Key Stage 1 could be the child's own life history.
What alternative ways can you suggest for introducing the concept of time?
How can you ensure that oral history exercises contribute to one or more of the history attainment targets at level 1, 2, or 3?
What contribution can they offer also towards general personal and social education?
Devise a history project for Key Stage 1 that would allow output in the form of role-play or model-making.
Tell half a story.
Tell a story set in the past and decide where you will stop to let the class take over.
What further activities could arise from this exercise?
For further consideration: history at Key Stage 2
One example of a possible bridging unit between Key Stages 1 and 2 has been given.
Suggest another one and devise a scheme of work to implement it.
Devise two alternative four-year plans for delivering the history programmes of study at Key Stage 2, paying particular attention to links between the units.
Look at one of the suggested organising approaches for delivering the Key Stage 2 history curriculum, and devise a detailed scheme of work to implement one of the core units.
Devise some questions covering elements of the unit on the Tudors and Stuarts that will help to develop historical reasoning and understanding of key historical concepts.
Choose one of the history units and carry out a detailed audit of the possibilities for cross-curricular links.
Effective teaching: Key Stage 3
Irene S. Perry
Transition from primary
In recent years many secondary schools have sought to improve their pastoral links with their associated primary schools.
This may or may not have involved departmental heads in planning induction sessions with year or house heads for in-coming pupils.
Too rarely has it involved the specialist in the secondary school in regular discussion with primary colleagues.
The advent of the National Curriculum makes it imperative that much closer curricular links are developed between secondary schools and their feeder primaries in order that continuity and progression can be ensured.
Knowledge of the organisation and content of the teaching of History on either side of the infant/junior and junior/secondary transfer points should be a factor in helping teachers to plan for continuity.
Each phase should share their knowledge and experience of the following:— approaches and methods used with pupils;— the range and nature of materials used;— the subject content covered;— the outcome of pupils' work (e.g. particular levels of attainment that could be expected or anticipated).
The programmes of study for each key stage provide opportunities to use units as links between key stages.
Good liaison should also ensure that duplication of content does not occur or that where repetition of a topic does take place, there is a significant variation in the depth, focus and treatment of such a topic.
While parental choice embodied in the Educational Reform Act has broken down the traditional secondary-feeder primary school catchment areas, for the vast number of secondary schools their associated primaries are unchanged.
Indeed the "clustering" of primary schools for curriculum development has and will continue to benefit the continuity and coherent planning for secondary schools.
Although pupils will transfer with a variety of experiences they should have learned a core of prescribed knowledge.
In addition, they should have been introduced to communication skills involving questioning, simulation and judgement and opportunities should have been given to  prepare the pupils to cope with conflicting evidence in actual historical issues.
This must be fully acknowledged by the secondary school history department when planning its work.
Unplanned duplication can no longer be excused.
Repetitive exercises to introduce the concept of evidence without consultation with primary colleagues is at the least unimaginative.
One measure of a successful department will be its primary/secondary links in terms of the frequency of consultation between phases, the level of joint planning between them and where possible the coherent management of a cross-phase unit of study.
Pupils transferring at the end of Key Stage 2 will bring with them a statement of attainment.
While the actual form of SATs is liable to change, the process of testing pupils at the age of 11 is unlikely to do so.
The results of these tests will be matched to the teacher assessments and used to determine the level of attainment reached by each pupil in each attainment target.
It is vital that secondary schools participate in the design of exchange records and understand the content of transfer documents.
Primary colleagues will have spent many hours compiling this information and it is incumbent on secondary teachers to use these to inform pupil progression.
In the past there has been an assumption that pupils' attainment will dip as a result of transfer and a settling period will be needed.
While this remains true perhaps in the physical and emotional sense, it need not be true of the learning situation if sufficient curriculum liaison has taken place.
Planning history for the lower school curriculum
The whole school approach
Planners of the History curriculum will need to take account of contributions that History will be able to make to a whole range of aspects of learning, as well as recognise the possibilities for the delivery of elements of the History curriculum in other ways and through other subjects.
It is essential that the members of a history department do not see the introduction of National Curriculum history as their entire curriculum.
Rather the programme of study for Key Stage 3 while being set in its subject context of a 5–16 continuum, should also be set in the context of the whole school curriculum framework.
This means that planners should be fully acquainted with and supportive of the school aims and be able to identify the special contributions which history can make to their achievement.
There should be a curriculum map available which shows how each of the subject areas in the school deliver their specific remits and where there are areas of possible overlap.
The history department can then draw on the skills and processes being developed by other departments and extend them.
Similarly, with a clearly enunciated history curriculum other departments in the school can see how they can be served on occasion or a basis can be laid in history which they can reinforce.
A concrete example could be in the use of computer databases.
Census materials are an invaluable resource for the historian but the technical manipulation of figures may be thought of as being the remit of the mathematics department or even the geographers.
In a school with clear lines of communication between departments it can be agreed which department will actually teach the way to manipulate data and analyse results and which will use this skill elsewhere for extension work.
There is no need for the history department to teach the skill before using census materials if the mathematics department has already done so but even more importantly if the historians need to know how to do this at an earlier stage than the mathematics department would teach this skill in their programme of study then the historians must negotiate this with their colleagues in the best interests of the children.
It is only through a combined approach that school will be enabled to deliver all their programmes of study and make enough time to do more.
The history department should also share in the drawing up and implementation of school policy statements.
These will cover areas such as equal opportunities, multi-cultural education, cross-curricular themes, competences and dimensions and special needs.
Where a new member of the department is appointed time should be taken to induct this person into the overall role of history within the school and its curriculum mission.
Devising a programme of study
The history department has to set about devising a programme of study for Key Stage 3 which embodies all the National Curriculum requirements, plus any local or county initiatives and any school based requirements.
This appears to assume that most secondary school departments have scrapped all their previous work and started again, which of course is not the case.
Most departments will select their supplementary study units with due regard to their existing resources and from their experience of what motivates their pupils.
Similarly, this choice will be influenced and informed by the school's locality.
Some areas may provide a rich vein of local history which is also well related to a supplementary unit.
For example:(1) a school in Liverpool may feel their local history to be linked to part of the world of work on American cotton plantations;(2) a school in rural Wales may wish to exploit connections of Welsh emigrants to Patagonia;(3) a school in Lancashire may feel it essential to include a study of textiles in the nineteenth century as an in-depth study in a Victorian core unit.
Teachers should try to identify criteria such as those mentioned above to guide their selection of content.
Simultaneously, a programme of study must be planned for the whole key stage bearing in mind what comes before and after.
Consideration needs to be given to the balance of time and coverage devoted to core units as against supplementary or school designed units.
Historians have always complained of content overloads in syllabuses and National Curriculum orders are no different.
The whole of year 7 could be devoted to the medieval world but cannot be.
There could be and possibly will be a wide range of views as to what features of the medieval world are most deserving of study but again teachers will have to make judgements about which elements are more significant and which could be given a "broad brush" treatment.
This means that the organisation of the units will have to be established in order to gauge the available time.
Several planning models can be adopted.
(1) Delivery of discrete units.
Here each unit would be taught separately from the others although links could be made at the end of the unit.
(2) "Nesting" .
This refers to the placing of a section of a supplementary unit within a core unit, e.g. the World of Work (nineteenth century factories) could be nested inside the core unit on Industrial Britain.
(3) Integrating units.
In this example the core unit would draw on both parts of the supplementary units and parts of the local study or school designed unit.
In examples 2 and 3 teachers will have to ensure that the focus of the parts making up the units is not lost within the organisational strategy.
This means that clear linkage must be made between contributing parts in order that the pupils can see the overall theme.
The Non-Statutory Guidance available from the National Curriculum Council in England and the Curriculum Council for Wales in Wales offers useful models for teachers planning a study unit (appendix 1).
There has to be a selection of content and teachers have to identify the key elements which they will focus upon and those which will receive the "broad brush" treatment.
Since everything cannot be covered in equal depth teachers need to develop the knowledge, skills and understanding required to progress through each attainment target.
It is helpful to specify concepts which underpin the content, e.g. kingship, migration, war and conflict and from these to  highlight aspects which enable pupils to meet statements of achievement.
This means that teachers must try to think simultaneously about the attainment targets and the statements of attainment within the levels.
In constructing a scheme of work then the selection of content must be closely related to a judgement on the depth of coverage to be attempted.
Further refinement can be achieved by trying to pose questions or hypotheses relevant to the content.
This will show what is significant and appropriate teaching activities can then be designed for pupils.
Since at Key Stage 3 the core units have to be taught in a chronological order that does give an initial structure to the overall plan of the three-year period.
Many teachers will wish to make use of a planning grid such as that suggested in the aforementioned Non-Statutory Guidance.
The following stages in the process may be helpful:(1) Having identified the unit ensure that the statutory content is clear.
(2) Pose the key questions or ideas which you perceive to underpin this topic of study.
This may also involve specifying the important concepts to be developed.
(3) Design activities which relate to the attainment targets and enable the pupils to ask questions and communicate their understanding in a variety of ways.
(4) Ensure the activities provide learning experiences for pupils through which you can assess their attainment of each attainment target or one in particular.
(5) Identify links with other areas of the curriculum and cross-curricular elements and seek to negotiate these links as and when appropriate.
(6) Evaluate the available resources.
This can involve materials already in school, some supplementary materials or the careful planning of a visit or trip.
At this stage the planning grid gives the teacher an overall direction for the work of a class or a group but further refinement will be necessary.
At the wider level each of the units has to be sequenced to achieve a balance through the entire key stage.
At the classroom level, the teaching and learning methods have to be organised to allow for much more than simple coverage of the topic.
Specific tasks have to be designed which allow evidence of attainment to be gathered and retained.
Continuity and progression have to be built in to the programme and there has to be scope for differentiation and extension.
However at least the teacher with a series of grids will have a programme of study which serves as the foundation for the scheme of work.
Classroom methodology — teaching and learning strategies
Good practice in the classroom can only be achieved where the teacher has evolved a clear framework wherein pupils can become secure, confident and interested.
At a basic level it is necessary to foster an approach which emphasises responsibility, good manners and good working habits.
The teacher must stress the need to bring equipment and text materials to every lesson.
The children must have impressed upon them the need for personal cooperation within the classroom as essential to the variety of learning situations with which they will be faced.
Moreover pupils need to learn appropriate modes of behaviour for a range of off-site learning activities, e.g. a visit to a cathedral, a climb up to a hill fort, following a town heritage trail or exploring a castle.
Having established such behavioural parameters the teacher needs to consider also the classroom environment.
It is always easier if a teacher has major ownership of her/his room.
Where a teacher is peripatetic in a school building it is much more difficult to display materials and motivate pupil contributions.
Given room ownership, the effective teacher will establish areas of display.
Some will be to provoke interest and curiosity, others will be to reinforce learning, still others will be for extension work and most importantly some areas will be for the pupils' own work which will serve as a major focus of attention.
Some displays may remain in place for lengthy periods.
The obvious example would be a time-line with a movable reference point throughout the term or session.
Other displays, however, should be changed regularly in order to maintain enthusiasm.
In addition to wall displays thought needs to be given to the equipment which can be used in the room, e.g. does the teacher always have to use the overhead projector or slide projector with the whole class or can groups of pupils go and view a selection of slides independently as needed?
The teacher might think of extra resources: a box of artefacts (some of which may be replicas) which the pupils can handle; a bookcase with additional reference materials including dictionaries and atlases as well as appropriate texts of higher and lower levels or a selection of visual materials for study.
Where paper based source materials are being used, the teacher must give thought to ease of access for retrieval as well as the effectiveness of storage.
Worksheets which are in good condition are treated with more respect than those which too quickly are crumpled, torn or part company with the staples or covering.
This is equally true of texts and even more expensive.
Therefore some early thought should be given to protective covers and storage.
The teacher should also make certain decisions about the arrangement of furniture in the room.
The layout can give as many messages to the pupils as it does to colleagues and senior  management.
A room laid out in rows with the teacher's desk centre front suggests a more didactic approach than one designed in groups with the teacher's desk less prominent.
It is up to the individual to decide the most appropriate arrangement and this should be informed by the range of strategies which he or she intends to use in the classroom.
It may be that at various stages the teacher will rearrange the room.
Having established a good working relationship with classes the new teacher may well be able to adopt a freer design with confidence.
Historical methodology
Before considering the strategies to be used in teaching history the teacher should be clear about the objectives he or she has in mind.
While its main purpose is not to produce professional historians, the teaching of history in school should enable pupils to gain some understanding of what history is and what historians do.
This means developing the pupils' ability to ask historical questions and interpret their answers.
As shown in the National Curriculum Council Non-Statutory Guidance the process of enquiry might involve pupils in:(1) posing questions and formulating hypotheses;(2) planning investigations;(3) finding, collecting and recording information;(4) assessing and organising information;(5) interpreting;(6) analysing the information as evidence for the enquiry.
These skills are further illuminated by the general requirements stated at the beginning of the Key Stage orders in the National Curriculum folder.
Pupils should be helped to investigate topics on their own.
They should have opportunities to:— use a range of approaches for investigating the past, including outline, in-depth, thematic and comparative.
— ask questions, identify sources for an investigation, and collect and record information.
Pupils should already have been encouraged to ask historical questions in the primary school but this should be reemphasised throughout Key Stage 3.
The following chart is a useful aide-mémoire: Adapted from CCW Non-Statutory Guidance for history, 1991.
To encourage the asking of such questions is central to the study of history.
While the questions asked by the teacher are vital and shall be referred to later it is the development of this skill in pupils which is crucial to their progression.
If they are to study evidence they must know the right questions to ask.
Every step in the argument depends on asking a question.
The question is the charge of gas, exploded in the cylinder head, which is the motive force of every piston-stroke.
But the metaphor is not adequate, because each new piston-stroke is produced not by exploding another charge of the old mixture but by exploding a charge of a new kind.
The materials which the historian questions are evidence.
Pupils need to realise the wide range this encompasses: written and printed material, evidence in the local environment, oral accounts, artefacts and visual records such as pictures, maps, posters, photographs and  film.
The teacher must provide opportunities for pupils to examine the widest range of evidence, to question it and come to conclusions.
As they become more familiar with using evidence pupils should extract as much information as possible and by asking increasingly complex questions become more able at evaluating its usefulness and its reliability.
As an example pupils at the beginning of Key Stage 3 studying the Norman Conquest could be given this exercise on "Who should inherit the throne?" .
In addition to asking questions pupils have to develop the ability to analyse historical evidence, make judgements about it and in doing so develop a sense of perspective about the people of the past.
With clearer understanding they will be able to use concepts such as change and continuity, cause and consequence and similarity and difference.
It takes time for pupils to appreciate the complexity of these concepts but this is what distinguishes history from other disciplines.
As the pupil progresses so the demands increase.
For example in studying the Peasants' Revolt of 1381 the analysis of the causes is further refined by their division into long-term causes and short-term causes: To encourage the analysis of evidence pupils must be asked to weigh up the sources which may contradict one another.
Similarly gaps in evidence need to be acknowledged not ignored.
Responses have to be expressed in appropriate terminology and be based on historical insight not simply on emotion.
The effective teacher needs to give thought to the abilities pupils will require in order to be successful historians themselves.
A useful model was presented in the Schools Council Project 13–16: A New Look at History (1976) as a way of considering analysis, judgement and empathy where associated skills were tabulated in ascending order:(1) Finding information — ability to use: an index, library catalogue, table of contents, glossary.
(2) Recalling information — ability to recall and use: standard abbreviations such as, e.g., i.e., sic., viz., general historical vocabulary, e.g. statute, act, treaty; chronological conventions, e.g. century, decade; particular terminology, e.g. middle ages, chivalry, domestic system, laissez faire .
(3) Understanding evidence — ability to: state information in other words; summarise, interpret graphs, charts, cartoons and maps; give examples of general points.
(4) Evaluating evidence — ability to: distinguish between facts, assumptions, inferences and hypotheses and value judgements; distinguish between valid and invalid conclusions, verifiable and non-verifiable information, relevant and irrelevant material, compare information and recognise contradictions.
recognise the kind of information necessary to support a judgement, argument or an hypothesis; detect logical fallacies; recognise an author's attitude or bias; recognise propaganda and its purpose; recognise lack of connection or gaps in evidence.
(5) Making inferences and hypotheses — ability to: suggest sources of relevant information where there are gaps; make inferences either logical or intuitive from evidence, draw and state conclusions; suggest causes and consequences of actions and events from hypotheses as starting points for further investigations.
(6) Synthesis — ability to use: organising themes or ideas (temporal, behavioural, causal) to make a credible narrative
This list can serve as a useful check for teachers.
The development of these skills has implications for teaching and learning strategies because only with a wide range of evidence can pupils gain adequate experience.
Furthermore, the situations which enable understanding of past events and people's responses to them must be such as to spark the imagination.
If a pupil is to enter the mind and feelings of more than one person in the past then classroom activities must be designed to facilitate and promote this.
Teaching and learning strategies
There are many ways in which history can be presented to pupils and the effective teacher will select the most appropriate vehicle to achieve each identified learning outcome.
Only a few are suggested here.
The well told story
While great emphasis has rightly been placed on the active involvement of the pupils in their learning, it should always be remembered that there is still a place for the teacher to convey a feel for an event or person by presenting the story.
Its accuracy, bias, and so on can be judged later but the dramatic effectiveness of this approach can often serve as an excellent starting point for further study, e.g. the murder of Beckett.
Role/play and drama
In a similar vein pupils themselves can be asked to act out various parts in order to explore contemporary feelings.
Dramatised television and radio productions can be included in this category.
A lesson on the Roman invasion of Britain can be enlivened by a radio re-enactment where the sound effects of galley oars and blood curling yells create scenes of notable impact.
Likewise a television dramatisation of British social history can often bring home to pupils the harsh realities of the workhouse and desperation of unemployed and impoverished labourers in the early nineteenth century.
Simulations and games
With pupils in lower secondary years their enjoyment of pretence is not yet impaired by age.
They can enter into a simulated situation with gusto.
Hence the challenge of building a Norman motte and bailey castle on behalf of a conquering lord (Fletcher's Castle, a computer programme from Fernleaf Productions) can become a real one in which the balances between defence and construction and survival have to be struck.
On an even broader front the use of an integrated package on computer such as Wagons West from Tressell Publications not only develops empathetic understanding of the dilemmas facing early American pioneers but allows cross-curricular links with geography, religious education and English.
Board games can enable pupils to interact and consider different viewpoints and motives at times in the past.
Into the Unknown, another Tressell Publication, played on board or computer can allow pupils to examine different attitudes towards exploration in the sixteenth century.
Similarly, a nineteenth century trade game can explore the motives and consequences in the development of the British empire and its diverse nature.
Diagrams, cartoons and pictures
The visual impact of materials never fails to illicit a response if it is well chosen.
The teacher can often save lengthy explanation by carefully constructing a diagram or chart which encapsulates the main points of a lesson.
Similarly pupils will often remember a pictorial representation which sums up an event or development.
Cartoons are  sometimes criticised as an invitation to anachronistic interpretation but provided they are used selectively they too can enable a wider range of pupils to access information.
Model-making and posters
This approach is perhaps more common in the primary schools but pupils at Key Stage 3 can still derive great pleasure from working with papier mâché and glue to construct their design of an Edwardian castle or an Inca palace.
Also as has been suggested in the Non-Statutory Guidance for history from the National Curriculum Council pupils could be given a selection of materials in a scissor and paste exercise to design a poster explaining why French people wanted a revolution in 1789.
Such activities need to be researched for accuracy but by focusing on a different type of outcome greater enthusiasm can be engendered.
Question and answer sessions in group or whole class situations
This is good traditional practice but the teacher should consider carefully the type of question to be asked.
Pupils can be helped to come to a deeper understanding of other peoples and/or events with the questioner's guidance.
Therefore a study of the types of question is a useful preparation point: Types of Question Question type Explanation (1) A data recall question requires the pupil to remember facts without putting them to any use, e.g. "When was the Battle of Hastings?" (2) A naming question asks the pupil to name something without showing how it relates to the historical situation, e.g. "What are the men in the picture wearing?" 
(3) An observation question asks pupils to describe something without relating it to their knowledge of the situation, e.g. "Describe what is happening in the picture?" 
(4) A reasoning question asks the pupils to explain something, e.g. "What does the picture tell us about how the Normans and Saxons fought?" 
(5) A speculative question the pupil is asked to consider how the situation might have developed or what led up to it, e.g. "What do you think happened next?" 
(6) An empathetic question asks the pupil to become involved personally with the evidence, e.g. "If you had been the soldier standing behind Harold, say what you might have thought, felt and done at the moment the arrow hit him in the eye." 
(7) A hypothesis generating question asks the pupils to speculate about possible causes and consequences, e.g. "What factors led Harold to fight the battle at that place and time?" 
(8) A problem solving question one which asks the pupils to weigh up the evidence.
 "What evidence does the picture contain that Harold was shot in the eye?" 
(9) An evidence questioning question questions that look at the veracity of the evidence, e.g. "On what do you think the weavers of the tapestry based their picture?" 
 "How reliable is the tapestry as evidence about the battle?" 
(10) A synthesising question a question that pulls the questioning process together, and allows for a resolution of the problem, e.g. "Write an account of the Battle of Hastings from the viewpoint of either Bishop Odo or Harold's standard bearer." 
As can be seen from the above it is possible to give questions a greater focus of purpose by considering what process it is that you wish the pupils to go through.
Differentiation
The preceding approaches are means by which the techniques applied in the classroom can be varied but effective teaching must go beyond this.
The introduction of National Curriculum History will have an impact on teachers' methodologies and on classroom management techniques.
Teachers will be in a position to form more accurate judgements about strengths and weaknesses of individual pupils in relation to attainment targets for history and will need to develop approaches which allow for a larger range of learning activities to be occurring than has, hitherto, been the case.
While the variety of approaches can be extended this must be planned in relation to the outcomes which the teacher has identified through the programme of study and attainment targets.
Whatever the nature of class organisation there must be greater focus on the pupils as individuals.
Whether they be in mixed ability, banded, streamed or set groups, the teacher must cater for each pupil's progress by providing tasks at the appropriate levels.
Several issues arise from this premise:(1) Teachers must use diagnostic records as pupils come to them, be it across a phase or year on year.
(2) The credence of such records must be ensured.
(3) Teachers must set appropriate learning activities for each pupil, i.e. differentiated.
(4) Teachers must provide opportunities for pupils to progress to higher levels.
(5) Teachers must track the progress of pupils and collect evidence of their attainments.
The question of records and record-keeping will be addressed in a later section.
Here it is the strategies of differentiation which must be considered.
Teachers have two main forms of differentiation at their disposal — differentiation by outcome and differentiation by task.
Historians are by and large more familiar with the former.
The traditional essay-type question can be set for the whole class and pupils can respond at their own level.
There is still a valid place for this type of extended prose.
Indeed it has been a skill whose weakness has been at the root of many criticisms of GCSE papers where short answers are not deemed to be adequate foundation for A level.
Of course there can be differentiation by outcome within subsections of structured questions without those subsections themselves being differentiated.
Teachers may well find that particular statements of attainment can be achieved and confirmed through such exercises.
Differentiation by task is a more complex and demanding strategy which does not take one simple form: In this example the teacher identifies the topic content which pupils should learn (the core), then sets different tasks for different ability levels within the class and these tasks are directed to achieving particular levels of achievement.
It requires great skill on the part of the teacher to match tasks to attainment levels and in reality it will prove unusual starting from a core to have a task which only addresses one level within one target.
However it is achievable.
There is one major drawback to this approach.
It does not allow for the pupil who is able to achieve in this example level 6.
In other words it places a ceiling above which such a pupil is prevented from rising.
This can have a demotivating effect on more able pupils and can lead to under-achievement.
This can be avoided in the second model: Here pupils would begin at an agreed level and be guided through tasks with demands at each step increasing so that every child can positively achieve, i.e. reach their place on the ladder while the most able can continue to show their abilities beyond a fixed range.
Obviously such structured tasks are more difficult to set.
It does require very careful planning and use of resources.
Some guidance can be derived from a study of flexible learning methods where whole courses have been designed for students in this staged progressive fashion.
The quality and accessibility of materials have to be high if this approach is to succeed and no organisational barriers are placed in the way of learning.
This means for example that an assessment exercise could be set around two sources which have contradictions.
The language of the sources could be simplified for those who had difficulty reading the sources or they could be copied on to tape for listening.
While the pupils are evaluating the sources prompts could be given to encourage positive achievement.
As the pupils continue through the tasks a wider range of source materials could be added which also included more sophisticated language.
Higher level tasks could involve using extraneous knowledge to reach conclusions.
It can be seen that a high degree of organisation and ample provision of resources would be essential for such an exercise to work.
It is important that teachers see differentiation not only as a strategy to ensure progression but also as a vital tool in countering under-achievement.
Where the work is clearly defined and structured the effective teacher can dictate to a greater extent the pace of the work and this will pay dividends across the whole ability range.
Hand in hand with the planning for differentiation goes assessment and record-keeping which must be linked to the programme of study.
Assessment, record-keeping and reporting
Assessment
Statements of Attainment are targets or objectives related to the overall attainment target to which they belong…
Statements of Attainment are also guides which enable teachers to see how far pupils have progressed in each Attainment Target.
They form the basis for assessment but are not in themselves assessment objectives…
Assessment based on Statements of Attainment will need to take into account the whole range of abilities to be found in any Statement of Attainment and the context — task and type of historical content — in which attainment of these abilities is being shown.
It will be the teacher's judgement, made over time and through observing performance in different tasks, whether pupils can be said to have attained the abilities identified in a Statement of Attainment.
This extract contains important messages for teachers.
The Statements of Attainment need to be in some ways "unpacked" in relation to the chosen programme of study and reordered not in sequence of difficulty but in terms of their place in the programme to ensure that opportunities for assessment are capitalised upon.
Secondly, despite the impression of the diagrams accompanying the TGAT report pupils do not always progress in a linear fashion but often reach plateaux and can even regress!
Any assessment scheme should take account of this.
Thirdly progression may not be identical across the attainment targets.
A pupil may reach level 6 in Attainment Target 1 but only be partially achieving at level 5 in Attainment Targets 2 and 3.
Finally and most significantly the closing sentence of the extract is well worth repeating: "It will be the teacher's judgement, made over time and through observing performance in different tasks, whether pupils can be said to have attained." 
This is the crux of teacher assessments.
Over the whole of a key stage a teacher or group of teachers will assess a pupil's progress through a variety of methods and reach a judgement.
A recent publication from the Schools Examination and Assessment Council on advice for assessment at Key Stage 3 in mathematics and science holds useful information for the forward thinking history teacher.
It suggests that teachers gather formal evidence which can be written work by the pupil but also encourage the collection of "ephemeral" evidence, i.e. evidence gained through observation, discussion or interaction.
Where a teacher is confident that in his or her professional judgement attainment has taken place but there is not a piece of concrete supportive evidence as outcome they are asked to annotate the context and their view of the achievement.
This whole area is one in which many of the practices of the "new History" can be safeguarded.
Role-play situations can be set up, annotated and pupils' demonstrated understanding evaluated by the teacher in situ.
Group work can continue and through on-going  observation and judicious questioning the teacher can establish the contribution and attainment of the individual members of the group.
Indeed it may be that this is also a direct aid in setting tasks which have stepped differentiation within them.
Another implication of this advice is that teachers need not begin keeping cupboards full of evidence from every pupil over three year periods in case they are selected for a random sample check on teacher assessments.
Those schools selected for the first quality audit in mathematics or science have recently been asked to supply 12 pieces of work from across the entire year group reflecting the spread of the ability range.
This does not suggest that schools would need to amass great quantities of pupils' work for an audit.
Therefore it would be more effective to select a cross section of the tasks set within a programme of study from which evidence will be retained.
This should be done at the planning stage.
While experience may show that certain tasks were not as good discriminators as others there is likely to be an abundance of evidence over the three-year period for teachers to use.
It should also be remembered that teachers are always assessing their pupils' performance on a daily basis and will know their pupils well over the period of time.
Provided such views are informed by good practice teachers should remain confident of their own expertise.
At this moment the actual tests which pupils will sit at the end of the key stage are in the process of design.
It would seem that differentiated papers will be set in history as in other subjects.
We must await more information as to the elements of content which they will focus upon.
It may be that only core units are tested and perhaps only one or two of those.
The danger of course will be that once the form and nature of the tests are known some teachers may be tempted — some even told in schools where league tables will be revered — to teach to the test.
It is hoped that the effective teacher will not need to do so.
Record-keeping
There has been increasing confusion over the terms "assessment" and "record-keeping" .
As already stated assessment is a daily practice of a good teacher who uses every opportunity to become better informed of the developing abilities of the pupils.
Record-keeping is the charting of the progress which need not be a daily procedure.
Again valuable lessons can be learned from those subjects which have been under National Curriculum orders longer than history.
There is and has been a great temptation to design many types of record sheets which involve complex systems of ticks, crosses and shadings to represent attainment.
While these may look impressive the experience within other subjects seems to indicate that the most common outcome of  such systems is the over-assessment of pupils and an unacceptable burden on the teacher.
Record systems should be designed to meet the needs of teachers, parents and pupils, not to get in the way of effective teaching.
Therefore the record-keeping system should be easily used and understood.
It should only aim to record that which is necessary for accurate reporting of a pupil's progress according to the agreed reporting format of the school as a whole.
It will incorporate National Curriculum attainment but there must also be a place for the wider skills of the subject which the teacher will wish to develop.
Furthermore, to avoid the necessity of duplication of records, there should be a place for recording the profiling categories common to most record of achievement schemes.
No-one in authority has yet ventured to say how often a level should be attained before it is confirmed or what allowance should be made, if any, for the pupil who will unlearn.
These are questions which history departments must pose for themselves but it should be borne in mind that it is at the end of the key stage that a final assessment will be required.
Teachers are not required to give a confirmed level for a pupil at any one moment during the key stage.
The best indication which can be given to pupils, parents or others concerned would be the level or levels at which the pupils are working.
It will be rare to find a pupil working at one level only; they are more likely to be working over two or three levels.
Record-keeping systems will therefore have to allow for this.
Reporting
At the end of the key stage, the teacher assessment will be matched to the test results and the pupils awarded a level of attainment.
It is not yet known what form this report will take but one can presume that a national format will be designed eventually.
Since school reports can stand separately from this it is possible to revise present reporting systems in preparation for the whole National Curriculum to come on stream.
The history department would be expected to participate in this process and then match up their own practice to that agreed.
The timing of the end of Key Stage 3 assessment does have some knock-on effects.
If a school intends to operate a form of option system allowing pupils to drop history at Key Stage 4 or to opt for the short course or continue with the full course, pupils and parents will presumably wish to base their decision on performance to date.
If tests are in June of year 9 followed by marking, standardisation and quality audit the results are not going to be available before July.
However, schools plan their staffing levels at least three months earlier and the timetable is usually worked on throughout the summer term.
Any major changes  in the size of groupings in the last few weeks of term could create significant problems.
Does this then mean that pupils will choose their options from some estimated grade or does this mean that schools will begin to set "mock" tests around option time?
These are the current questions being asked but no simple answers have yet been given.
Conclusion
History teaching has undergone many developments in the last three decades and no doubt change will continue although it is to be hoped that the pace of that change may diminish.
Key Stage 3 is a vital bridge between the primary school and the upper stages of the secondary sector.
To ensure the continuing popularity and growth of the subject at Key Stage 4 and beyond, teachers must not simply teach the programme they must aim to instil an interest in and enjoyment of the subject.
A blend of methodologies and careful selection of stimulus materials is valuable but above all a clearly enunciated plan of what is to be taught and assessed is the necessary prerequisite.
The National Curriculum has given the basis, it is up to effective teachers to use their professional skills to translate this into a worthwhile and meaningful experience for each of their pupils.
Further questions to consider
(1) What is your function within the history department?
(2) How are the delegated responsibilities allocated?
(3) On what criteria are resources selected?
(4) Are resources easily retrieved?
Are they differentiated?
(5) How are classes organised?
Mixed ability?
Setted?
Banded?
(6) Do you have a departmental scheme of work which is realistic and usable?
(7) Have you contributed to it?
(8) How would you deliver the Key Stage 3 programme of study?
Nesting of units or discretely?
(9) Have you established the time allocation over the three-year period?
(10) How would you manage a group work situation to ensure that all pupils are actively involved?
(11) Do you have a clear assessment policy which conforms to the whole school policy?
(12) Is your record-keeping system efficient?
(13) What type of ephemeral evidence are you aiming to collect?
(14) Are there any strategies you can use to help pupils prepare for the tests without teaching to the test?
Resources for teacher-designed units: some general guidlines
Mary Aris
The programmes of study prescribed for National Curriculum history are merely outlines.
Before they can be implemented, they need to be turned into meaningful schemes of work.
There will be many ways of delivering the topics and requirements.
Individual teachers, or in some cases groups of teachers in cooperation, will need to plan their own school units.
In the process of delivering National Curriculum history it is most important that pupils are introduced to a wide and varied range of historical resources, and it may be useful to offer some general advice on the resourcing of such units.
The prime consideration should be the evaluation and use of evidence, which lies at the very heart of the historical method.
Effective history teaching at all levels must bring pupils into contact with primary evidence, and it is important therefore that, from the outset, the teacher of history forms a clear idea of the important distinction between primary and secondary sources.
Primary and secondary sources: "evidence" and "interpretation" 
Primary sources are more "first-hand" than secondary sources.
They are sources that are contemporary or near contemporary with the period being studied, documents that were written by the participants, or by people at or near the time.
Often they are what we would call eye-witness accounts.
Primary sources also include the material evidence, the artefacts, buildings and structures that were created, modified and used by those people in the past.
Old photographs, and some archive film footage or earlier radio broadcasts would also be included, depending on the period being studied.
All our interpretations about what happened in the past must ultimately rest upon this evidence surviving from the past.
Secondary sources, in contrast, are interpretations of the past produced at a later date.
They are also written with hindsight.
They include the writings of historians, and textbooks, stories about the past, and historical fiction.
Secondary sources also include dramatisations  and reconstructions by theatre in education groups, actors, or museum staff acting "in role" , and many film or video or radio and television productions.
Secondary sources also include artists' illustrations and interpretations of historical events, archaeologists' reconstruction drawings, and models or pictures purporting to show how things used to be.
Of course, when the topic is examined in detail all kinds of problems of definition and qualifications arise.
There are a number of problems in defining "first-hand accounts" .
How close to the event does a writer have to be?
The account of the Roman conquest of Britain by the Roman writer Tacitus, is certainly more "primary" than Collingwood's Roman Britain written in the twentieth century, yet Tacitus was describing events in which he himself had not participated, though his father-in-law, and one of his key "sources" , was the General, Agricola, who had played a leading role in the campaigns.
Memoirs and autobiographies may be written some considerable time after a key event, and usually enjoy the benefit of hindsight.
Some sources are both primary and secondary sources, in relation to different periods in the past.
Despite the difficulties, the teacher needs a rough working definition.
If the teacher is not clear in his or her mind about what is "evidence" and what is "interpretation" , there will be confusions and it will prove impossible to do full justice to Attainment Targets 2 and 3.
Attainment Target 2 is concerned with studying interpretations of the past.
Attainment Target 3 is about using historical evidence.
Books written in the present day by historians are undoubtedly secondary sources, each representing one person's view of what happened in the past.
But other interpretations may not be so obvious at first sight.
Simulations and reconstructions found in some theme parks and interpretation centres are also useful secondary sources.
Indeed, one approach can be to investigate whether they offer a "sanitised" or nostalgic view of the past.
But the situation can be very confusing, as many museums and archaeological sites now also employ models and simulations in attempts to interpret their holdings and make their displays more attractive.
Some things are more genuine than others, or rather more firmly rooted in evidence.
The straw-covered Viking houses at the Yorvik Viking Centre hide steel frames beneath their wattled walls; the figures and displays of goods are reconstructions, though the interpretation is rooted in evidence which is carefully displayed alongside the reconstruction.
In fact the most recent reconstructions of Viking figures are very carefully based on evidence and are the result of a great deal of lengthy scientific research.
The newest models at Yorvik are based on a computer reconstruction, which can take a skull and remodel the flesh on the human face; building up from the skeleton is the nearest we can get to what individual Vikings actually looked like.
Period rooms in a museum are usually reconstructions and interpretations of the past, though they may well contain primary source material, the furniture and genuine artefacts from the past, and an assortment of objects which may well belong to the same period but which come from many different sources.
On the other hand, a room in a country house with its original furniture is genuine evidence, though even this will bear the marks of later alterations and additions and later use.
Even at the primary stage, it has been shown that children can often grasp that a country house contains material that has accumulated over a long period.
 "Is this genuine?" and "When was it produced?" are vital questions when dealing with material evidence.
Primary sources are not necessarily more accurate than secondary sources.
An account written by someone participating in some event or controversy may give a far more partial view than the carefully researched, balanced interpretation of a later historian who has sifted and weighed up all available evidence.
Indeed a primary source, a written document or a newsreel film, may be biased, mistaken, or occasionally totally inaccurate (some wartime propaganda for instance).
What is important for its value as evidence is that it is contemporary with the period under study.
In teaching history, pupils need to be encouraged to treat evidence from the past in a rather different way, from a secondary source.
It is not simply information to be taken at face value.
It is material that needs to be questioned, and evaluated.
Pupils should be encouraged to cross-check one source against another.
Nor is the fact that a document is biased a reason for dismissing the document as worthless or unreliable.
Pupils need to learn that a biased document can be very useful indeed to the historian, because it may offer us insights into motives and attitudes of people in the past.
The distinction between primary and secondary sources will not always be immediately obvious to the pupil.
Discussion and questioning will be needed to establish if it is evidence from the past, or if it is a later interpretation.
With video, for instance, some children can be genuinely confused by dramatisations, though others can use the visual clues to categorise black and white archive film as coming from "the past" .
Dramatisations and reconstructions can be of great value in trying to convey to pupils an idea of the past, but they are none the less interpretations.
They will be useful for Attainment Target 2 (Interpretations of History) though not Attainment Target 3 (Using Evidence).
The effective teacher of history will need to use both primary and secondary sources.
The attainment targets in National Curriculum history require the use of both, but it is important to be aware of the distinction between them to avoid great confusion.
Secondary sources and interpretations depend upon and must be tested against surviving  primary evidence.
 "When was it written?" and "Is it real?" must be key questions to ask about any historical source or resource (see Figures 4.1 and 4.2).
Documents
Written sources have become almost indispensable for today's history teaching.
There are three prime reasons why they are so important.
First, no other type of historical evidence offers the historian such depths of insight into human conduct.
Without devaluing the important contribution made by archaeology or place names or other kinds of evidence, written documents offer us so much more insight into the past.
Often documents illuminate people's thought processes.
They hint at how people thought and felt, at why they acted as they did.
Even where things are not made explicit, we can sometimes infer information or attitudes.
By definition "history" begins when written records begin.
Archive sources have very special qualities, and should therefore lie at the heart of any attempt to use primary evidence in the history classroom.
A second factor is the versatility of archive sources as a teaching resource.
Documents (whether in facsimile, as transcripts, or in the form of short selected extracts) are particularly suitable for use in the classroom.
There are many different ways in which history lessons can be "document led" .
Archive sources can be used for a wide variety of purposes, not just as illustrative material, and not only for their informational content, but also because of their potential for the development of historical skills and historical questioning.
Thirdly, it has long been recognised that written documents produced in the past often have a special quality, which is not      possessed by school textbooks or the writings of later historians.
They were produced by people in the past.
They offer a direct link with the past.
Their physical appearance, as well as any informational content, is often important.
More than twenty years ago, the archivist Emmison tried to convey to teachers what he felt to be the special qualities of an original document: The original document is in a sense more real than any text book can hope to be; for the writer, though he may have been misguided, biased or mistaken, at least lived through the events of which he speaks; and whatever his shortcomings, he was in certain respects better informed about the times and conditions in which he lived than is the interpreter writing two or three hundred years afterwards.
There is too the fact that the original letter or document is charged with an emotion, an urgency, and an immediacy, to which the later printed record can never pretend At least for some — and probably for more than is generally imagined — the original document, letter or journal is the best door into the past.
The local example of the national theme
When documents first began to be widely used in history teaching, local documents were often cited as a local illustration of the national theme.
Using local sources in this way the history teacher was able to relate the particular history topic to the pupils' own locality and so to their own experience.
In 1969, a number of contributors to "history" had proposed the use of local documentary sources as a remedy for the perceived "crisis" in history teaching at this time.
Local records offered one of the key ways of making history more "relevant" .
Often too a local document might be used as a springboard, as starter material allowing the teacher to work from the known and familiar locality to the wider historical context.
Use of local examples can often motivate, and hold attention.
With primary school pupils and with lower ability pupils in particular, the local connection can be important, but all pupils can benefit from such material.
Sources for local history
Document sources are indispensible for most local history studies.
Using the local area is particularly important at primary level, for instance.
The square mile around the school can be the starting point for many enquiries, including investigations of a historical nature.
Many primary teachers start investigations of the past by working out from the history of the school, village or local area.
The history of many localities and of most schools has still to be  written, however, and a search in the library may often prove disappointing.
Fortunately, most local record offices contain an abundance of sources for local history, going back at least two hundred years.
Standard sources such as census, tithe maps and schedules, trade directories, school log books and school records, parish records, maps, government reports, newspapers, old photographs, and oral history sources offer a quarry of evidence which can be used in an active learning and enquiry process from Key Stage 2 onwards.
This raw material, the "building bricks" of local history, offers evidence which pupils can sift and use to piece together the history of their locality.
Turning this "heap of evidence" into a coherent and meaningful account of the past is a process which can directly foster historical skills.
National Curriculum history now requires all schools to produce their own school-designed units on local history, and in most cases teachers will need to make use of material from their county archives or local study centre.
Document-led exercises in history
Documents can form the basis of many exercises or activities in class.
Using single documents
An entire lesson's work can be generated by even a single document.
Exercises, worksheets, and questions can centre on it.
Ideas, hypotheses and historical concepts can be developed from it.
It can form a focus for comprehension and discussion.
In approaching any historical document there should be a progression from lower order to higher order thinking.
Pupils should be encouraged to move on from simple comprehension and factual questions to questions of a more historical nature.
Comprehension questions are intended initially, to familiarise pupils with the document, and, in addition, to establish a certain body of knowledge about the document and especially about the process of its creation, that will form the foundation for enquiries directed at more "historical" preoccupations.
Single sources can be used in a variety of ways and at various levels of sophistication (see Box 1).
Younger pupils may be encouraged to compare the past with the present, developing concepts of similarity and difference.
Pupils may be required to present information from the document in a different form.
Some documents may offer evidence about attitudes.
Others may deal with motivation, causation or the consequences of human actions.
Some may be used to develop skills of inference, seeing meanings that are not explicitly stated.
Documents can often be interpreted at several "levels of  meaning" .
Some documents offer superb examples of bias.
Different documents have different qualities and offer different avenues for discussion and investigation.
An effective history teacher needs to be able to spot the potential of particular pieces of evidence and select carefully for a particular task.
Very often questions and tasks can lead on from work on the document to more open-ended enquiry or discussion, and to further research and investigation.
Groups of sources
Groups of documents offer even more versatile and creative teaching strategies.
The teacher of history needs to learn how to put together a group of sources to target particular historical skills or concepts.
One approach could be to select a number of different types of evidence on a related theme.
A written source, a visual source and a statistical source is one fruitful combination.
Pupils can be asked to assess the value of different types of sources and to compare the evidence they offer.
Two sources offering different accounts of the same issue or event, provide the history teacher with another very useful device.
Sometimes this approach will be useful to highlight different viewpoints and attitudes to a particular event.
Often this can lead on to valuable work on the subject of bias in documents.
At other times the evidential value of two sources can be assessed.
Pupils can be encouraged to compare and contrast different accounts, and to cross-check particular points, highlighting discrepancies, and correlations between the sources.
Follow-up work could involve discussion of possible reasons for the discrepancies.
Another technique might be to put a primary  source alongside a later secondary account, inviting pupils to explore the differences between primary and secondary sources.
Documents have an important role in child-centred learning methods.
Since pupils often learn far better by doing than by listening or looking, documents can be useful for a variety of active learning situations.
The evaluation of evidence and the study of bias
The evaluation of primary source material has been given increasing emphasis in recent years, most notably with changes such as GCSE or National Curriculum history.
Pupils are often invited to ask questions about the completeness or the reliability of a source.
To explore these avenues we usually need to know something about how or why the document was created, and what the writer could reasonably have been expected to know.
Pupils will need to distinguish between fact and opinion, and to explore underlying motives or attitudes.
Documents offer many possibilities for the study of bias.
Careful selection of the document is crucial.
Often it can be useful to select a source with a strong and very obvious bias, at least initially.
Even a single biased source can be useful.
There is great scope for the study of "value-laden" words and terms.
Pupils could be asked to pick out or underline all the things which suggest bias or which are opinion rather than fact.
A useful follow-up activity which can counter-balance the particular bias of the chosen document is to ask pupils to rewrite the document from an opposite point of view.
Some sources have a subtle rather than a very strong and obvious bias.
These can be used to sharpen skills of inference and to focus on underlying attitudes, prejudices and entrenched beliefs, about which even the subject himself may not have been fully conscious.
This kind of exercise can build up a certain caution in approaching a document, and a realisation that not everything is to be taken at face value.
The degree of sophistication will vary according to the age and abilities of the pupil.
Pupils will also become aware of the need to check one source against another whenever possible.
It is important, however, to ensure that a positive attitude is maintained towards the sources.
There may be problems with using some sources, and documents may sometimes need to be treated with a degree of caution.
A source might not tell us all we would like to know; a document may sometimes be biased — but these sources are still the only direct evidence we have, and the historian has to learn to use them effectively.
Indeed, pupils should come to realise that biased sources are often very valuable to the historian in revealing the attitudes and values of people in the past.
Understanding viewpoints/empathy
The School's Council History project defined empathy as "understanding without approbation" .
Although empathy has attracted considerable criticisms (and perhaps a degree of misunderstanding) a key objective in history teaching involves appreciation of how people in the past thought and felt.
There is a need for pupils to appreciate a range of viewpoints.
(This can be especially useful for coverage of Attainment Target 2.)
The Schools Council history team rightly foresaw many difficulties and problems which could arise from empathy work.
Many of these surfaced with the introduction of GCSE, in a heated debate over empathy, in the press and among parents, as well as among the teaching profession.
Yet empathy is essential for historical understanding.
It helps us to understand motivation.
It underlines the fact that history is about real people.
Very often it helps pupils to make the imaginative leap that is required of a historian.
One of the solutions adopted by teachers has been the use of specific documentary extracts to introduce and focus an empathy exercise.
This has tended to replace previous strategies such as "Imagine you were" Documents can offer stimulus and provide the sort of concrete detail and differentiation which are necessary for a successful exercise on empathy.
One very fruitful device adopted at GCSE has been to select a certain kind of document, or group of documents, that carries an apparent contradiction.
Getting the pupil to resolve the apparent "dilemma" forms the basis of the exercise.
It is the documentary sources that provide the heart of the exercise.
Using documents as a basis for class activities
Many class activities can arise from work focused around original written sources.
This may include written work, answering questions or completing worksheets on a source, and whole class or group discussion.
Activities can also take the form of drama, role-play or debate.
Certain controversial issues may even be suitable for a trial.
Group presentations offer another approach for active learning using documentary sources.
Groups can work on different sources or cover different topics, and the result of their investigations and conclusions can be shared with the rest of the class in a group activity or presentation.
Follow up work to the study of original sources might include elements of reconstruction or re-creation, often drawing on and synthesising information from a range of sources.
Re-creating a typical Victorian school day is a highly successful follow-up at Key Stage 2 to work on school log books, school photographs, and inspector's reports, and so on.
Re-creating an old-fashioned Christmas, cooking and trying out old recipes, modelling or trying different solutions to a problem such as bridge building — these are a few of the numerous  possibilities for follow-up work.
Often these activities may offer highly desirable cross-curricular links.
Successful work using primary evidence may lead on to creative expression, which may come from a synthesis of the information gathered from the documentary evidence.
Ways of presenting documentary sources
Ever since the spread of offset-litho printing and the photocopier, documents have been used extensively in facsimile to give some of the flavour and feel of the original document.
Published compilations of documents have become readily available.
Teachers can also visit their own local record office and obtain copies of local records of their own choice.
Very localised examples from a particular town or village are often obtainable, and these can give history an added immediacy.
Extracts from documents are increasingly being used in a range of textbooks.
At first these tended to be employed mainly as illustrative material, but they are now increasingly being used as a means of developing certain historical skills or concepts.
Written sources can be used in transcript.
This is a useful method, which shortcuts any possible problems of palaeography.
It allows short extracts to be presented.
The language of the original, or oddities of spelling or punctuation, can be amended to some degree — an important consideration when using such material with primary school pupils or pupils with learning difficulties.
In editing a transcript some of the wordiness or digressions and sub-clauses, which are often found in official documents, may be omitted.
While purists may question the editing of documents, with younger age groups or lower ability, some simplification is justifiable; pupils must be able to understand a source before they can make use of it.
Young children, too are incapable of grasping many variables at the same time, and a source that is too complicated can confuse or distract.
Any simplification can also be justified by the fact that there will be progression in the National Curriculum course.
Skills can be refined at a later date.
Topics can be revisited, when pupils are capable of greater understanding and a more sophisticated approach.
More recently, archive sources have also been used in newer computer formats, in databases, viewdata programmes or telex simulations for instance.
Often the computer can be connected to a printer to provide an instant printout.
Presentation of documents by oral means offers another avenue.
In its most sophisticated form radio has produced some memorable compilations, dramatising the texts of documents and adding in a variety of sound effects.
Taped sources can be effective, especially for pupils with reading difficulties or visual handicap.
Certain sources, such as letters or diary extracts lend themselves particularly well to this form of presentation.
Although these methods offer an effective means of using documentary source material in the classroom, there are strong arguments for bringing pupils into contact with original documents at some stage in their school career.
The original documents are themselves artefacts, and there can be great value for pupils in seeing and even handling parchment and yellowed paper.
It can bring them literally in touch with the past.
Most local record offices encourage educational group visits.
Often groups can be given a "familiarisation visit" , going behind the scenes in the archives to learn about the range of documents and the methods of preserving and caring for them.
Such visits can form a very useful introduction to a history course.
Much of the time pupils will work on sources that have been carefully selected by the teacher.
At some stage a visit to the archives can also be useful to introduce a wider range of sources.
Coursework at Key Stage 4, for instance, can have a valuable function of requiring the pupil to select material that is relevant for a particular enquiry.
How to use your local record office
The county record office or other local archives should be a focal point for all teachers of history.
Some have an education officer and can offer schools special help, but even offices with less developed services offer an important bank of local primary source material.
Any history teacher moving into a new area should make contact with their local archives.
The following points should be noted:(1) It is important to get to know how the finding aids work, so that history teachers can locate relevant documents.
(2) Teachers should appreciate that the staff cannot do their research for them, and should be prepared to help themselves, though they will usually find the staff to be extremely helpful.
(3) Many archives have compiled reference "packs" for popular topics which can be extremely useful, even if they do not cover every need.
Many archives also publish a variety of document packs, source books, posters, postcards, and so on.
(4) Most local record offices allow group visits to the office.
As well as offering tours of the record office and general introductions to archive sources, some have a group room/classroom where groups can work on particular topics.
(5) Some record offices offer in-service courses, or workshops to allow teachers to prepare their own teaching materials, or will cooperate with teachers' groups producing resource materials.
(6) Pupils may need to visit individually for coursework or project work.
The teacher should always notify the record office in advance and check that there is suitable material for a particular topic.
Pupils should be well prepared, and it is advisable to issue them with a guidance sheet that can be shown to the staff.
(7) Archive material is unique and irreplacable, and history teachers should handle original material carefully and encourage their pupils to do the same.
On occasions offices may require pupils to use copies, especially of popular or fragile material.
(8) Staff in record offices will appreciate occasional feedback about how their material has been used.
(9) Many offices produce teacher's handbooks or information sheets, offering further guidance.
Pictorial sources
Visual sources, pictures, sketches and paintings, photographs and engravings are usually eagerly sought after for use in teaching history.
Old photographs can be located in the collections of archives, museums, or local studies centres and in some libraries.
Friends, families and members of the community may be another source for photographs of the last 50 years or so.
Photographs
Photography was invented in 1827 by Niépce.
The earliest photographs (available from the 1840s generally) tend to be formal posed portraits.
Not all old photographs are dated, but internal evidence may help to establish an approximate date.
The original source print,(whether daguerrotype, albumen print, gelatine print, and so on) can offer valuable dating evidence.
The back-drops to portrait photos in the photographer's studio can also offer important dating clues.
Particular backdrops were fashionable at different times (and the furniture or background in an old photograph may tell us more about tastes and fashions in photographers' studios than it does about furniture in homes).
By about 1880 street photos and action photos had become more common.
Some photographs offer internal evidence (fashions, transport, and so on) that can help to date them.
Although it is often claimed that the camera does not lie, when using old photographs for historical purposes pupils need to give attention to the processes involved in choosing a subject and taking a photograph.
They need to realise that a photograph can be just as carefully "composed" as any painting.
The intention of the photographer is something that needs consideration.
 "Why was this photograph taken?" is one of the most important questions pupils can ask (see Box 3).
Work produced by artists — engravings, wood-cuts, portraits and paintings
Before the age of photography, engravings and wood-cuts are available from the fifteenth century to the nineteenth century.
These originate from artists' sketches that were engraved onto copper or steel plates, or wooden blocks in earlier times, and reproduced by a printing process.
Paintings, drawings, and portraits are other useful pictorial sources, and for the Middle Ages the decorations and embellishments in medieval manuscripts, books of hours and church panels form another excellent pictorial source.
While all primary sources need to be assessed and handled with a degree of caution, with artist's material there are additional considerations.
As well as allowing for the "artist's licence" we need to remember that artists often had to satisfy patrons, or produce work that would sell.
There were also different conventions surrounding painting at different periods.
Picture appreciation may involve reading clues or decoding messages which give information about the subject's social status, tastes and fashions at that time.
There is sometimes a hidden symbolism that would have been apparent to people at that time.
We should also try to gauge the attitude of the artist to his subject; here again there may be coded "messages" .
Some pictures, Victorian engravings for instance, may be more useful for telling us about Victorian tastes, fashions, and expectations than for the scenes they portray.
Artists do not only record the world about them.
They often choose to depict historical scenes.
These should be treated as secondary sources, "interpretations" of the past.
Such things are extremely useful for that purpose, and for Attainment Target 2 in National Curriculum history.
Symbolism can be another complicating factor because art operates on many levels of understanding.
Quite soon after the execution of Charles I, for example, many artists rendering his final moments, show Charles almost as a "Christ figure" , a martyr.
This may not be very accurate as a depiction of what actually happened, but it is extremely valuable in showing the myths and popular interpretations that have grown up afterwards.
Learning to "read" pictures
There seems to be a general assumption that picture sources are particularly suitable for use at Key Stage 1 and Key Stage 2.
Doubtless this view is influenced by the fact that children's reading ability is more limited at this time.
However, studies by Gill Aslett and Joan Blyth and several more recent investigations have stressed that young children need to be trained to "read" pictures.
Indeed on being  presented with a picture, pupils may look at it for only a very short time and give only the most cursory replies when questioned about various features.
Training is needed to enable them to derive greater value and information from the source.
One of the tests of the success of this training in "picture reading" will be that pupils will gradually spend more and more time looking at the picture, and "reading" it at various levels (see Box 4).
Methods and techniques for using pictorial sources
Various techniques can be employed in this process:(1) How do we look at pictures?
One teacher started by asking her class what caught their attention first.
Pupils then drew the path that their eyes travelled round the picture.
Leading on from this, the class discussed how they looked at pictures, and how the picture was composed.
(2) Is there a story in the picture?
The importance of story at Key Stage 1 and 2 is highlighted by this approach.
Pupils could be encouraged to ascertain what is going on in the picture, what has happened or is about to happen, why are people doing certain things.
(3) Pictures can be read at various levels.
There is the overall impression of a picture, and focus on sections of the action, and finally on small details.
(4) Looking for clues.
It is important to encourage children to look for clues, and to realise that some small detail (a crest on the side of a coach, for instance, or a sign above a shop) may have an important bearing on the story or meaning of the picture.
(5) What does this tell us about the people in the picture?
Enquiry can be fostered by asking "Who is the most important person in the picture?" , looking at gestures and expressions, or asking "What clues can we get about a person's wealth or social status?" 
(6) Use of symbols.
Sometimes pupils can appreciate that certain things are used as symbols.
(7) Is there a sub-plot?
Artists' pictures in particular often contain several storylines within them.
Sometimes there are "sub-plots" taking place in the picture as well as the main story.
(8) Skills of inference.
Pupils can be encouraged to use a picture as evidence and to deduce and infer further things from what they see.
Often the topics explored may be quite different from the ostensible main subject or happening in the picture.
A picture of a street scene, for instance, can give rise to many avenues of investigation.
What does this tell us about people's clothes at that time?
How did people travel then; and does this suggest anything about the state of the roads?
What were houses made of at this time?
Were the streets paved?
How are things different today?
(9) Generating activities.
Use of a picture will often lead on to further activity.
A class might be asked to tell a story to explain the picture, or they might be provided with more information to help them understand it.
There could be drama or role-play.
They may go on to use further sources to discover more about a particular topic.
(10) Comparing pictures.
Very often more than one picture can be used in an exercise.
Initially pupils often find it far easier to compare a past picture and a present picture than to compare two pictures from different periods of the past.
Pupils could be asked to sequence two or more pictures, to say which came first.
The exercise should be followed by discussion with pupils being asked for their reasons.
(11) Learning specialist language.
Often children's response to a picture is limited by their vocabulary and their ability to describe features.
It is important that they slowly build up a historical vocabulary, and learn some of the technical terms that will allow them to talk about what they can see.
(12) Using pictures of people.
A group photograph can be the starting point for further investigative work with pupils at Key Stage 1 or 2.
A family picture or a photo of a group of workmen, servants, and so on could be used.
Children can be asked to "be" one of the characters and describe their clothes, tools, work, or lifestyle, doing further research to fill in the details.
Artefacts
Artefacts, that is objects that were produced in the past, have great value for the teaching of history.
In a very real way they put us in touch with people in the past, especially ordinary people.
Objects are often excellent material to use with very young children, who have not yet developed reading and writing skills.
They are also for the same reason very suitable for lower ability pupils or for multicultural groups, and can be a useful leveller.
But all pupils will benefit from contact with genuine artefacts from the past.
Use of artefacts also offers many important cross-curricular links.
Even damaged or broken objects can be useful.
It is not always necessary to have the entire object — a broken piece of the rim of a plate can give us nearly as much information as the entire plate could have done.
The previous experience of many teachers of history may have been largely book-based or document-based, and teachers may need to acquire skills in using and questioning historical objects.
The support  of museum education services and the in-service course offered by many museums will be important in equipping the history teacher with the skills for utilising artefacts and other museum resources.
Questioning objects
Asking questions about objects, classifying them and deriving information from close observation can significantly deepen understanding.
 "What is it?" or "What date is it?" are not necessarily the best questions to ask first (see Box 6).
These two questions alone, paradoxically, may actually stop further historical enquiry in its tracks, as pupils may feel that once an object has been labelled and identified, there is little more to be said about it.
 "What is it made of?" and "How was it made?" are far better starting points and can lead on to the extraction of a great deal of information about the people and the society that produced it.
Many objects offer clues that tell us how they were made — an air bubble in a piece of mouth-blown glass, or the tell-tale edge that the join in the mould has left all around a cast-iron object, or the impression of a paw print left by a stray cat on a Roman clay roof tile.
Items such as these indicate just how much information objects can carry about the processes of their creation.
Some questions may be answered from the object itself.
Other questions may lead on to further enquiry and research.
Using objects calls for close observation, and allows pupils to develop hypotheses "What could it have been for?" 
 "How did they use it?" 
 "Is it genuine or a replica?" 
 "Which of two objects is earlier?" 
It calls on pupils to test their ideas against the evidence, and to give reasons.
It forces them to tease out information from inanimate objects.
Comparing two objects, or sequencing a number of objects is an activity that can help to deepen understanding of change and continuity.
Historical objects provide links with the people who made and used them.
Actually handling an old object can provide a tangible link with the past.
Objects ought to lead to investigations about the society that produced them and the people who used them.
Objects frequently provide a link with very ordinary people in the past, the sort of people who may have left few other records of themselves (see Box 7).
Where are historical objects to be found?
Some common, fairly recent objects may be brought into school by pupils, or may be fairly easily acquired from junk shops, or as loans from parents or the elderly, although prices are rising even for twentieth-century objects.
It is not necessary for every school to have its own collection, however, especially as old objects require care and conservation.
Certainly for earlier periods the rarity and high monetary value of items will place them beyond the reach of schools.
Replicas offer one possible channel, and many museum shops and heritage  shops sell these.
Replicas are very useful for reconstruction activities.
A class can fill and light a replica pottery Roman oil lamp, whereas a 2000-year-old original would need to be handled with great care.
But schools should not rely continually on replicas, and when they are used the fact that they are copies should be acknowledged.
As was emphasised earlier "Is it genuine?" is an important question, but there is a real need for pupils to come into contact with genuine, quality artefacts, that are some of the best examples of their kind, and this involves regular visits to the nearest general museum, to do work in depth on particular groups of genuine old objects.
Museum education services
Many museums offer schools on-site object handling sessions, organised by a professional museum education officer.
Teachers should certainly take advantage of these services where available.
Close first-hand contact with a small number of genuine artefacts is of tremendous value, allowing pupils to see and touch, and to develop techniques of questioning.
Introductory handling sessions followed by work in the galleries generally allow pupils to get far more benefit from a museum visit than use of the exhibition galleries alone, where objects may be displayed behind glass.
Museum loan services to schools are another useful resource for history teaching.
Boxes of objects and associated material can be borrowed for use in the classroom.
A class doing the Home Front, for example, could borrow a box containing gas masks, ARP (Air Raid Protection) equipment, a ration book and other associated period objects.
When using museum loan services, history teachers should also take advantage of any support offered by a museum's education staff.
In-service courses, for instance, are offered by many museum education services, and can show teachers how to get the full potential from an item.
Some museum education officers will also travel out to a school with a handling collection and conduct sessions in school.
This could be especially useful as preparation before a museum visit.
Using groups of objects
Just as small groups of documents are often far more useful to the history teacher than the single source, so artefacts often yield their greatest potential when grouped together.
Sequencing
Sequencing objects can help to develop ideas of chronology, and concepts of change and continuity.
Groupings of objects can highlight similarity and difference between different periods and cultures.
Grouping objects of the same period
Examining a number of artefacts of the same period can help to build up a composite picture of a society and culture.
This calls for skills of synthesis.
Objects can also be used most successfully alongside documents and other sources.
Using objects in problem solving exercises
Small groups of objects can sometimes be most effectively used in problem solving activities.
These activities are sometimes offered by museum education services.
They can develop skills of deduction and evaluating evidence.
Pupils may be invited to play at being a detective to resolve some mystery, or they might investigate the contents of a seaman's chest, a collection of craftsman's tools, or a doctor's bag, or a lady's valise, for example to help pupils to build up a picture of the people who used them.
Using artefacts in living history and recreations
At museums or historic buildings children, often dressed in costume, may be able to use and handle old equipment — old washing equipment, for instance, or Victorian schoolroom equipment.
Museums and historic buildings
It is important that field trips and museum and site visits form an integral part of the school curriculum for history (Report National Curriculum History working group)
Ideally an out-of-school visit of some kind is desirable in nearly every history study.
This could involve use of the local environment, making use of a relevant local site or sites in the locality, or it could involve a visit to a major historic site, building or museum which offers an example of the best of its kind.
Site visits and museum visits should be a regular feature in the schemes of work for history.
It is important, too, that a particular class group or year group should enjoy varied experiences on different visits.
They must be allowed to benefit fully from the rich experiences that museum and site visits can offer.
Museums, historic buildings and historical sites and places of historic interest are key resources for history teaching.
There is a vast range, and the facilities and opportunities offered by these vary considerably.
Ideally, if finance permitted, there would be a site visit, or perhaps several visits for every history topic.
Teachers will wish to use local examples near at hand, in order to relate the themes and issues of history directly to the pupil's own area, and also because encouraging appreciation of the built heritage is a key objective of history teaching (appreciating history all around us).
At some stage  teachers will also wish to take groups further afield to see examples that are some of the best of their kind.
If there is a good general historical museum within the region, offering wide ranging collections, then this is a resource that pupils should return to many times over the years, to pursue different enquiries.
Whatever the topic covered, museums and historic sites offer pupils the genuine article, whether it is a Roman sandal or a nineteenth-century crinolene, an English country house or a medieval castle.
Going on a site visit widens pupils' horizons and offers stimulation and "hands-on" experiences that the classroom cannot provide.
Reports of the National Curriculum History Committees in both England and Wales have stressed the importance of museum visits and site visits for the teaching of National Curriculum history.
Objects and buildings made by people in the past offer a direct link with the past.
Site visits also generally offer teachers an excellent mechanism for covering all of the required key elements in the "PESC" formula (the political/military, social, economic, and religious/cultural aspects of a topic or period).
A visit to a country house for instance will probably include reference to some of the social groups and classes of the period under study (upstairs/downstairs, the estate workers, the craft or factory workers who produced many of the goods seen in the house); the role of the gentry as leaders and rulers of their society can be covered; there will be ample scope for looking at the economic and technological aspects of life in the period, especially if the house is related to its setting and the surrounding estate and countryside that supported it; finally there will be objects or rooms in the house which relate to cultural or religious life in the period.
Active learning through site visits
A visit to a museum, historical building or site of historical importance should involve far more than passive looking and listening or sightseeing.
In the 1980s there has been a general move in museum education circles towards active learning experiences on site.
This move towards child-centred experiences has been further encouraged by initiatives such as GCSE (General Certificate of Secondary Education), TVEI (Technical and Vocational Educational Initiative), CPVE (Certificate of Prevocational Education) and so on.
Increasingly the guided tour or the teacher-dominated exposition is being replaced or supplemented by activities, experiences and exercises demanding greater participation or thought from the pupil.
Activities on the site visit
A range of on-site activities can be carried out during a visit.
These may include information gathering, problem solving, participation in workshops, completing a task sheet, taking part in practical activities, creative work, handling and touching museum objects, looking at related documents or pictures, listening to music or participating in a tape recorded tour, or listening to a talk from an education officer.
Some sites offer the potential for role-play, drama or an empathetic exercise, or even a full "living history" experience, where pupils wear historic costume and carry out historical activities.
Other activities may include following a trail.
Educational visits involve doing and experiencing, as well as looking and listening.
Information collecting
Using a site visit as an information collecting exercise is one strategy adopted by many groups.
This will be most successful if advance preparation has been carried out.
Tasks should be clearly defined and every pupil must be clear about what is expected of him.
On a large site pupils will not be able to cover everything in the time available, so pupils can be divided into groups and instructed to investigate different topics or features.
Motivation is often increased if it is made clear to a group that they are covering a topic on behalf of the whole class and that their results will be shared by the rest of the class.
After the visit the information recorded by the groups needs to be pooled.
The process of sharing "their" information with others has a constructive role to play.
It involves further active learning, calling for skills of presentation and communication, and also of listening, and questioning on the part of other groups.
Above all it takes seriously the work done by the pupils on site, and incorporates it into further classwork.
The exercise is not simply completed and then forgotten.
The process as well as the final product is important.
Working as a team, and working in unfamiliar surroundings are important.
Preparation for an information collecting exercise
(1) How will information be gathered?
Discuss with the pupils ways of gathering information: listening; looking; handling and touching, feeling; perhaps tasting or smelling; seeing how things work; seeing how things are constructed; measuring and surveying; asking questions and discussing; reading; looking at associated documents, or museum publications; re-enactment and recreation; using the imagination.
(2) How will the information be recorded?
Discuss with pupils various techniques of recording information during a visit: making notes; making sketches; making a plan; noting down measurements, etc.; taking photographs; using a video camera; speaking into a cassette recorder; recording various sounds on the site; brass rubbings or stone rubbings; artwork of various kinds; collecting vocabulary to describe the place; completing questions on a worksheet; taking compass bearings.
(3) What equipment do we need to take?
Following on from these discussions, prepare a checklist of the equipment the group will need to take: pencils and field notebooks; clipboards; graph paper for plans; paper and crayons/charcoal for sketching; tape measure; compass; other art materials; camera; video camera; tape recorder.
Problem-solving activities
Problem solving is a strategy that has proved useful, especially with older pupils at Key Stages 3 and 4.
In essence problem solving presents a new and challenging angle on a site or feature.
It may involve role-play, or skills of presentation.
It will certainly involve close observation and careful thought (see Boxes 8 and 9).
Every site is different and the possibilities offered will vary, but problem solving offers teachers a transferable method that can be adapted to most sites.
On most sites there will be dozens of possibilities.
Some of these may offer opportunities which lean more towards science, technology or maths work — drawing up and costing a cleaning contract for a historic building (How exactly does one clean that crystal chandelier?
What sort of cleaning method will avoid damaging those fragile old fabrics?
How did people in the past clean this room, and are old-fashioned methods or modern methods better?
How long does a job take?
How many hours of labour will be needed?).
These may be very useful where it is hoped to build in cross-curricular links.
However, often the history teacher will look for problem-solving exercises which involve historical objectives — historical understanding, empathy, synthesis, use of evidence, and so on.
On-site interpretation — talks, guided tours, audio-visual presentations, etc.
Some establishments offer talks, or guided tours (with a guide or with audio equipment) or audio visual presentations.
The teacher should always preview these to determine if they are suitable, and assess if the language level, content, and so on is suitable.
Often most benefit is gained if the teacher goes over key points with the group afterwards to check on understanding.
If there is a museum classroom the group can gather there to recap on what they have learned, towards the end of the visit.
It is important that the teacher should find out exactly what the museum, site or building offers.
Certain museums offer a set "visitor experience" , at others there is flexibility or choice over what is offered (see Box 10).
At some museums interpretation is offered, in whole or in part, through people in role carrying out craft work or demonstrations, or talking to visitors.
The Museum of the North at Beamish, for instance, is one where people provide the main interpretation on the site.
In these cases it can be useful to know whether the interpreters are instructed to stay in role at all times or whether they may step out of role.
This might be relevant for National Curriculum history Attainment Target 2 on interpretations of history, for instance.
Wherever there is a museum education officer, it is well worth requesting advice or on-site help for an educational visit.
Museum  education officers are professionals with considerable experience of the educational use of museums.
If he or she is apprised in advance of your particular aims and objectives, and work the pupils have already done on the topic, and so on, the session can often be very carefully tailored to get maximum value from the visit.
The education officer will also pitch his or her talk at a suitable level for the age group concerned, something that is not always achieved by an ordinary guide.
Education officers are aware of many possibilities for using and interpreting the site, and can often pass on methods or good ideas that have proved successful with other groups.
Worksheets
The use of worksheets on a site or museum visit evokes varied responses among teachers and museum education officers.
Some oppose the use of worksheets, others make regular use of them.
Others make occasional use of them to structure observation and enquiry (see Box 11).
There is no doubt that some worksheets are simply banal, and it may be these that have given them a bad name — especially the quiz type that simply ask "How many?" or "What?" 
Pupils can become bored if asked to complete a lengthy worksheet at every site.
However, worksheets can be useful.
They can structure activity and direct attention to particular topics.
They can focus on historical concepts like change over time.
They can convey important information as well as ask questions, which can enhance understanding of the site.
Many can be extremely imaginative, and attractively illustrated.
Some can develop higher order thinking in a highly constructive way — for instance pupils could be asked to compare two features that are not adjacent to each other, but are found in different parts of the building.
Pupils must not become so intent on filling in the answers, that they ignore other important factors such as the "feel" and atmosphere of the  site.
Direct experience of "the real thing" must after all remain the primary purpose of any site visit.
Organisation during the visit can play a part.
Worksheets could be distributed in the second half of the visit, once the group has had an opportunity to explore and react to the site.
Much will depend on the particular aims and objectives of the teacher.
Generally, however, worksheets should ask questions that require direct observation on site.
They should not consist purely of lower order questions, "What?" 
 "How many?" , etc. (e.g. "How many arrow slits are there in the north wall?" ), but should include questions of "Why?" and "How?" (e.g. "Explain why it is so difficult for an attacker to get in through the castle gate" ).
Worksheets can be especially useful if they encourage the pupil to compare one feature with another, especially features in different places on the site.
They can also include questions which ask pupils to put themselves in the place of some person in the past.
They may include a problem-solving activity.
At the end a creative response may be required.
Generally there should be some question which asks pupils to synthesise the data they have gathered at different parts of the site.
Some worksheets may begin with simple lower order questions, leading on to a higher order question.
For instance, after completing some lower order questions about individual features in a Victorian gaol, pupils were asked to synthesise this information: "Explain why it is so difficult to escape from this prison." 
On a complex site, rather than try to cover the whole site, it may be far better to structure a worksheet around the investigation of one particular feature, or one particular theme.
Many museums employing specialist education officers offer teachers sample worksheets.
Museum professionals know the site and the collections very well, and their productions may often prove helpful (especially to teachers who may be less familiar with the site or museum).
They frequently offer useful ideas and strategies, but should usually be considered as examples only.
Inevitably they will not suit every need, but in many cases they can be adapted, used as models or as a source of ideas for a teacher-produced worksheet, which can target particular objectives and be tailored for a particular age or ability range.
An alternative to the questionnaire-type of worksheet, is the field booklet or pamphlet with pre-selected headings and blank spaces where the pupils can jot down their own notes on particular features, or make plans and annotated sketches.
Increasingly pupils who have prepared in advance for the visit may arrive armed with their own list of questions and topics that they wish to investigate.
The computer or concept keyboard is becoming a useful tool in the preparation work for site visits.
Pupils could use the computer to prepare for their visit and arrive provided with printouts  of data-sheets or lists of questions.
Data collected during the visit could be input onto a database on return to school.
For instance, before a visit to a castle, pupils could draw up a list of features often found in castles and investigate how many of the features their chosen castle possessed.
Has it got: a moat; a gatehouse; outer walls; concentric defences; projecting towers; a drawbridge; portcullis; draw bars at the gate; a keep; towers; murder holes?
Where is it? on a hill; by the sea; at a river crossing; on an important route.
Data about different castles could be put into the computer and the different castles compared.
This exercise would be especially useful if it was used in work looking at the development of castles, from motte and bailey, to stone keep, to sophisticated fortress.
Using other resources on site
The history teacher adopting an evidence based approach will regularly use document sources in the classroom, but there can be an added advantage in looking at relevant documents or pictures in the historic surroundings themselves.
Many historic buildings and museums offer their own resource packs.
If there is a museum education officer, he or she may be able to offer help or resources.
Period music could be played or performed on site.
A poem or a literary extract might be read during the visit.
Site visits can offer valuable cross-curricular links.
One group of children built working models of medieval seige equipment in their technology class (e.g. a trebuchet and a mangonel).
One of the aims in technology was to evaluate different designs by a series of tests.
The exercise was given added spice when pupils carried out their tests (to see which machine could hurl a missile the furthest) on a site visit to a real medieval castle where such machines would have been used.
Drama, and role-play on site
On occasions pupils may engage in drama and role-play during a site visit.
This is easiest at places which allow schools access at times exclusively for educational visits, or where some special space can be set aside where a group can work undisturbed.
Often it is easier to arrange this out of season than at the height of the busy tourist period.
The museum staff should always be informed of your intentions in advance.
Some museums will offer specialist help for this activity.
Drama work in a historic setting need not involve a polished "performance" but rather a workshop situation where every pupil is encouraged to enter into the thoughts and the feelings of a historical character, or perhaps several characters in turn.
It may involve the use of relevant historic documents.
It will certainly involve a lot of discussion and asking questions, and an appreciation of the setting.
It is excellent for developing empathy (putting themselves in the shoes of a person from the past), or perhaps exploring an event from different viewpoints (to target interpretations of history).
Imagination can be stimulated by the setting itself and also through awakening the senses, touching objects, experiencing sounds, tastes and smells, perhaps even playing a short excerpt of period music.
Organised events, "living history sessions" , activities, theatre in education workshops, etc.
An increasing number of educational days or events are being offered by bodies such as English Heritage at historic sites.
These usually involve pupils wearing historical costume and carrying out tasks of a historical nature appropriate to the site.
Pupils may become medieval monks (or nuns) in a monastery, listening to an address by the abbot, taking part in worship, acting as medieval scribes, or doing more mundane tasks such as gardening or preparing food and eating a medieval meal.
Many smaller museums offer similar shorter sessions, where pupils can carry out certain activities appropriate to the historical site in question — such as lessons in a Victorian classroom, washday or cookery sessions in a cottage or kitchen, or working as a servant in a large country house.
If it fits in with your scheme of work, these may be extremely useful at Key Stages 1 and 2.
For older pupils, theatre in education workshops may be more appropriate.
Many historic sites and museums will also be willing to cooperate in events and performances at historic sites devised and organised by the schools themselves.
Handling sessions, workshops, etc.
Where there is a museum education officer, pupils will often be offered sessions handling objects, or participating in other activities.
A considerable number of museums have special handling collections, usually drawn from the reserve collection.
Very often pupils will benefit from the opportunity to see and handle, and discuss a few selected artefacts at close hand, before going on to work in the display galleries.
Sometimes the sessions may take place in the galleries themselves.
There are advantages in being able to relate the objects handled to other items on display.
In other cases, especially if space is limited, handling sessions will take place in a special classroom, where there may be other related resource material available and where practical follow-up activities can be carried out.
At Warrington museum, for instance, pupils were offered opportunities to handle Roman tiles and pottery.
Careful examination of one roof tile revealed the impression of an animal paw-print.
This offered clues about the process by which they were made.
They may have been left outside to dry before being fired.
Because this museum possessed its own pottery kiln, pupils went on to make and decorate their own clay roof tiles, which were then fired in the kiln.
Museums and the lower ability pupil
Site visits are of great value with the so-called "lower ability" or "remedial pupil" .
They offer valuable sensory experiences, and opportunities.
However techniques need to be developed to make best use of the opportunities.
The visit may need to be broken down into a series of short and varied experiences.
It may be necessary to stop at intervals to go over certain key points in order to check on the degree of understanding, or to reinforce a point while it is fresh in the memory.
Full use needs to be made of tactile and sensory experiences.
Site visits can awaken motivation, and pupils learn by direct experiences which are not dependent on reading ability.
Cross-curricular possibilities
In museums or on site visits pupils may learn in ways not possible in the classroom.
The "hands-on" experiences and direct sensory experiences are unique strengths of museum education.
Museums and site visits also offer oportunities for learning across the curriculum.
Nor are the curricular links only with humanities or "arts" subjects.
There are many excellent opportunities for work in science or technology during an out-of-school visit.
Very often the experience of a site visit can be enhanced by cross-curricular work.
A visit to a  historical site may be enhanced by carrying out artwork or creative writing or drama work.
Pupils sometimes respond to a site more fully if their senses are heightened.
There is also a strong practical argument for involving teachers of other subjects.
Out-of-school visits are expensive and can be disruptive of the curriculum and of school routines.
Therefore the more subjects that can benefit, the greater the chance there is of such visits taking place.
With the advent of the National Curriculum, many museums will be able to offer advice on what subjects and attainment targets can be covered by a visit, and at what levels.
The museum education officer may well be able to suggest combinations of subjects applicable to a particular age group.
Primary schools will of course carry out a range of cross-curricular work, but there can be great benefits from this approach at secondary level also.
Preparation and follow-up
To get full value from a visit, adequate preparation and follow-up are vital.
This involves preparing the pupils for the visit as well as dealing with all the practicalities of the arrangements for transport, bookings, and so on(see Boxes 12 & 13).
If it is at all possible a teacher should preview the place to be visited, though this may not always be possible with places at a distance.
Most charging sites and museums offer teachers free admission for a preview visit.
There should be liaison with the staff of the museum, and especially with the museum education officer if there is one.
Most museums offer relevant publications, guide books, document packs, slides, teachers' notes etc. which can be purchased in advance.
Some museums provide teachers' information packs, which can contain sample worksheets, a plan or gallery guide, and other background material.
Teachers and helpers who are not familiar with the site also need to be briefed.
Pupils need an introduction to the topic, and may need background information to appreciate what they will see on site.
It is vital that the teacher make clear what they will do on the visit, and what activities they are expected to carry out.
Reminders about safety may be needed on some sites and agreements about appropriate standards of behaviour may need to be negotiated.
It is also important that pupils arrive on site appropriately dressed if they are to be comfortable.
Appropriate clothing may be determined by how much of the site is under cover, whether there is any walking between places, the nature of the building, or if there is any special experience, like going down a mine.
Many historic sites and buildings can be cold even in summer, and warm clothing and appropriate footwear may be needed.
Follow-up work will ensure that the site visit is integrated with that term's scheme of work.
A visit may raise questions and offer topics that will involve further enquiry and the use of further resources.
This is the point when museum packs, document packs and other resources will be most useful.
Groups may need to present and share their findings with other pupils.
Results of investigations and the like will need to be written up.
A visit may lead to a display, or an audio-visual presentation or perhaps drama, role-play or empathetic work.
Presentation of work
After the visit there is a strong case for giving such activities a high profile within the school, through written reports, exhibitions and other presentations, for instance at school open days and parents' evenings.
A good school is one which provides opportunities for such visits.
On occasions museums will appreciate feedback from teachers about the results of the visit.
An invitation to see work resulting from the visit will often be appreciated.
Thank you letters from the children themselves, a note from the teacher outlining the benefits of the visit, or even a sample of the work produced as a result of the visit will be extremely welcome.
Video, television broadcasts and film
The visual image has largely replaced the written word as our principal means of communication (R.W. Unwin)
Today's pupils operate in an environment where the visual media are paramount.
Television, film and video have the capacity to command attention and often pupils have a positive attitude towards television or video.
The moving image has immediacy and can offer vivid detail.
It is useful too for pupils with limited reading abilities.
Video can enhance the study of history in the classroom, and for many teachers it is perceived as one of the key resources for learning.
As primary source material too, for the study of the twentieth century, the moving image is a valid and important form of evidence.
When using video film or broadcasts for history, pupils should be encouraged to make the distinction between primary and secondary sources.
It should not be assumed, however, that the distinction will be immediately clear to all pupils.
Key skills need to be taught, not assumed.
Indeed recent surveys by the National Foundation for Educational Research have revealed that there is often a great deal of confusion in pupils' minds, particularly as so many educational  programmes for history now employ dramatic reconstruction.
In a recent survey carried out on over 300 pupils aged between 10 and 11 years, when pupils were shown an extract from the Yorkshire television series "How we used to live" , only 40 per cent of pupils identified black and white archive film as representing "the past" .
Ten per cent suggested that the use of black and white film meant the film-maker could not afford colour!(results reported in The Times, 14 October 1991).
It is the history teacher who will have to bring out the distinction.
 "When was this made?" is a crucial question for discussion of follow-up work.
Effective use of video
Film, television output, and educational productions are mainly used in schools in the form of video, as this is cheap, easy to operate, and versatile in the ways in which it can be used (see Box 14).
A great deal of video material is now readily available: documentaries, dramatisations and feature films, educational broadcasts, and archive film (which includes official war film, newsreels, amateur film, and more recently old television material).
Material is often also available on loan.
Where educational broadcasts are used, in the majority of cases it will be better to record a programme, rather than watch it live, not just for the convenience of the school timetable, but because video, as opposed to a live broadcast, is a more versatile educational tool.
Using television and video effectively for teaching history, must involve far more than the passive watching that most pupils engage in when they watch television at home.
A number of techniques can be employed to make the experience more valuable.
Alan Farmer suggested that with a vivid feature film, children should be allowed to watch it through without a single interruption.
Afterwards he recommended that the class should go over selected extracts, looking at them with a worksheet.
At other times a teacher may wish to use only a very short sequence.
Video can be stopped and re-started.
This is one of the most effective ways of using video in the classroom.
After running a short video sequence, a question and answer session, or analysis of some key point, or a discussion can take place.
This procedure also allows the teacher to check on the degree of understanding.
It may enable him or her to highlight some salient point, or to focus pupils' attention on a particular question as they view the next sequence.
Modern video recorders with their freeze-frame facility offer further possibilities.
The teacher can stop the video, re-run a short sequence, and then freeze on one particular frame.
Exploration of body language can be illuminating.
With the frame frozen the attention of the class might be drawn to a particular gesture, or to an expression on someone's face.
Or they might discuss the juxtaposition of certain symbols, or certain strong visual images.
This can be especially useful with archive film.
Another useful device, which offers a check on understanding, is to play the sequence through initially with the sound track running.
The video is then played through a second time without the sound.
Pupils working in pairs or groups are required to operate the equipment, and to record a commentary on to audio tape.
Even pupils as young as 6 have been able to carry out this exercise.
With film or video there are also opportunities for investigating how the media have presented a particular topic, or a particular personality.
Video has a useful role to play in "interpretations of history" (Attainment Target 2 in the National Curriculum for history).
One teacher showed a brief extract from a historical film that had proved a great box office success.
 "That wasn't history, that was Hollywood!" he exclaimed as he kicked off an examination of interpretations of history.
All of these "intensive" methods of using film and video can introduce greater depth of understanding than passive viewing, and help to realise the potential of this extremely powerful medium.
Types of film and video available
Educational broadcasts
Many of today's educational broadcasts for history are extremely professional.
Usually the programme is intended for a certain age group.
It will generally be carefully structured.
Key points can be clearly and carefully made.
It may often form part of a series, although history teachers need not be tied to utilising the whole series.
In a busy timetable, video may be only one of a number of varied resources that the teacher wants to use.
Educational broadcasts are secondary sources (though some programmes may contain extracts from archive film).
General historical documentaries or historical dramatisations
Often these can provide extremely useful teaching material, despite the fact that they have been produced for the general public, rather than with a school's audience in mind.
The length of these broadcasts may be a problem, though perhaps a film could be shown in its entirety through a school history society rather than during a history lesson.
Even if the entire programme is too lengthy or unsuitable for classroom use, there may well be short sequences which could prove useful in teaching history.
Recent concessions on recording television programmes have made it much easier to use this type of material in education.
Schools can now apply for licences to record any television programme, not just educational broadcasts.
Many videos can also be hired.
As with educational broadcasts these are secondary sources, someone's interpretation of the past.
Archive footage
This is a source that is of course only available for the twentieth century.
Archive footage is becoming more widely available.
Also television documentaries are making increasing use of archive film from the stores of national and regional film archives.
Much early archive film is silent film.
Where there is a commentary this was generally dubbed on.
It is important too, to appreciate the limitations of early film, and the technical problems of shooting sequences.
Much war footage was filmed far behind the actual front lines.
Many sequences were staged.
There is a famous sequence of "Going over the top" in the First World War which has been shown to be a staged sequence.
When viewing film it is important to bear in mind how it would have been produced (see Box 16).
Creators of film and documentaries sometimes drew upon stock shots, and the actual sequence shown is not always what it purports to be.
Twentieth-century archive film is direct evidence, but it is also a producer's or director's creation, sometimes biased, and often an interpretation of events.
All film needs critical evaluation.
Film is something that has been edited and this should always be borne in mind when using it.
Despite these caveats archive film is extremely useful.
Indeed it can be an excellent vehicle for exploring bias or interpretations of history, precisely because of the considerations outlined above.
Usually the teacher will use only a short sequence.
This is primary evidence (material produced in the past), though it may well also offer a particular interpretation of an event.
Film evidence can be extremely useful in investigating how the media both influence and reflect contemporary events and opinion.
Film in a foreign language can be usable, even if the sound track is unintelligible.
Focus on visual information may be sharpened, when pupils are not trying to follow a sound commentary at the same time.
Sometimes, even speech in an unintelligible foreign language can be illuminating.
The rhythms and tones of a public speaker, for instance, can help pupils to appreciate his techniques of rousing an audience, even if we cannot understand the words.
Period amateur film
This is a primary source potentially as useful as archive film, although often of lower technical quality.
Sometimes amateur film has a value for local history.
Occasionally amateur film is the only visual record of a particular event or topic.
Technical deficiencies may irritate, but judicious selection of a short sequence can provide useful evidential material.
Extracts can be shown, without the sound commentary if necessary.
It may be especially useful, if used alongside other types of evidence.
Computers for history teaching
Computer technology is experiencing rapid change.
When computers were first introduced in schools, they were the preserve of the maths or science departments or of special computer studies courses.
However, as the use of computers has spread rapidly to large sectors of work and business, there has been a growing trend to encourage the use of computers in schools across the curriculum.
Information technology has become one of the cross-curricular requirements of National Curriculum.
The teacher of history will need to plan the use of resources so that some parts of the scheme of work are delivered through computers.
Databases
One of the earliest uses of computers in history teaching involved the use of database software.
This is a highly structured software where data is divided into fields.
The first applications therefore were with archive material, which was itself highly structured and which was available in quantity.
Documents like census ennumerator's schedules, parish registers and registers of all kinds, some shipping records, certain kinds of crime and punishment records, and so on, are highly suitable for this sort of software.
Historical data can also be collected from a range of other less structured records and diverse kinds of sources, and input by pupils themselves under agreed headings.
The chief value of the computer in this instance lies in its ability to search a large number of records very quickly.
As software has improved computers can also output the results in the form of bar-charts, pie-charts, scattergraphs, and so on.
Database programmes make it easier to use "bulk" material like a census in the classroom, which previously presented considerable handling and organisational problems for the teacher.
It is not necessary to use very large databases.
A sample of a few hundred census records is often just as useful as a database of several thousands.
There are many ways of interrogating the data.
Pupils can be given question sheets and required to carry out searches of the database to find the answers.
Databases are only as useful as the questions pupils ask of them.
Some use of databases involves mainly lower order questioning ( "How many people had work connected with the railway?" 
 "What was the average number of children per family in 1881?" ).
One means of engendering higher order questioning of a more "historical" character has been to encourage pupils to construct hypotheses and then test these against the evidence.
This sort of work may involve as much discussion and "off screen" work as actual use of the computer (see Box 17).
Some data disks are available in commercial packages, and indeed some record offices offer packages.
Teachers' groups or pupils could also create their own databases using local sources obtained from their county archives office, after first seeking permission from the record office whose source material it is.
Computer simulations
An increasing number of history simulations are available.
Children can search an area of sea for the wreck of the Mary Rose, for instance, decide on a site for a medieval castle, or play the part of archaeologists excavating an archaeological site, deciding where to excavate and evaluating the evidence of the finds.
Certainly these can motivate pupils and offer variety and enjoyment.
The best are those that do not simply rely on a historical setting, but encourage historical  skills, evaluation and understanding.
In general they are most useful for Key Stages 2 or 3.
Many simulations tend to be rather too simplistic for work at GCSE level, at least among the range currently available.
Even a less than ideal package can offer useful insights, however.
A group of fifth form pupils when asked for their response after using a simulation on the Arab-Israeli situation, remarked that one thing it had demonstrated was how easy it was for the countries to slide into war!
Telex-type simulations
These are programmes that release screens of information or sources at timed intervals.
They are particularly useful for events of a narrative kind, a battle, the course of a war, a plague or cholera epidemic, etc.
The screens can consist of either information, or, perhaps more useful still to the history teacher, of actual contemporary sources.
The course of a cholera epidemic, for instance, can be reported and its causes investigated by means of excerpts from documents written by people at the time.
These are useful programmes also in that they can utilise a wide range of archive source material,(excerpts from letters, diaries, newspaper accounts, official reports etc).
They are not restricted, as formal databases are, to record material that is highly structured.
Some record offices are producing disks, but disks can also be produced by a teacher or teacher's group.
Using telex programmes
One effective way of using telex-type programmes is to cast pupils in the role of a newspaper editor and his staff.
This exercise was carried out by a third year group in a secondary school studying a cholera epidemic.
Reports are coming into the newsroom of a cholera epidemic in a nearby town.
As reports flood in [in this case they are drawn from contemporary accounts]groups must produce a front page story about the cholera.
Groups will also need to organise themselves and delegate different tasks in order to produce their newspaper by a strict deadline.
You must evaluate your evidence, check it against other sources and decide if it is reliable.
Your readers will also expect the paper to investigate the causes of the epidemic
The process as well as the final product was important in this exercise.
It helped to develop skills of cooperation and communication.
It also encouraged historical skills, such as handling and evaluation of evidence, investigation of cause and effect and empathy.
Working under pressure to meet a deadline had a motivating effect.
Viewdata programmes
Viewdata programmes offer great potential for history teaching.
 "Data disks" of original source materials can be compiled for instance, allowing pupils to access pieces of evidence on particular topics.
In one data disk on the First World War, for instance, pupils were able to access an official report of an attack, an entry in a private diary and also to see how a newspaper reported the incident.
An advantage is that the software (which is usually menu driven) allows pupil choice over what is called up.
Multiple screens can offer a range of sources and screens could also include questions and exercises, historical information, or secondary sources as well as primary source material.
Careful structuring of the disks can allow key concepts to be targeted.
Unlike structured databases, Viewdata is useful for a great variety of written source materials.
More recently software has been produced which combines the characteristics of viewdata screens with the sort of search capability usually found on databases.
Appian Way, for instance, offer data disks that can conduct searches and produce material relevant to specific topics.
Teachers can even search on a skills basis, to produce material that would target change and continuity, or cause and consequence.
Authoring programmes, concept keyboard, etc.
Although concept keyboard was initially developed for special education, this is a type of software with a far greater potential, which could be used from Key Stage 1 up to Key Stage 3.
Using authoring software such as Touch Explorer Plus, this offers great potential for the teaching of history.
Concept keyboards allow areas of an overlay, which could for example be a historical map or a picture, to be touched by the pupil, calling up associated sub-screens of data or questions about the feature in question.
Screens can be created at several levels, allowing for rising levels of difficulty in one case or for thematic treatment, or for a mix of information and questions and exercises.
Other computer based variations on the basic concept use a mouse-driven pointer to select key areas of an image.
Genesis for the Archimedes is one of these.
One advantage of this range of programs is that teachers or groups of teachers could produce local teaching materials for themselves.
There are endless possibilities for creating teaching materials.
Pupils could select areas of a historical map, for example, and call up further screens of related data or sources — the census records of families who lived in a particular house, perhaps.
Spreadsheets
Speadsheets have not so far figured largely as a resource for history, but they could be used with certain types of documentary sources.
Like databases they require source material that is structured in format.
One possible further use in history might be in modelling what might have happened.
By inputting alternative values, pupils can investigate other possible outcomes.
Wordprocessors, desk-top publishing software, etc.
Although these are general programmes, whose value is not confined to history, the use of wordprocessors for the output of some written work can motivate pupils, and encourage pride in presentation.
The use of non-standard typefaces, such as gothic, to produce historical material is a simple device that has proved highly successful at Key Stage 2.
Other computer resources
Interactive video as its name suggests gives pupils control over what is accessed.
Although the production of disks is expensive at present, the situation could change very rapidly.
Other software uses computers to stop and start ancillaries, such as tape recorders or videos.
There is also other equipment which can be used in distance learning situations.
No doubt there will be many further developments, but already there is a great range of material available for history teaching.
Classroom management for the use of computers
A new style of classroom management may be required when using computers in history teaching.
Arrangements will depend on how many computers are available.
A single computer may be constantly available alongside other resources as a reference tool, or for some simulations.
Better provided classrooms may have a number of computers, but groups may have to be rotated in turn to use a computer, while other groups carry out other tasks.
Generally small groups of children working together stimulate each other.
Effective history teaching may also require that pupils spend as much time away from the screen, discussing, hypothesising and analysing their findings, as actually working at the keyboard.
Indeed one possible advantage offered by computers is that they free children from lower order tasks and allow far more time for higher order thinking — instead of laboriously drawing a graph, pupils have more time for analysis of a graph produced by the computer.
Teaching strategies need to adapt to this new situation, to exploit the potential offered by computers.
Computers should also complement not replace other resources, and where sources are offered on screen, there should also be "hard copy" examples of what the original documents actually look like.
Many packages offer supporting booklets or documents as well as disks.
Teacher produced resources
Computer resources can be created by teachers, or pupils, as well as purchased from commercial sources, using viewdata, telex or database software.
This has the great advantage of allowing local history materials to be used.
While few individual teachers will have time for extensive projects, there are many possibilities for teachers' groups, or for collaborative projects with local record offices or museums.
Permission should always be sought from the institution concerned for the use of its material in this way.
Games
At one time most games relevant to history were board games.
Many of these were war games which involved the movement of fighting forces and resources over a map on the board.
Some like "Diplomacy" , which is set in pre-First World War Europe, involve pupils in negotiations with other "countries" , setting territorial goals, and forming (and often breaking) alliances.
Now computer-based games and simulations have replaced many of these.
Teachers may find history games valuable for occasional use.
Certainly too they may be extremely useful for the history club and after-school activities.
Perhaps the main value is in illustrating the complexity of cause and effect.
History has no inevitable outcomes.
Games show the cumulative importance of individual human decisions on events, and demonstrate that different decisions at particular points could have led to very different outcomes.
They are most useful if discussion is programmed in afterwards.
Books and printed sources
In the course of school history, pupils will need opportunities to use a wide range of secondary sources and printed material.
As well as books written specifically for school use, pupils should at some stage come into contact with biographies and memoirs, published diaries, historical fiction and some writings about local history.
They should be encouraged to consult basic reference books, such as the Inventory of Ancient Monuments, the Dictionary of National Biography and encyclopaedias.
The range of books used will increase over time, but introduction of these resources needs to be planned.
Work in history will also at times involve the use of libraries and reference libraries, record offices or local studies centres.
History teachers need to ensure that their pupils have the basic reference skills that will allow them to make effective use of books.
These skills should be taught not assumed.
They include the use of contents pages, index and glossary.
Pupils may need to know about ways of classifying books — the Dewey system in public libraries for instance.
In the later stages pupils need to know about the use of references, and in their own work should be encouraged to keep a record of the sources they have consulted.
They need practice at making notes when they have found information (see Box 18).
Contact with books and other printed material published in an earlier age is also important.
These are primary sources in their own right.
Handling and using them may give a sense of the past.
They will include government reports, travellers' descriptions and antiquarian books, trade directories, old newspapers, early school textbooks.
These will often be found in a local study centre, or the rare books section of a reference library, and local record offices in particular will have a wide range of early printed material as well as manuscript sources.
To use these effectively pupils need to be able to work out when a book was published.
Pupils should come to appreciate that all history books are interpretations of the past, that interpretations can vary, and that the best are those strongly rooted in evidence.
Twenty years ago history textbooks did consist principally of "text" .
Publishers today have provided teachers of history with a wide and varied range of books for class use.
Many of these are attractive, well-illustrated and include primary source material.
Books or packs which offer compilations of primary source materials have also become more plentiful, including those produced by local record offices and museums.
Peter Roberts writing in 1981 put in a plea for more textbooks that deal with the  processes of historical enquiry.
He pleaded for sources to be used for more than just illustration or comprehension.
Roberts stressed that if a textbook is to form the main staple of the course then it should teach historical procedures, as well as offering a historical narrative.
Increasingly, books for school use are targeting skills and concepts as well as content, though very few of the first wave of National Curriculum history titles, hurriedly rushed out by publishers, were in fact written after the final reports for history had been issued.
Not all teachers today use a single standard textbook as their staple material and many schools have difficulty affording class sets.
Many departments buy a varied selection of relevant books and source material and use these alongside teacher-produced resources.
These books need to be readily accessible to pupils, both in the classroom and in the school library.
A table or trolley of relevant books and resources could be constantly at hand when teaching history.
School library loan services can offer a wide range of material.
History around us — historic landscapes as a resource for history teaching
Britain offers a wealth of historic landscapes, townscapes, field systems, roads, tracks and routes, railways and canals, banks and boundaries, ancient woodlands, walls and hedges and old industrial sites, settlements which have been planned, settlements which have evolved over time.
In recent years the historical value of these has come to be appreciated.
At some stage the history teacher may want to tap into some of this.
Air photographs
Aerial photographs are often a useful way to start to approach these historic landscapes and townscapes.
The overall view is an aid to understanding, for example, seeing the grid pattern of streets of a medieval planned town, for instance .
Sometimes, too, features such as earthworks and cropmarks and patterns that are not easily visible on the ground become apparent from the air.
Aerial photography is a technique that has revolutionised the study of archaelogy, leading to many new discoveries.
Walking and fieldwork
The local historian W. G. Hopkins once claimed that every historian worth his salt should get mud on his boots.
Certainly fieldwalking is a valuable activity that can help pupils to appreciate the history around them.
They can literally walk in the footsteps of people in the past, walking a section of Roman road or an old packhorse track, or following the route of an abandoned railway, or perhaps storming a hill-fort or castle.
Fieldwork and field survey can follow on (see Box 19).
It might involve survey and dating of a length of hedge, by identifying and counting the shrub species it contains, a graveyard survey, or detailed survey work on an archaeological site or in a settlement.
Historical resources are complimentary.
Fieldwork in a historic landscape will often lead on to further research and document work to try to make sense of what has been found.
The use of theatre in education
In recent years a number of theatre-in-education groups have made an important contribution to the teaching of history (see Box 20).
Frequently the theatre-in-education group is associated with a historical site, although their workshops can stand alone and take place in school.
Often the "actors" are ex-teachers.
A series of workshop sessions can be commissioned either by a particular museum, or by a local authority.
These workshops are particularly valuable on a historical site that may be indistinct, puzzling and confusing, or extremely complicated.
The sessions take many forms, but include short, dramatic representations of what happened on a particular site, or characters in role.
Productions such as these should show a respect for evidence.
One advantage of the workshop approach, as opposed to a more formal dramatic presentation, is that the sequence can be stopped at any time.
A key sequence, vital for historical understanding, can easily be re-run.
The production can be halted at any point so that discussions and questions can take place.
The sessions are also highly varied and interactive.
Pupils are involved, answering questions, discussing a point, sometimes offering solutions to a problem, and usually at one point role-playing in the sequence.
Often in theatre in education there is a link person who has a number of key functions, in turn acting as presenter, teacher, questioner, comic relief, sometimes, indeed, pretending not to understand and needing to have points carefully explained.
This person introduces things, and often links different sequences, sometimes imparting information, sometimes questioning the pupils, or the actors in turn.
Music
The National Curriculum recommendations made several references to the use of music as a resource for history teaching.
This is an area together with art offering important cross-curricular links.
Fortunately today recordings of period music are now widely available, much of it performed on authentic period instruments.
There is no doubt that period music can enrich experience, add atmosphere and help to convey the experiences of people in past times.
Music can be extremely memorable, and the involvement of all the senses is a well-tried expedient.
Music allows pupils to appreciate the cultural contribution that different periods have made.
The introduction of a piece of music also covers the cultural/religious aspect of the political, economic, social and cultural requirement.
Pupils can be introduced to short pieces of period music in a history lesson.
Longer pieces might be played softly as background music on occasions to create atmosphere.
Pupils will also enjoy performing simple period music (playing medieval music on recorders and percussion instruments, for instance, or perhaps performing negro spirituals in a lesson about slavery).
Pupils will appreciate the distinctive elements of period music, if they are given opportunities to create their own music using elements/themes, rhythms from earlier music.
Music can also be an important means of communication.
One group of primary children were doing a pageant on the Celts and Romans.
How to convey the battle scene posed a problem.
Stage fights were considered but rejected.
Instead the class used percussion music to convey the clash between the two armies.
In primary schools learning will be seamless and music will fit naturally into the programme of activities.
In secondary schools the cooperation of the music department might be enlisted, and the music department there may well have a wider range of recordings to offer, or may be able to advise on suitable pieces.
It is possible to use music at historic sites.
(Just reflect how organ music playing softly can add to the atmosphere of a cathedral or religious building.)
Appropriate period music can be played on visits to a historic building, and some groups have staged wholescale performances at historic sites (see Box 21).
Many heritage establishments will be cooperative provided the matter is discussed in advance.