 

The Customs Union — Keith Penketh
Introduction
One of the major methods of achieving a regional economic bloc is to create a Customs Union (CU).
A CU arises when countries join together to abolish all restrictions on trade between themselves while maintaining a common external tariff on imports into the Union.
The formation of a CU certainly breaches the principle of universal free trade because it practices discrimination against non-members.
However, it reduces trade barriers between members of the CU and generally stimulates inter-bloc trade and reduces the share of trade with countries which are not in the Union.
As such a CU is an aid to the economic integration of its members, but may be harmful to the liberalisation of trade on a global basis.
In 1948 the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg formed Benelux which was a CU in industrial goods.
This method of integration was extended with the foundation of the ECSC in 1951, to establish a CU for coal and steel products between Benelux, France, Germany and Italy.
When the EEC was established in 1957 the objective of creating a CU was clearly spelt out in the Treaty of Rome.
Until the 1980s when the moves to create the SEM began to assume major importance, the formation of a CU was the main method used by the EC to integrate the economies of the member states.
The CU of the EC therefore forms a central and fundamental position in the economic integration of the Community.
With the enlargement of the EC, firstly by the accession of the UK, Ireland and Denmark in 1973, followed by Greece in 1981, and Spain and Portugal in 1986, the CU of the EC became the largest regional trading bloc in the world.
It is from this position that the EC is seeking to move on to deeper integration by the creation of the SEM and the movement towards EMU.
The Customs Union of the EC
A CU reduces tariffs to zero on intra-union trade, but on extra-union trade a Common External Tariff (CET) is adopted.
It is the CET which distinguishes a CU from a free-trade area.
With the latter form of regional economics association, nation states are free to adopt their own tariff levels upon goods imported from the rest of the world.
It is often claimed that a CU represents a movement towards freer trade.
However, participation in a CU does not  necessarily represent a freer trading regime for all participating countries.
There are two reasons for this.
Firstly, it is a consequence of averaging tariff levels to calculate the CET that some countries' post-union tariff levels (namely the CET) will be higher than pre-union tariff levels.
Secondly, as adjustments to the CET are not made following the entry of new members, there may be cases where a CET is significantly above pre-union tariff rates.
Agriculture in the United Kingdom is an example.
Imported largely duty free into the United Kingdom before accession, agricultural products were subject to a variable levy under CAP after accession.
This is hardly a characteristic of freer trade in goods.
Whether membership of a CU is from the single country viewpoint a step in the direction of freer trade depends upon the tariff levels which prevail before and after joining a CU.
Any decision in favour of participating in a CU depends upon the ultimate objectives of economic policy, namely what it is that countries are attempting to maximise.
Although it may be clear what countries are attempting to maximise — real income for example— there is no consistency as to the correct approach to adopt in evaluating the attainment of this objective.
Broadly, two approaches can be discussed: the traditional approach and the direct cost approach.
The traditional approach
This approach may be termed the static welfare approach to the analysis of customs unions, and was developed by Viner,(1950), Meade,(1955) and Lipsey,(1970).
Originally presented in terms of partial equilibrium analysis, it has been extended in two principal directions.
Firstly general equilibrium analysis was used to study the effects of CU formation, and secondly it was extended to embrace more than two goods (Collier 1979).
The traditional approach is concerned almost exclusively with the role of countries as importers.
Viner was able to analyse and illustrate that the formation of a CU was not necessarily advantageous to individual countries, to the union as a whole, or indeed to the world as a whole.
In his analysis Viner developed the concepts of "trade creation" and "trade diversion" .
Although concerned initially with resource allocation effects, the concepts of trade creation and trade diversion have been used to analyse whether shifts in trading patterns lead to benefits or costs in terms of gains and losses of consumer and producer surpluses.
Using partial equilibrium analysis, and assuming that a non-member country is considering participation in an existing CU, an evaluation of the welfare effects is possible using the traditional concepts of producer and consumer surplus.
If CU formation results in a shift in domestic consumption away from relatively high cost domestic production to relatively low cost partner production, or rest of world production, or both, then trade creation is said to arise.
A full scheme of possible outcomes is documented in Collier,(1979).
One possibility arises when a relatively small country in international trade participates in a union which has a "large" share of world trade.
For a given commodity the union producers' export supply curves, and those of the rest of the world, are below the equilibrium price for the good in the domestic economy.
Prior to the CU all external suppliers are excluded from the domestic market by a prohibitive tariff.
After participation in the CU, and the adoption by the CU of CET against non-members equal to that applied by the domestic economy before the union, then the commodity will be imported from the union partner.
Domestic production as a source of domestic consumption has been  displaced by partner country production.
This switch from high cost domestic production to lower cost partner production is termed "trade creation" .
It is depicted in Figure 1.1.
Home demand and supply curves for the good are represented by Dh and Sh, and PuSu and PwSw are the partner country and rest of the world supply curves.
However, prior to membership of the union all external producers are excluded from the home market by the imposition of a tariff which moves their import supply curves above the equilibrium price in the domestic economy.
The home country is self-sufficient at an equilibrium price of OPd and quantity of OC.
With membership of the union the CET does not apply to the union partner, but does apply to the rest of the world.
The supply curve from the partner country now reverts to PuSu and the partner supplies imports of BD to the home country.
Domestic supply falls from OC to OB, but domestic demand rises from OC to OD.
The resource cost of producing BC of the good has fallen from BCHE to BCFE, a saving of EFH.
This is beneficial in terms both of union welfare and world welfare, because less resources are used to produce this output.
The home country has clearly gained, for although producers' surplus has fallen by PuEHPd, consumers' surplus has risen by PuGHPd.
Assuming that these surpluses are equally weighted, the net gain to the home economy is shown by the area HEG.
Clearly the gain would have been larger had the home economy formed the union with the rest of the world.
A policy of free trade, rather than membership of a discriminatory trading regime, would have maximised the benefits of tariff reductions.
However in terms of welfare gain, participation in the union is obviously a step in the right direction.
Viner provided a framework for the analysis of changes in trade patterns which lead to welfare losses as a result of participating in a CU.
This arises when participation in a CU results in a switch from a low cost, to a higher cost, source of supply.
This is called "trade diversion" .
Before the union was formed the tariff against all outsiders was not prohibitive, and the home country's imports came from the lowest cost source namely, the rest of the world.
However as a result of participating in the CU, tariffs against the partner countries' exports are abolished.
For domestic consumers imports of this commodity from union partners become cheaper than those from the rest of the world.
Although the rest of the world was the lowest cost source of supply the imposition of the CET meant that it was not the lowest priced source of supply in the domestic economy.
Appropriate analysis of trade diversion is dependent upon the nature of the countries described by the model.
Countries can have either a small or large share of world trade.
In cases where the home country has a small share of world trade for a particular commodity, and the partner country and the rest of the world have a large share, the home country can import the commodity at a constant price i.e. the import supply curve is horizontal.
If the partner country and/or the rest of the world have a small share of world trade then the import supply curves will be upward sloping.
Clearly a variety of possibilities for import supply curves can exist.
In Figure 1.2 the home country is assumed to be small while the partner country and the rest of the world is large.
Prior to participation in a CU and with a tariff rate upon supply from the potential partner and the rest of the world, the lowest priced source of import supply is the rest of the world Pw Sw.
Domestic production is OC and imports CD.
Tariff proceeds FGHL go to the government of the home economy.
When the home country joins a CU whose external tariff is identical to that of the home country prior to participation in the union, domestic production falls to OB but domestic consumption rises to OE.
BE imports now come from the union partner at a tariff free price of OPu.
Trade diversion has arisen.
The cost of the original quantity of imports  CD has risen by HLNM.
There is a loss of tariff revenue to the domestic government of FGLH, and producers' surplus has fallen by PuPwRF, but consumers' surplus has risen by PuPwGS.
The gain in consumers' surplus minus the loss in producers' surplus is equal to RFGS.
Part of this, namely FGNM, is part of the lost tariff revenue which has been transferred from the government to domestic consumers, therefore a net welfare benefit equal to the areas RFM & SGN is gained.
The area HLNM (the amount of trade diversion i.e. the higher price paid for original imports of CD) may be compared with the net welfare gains.
Clearly there is a net trade diversionary loss as HLMN is greater than RFM + SGN.
The extent of this loss will be greater the bigger the gap between world prices and union prices.
The analysis can be made more sophisticated, and sometimes more realistic, by introducing alternative assumptions relating to country size.
However, the same type of results will emerge when the CU excludes the lowest cost producer from the union.
When trade diversion arises, higher cost supplies from the union partner displace lower cost supplies from the rest of the world.
This switch in the source of supply arises because although imports from the union partner are more costly than imports from outside the CU, these imports are not subject to the CET whereas imports from the rest of the world are subject to the CET.
The cost of the imported good (excluding the tariff imposition) is the focus for terms of trade changes.
Clearly (see figure 1.2) import prices rise (from OPw to OPu) after CU formation.
The deterioration in the domestic country's terms of trade is the essence of trade diversion.
However a cheapening of the import to domestic residents occurs now that tariff free imports from the partner country replace tariff laden rest of the world imports.
Of course on diverted trade the government does not derive tariff revenue.
When the change in surpluses of the three groups — consumers, producers, and government — are collectively considered, there is an overall loss resulting from trade diversion in the example depicted by Fig 1.2.
The dynamic effects of CUs
The concepts of trade creation and diversion are concerned with the allocation of resources in a static framework.
That is in a system with a given set of factors of production and a fixed technology.
It is also normally assumed that there is a perfectly competitive market structure and no potential to reap economies of scale.
However, the change in trade patterns induced by the creation of a CU could result in alterations to the competitive environment, and give rise to opportunities to reap economies of scale.
These dynamic factors may well have stronger impact on members of a CU than the static effects of trade creation and diversion.
Here the focus will be upon three of the so called dynamic effects,(these factors are also discussed in Chapter 2).
1.
Monopoly Power.
The removal of tariffs can reduce monopoly power within the home country by increasing the possible sources of supply.
This can result in higher outputs, lower prices and the reduction of monopoly profits.
It is also possible that non-price competition, in terms of quality of products, can be stimulated by the creation of a CU.
2.
Efficiency gains.
This relates to possible gains in technical efficiency arising from an increase in  competition.
This is connected to theories of x-inefficiency which were pioneered by Leibenstein, 1978.
The productivity of existing resources is alleged to rise in response to the threat to established markets provoked by tariff free trade between union partners.
This can result due to reductions in overmanning and improvements in other types of slack management procedures.
However, Pelkmans, 1984, reminds us that the technical efficiency gains are by no means automatic as a result of greater competition in integrated markets.
Participants may swim faster or indeed may sink, much depends on the willingness and abilities of firms to adjust to the increase in competition.
3.
Economies of scale.
Although a CU may have implications for both internal and external economies of scale, the emphasis is normally placed upon the technical aspect of internal economies.
Whenever a CU is formed it is likely that some industries will flourish in certain countries as the market widens.
This can occur if plants are operating at less than minimum efficiency scale (see Chapter 2).
In these circumstances the increase in output made possible by the CU would lead to a reduction in the unit cost of production.
A higher scale of output may also provide the opportunity to introduce techniques of production which would be uneconomic at lower scales of output.
The market in the countries of the CU may come to be dominated by producers in one of them.
The more enterprising economies experience a gain whilst industries located in less enterprising countries languish.
Induced trade deficits caused by such structural change may not result in an appropriate exchange rate adjustment.
The impulse to establish different areas of comparative advantage when a country loses market share to the industries of another country may be lacking.
The lack of an appropriate exchange rate adjustment may well inhibit the ability of members of the CU to adjust to the changes induced by increased competition.
Members of a CU may participate in an exchange rate union such as the EMS, and therefore short-term exchange rate adjustment may not be available to them.
In these circumstances adjustment of their industrial structures, induced by membership of a CU, cannot be aided by exchange rate adjustments.
In these circumstances membership of a CU may result in large scale unemployment which could persist until the appropriate restructuring of the industrial base takes place.
It is therefore possible for membership of a CU to lead to some countries experiencing long-term problems in coming to terms with the new competitive environment.
The direct cost approach
Studies have ranged from attempts to estimate the effects of membership upon the balance of payments as a whole, to a more narrow focus upon the balance of commodity trade.
They share one feature in common, namely an attempt to quantify what the condition of, say, the balance of trade would have been had the country in question not participated in the CU.
Once this "anti-monde" is defined and calculated, the difference between actual trade and "anti-monde" trade is ascribed to union membership.
The main problem with this type of analysis is that there are so many different "anti-monde" to choose between (Winters 1987).
Also, as the years between initial membership and the present day extend, a time must come when the accuracy of any "anti-monde" is open to serious doubt.
One of the last serious attempts to derive an attributable cost of membership of a CU was undertaken by Grinols for the United Kingdom in 1984.
Since then, information on this front has been hard to locate.
It is also the case that most of the studies of this type have been concerned with the effects on the UK of membership.
In order to estimate the costs of membership of a regional trading bloc as a whole, membership dues and integration induced trade flows must be included in the calculations.
If, however, concern is more narrowly focused only on the effects of the CU then the consequences for the balance of trade is the major concern.
With this approach any movement in the direction of a trade deficit is identified as a cost, and conversely a gain is associated with the development of a surplus.
Generally it is the total trade associated with a CU which should be investigated.
However, policies of positive integration such as the CAP, which impinge upon trading relationships, can blur the CU issue and can incline us to exclude a particular class of trade.
Hence trade agricultural products in the EC may be excluded because strictly it is the operation of the CAP which largely determines trade in agricultural products.
Prospective members are concerned with the total effects on their balance of payments of joining the CU.
Hence the British government adopted a broader approach to membership of the EC than a basic CU framework would dictate (British Government White Paper 1971).
In consequence the central objective of governmental concern prior to membership was the balance of payments.
However, after the event several attempts have been made to estimate the direct cost of participating in the EC.
These studies highlight the balance of trade in manufactures (European Free Trade Association 1972, Kreinin 1969, Resnick and Truman 1971, Williamson and Bottrill 1971).
Balance of trade effects of membership
In terms of the allocation of resources the Vinerian concepts of trade creation and diversion are respectively welfare enhancing and welfare reducing.
Full realisation of benefit with regard to trade creation is conditional upon the existence of traditional classical assumptions, namely that resources are mobile nationally, but immobile internationally.
Given the existence of resource mobility in a single country, the exploitation of comparative advantage is possible.
Without it, the gain is smaller and confined to the consumption benefit of cheaper imports.
If the criterion for the evaluation of gain or loss is not in terms of either the "maximisation of productive efficiency" or the "optimisation of consumption" , but rather in terms of the impact of membership of a regional trading bloc upon the balance of trade, then it is difficult to identify trade creation with a benefit arising from a switch between the domestic supplier and the union partner.
Trade creation induces a rise in imports and hence induces a deficit in the balance of trade.
Trade diversion involves a switch between third country and union suppliers at worsened terms of trade,(see figure 1.2 PuSu replaces PwSw).
The good imported from the union partner is now tariff-free and lower in price to domestic consumers than the tariff-laden import from the rest of the world.
There is a so-called unfavourable movement in the domestic economy's terms of trade.
The effect upon the balance of trade is also adverse because not only is the initial volume of imports more costly, but because the price of imports in the  domestic market has fallen, cutbacks in domestic production and increases in domestic consumption simply stimulate more imports.
If the focus of attention were to dwell solely upon imports, a potential or existing member would hardly relish CU membership on a balance of trade basis.
In reality, the focus for the aggregate balance is of course both upon imports and exports.
Clearly trade creation experienced by union members on the import side results in an equivalent rise in exports of other union members.
For the CU as a whole there is no change in the balance of trade as the changes of the individual members balance out.
However, individual members could be faced with a deterioration in their balance of trade if the trade creation effect were to increase imports more than exports.
With trade diversion, the initially preferred tariff-laden imports from third countries are replaced by tariff-free imports from within the CU.
These are cheaper to consumers, but more costly than those from countries outside the union.
Clearly for the union as a whole trade diversion improves the balance of trade, because union exports to union partners replace third country exports to union partners.
For each individual country in the union however the balance of trade deteriorates on the import side.
Imports are cheaper to consumers and hence a rise in the volume of imports is to be expected, as the cost of the goods excluding the tariff has risen but the domestic price of the goods including the CET has fallen.
However there will also be export trade diversion when a union country supplies a partner country in place of the imports from third countries.
This is balance of trade improving for those countries that supply other member countries with diverted imports.
The integration induced effects upon the trade balance cannot be confined to the standard Vinerian concepts.
Both static and dynamic effects arise.
There are other effects additional to the Vinerian concepts of "trade creation" and "trade diversion" which impinge upon the trade accounts.
When the EC was established, the CET was defined in terms of the original six members.
This meant that for some countries the CET was lower than national tariffs.
Of itself, this served to stimulate rest of the world exports into these countries.
Increased trade with third countries due to this effect and also the induced trade following from the increase in growth stimulated by the creating of the CU have been called external trade creation.
Alternatively where the level of the CET was higher than pre-existing national tariffs thus stimulating a rise in home sales, this is termed trade suppression.
This leads to an improvement in the balance of trade of union members.
Dynamic effects can also arise from economies of scale, and other factors induced by the formation of the CU.
An industry inside the bloc may have a comparative advantage and benefits may be reaped from internal economies of scale, learning effects, and inducements to alter production processes.
Lower cost production and prices will follow and this will help to expand an area of manufacture within EC markets and also serves to enhance the market for such goods in the rest of the world.
Estimates of the effect of integration on trade
Numerous studies have attempted to estimate the effects of membership upon a country joining the EC.
Some studies have dwelt solely upon the CU aspect of membership, with a focus upon manufacturing industry.
Other studies have cast a wider net to embrace other  elements in the balance of payments (Featherstone, Moore and Rhodes 1979).
A selection of some of the major studies is given in the bibliography at the end of this chapter.
An "anti-monde" analysis is used to try and establish and quantify the effects of integration.
It is normally assumed that a given variable would have remained constant in the absence of integration.
What is termed "residual imputation" is used to establish the integration effect by deducting the "anti-monde" result from the actual result.
Balassa's (1987) "anti-monde" was derived using the assumption that the income elasticity of demand would have remained constant had it not been for the effect of economic integration.
With regard to the UK, a recent test by Winters using the "Almost Ideal Demand System" , led to the conclusion that the British trade balance had worsened by £3.1 billion and UK output had fallen by 1.5 per cent resulting from joining the CU of the EC (Winters 1987).
It is not the purpose of this chapter to provide a comprehensive survey of the empirical work undertaken upon this topic.
However a flavour of recent procedures and problems can be had by examining two recent contributions.
A work similar to Resnick and Truman (1971) was developed recently by Jacquemin and Sapir (1988).
This takes a "Constant Share Approach" to some balance of trade effects of membership.
Given the variety of forces influencing a country's trade and domestic consumption after the formation of a CU there is much diversity of outcome.
It is not sufficient for example to establish that for a given country inside the union exports and/or imports rise after integration.
In absolute terms this may simply represent trends in a growing economy.
It is more appropriate to focus upon the proportions by which domestic consumption is served by domestic production, partner country and rest of world imports.
For instance, if the proportion of domestic consumption which came from domestic production rose then this may result from trade suppression, or the existence of dynamic effects producing lower prices in an industry exhibiting comparative advantage within the integrated area.
The use of share analysis is a way of investigating the impact of integration on a country's trade.
The technique involves estimating apparent consumption by deducting exports from domestic production and adding on imports from union and non-union sources.
Each element of the consumption aggregate is then expressed as a proportion of the total.
Table 1.1 indicates the range of possibilities after foreign trade is subject to disturbances resulting from membership of a CU.
Jacquemin and Sapir use share analysis to study the effect of integration upon a country's trade over time.
Their interest is focused upon revealed changes in integration effects over time, as indicated by a domestic share of apparent domestic consumption (p-x), a partner share of apparent domestic consumption (Mp), and a rest of the world share of apparent domestic consumption (Mrow).
In case D both partner and rest of the world shares have risen therefore it cannot be claimed that the effects of integration have been to reduce dependence upon non-partner countries.
Clearly here is a case of both internal and external trade creation.
In case E the share from the partner declines while that from the rest of the world rises, this indicates that external trade creation has occurred.
With case F, the share of imports from the partner country rises, but the share both of domestic production and imports from non-partner countries have declined.
This suggests that the forces both of trade creation and trade diversion have been at work.
In cases A, B and C the share of domestic production in apparent consumption has risen, which may be a result of trade diversion.
Either imports from the partner country or imports from the rest of the world have declined, or both.
Unfortunately figures which can be derived as a result of this exercise are not free from influences upon trade which may have arisen irrespective of the process of integration.
In other words, any increases or decreases cannot be solely attributed to the effects of economic integration.
The data capture movements of relative prices and incomes which may have little to do with the effect of economic integration upon trade, but rather follow from changes in policies or other factors.
Hence share analysis is hardly a refined tool to use to examine the effects of CU.
An alternative approach is offered by Grinols (1984).
Basically Grinols considers how much income do individuals in the UK need at the set of prices which prevail after integration to be no worse off than before the integration took place.
His attention is therefore focused upon Britain's welfare and not simply confined to the balance of trade.
To determine whether Britain's welfare from membership has risen or fallen he draws attention to the value:
T = actual transfer in £ from UK to EC
= value of pre-membership trade at post membership prices
S1 = increase in profits from domestic production at post membership prices relative to pre membership production levels + the saving at post membership prices from the substitution to cheaper goods.
The focus is upon three aggregates when a judgement is made whether a country is paying an "appropriate" amount for membership of the EC.
The first is the actual transfer itself (T).
This is the payment or receipt which arises from the way in which the EC budget is financed and disbursed (see Chapter 4).
The second aggregate  is the increase in the cost of purchasing Britain's 1972 trade quantities at post membership prices.
In fact the resulting terms of trade loss from membership on the pre-entry trade quantities was estimated on average at 2.3 per cent of GDP.
If in addition to a negative there arises a negative (T) then an overall income deficit exists.
However there may be dividends in production and consumption measured by (S1), which, if positive, help to reduce the overall size of the income deficit.
Grinols defines the dividend in production as "the profits of British post entry production less the profits which would have been earned using 1972 membership production levels." 
The dividend in consumption is defined as "the cost of 1972 pre-entry consumption less the minimum cost of purchasing an equally desirable bundle at post-entry prices." 
Both are estimated as positive for the UK between 1973/1979.
Their effect is to reduce the average loss arising for the UK from membership of the EC.
Between 1973-79 the loss is estimated at 1.9 per cent of GDP.
The conclusion one is driven to from these studies is that Britain has suffered a significant real income loss from membership.
The current position
It is perhaps not surprising that estimates of the gains and losses to the UK from EC membership appear to have dried up, and the other member states have never engaged in large-scale studies to assess the costs and benefits of membership of the CU.
As the years since joining the EC get more numerous, confidence in the proximate accuracy of figures describing an anti-monde must decline.
It becomes increasingly difficult to establish what effect would have arisen without integration, and hence to calculate the value of the inte- gration effect.
Consequently more rough and ready calculations might serve to provide an assessment of the current situation with regard to UK membership of the EC (see Dearden 1986).
The state of a country's trading balance on a geographical basis may direct our attention to the condition of the trade balance with the rest of the world.
This is more likely to occur when there is an obvious contrast between the balance on intra-trade (trade within the EC) and the balance on extra-trade (EC trade with outside countries).
The so-called "direct cost approach" in the estimation of the effects of a CU, dwelt upon the trading balance of the integrated area.
It is not uncommon to attribute the entire outcome of the regional trading balance to the effects of economic integration.
For example, the division of the UK's balance on visible trade between the EC and the rest of the world provides this kind of contrast.
(Table 1.2).
A noticeable feature of Table 1.2 is the difference between the visible trade balance with the EC compared to that of the rest of the world.
In 1978 and 1983 when the UK was in surplus with the rest of the world, a significant deficit was registered with the EC.
When the UK was in deficit with both regions, the deficit with the EC was much larger than that with the ROW.
Moreover the differences are not related to differences in trade proportions between the UK and the EC and the rest of the world.
Even when narrowly conceived, the figures do not solely focus upon the CU effect of membership but also embrace other effects of membership such as the outcome for visible trade of the CAP.
It is customary therefore to focus upon a narrower trade related concept than the balance of visible trade to distinguish the CU effect of membership.
Trade in such goods as energy supplies, for instance oil, are not part of the CU effect of membership.
We are left with trade in manufactured goods, and it is to this trade on an intra- and extra-basis that we now turn.
In Table 1.3 figures for the trade balance in manufactured goods are given on an intra- and extra-basis for the four major industrial countries in the EC.
Certain features merit particular comment.
Firstly the strength of West Germany's balance both on an intra- and extra-area basis is very pronounced.
Secondly, the stability of Italy's balance on an intra-basis, and a modest growth of surplus on an extra-basis is evident.
Perhaps surprisingly the country which on balance has experienced the largest deficit in trade on a manufacturing basis with the EC is France.
Until recently, the deficits of France on an intra-area basis have been offset by surpluses on an extra-area basis.
Since 1973, the UK in common with France has never been in surplus with the rest of the EC in trade in manufactured goods.
The deficit of the UK appears to have stabilised between 1985–1987.
However the decline in the extra-area balance since 1982 has been so great, that although still positive in 1987, it has been insufficient to prevent the overall balance of trade in manufactured goods from moving into deficit.
In France it was not until 1986 that the surplus on the balance of trade in manufactured goods on extra-trade was insufficient to offset the deficit on intra-trade.
However the statistics on intra-trade are not wholly attributable to a country's membership of the EC.
Other factors such as changes in relative prices and incomes that are not significantly influenced by the formation of a CU, can obscure the effects of a CU upon trade.
A simple procedure used some years ago by Kreinin (1969) consists of normalising intra-trade statistics.
Here normalisation is undertaken by utilising trends in extra-trade.
Normalisation is done by taking the average rate of growth exhibited by the extra-area trading balances.
The proposition is that had these four countries remained outside the EC, their intra- trade in manufactures would have developed in the same way as their extra-trade.
Hence we can predict the development of intra-trade had these countries not joined the CU.
The difference between the actual intra-trade and the normalised intra-trade is then described as the CU effect upon trade.
These calculations for the four countries in question appear in Table 1.4.
The figures above using the Kreinin method constitute the "anti-monde" for trade in manufactured goods of the four countries indicated.
All that remains is to normalise the actual trade figures in Table 3, using the "anti-monde" figures in the table above.
The results are given in Table 1.5.
As expected the CU has strengthened the manufactured trade balance of West Germany (D).
Significantly it has substantially weakened the trade balance of France, Italy and the United Kingdom.
Negative valuations for Italy are perhaps surprising when her trade balance with the EC is always in surplus.
The application of the "anti-monde" suggests that the surplus would have been significantly greater but for participation in the CU of the EC.
Perhaps surprisingly, although the figures show that UK membership has produced trading deficits, the extent of the deficits have not been as large as those of France and Italy.
Estimates of this kind although more refined than the raw trade statistics can only be tentative.
In the first place the division of trade between intra- and extra-trade is not only affected by economic integration.
The normalisation technique is not independent of the process of economic integration and to that extent it is not analytically clean.
Furthermore it would be remarkable if changes in relative prices and incomes were identical between the two areas.
To the extent that they are not, the CU effect is clearly picking up other influences.
Unfortunately the statement of Balassa made some years ago still remains true,"there exists no wholly satisfactory way of measuring the effect of a customs union or free trade area on trade flows.
International transactions are governed by many factors, and it is difficult to isolate the influences exercised by regional integration."
(Balassa 1973)