

The Budget of the European Community
Introduction
Membership of an economic community requires the acceptance of a financial obligation to fund the objectives of the organisation whether they consist of the limited objectives of a regional trading group, or the more extensive objectives of an economic union.
Clearly the expenditures undertaken by a regional trading regime require a lower level of funding compared to an organisation which adopts positive policies which add to the range of expenditures.
Conversely the benefits which accrue from a fully fledged economic union are by definition more numerous than those which result from membership of a customs union.
Failure to benefit from some union policies need not preclude membership if advantages accrue from other union policies.
In terms of funding however policies are not equally weighted.
It is clear that certain policies have a limited call upon union expenditure, while other policies are a heavy burden upon expenditure.
The discriminatory trading practices of the EC provide an illustration of this.
One may contrast the effects on the budget of the trade policy of the EC with respect to manufactured goods, and to agricultural products.
The former is basically a source of revenue, while the latter is overwhelmingly a source of expenditure.
Consequently, different policies have different effects on the EC budget, and therefore on the implications of the budget for member states.
In terms of budgetary expenditure, the EC is an organisation which is principally devoted to agricultural protectionism.
Expenditure related to the EAGGF (Guarantee Section) while officially justified according to a number of criteria (Coleman 1983), is certainly protectionist in effect.
Moreover its relative importance has changed little between 1981 and 1988 (see Fig. 4.1).
The size of the EC budget relative to the combined budgets of member states is small.
The EC budget has risen from 2.7 per cent of member states' budgets in 1980 to 3.69 per cent in 1989.
Community policies, and expenditures upon them are of course not perfectly substitutable for alternative national policies.
In terms of the emphasis given to agriculture in the EC, the structure of the budget of the EC is very different from national budgets.
This not only results from the emphasis given to agriculture, but also is due to the more limited range of other expenditures of the EC.
Policies which absorb the lion's share of expenditure in nation states such as defence, health and social security, education and the administration of justice, are almost entirely absent from the budget of the EC.
In terms of the 1988 budget the relative significance of the various mainstream expenditures is given in Table 4.1: Much expenditure under item no. 2 is a fairly recent addition to the pattern of expenditure in the EC.
Allocations to these items result in the so-called structural funds, e.g. the ERDF and the ESF.
Looking towards the future, and taking the view portrayed in the SEA, the aspects of EC policies which require priority finance relate to fostering the economic convergence of member states, assisting industrial research, and transforming declining industrial regions.
Given that it may be possible to contain agricultural expenditure in the future, the structure of the budget some years hence should differ from that of today.
The EC budget is not a device for fiscal fine-tuning.
Article 199 of the Treaty of Rome specifies that EC expenditure and revenue should be in balance.
Naturally shortfalls and overruns occur when one year is compared with the next.
A shortfall in one year is however matched by increased revenue in another to rectify any imbalance in the previous year.
This is not to suggest that because the budget is not used for fine tuning it is devoid of fiscal impact.
The saving and production propensities of those who are taxed, and those who are recipients of EC expenditure are unlikely to be the same.
Therefore the EC budget will have implications for the allocation of resources in the member states.
Moreover the principle of "juste retour" does not pervade the budget.
This principle, which seeks to balance a nation's contributions to, and receipts from, the budget is not in evidence.
Some members are in a net surplus position, while others are in net deficit.
There is a fiscal impact on an inter-country basis and in aggregate the impact of the budget is probably positive, but is likely to be small.
The principal problems of the EC budget
Most difficulties with the EC budget impinge upon both the expenditure and the revenue side.
One complaint relating to the expenditure side criticises the narrow range of expenditures of the EC.
This has been described in terms of expenditure appropriations as "tokenism" (Padoa-Schioppa 1989).
It is this issue which in part the SEA has addressed.
The implementation of the SEA requires finance, and this should result in a broadening of expenditures within the EC budget.
Notwithstanding this issue, three principal problems have beset the EC budget, especially over the last twenty years.
They are budgetary procedure, the inadequacy of resources, and the redistributive aspect of the budget.
Budgetary procedure
Prior to 1975, power over the budget was vested solely in the Council of Ministers.
This avoided conflict between the various institutions of the EC.
In 1975, under Article 203 of the Rome Treaty, budgetary power was shared between the Council and the European Parliament.
Parliament was given the right to reject the draft budget, and to have the last say on non-compulsory expenditure.
Expenditure was divided between "compulsory" expenditure and "non-compulsory" expenditure.
The first consisted of "expenditure necessarily resulting from the Treaty" and related mainly to agricultural expenditure and expenditure upon third countries, while the latter type of expenditure covered principally the structural funds.
Parliament had the authority to increase non-compulsory expenditure by up to one half of the "Maximum Rate" .
This "Maximum Rate" was made up of the arithmetic mean of the trend of GNP of EC countries, the average rise in member states' budgets, and the trend in the cost of living.
The years between 1975 and 1988 were marked by conflicts between Parliament and the Council.
However the Brussels Inter-institutional Agreement of 1988 secured a financial perspective for the period 1988–92, between Parliament, the Council and the Commission.
Expenditure ceilings established in the perspective were agreed as binding.
However Section B.8 of the perspective states that "any revision of the compulsory expenditure figure will not cause the amount of non-compulsory expenditure to be reduced" .
Presumably attempts will be made to agree expenditure ceilings post-1992 to avoid the outbreak, at a later date, of inter-institutional frictions.
The inadequacy of resources
The inadequacy of resources is highlighted by a recurrent tendency for expenditure to run ahead of revenue.
By far the largest item of expenditure, namely the EAGGF (Guarantee  Section), grew by 75 per cent between 1983 and 1988, and in each of the years actual expenditure exceeded the estimates.
The expansion of the structural funds, the introduction of new policies (research, fisheries, the Integrated Mediterranean Programme IMP), and the introduction of new members in the 1980s placed additional calls on EC expenditure.
On various occasions the resources of the EC have proved to be inadequate to meet the growing demands placed upon the budget.
From the revenue side the solution adopted was to change both tax bases and tax rates.
Prior to 1971, contributions to the EC budget were based upon relative GDP's.
In 1971 the "own resources" system of earmarking specific taxes was adopted.
Indeed the meaning of "own resources" has changed somewhat since the early attempts to identify tax bases appropriate for EC usage.
Originally tax revenues which were identified more with EC, as opposed to, national policies were earmarked for EC use.
Hence customs duties and agricultural and sugar levies were transferred to the EC.
The customs duty source of revenue arose from the adoption of the CET.
Agricultural levies arose from the adoption of the CAP.
Revenue from VAT, limited to a 1 per cent rate of VAT on a common base, was also transferred to the EC.
The VAT was pre-emimently an EC tax, and new members were obliged to adopt this particular indirect tax.
However as intra-EC trade in manufactures expanded relative to extra-trade, and as tariff rates were reduced under the auspices of GATT, and also as the EC moved towards self-sufficiency in agricultural products, this revenue from customs duties and agricultural levies was hardly buoyant.
Unfortunately shrinkage of revenue from these sources was not compensated for by growth of revenue from the notional 1 per cent VAT on a common base because consumption expenditures were accounting for a declining share of the GNP of the EC.
It has been claimed that "the budgetary problem of the Community arose because there was a ceiling on income but not expenditure" (Hill 1984).
A number of proposals both at the unofficial and the official level were made to overcome the shortage of finance.
As the argument over tax bases and tax rates is by no means over, it appears appropriate to comment upon some of the principal proposals.
There are proposals which relate to earmarking all, or a proportion of revenue from specific consumption goods (Denton 1982).
Taxes on cigarettes, or alcohol, or even oil imports have been proposed.
Inter-country contributions to revenue based upon this kind of proposal would seem to be somewhat arbitrary, and based upon inter-country differences in smoking and drinking.
An EC wide tax on oil imports would obviously favour the UK.
Another proposal is to relate budgetary contributions to the degree to which countries contributed to agricultural surpluses.
This was not pursued when it was realised that quite small countries like Ireland could become significant contributors.
A further proposal relating to the expenditure side of the budget came from a study by Spaventa (1986).
This was to segment the budget into a EAGGF (Guarantee Section) part and other areas of expenditure.
Resources available for the Guarantee Section were to be strictly limited, with the rest of the budget insulated from imbalance in the agricultural budget.
In Stuttgart in 1983 the so-called Stuttgart Mandate was issued calling for a brake upon agricultural expenditure.
Later in the year however a programme for the "rationalisation of agriculture" was issued by the Commission containing proposals for the extension of the guarantee threshold principle, supplementary levies and a product approach to price fixing.
It was however at Fontainebleau in 1984 that agreement was reached by the Council of Ministers to expand the resources available to the EC by enhancing the traditional "own resources" .
This was to be done by raising the VAT ceiling from 1 per cent to 1.4 per cent.
In  prospect at that time was a further enhancement of the ceiling to around 1.6 per cent in the year 1988.
This prospect was not to materialise.
At Brussels in 1988 problems concerned with the shortage of financial resources and the need to inject financial discipline into the budget resulted in a series of new measures.
A ceiling was set on revenue between 1988–1992.
This was set at 1.2 per cent of the GNP of the EC by 1992, with intermediate ceilings prior to 1992.
To keep within this ceiling it was agreed that the rate of growth of agricultural expenditure should be set at 74 per cent of the rate of growth of Community GNP.
While agricultural production and expenditures are not always contained by regulations of this nature, attempts were made to stabilise agricultural expenditure by introducing automatic price cuts, once thresholds upon production were reached.
In agriculture a "set-aside" scheme was also instituted, whereby farmers received compensation for taking arable land out of production.
Outside the normal budgetary provision a reserve of $1 bn was to be established to finance agricultural expenditure resulting from a significant and unexpected fall in the value of the dollar.
The reserve is formally called the "EAGGF monetary reserve" .
There is no doubt that the Brussels Agreement provided for a significant 25 per cent expansion in the resources available to the EC.
Probably a notional VAT contribution of around 1.9 per cent would have been required to produce an equivalent rise in resources.
It is unlikely that this rate would have been acceptable to all members.
A consequent diminution of the EC's resources would have probably resulted.
Whether the 1.2 per cent of GNP ceiling can be preserved after 1992 depends upon the containment of agricultural expenditure, limiting the ability of the EC to adopt new expenditure provisions, and limiting the growth and development of existing policies to within the growth of Community GNP.
In 1990 the description attached to own resources was changed.
It is regarded as"tax revenue allocated once and for all to the Community to finance its budget and accruing to it automatically without the need for any subsequent decision by the national authorities' (European Commission 1989b).
In fact this implies that any tax base at all may be used as part of "own resources" .
The structure of own resources implied by "once and for all" does appear to resolve the future flexibility of revenue to meet changing circumstances, although it opens up considerable potential for dispute, as it implies part of the revenue from income tax could be designated as "own resources" .
7The redistributive aspect of the budget
Given that the EC is committed to economic convergence it would be counterproductive if resulting from the operation of the budget, economic divergence was reinforced rather than reduced.
Initially, almost the entire focus of the budget was upon matters of resource allocation.
Equity was not an issue which was given serious consideration.
However it was realised that upon the accession of the UK to the EC a disproportionate financing burden would fall upon that country.
For the UK throughout the 1970s gross contributions were high relative to economic prosperity.
There were three reasons for this state of affairs.
Firstly, the UK's extra-EC import trade was high, and hence dutiable imports were also relatively high.
Secondly extra-EC agricultural imports were also relatively high.
Thirdly UK contributions coming from the  application of the 1 per cent VAT rate were also high, because of the high ratio of consumption expenditure to GNP within the UK.
In 1975 a "financial mechanism" was introduced providing for refunds of excessive gross contributions.
The conditions established as a qualification for a refund were however somewhat restrictive and no refund was secured through this mechanism prior to 1980.
The situation for the UK would have been rendered more acceptable if high gross contributions had been offset by high gross receipts.
This was not the case as the amount of agricultural production qualifying for EAGGF (Guarantee) expenditure was relatively small.
Hence high contributions were only partially offset because receipts were comparatively low.
The effect was to make the UK the second largest net contributor to the budget in 1980 (see Table 4.2).
Agreements to secure refunds were obtained covering the years 1981–3, but a more permanent solution was sought.
However the UK was given a larger share of the regional and social funds.
Hence the emphasis was upon an expenditure solution to the UK's budgetary problems.
Given the limited nature of the regional and social funds relative to the agricultural budget the benefits could not be substantial.
In an attempt to resolve the problem of equity and efficiency, the Spinelli Report, commissioned by the European Parliament was published in 1980.
The report proposed that a progressive element could be applied to contributions.
One part would be based upon GDP per capita relative to the EC average, and the other part would be based upon an index of population.
Countries with relatively low per capita incomes and also relatively low populations would benefit.
Although the report did not propose radical changes in contributions, it was never adopted.
There is no doubt that there are common features contained in the Spinelli Report and the Brussels Agreement which was adopted eight years later.
The Fontainebleau Agreement of 1984 in addition to enhancing the resources of the EC by increasing the VAT ceiling to 1.4 per cent, also addressed the issue of equity in relation to the UK's net contribution (see Denton 1984).
Here it is useful to distinguish between the "allocated" expenditure of the EC budget and the "non-allocated" expenditure.
Allocated expenditure is that which can be identified as being used for the benefit of a particular country within the EC.
Conversely non-allocated expenditure cannot be identified as earmarked for the use of a particular member.
The EAGGF Guarantee and Guidance expenditure can be  allocated, but administrative expenditure upon the institutions of the EC, or aid to Third World countries cannot be allocated to particular member states.
Hence the net contribution that a country makes to the EC budget is simply the difference between total financial contributions and total allocated expenditure.
Thus it is possible to compare a country's relative contribution to the EC Budget with its share in allocated expenditures.
The introduction of a mechanism for refunding the UK for the gap which existed between payments by the UK to the EC budget and allocated receipts was an innovation of Fontainebleau.
It was to be financed by those countries who received more from the budget than they paid into it.
In the event the gap was not measured by relative own resources and allocated EC expenditures, but by relative VAT payments and allocated EC expenditures.
This had the effect of reducing the gap for the UK.
Two-thirds of this gap was to be refunded to the UK.
The adjustment mechanism was a lowering of the VAT based payment for the UK, but an upwards adjustment in VAT payments for the net beneficiaries of the budget.
However the main contributor to the EC budget, West Germany, was unwilling to pay her full contribution towards the adjustment for the UK.
Therefore, West Germany was given a one-third reduction towards the compensation necessary for the UK.
Ad hoc arrangements of this nature are far from a rational approach towards planning an appropriate budget.
The figures of net contributions to the EC cannot be accepted without question.
There are three basic reasons why this figure should not be used without qualification.
Two of the reasons cast doubt upon the significance of figures in the budget, while the third throws suspicion on the use of the budget as the sole appropriate measure of burden or benefit (see HM Treasury 1982).
Firstly, there is the so-called "Rotterdam–Antwerp effect" .
Goods imported into EC countries are often imported through the ports of Rotterdam and Antwerp.
Import duties collected by the Netherlands and Belgium are counted as part of their gross contribution.
The burden of the import duty is of course borne by the consumer of the tariff-laden import.
If this is in a country other than the Netherlands and Belgium then the burden borne by their consumers is not reflected in their gross contributions.
This implies that the gross contributions of the Netherlands and Belgium overstate the financial burden while the gross contribution of Germany for example understates the financial burden.
Secondly, an effect may arise in the recording of gross receipts to the EC budget.
Under the CAP, export subsidies are given to bring EC prices down to world prices.
But produce may be routed through an EC country other than where it was produced, and the export rebate claimed in the second country.
The refund is counted as part of the gross receipts of the second country even though it is the first country that benefits.
This is sometimes described as the reverse Rotterdam–Antwerp effect.
There is no mechanism which ensures that the benefit will exactly offset the losses for any particular country.
Certain countries will be net gainers, others net losers, while others such as the UK will hardly be touched by these two effects.
Thirdly, there are gains and losses which arise outside the budget.
They occur because of the existence of EC policies.
Consider for instance EC countries that export agricultural produce to other EC countries.
They do so at prices fixed under the CAP.
These are normally above world prices.
If these exports went outside the EC they would receive funds from the EC budget.
Nonetheless there is a benefit to those countries which are net exporters of agricultural produce to other EC countries.
The benefit arises because the price of agricultural products is artificially raised by the effects of the CAP.
The consumers of agricultural products in net importing countries finance this benefit.
In relation to agriculture one could draw up an  "economic" budget.
The cost or benefit is calculated by the volume of net imports, or exports, times the difference between EC prices and world prices.
Member states like France, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Ireland make significant trading gains.
The UK is in significant deficit on intra-EC trade in agriculture, and therefore suffers losses from this trade in agricultural produce.
It is also alleged that those countries that are in surplus in relation to intra-EC trade in manufactures have also gained from the CU effect.
Hence a manufacturing budget and an agricultural budget can be devised and used in conjunction with a financial budget.
As the market in manufactures enjoys less protection than the market in agricultural produce, it does not appear unreasonable to focus upon intra-EC trade in agricultural produce when a financial budget and an economic budget are considered.
At an official level however it is solely the financial budget which is at issue in the determination of the net amount to be assigned to gainers or losers.
The Brussels Agreement of February 1988 (European Commission 1989b) marked the next stage in the re-organisation of the EC finances.
Recall that a ceiling rising in 1992 to 1.2 per cent of total Community GDP was established.
This measure provided in part the financial discipline which was lacking in the budgets of earlier years.
It certainly permits a rise of almost 100 per cent in the structural funds, and should especially benefit the three most recent members of the EC.
With regard to the redistributive mechanism, the VAT contribution rate of 1.4 per cent was sustained.
To assist those countries whose consumption proportion in GNP tended to be high, the VAT base was to be capped at 55 per cent of GNP (at market prices).
It was the introduction of the new fourth resource which clearly injected the principle of ability to pay across all countries.
Where traditional own resources are inadequate to meet the new expenditure ceiling, the fourth resource comes into operation.
It is a variable topping-up resource to meet the expenditure ceiling.
It is levied on countries in the proportion that their GNP bears to Community GNP.
It is thus not linked to any specific existing tax within the EC.
In 1989 for instance extra revenue equivalent to 0.0675 per cent of total EC GNP was required.
While this is a further step in the direction of equity, it does not of itself avoid the inequities arising from the payment of other own resources, and consequently rebates for the UK are still needed.
Because the UK clearly benefited from the capping of VAT and the introduction of the new fourth resource, the basic amount to which the UK was entitled was to be adjusted to a "reference compensation amount" .
This is basically the difference in the amounts payable under the new budgetary arrangements compared to the old scheme.
Under the new scheme the UK received a smaller adjustment than under the earlier scheme.
Agreements made at Brussels in 1988 are a milestone in the development of the EC budget but this particular development is hardly terminal.
There are a variety of reasons for a belief that structural adjustments to the EC budget are not over.
Firstly, the topping up mechanism while it is geared to ability to pay is the only own resource precisely defined in this way.
Apart from the abatement received by the UK, other sources of revenue are not precisely geared to ability to pay.
Secondly, provisional arrangements made for Spain and Portugal are likely to be succeeded by the full disipline of the budget.
Probably an adaptation of the adjustment mechanism applicable to the UK will be proposed.
Thirdly, any expansion of the EC to embrace some Eastern European countries a strain would be placed upon an adjustment mechanism intended for a single country.
Conclusion
Now that the definition of "own resources" has officially changed, it makes sense to focus upon the principle of equity from the outset.
Given the protests against inserting the principle of "juste retour" into the EC budget, much greater emphasis can be given to relating national payments to relative GNPs.
To focus upon income derived from protectionist policies as a major source of finance, is not compatible with the role of the EC as a significant participant in the world trading system.
A national tax structure not only embodies the principle of ability to pay but also embodies the principle of progressivity in relation to ability to pay.
Except in a piecemeal way the EC budget does neither.
A system whereby gross contributions to the EC budget have a well defined relation to relative incomes, even without progressivity, would be a major step in matters of budgetary harmonisation.
At least two issues associated with the present method of finance should be resolved.
Firstly, the UK is often accused of intransigence in relation to the growth of EC expenditure.
When the distribution of revenue is seen to be equitable, one would expect to see this intransigence diminish and with it doubts about the commitment of the UK to the EC.
Secondly, there is a need to facilitate the finance of other objectives of economic policy such as fulfilling the objectives of the SEA, and act as a handmaiden to growth both inside and outside the EC.
A successful outcome in these areas would seem to be necessary if the EC is to be able to finance the activities necessary to build the new European Economy.