

Regional Policy — Judith Tomkins and Jim Twomey
The emergence and persistence of regional disparities
There are very few features that are common to nations at differing stages of economic development.
But there is one feature that is prevalent in every nation at any stage of development, i.e. the existence of spatial disparities in economic fortunes.
It appears to be an inescapable fact that regardless of whether a nation is developing, developed or experiencing economic decline, the indigenous population will experience differing degrees of economic prosperity depending on their particular location in the economy.
There are many reasons why such spatial differences within nations emerge and are maintained.
In terms of geography, there may be a simple explanation such as a relatively poor endowment of natural resources which prevents exploitation of the land and inhibits economic development.
On the other hand, other regions may well be in a position to benefit from the discovery of natural resource stocks such as oil and gas.
Also important in terms of geography, however, is the issue of peripherality.
Regions can be disadvantaged by their distance from population or production centres.
This distance may therefore result, inter alia, in above average transport costs, restricted access to large urban conglomerations with a concomitant reduction in the capacity to develop service activities and an inferior transport infrastructure.
As for economic explanations of regional disparities, one of the major reasons why certain areas perform better than others will lie in the differing natures of the respective industrial structures.
At any time certain industries or sectors of an economy may be experiencing some degree of growth while others experience some degree of decline.
It is clear, therefore, that the economic fortune of any one region will tend to reflect the distribution of economic activity within that region.
Many areas in Europe have historically tended to specialise in a narrow range of industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding.
In the face of changes in patterns of demand, output and competition in the mid- to late twentieth century these industries have experienced something of a decline.
The same regions that once benefited from growth in these industries have, subsequently, suffered economic decline and depression.
Many other economic factors might be viewed as contributing to the emergence of spatial disparities in economic prosperity.
Evidence from the UK suggests that the peripherality of certain areas is often manifestly displayed by substantial differences in the levels of innovation, the rate of new firm formation and the extent of external control between regional economies.
In addition, the important research and development activities of many  technologically advanced industries often tend to be concentrated in "core" as opposed to peripheral economies with the latter frequently assuming a "branch-plant" nature.
As far as standard neo-classical economic theory is concerned, it is of no real consequence why regional disparities emerge since there are mechanisms in an economy which will ensure that they will prove to be only a temporary phenomenon.
Provided that labour and capital are perfectly mobile, that factors of production are fully employed and that there exists free competition, then it is argued that market forces will ensure the removal of spatial disparities.
In practice, however, these conditions are met on very rare occasions so that one might conclude that spatial differences in economic potential are unlikely ever to be equalised.
Indeed it is possible to imagine circumstances in which not only are regional disparities not reduced, but they are further extended.
Cumulative causation theories provide a strong theoretical rationale for widening regional prosperity.
The basis of these theories lies in recognition of the fact that because of the impact of differing levels of productivity or the existence of internal and external economies of scale it is perfectly feasible that economic benefits begin to accumulate in particular regions of an economy and become self-perpetuating.
In such circumstances, market forces may actually come to reinforce this development and contribute to unbalanced regional growth.
Defining the Community's regional problem
Any attempt to assess the nature and magnitude of the regional problem in the Community is a complex task.
Community members represent a series of very diverse and heterogeneous economies at different stages of development and with differing structural problems.
The task is further complicated by the fact that the collection of regional data for the EC is not only a vast undertaking but often produces output that is of more doubtful reliability than the national counterpart.
This latter aspect of regional data becomes less of a problem with the progress of time and the development of administrative mechanisms directed at greater accuracy, but does indicate caution when comparisons are made with early Community regional statistics.
Another problem connected with analysis of the regional problem in the EC relates to the precise definition of a region.
It is often the case that the definition of administrative regions within countries tends to reflect certain historical and institutional processes which, although they might have produced some degree of spatial cohesion, do not necessarily accord with what one might view as appropriate for economic scrutiny.
This point is noted in the First Periodic Report on the social and economic situation in the regions of the EC (1981).
The report considers which level of geographical unit is most suited to analysing regional problems in the Community from the three levels defined in the mid-1970s and subsumed under the French acronym, NUTS levels I, II and III.
It decided that the level II regions or standard "administrative base units" was appropriate for consideration.
The use of level II regions for analysis of regional disparities was perfectly understandable in light of the fact that there already existed in many countries an administrative structure which was in a position to provide relevant statistical information.
The problems and criticism that arose from this decision, however, reflected the varying sizes of the administrative units.
For example, certain German regions (notably Hamburg, Bremen and West Berlin) were little more than cities and quite small relative to the large British and French regions.
This criticism  was to some extent pre-empted in the report by recognition of such difficulties and there has been a movement in recent years to a further disaggregation of the relevant geographical unit.
In terms of the statistics directly employed to assess regional economic performance, by far the widest exposure tends to be given to measurements of regional per capita GDP.
The Gross Domestic Product of a region represents the total sum of the value added in that region minus the input of factors of production located or employed outside the region.
The convention is to measure regional GDP at market prices and to value it in purchasing power standards (PPSs) to permit inter-country comparisons.
At a national level, per capita GDP differentials measured in this manner vary substantially.
Indexing the average of the twelve members as 100, the national distribution of per capita GDP in PPSs in 1988 ranged from 121 in Luxembourg and 113 in the Federal Republic of Germany to 55 in Greece and 54 in Portugal.
As for level II administrative regional units, the disparities are even greater ranging from a very high value for Hamburg (182), Bremen (128) and Hessen (128) in West Germany to 48 in Nisia, Greece.
More disaggregated spatial data is not yet available though earlier studies (e.g. Padoa-Schioppa 1987) suggest that the range of disparity may well be of similar if not greater orders of magnitude.
That such differences exist indicates the wide variety of economic prosperity within the EC.
Whereas some areas have a per capita income level well above the EC average, there simultaneously exist areas which have just a fraction of that average.
It is important to recognise, however, that the degree of disparity evident in the statistics in the late 1980s reflects the accession of Greece (1981), and Spain and Portugal (1986).
There is no doubt that the enlargement of the Community via the introduction of these nations considerably added to the nature of the Community regional problem.
Padoa-Schioppa (1987) notes that as a result of their accession, Greece, Spain and Portugal increased Community GDP by 10 per cent, population by 22 per cent and employment in agriculture by 57 per cent .
In addition, the same source reports that the population living in areas whose per capita GDP is less than 25 per cent of the EC average has virtually doubled as a consequence of the expansion.
These statistics should, on the other hand, be kept in perspective.
It still remains the case that something between 50 and 60 per cent of all regions in the Community lie within 15 per cent of the Community average per capita GDP.
Per capita regional GDP is only one way of viewing the spatial disparities within the EC.
One might also consider looking at the range of employment/unemployment experience and labour market participation and activity rates, although international comparisons of unemployment are notoriously difficult to make given the variation in definitions and data collection.
The EC has at various stages attempted to devise summary indicators of regional performance as a guide to the magnitude of the regional problem.
In the Second Periodic Report on the development of the regions (1984), for example, a "synthetic index" based on both GDP and unemployment was calculated.
In the Third Periodic Report (1987) the index was amended to take account of labour force growth.
In the case of the latter report, this illustrates that the "least favoured regions" are almost exclusively large agricultural areas on the periphery of the Community in contrast to the "most favoured" regions which are characterised either by being large administrative/service centres or by containing large industrial concentrations.
If one were to attempt to classify "problem" areas on this basis, least favoured areas would probably include Portugal, Greece, Irish Republic, Northern Ireland, Southern Italy and about one-half of Spain.
Declining industrial areas would probably include some parts of Britain, north east France, northern Spain, east Belgium and east Netherlands.
As for changes over time in spatial disparities within the EC other than those generated by the accession of new members, Boltho (1989) demonstrates that from 1950 onwards there has been some reduction in the degree of regional income imbalance.
It appears that equalisation tended to be more pronounced in the 1950s with the relative decline of the role of agriculture, extensive post-war migration and the implementation of extensive welfare programmes.
In the 1960s there is evidence that the process of equalisation began to slow down somewhat and statistics suggest that the first oil shock of 1973 actually reversed the trend altogether with disparities tending to widen.
The latter phenomenon would not actually come as a surprise to regional economists.
It is a common observation that spatial disparities tend to be reduced when national economies as a whole experience growth and vice-versa.
In fact, Boltho points out that the greater part of the equalisation that has occurred in the EC since the 1950s is due to greater inter-country equality rather than greater intra-country equality, i.e. disparities have been reduced as nations as a whole have converged rather than regions within nations moving closer together.
The evolution of regional policy
Regional policy did not emerge in the EC until 1975, but nevertheless, prior to this time there was embodied in the Treaty of Rome an implicit concern for regional disparities.
In the preamble to the Treaty, the objective of "reducing both the differences existing between the various regions and the backwardness of the less favoured regions" clearly signals this concern.
It was also recognised in the Treaty that EC policies, such as CAP, could themselves have a significant differential regional impact.
It was accepted that member states would operate their own national regional assistance instruments, whereas the Community's preoccupation would be to ensure that national aid did not conflict with its competition policy, by providing protection for domestic industries under the guise of regional aid.
Thus Article 92 provided for aid by member states "to promote the economic development of areas where the standard of living is abnormally low, or where there is serious underemployment" provided that such aid did not "adversely affect trading conditions" .
Assistance was to be generally "selective" and "exceptional" , contributing to investment rather than running costs.
As regional policy at the national and EC level has evolved over the years, in order to ensure that national assistance does not conflict with the pursuit of competition and free trade, the EC has defined criteria for determining aid eligibility (usually on the basis of GDP per capita and/or unemployment rates).
Restrictions have been placed on the percentage of a nation's population which may be covered by aid and ceilings imposed on the intensity of support measures.
Not surprisingly, such actions by the EC have been fiercely contested by individual states at various times, particularly when the EC sought to reduce the extent of any nation's regional assistance measures.
The Treaty also established mechanisms through which regional assistance could be directed, if desired.
In discussions prior to the final draft of the Treaty of Rome for example, the concept of a specific regional fund was considered, but rejected in favour of the European Investment Bank (EIB) which would provide finance for a range of activities including regional development activity.
The European Social Fund (ESF) was not, on the other hand, specifically charged in the Treaty with providing regional assistance.
Nevertheless, its overall  responsibility to increase the geographical and occupational mobility of labour within the Community has meant that in practice, a lot of its funds have been channelled towards the relatively less prosperous areas, and to Italy in particular.
Moves towards a more active and coherent Community regional policy gradually gathered momentum throughout the 1960s.
In its first report on regional policy in 1965 the Commission called for EC policy to be integrated with national policy.
The post of Director General for regional policy was established in 1968, and the next year saw proposals by the Commission for the creation of regional aid instruments.
Although these proposals were not accepted, they represented the forerunners of the policy which was to emerge in the 1970s.
An additional urgency was injected into the moves towards a coherent regional policy by the emergence of the debate on economic and monetary union in the 1970s.
It was felt at the time that regional disparities would inhibit commitment by member states to such integration.
Thus the Paris Summit in 1972 produced a clear statement that a high priority should be given to correcting regional imbalances which would otherwise interfere with the realisation of economic and monetary union.
In this light, a commitment was also made to the creation of a regional fund.
The problem of the enlargement of the EC, which would inevitably cause a widening of regional inequalities, also gave impetus to the regional policy debate.
In particular, a mechanism was required to channel funds to the UK as compensation for the effects of CAP, from which other member states benefited disproportionately.
The basis of future regional policy and its instruments was eventually to be found in the Thompson Report (1973) on the regional problems of the enlarged EC, which reaffirmed the view that in the long term, monetary union was not possible without an effective regional policy.
Regional policy 1975–85
The European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) was finally established in 1975, together with general agreement on the definition of a region, on the criteria for determining eligibility for assistance and upon the general characteristics that policies should possess.
In particular, to qualify for national assistance (and hence Community assistance) a region would need to exhibit one of the following; a per capita income level below the Community average, more than 20 per cent of the population engaged in agriculture, unemployment more than 20 per cent above the Community average, or particularly high levels of migration.
A limit had already been placed on the extent of national assistance two years earlier so as to prevent member states from engaging in self-defeating competitive bidding to attract mobile investment, and also in recognition of the basic idea of the Treaty of Rome that there should be a single market with free competition.
The ERDF initially had a small budget, with the facility to provide investment grants and loans for specific projects.
Grants were available up to 20 per cent of capital costs or 50 per cent of the aid supplied nationally, and loans were available through funds directed via the EIB at reduced rates of interest (3 per cent below market rate).
Projects were therefore not in themselves initiated by the ERDF; member states put forward projects to receive assistance and the limited funds available were allocated on the basis of predetermined national quotas.
Italy and the UK received the largest allocations (40 per cent and 28 per cent respectively) indicative of their relatively less prosperous state compared to other members.
It was not long before these arrangements came under review.
In 1977, the Commission felt it necessary to reconsider EC regional policy in view of the fact that its operation had highlighted certain difficulties.
The economic experience of the 1970s had exacerbated existing regional problems as well as giving rise to new ones.
Firstly, the EC's role in policy was essentially passive under the existing arrangements in that any regional dimension to the aid available was largely determined by member states themselves.
Secondly, there was the emergence of what was to be a continuing question for EC policy, namely the issue of "additionality" .
It was argued that ERDF resources did not in fact represent truly additional aid for problem regions if such aid merely replaced expenditure that national governments would otherwise have incurred themselves.
As a first step towards dealing with these two questions, the 1977 review proposed that EC policy should increasingly be concerned with problems arising from peripherality, particularly where more than one nation was involved, or from the consequences of other EC policies, such as CAP.
In 1979, therefore, the Council amended the structure of the ERDF to allow a proportion of the fund to be allocated for "specific regional development measures" which were not nationally allocated.
This non-quota section to the ERDF is interesting for a number of reasons.
It represented an attempt by the EC, albeit in a small way, to address the problem of additionality, to take the initiative in regional matters and to introduce "programme" financing into its regional policy — a mechanism which was to become more important subsequently.
In the event, however, the Commission could only obtain agreement for 5 per cent of the ERDF budget to be non-quota, and very little interest was expressed in these funds by member states.
The suggestion of the 1977 Review that a comprehensive system of periodic review, analysis and assessment of regional policy should be instigated was upheld, leading to the First Periodic Report.
This initiated a process of regularly updating the regional policy of the EC together with a programme of regional impact assessment to evaluate the regional effect of other EC policies.
The outcome of the Report and the following debate which this generated was a new ERDF Regulation which came into force on 1 January 1985.
Although a compromise, it still contained substantial revisions.
The principal objectives of EC policy were to provide aid to areas of industrial decline or slow development with a simple criterion for aid eligibility.
This consisted of an index (with a score of 75 or below) which combined relative per capita income and relative unemployment levels, and was an attempt to redefine the assisted areas more narrowly so as to direct funds to those areas most in need.
This was necessary since 40 per cent of the EC's population lived in areas which were eligible for assistance,(including 37 per cent of West Germany's population).
There was also to be greater emphasis upon actions to promote indigenous growth using local resources, rather than a reliance upon large scale investments by private and public sectors.
It was also the intention to increase the share of the fund directed at service industries, such as tourism, from the existing 14 per cent to 30 per cent.
The Commission was attempting by these measures to reduce the past bias towards spending on large infrastructure projects favoured by national governments.
Finally, the programme approach was to be extended over the whole Fund, with National Programmes of Community Interest, Community Programmes and Integrated Development Programmes, so that at least 20 per cent of the budget would be directed towards programme expenditure.
Individual projects were still considered for fund assistance up to a maximum of 50 per cent of expenditure, but programmes could receive up to 70 per cent.
The advantages to the Commission of programme financing arose from the long-term nature of such a plan for  regional development, which required agreement on financing arrangements in advance from all the concerned parties down to the local government level.
There was therefore a degree of assurance about the "additionality" of Community funds.
This was even more so for the special programmes developed by the Community, such as the Integrated Mediterranean Programmes which were established to enable the southern regions of France, Italy and Greece to adjust to the accession of Spain and Portugal into the EC.
With the provision for periodic review, the basic framework for future regional policy was now in place.
Nevertheless, the commitment by the EC in terms of actual resources was still extremely small; ERDF expenditure in 1984, for example, constituted only 0.08 per cent of the EC's GDP.
Set alongside the regional impact of other EC policies, notably CAP, the ability of the regional funds to make progress towards correcting spatial disparities was severely restricted.
The CAP, the largest component of the EC's budget, by providing assistance on the basis of output and type of product, was not regionally directed and often worked in the opposite direction to regional policy.
In 1985, the wealthier northern regions of the EC received 25 per cent above the average of budgetary expenditure per person employed in agriculture, whereas the regions in the southern periphery received 25 per cent below the average, and even less in some instances.
Thus the regional assistance provided by the EC could be viewed as a rather weak attack upon a problem which the EC had itself exacerbated.
In terms of the form (rather than scale) of policy, there was still the problem of "additionality" as a cause for concern.
Not only was it the case that many projects were already under way before ERDF resources were committed, but also member states were free to add ERDF aid to the national aid for the project (individual additionality) or to add such aid to national regional expenditure as a whole (global additionality).
The latter option was the more frequently adopted, so that it became very difficult to evaluate the contribution, if any, that ERDF expenditure might have made to economic development.
While a new regulation in 1985 ruled out the option of global additionality, the question of individual additionality still remained for the future.
With the accession of Spain and Portugal in 1986, and the resulting shift in regional disparities within the Community, the argument for a further enhancement of regional policy was strengthened.
Evidence of this was already to be seen in the Integrated Mediterranean Programmes.
But perhaps more importantly, the Single European Act (SEA) of 1986 added an urgency to the search for a more effective regional policy.
Indeed, anticipation of the possible unequal distribution of the benefits of greater competition meant that reform of the Structural Funds, that is the ERDF, the ESF and the EAGGF Guidance Section, became an essential condition within some member states for agreement to proceed towards completion of the SEM.
The Single European Act (SEA) —The regional dimension
The SEA is the most important development within the EC since the Rome Treaty.
Chapter 2 discusses in some detail the implications of the SEA for EC integration, and the potential aggregate economic benefits that might accrue.
The concern here, however, is not so much that of the level of such benefits but their spatial distribution.
As noted above, the Rome Treaty did not explicitly incorporate any regional dimension, but it did recognise that EC policies might well have a differential spatial impact.
It is generally the case, nevertheless, that  in the 30 years since the signing of the Treaty, EC policies have only rarely been developed in a framework which explicitly evaluates the spatial impact of those policies.
Indeed the EC has in the past been more concerned with the question of whether national aid programmes contravened its competition policy rather than whether its competition policy might have any adverse consequences for the regions of member nations.
As part of the process towards implementation of the SEA, an agreement was reached in early 1988 to double the size of the Structural Funds in real terms by 1992.
The mechanisms for distributing the Funds were also subject to major revisions and these became effective on 1 January 1989.
The reforms provided a clear statement of the five main objectives of EC regional policy (Table 7.1), the means by which policy would be implemented and the role of each of the Structural Funds in meeting these objectives.
The Structural Fund allocations to member states under each objective are shown in Table 7.2, where it can be seen that Spain, Italy, Portugal and Greece are the principal beneficiaries.
The objectives represent the basis for defining the regions eligible for aid and it is the structurally backward, or Objective 1 regions, which receive the major share of the Structural Funds (77 per cent).
Such regions are designated for a period of five years and are specifically defined to be those areas (NUTS Level II) where per capita GDP in PPSs is less than 75 per cent of the Community average.
On this basis, all of Greece, the Irish Republic and Portugal, most of Spain, Southern Italy, the French overseas Departments and Northern Ireland (a special case) qualified for Objective 1 funding.
Priority was in this way accorded to the least prosperous regions and countries of the Community, partly arising from an expectation that these areas might otherwise be expected to benefit least from the SEM.
Designated Objective 2 regions presented more of a problem for the Community in terms of reaching agreement on the specific criteria for the definition of industrial decline, and hence upon the particular regions to be assisted.
In the end, areas were to be selected for three years (at NUTS Level III) according to the following conditions: an unemployment rate higher by at least 15 per cent than the EC average during the previous three years, and industrial employment as a percentage of total employment greater than the EC average in every year of   the previous fifteen years.
Areas suffering substantial job losses in specific industries could also be considered; for example, in late 1990 certain coal-mining areas were incorporated into the list of Objective 2 regions.
The problems of selecting Objective 2 regions are particularly illustrated by the UK case, where the final list of Objective 2 regions contained anomalies in that some areas became eligible for EC but not national assistance, despite the fact that ERDF monies were required to be additional to national expenditure and could not therefore constitute 100 per cent of any assistance measure.
Also, in the context of industrial decline, the UK argued for the inclusion of some inner city areas under Objective 2.
In the event, such areas were excluded but there was agreement by the Commission to consider other means of assistance for urban areas until the next review of regional policy in 1993, when the issue would be re-examined.
A further factor in the debate surrounding Objective 2 has centred upon the type and proportion of aid to be granted under this heading.
As has already been stated, infrastructure spending previously constituted a large percentage of EC aid to member states.
However, under the new regulations spending on infrastructure projects in Objective 2 regions was limited to those projects which directly provide "the basis for the creation or development of economic activity" of the area concerned.
This represented a much tighter definition than under Objective 1.
Furthermore, aid to industry had to be demonstrably "additional" to national expenditures, and overall assistance was limited to a maximum of 50 per cent of total expenditure.
Overall, while the UK is the main beneficiary under Objective 2 (Table 2), the fact that the UK is excluded from Objective 1 assistance (with the exception of Northern Ireland) means that access to the vast bulk of the Structural Funds is denied.
As the UK (and other more prosperous countries) have moved up the league table of relative prosperity, it is not surprising that assistance under Objective 2 has been fiercely debated.
Objectives 3 and 4 were not in themselves regionally restricted, although the new priorities for ESF funding have a regional dimension.
For instance, more resources were to be directed to the long-term unemployed, particularly among young people, in the Objective 2 and 5(b) regions.
Finally, Objectives 5(a) and 5(b) differed somewhat from the previous four in not being concerned with industrialisation as such, but with rural re-structuring and development.
The regional dimension is principally to be found in 5(b), which represented an addition to the previously stated objectives of the EAGGF Guidance Section, to improve productivity in the agricultural sector, assist in the provision of infrastructure and in the promotion of structural change among farms in rural areas.
Aid was now able to be granted to measures which promoted diversification into other activities such as tourism and craft industries.
While such rural development in non-agricultural activity was also made eligible for aid from the ERDF and ESF, the overall level of funding in this area was set at a relatively low level, in relation to the other Objectives, and in comparison to the budget allocated to the CAP.
Again as with Objective 2, there was much debate on the areas eligible for aid under 5(b).
The criteria for determining selection were a high percentage of total employment in agriculture, and a low level of agricultural income and socio-economic development.
Additionally, peripheral areas experiencing de-population, environmental pressures or other unfavourable characteristics inhibiting development, such as the size structure of farms, could be considered.
Thus, via these five Objectives, but principally through 1, 2 and 5(b), it was hoped to provide a more effective basis for the reduction of regional disparities and the promotion of balanced development in the SEM.
The main mechanism for the co-ordination and implementation of policy was to be the Community Support Framework (CSF), arguably the most significant element in the Structural Fund reforms.
The process of generating the CSF begins with three-year or five-year regional plans drawn up by the individual member states which are then presented to the Commission.
The CSF is an amalgamation of the regional plan and the Commission's own priorities for assistance in the relevant area.
Since it is more than likely that funds would be limited in relation to the demand for them, the Commission's own priorities become important in deciding where and how to intervene.
In this way the CSF provides both a statement on the objectives for the particular region in question, and also a programme of intervention measures to be pursued, together with the sources of necessary funds, thereby achieving a greater co-ordination between the Structural Funds and other Community instruments.
Lastly, to operate alongside the CSFs and Integrated Development Operations were a number of Community Programmes, undertaken on the direct initiative of the Commission to address particular problems in certain areas.
In particular, a number of more recent initiatives emerged with the primary purpose of providing assistance for those regions at a disadvantage with respect to the SEM (mainly, but not exclusively Objective 1 regions).
Through the above reforms, it was intended to create a more effective Community regional policy to cope with the additional stresses facing some regions as a result of adjustments to the SEM.
Policy was to operate through a partnership of local, regional, national and Community authorities in the pursuit of common policy objectives.
By engaging in some instances in dialogue directly with local and regional authorities and by-passing national governments, the Commission hoped to be able to co-ordinate the allocation of the Structural Funds and direct aid more effectively to the problem areas, thereby also implicitly weakening the influence of national government upon the use of EC funding.
Central to the whole process was the CSF, the latest stage in the trend towards programme rather than project intervention.
Overall, the reforms (particularly the CSFs) represented a further attempt to move away from the passive form of EC regional aid, whereby EC expenditure was simply added to nationally determined projects, and regional policy was therefore little more than a system of budgetary transfers.
The overall effect of the above measures was to shift the future direction of assistance towards the poorer regions (as Table 2 illustrates).
Existing member states, such as the UK, therefore were to receive relatively less in terms of regional aid than previously, although this could in part be compensated by the general increase in the size of the Structural Funds.
Despite this increase in size, and the fact that regional aid can contribute a significant input of resources to any particular area, it still remains the case that the extent of Community regional assistance is small, amounting to just 25 per cent of the total EC budget by 1992.
In view of the emphasis that is put upon regional aid as a means of ensuring a more even distribution of the benefits of the SEM, this is perhaps surprising.
The SEM and regional policy
Regional policy has thus been amended in accordance with a perceived need to deal with the growing regional disparities which might arise as a consequence of the SEM.
Whether such policy changes are adequate depends upon precisely how the achievement of the SEM will affect regional economies throughout the community and this, on the whole, is rather vague.
Indeed, in the extensive assessment of the economic potential of the SEM undertaken by the Commission there is little in the way of spatial analysis.
The report states that estimation of the benefit distribution by country, let alone region, would be an enormously complex task and accordingly refrains from making an attempt to examine in any detail the spatial dimension.
As Begg (1989) points out, "the emphasis in much of the analysis of '1992' seems to be that, provided the macroeconomic gains for the Community as a whole are realised, questions about the spatial impact of the single market are of secondary importance." 
If this is the case then it raises serious concerns about the commitment of the EC to reducing the range of economic prosperity within its boundaries.
The ERDF along with other elements of the Structural Funds provide a compensatory mechanism of sorts for potential "losers" .
But it is important to place this increase in perspective.
Even when doubled the Funds will take up only a quarter of the EC budget and will approximately amount to something in the order of 4 per cent of the total estimated aggregate gains from completing the SEM.
The questions that appear not to have been officially asked are to what extent will the projected gains accrue to areas already experiencing relative prosperity; to what extent will these gains involve reductions in prosperity in underdeveloped/unfavoured regions and whether a transfer of some 4 per cent of the "net" gains is sufficient to compensate for such losses.
In some senses this transfer is sufficient in that the SEA was accepted on the basis of the 100 per cent increase in Structural Funds designed to ease adjustment.
There is a substantial risk, however, that some areas/nations may well suffer from "underselling" of their position.
It is particularly a comment on the far-sightedness of politicians that they can adopt a policy measure of such magnitude in the absence of any analysis as to how their particular constituents will be affected, and simultaneously determine the level of compensation appropriate for adjustment problems which have not been quantified.
The ultimate outcome of the SEM and the economic forces therein, at a regional level, will prove to be the result of a series of different processes.
Already in this chapter there has been a discussion of the factors which appear to contribute to varying regional prosperity.
From the 1985 White Paper through to the 1988 Cecchini Report, it is evident that the projected benefits resulting from the SEM programme are expected to result to a large extent from the exploitation of potential scale economies.
If these economies are to be achieved then two possible scenarios present themselves.
It must either be the case that existing product markets will be serviced by fewer firms or that the former will expand to a level consistent with greater output levels (Begg 1989).
At best, GDP growth in the Community resulting from the internal market programme is estimated to be of the order of 6 per cent .
If this expansion is insufficient to accommodate the increased productive potential of the Community then the relevant scale economies may well be achieved by some rationalisation of existing production units.
The extent to which this impacts upon various regions in any economy will obviously reflect the spatial concentration and nature of those industries/sectors that experience such restructuring.
If British evidence is anything to go by it is often large and relatively dated production units that tend to be the first to close in periods of rationalisation.
These units are typically located in peripheral regional economies (Tomkins and Twomey 1990).
It should be noted, however, that the spatial impact of scale economies will be ameliorated to some extent if the relevant industry/sector is already integrated to a relatively high level within Europe.
In this case the potential economies will be somewhat low and the impact of their realisation minimal.
Discussion concerning the potential impact of scale economies, in terms of restructuring, does not finish with consideration of the peripheral economies alone.
If the concentration of production and distribution units becomes a major force in the transition to the SEM, there will be an inevitable tendency for that concentration to occur in the core regions which will probably not only contain relevant headquarters and production units, but will also guarantee proximity to markets and immediate access to a range of supporting service functions.
Apart from the potential loss of economic activity from more peripheral areas, it is not necessarily the case that such further concentration in core regional economies should be viewed as in any way desirable.
Several core economies in the centre of Europe are already relatively congested.
Further demands on such areas may actually begin to produce diseconomies in the form of increased congestion and "overheating" .
These potential costs are not considered in the background research to the SEA.
They may significantly reduce the projected gains of closer European integration.
To the extent that completion of the SEM will encourage production activities to become more mobile, there are a series of factors which will also come to determine choice of location.
In the same way that rationalisation may encourage centralisation towards core economies, proximity to major market centres and abundance of supporting service activities may be expected to draw "footloose" production and distribution units towards central areas of an economy.
This effect will be reinforced if the infrastructure of peripheral areas appears inadequate.
Surveys of the determinants of business location choice frequently point to the availability of suitable premises and labour, access to air transport, access to motorway networks, etc., as important factors influencing the location of new business units.
Therefore while the emphasis on infrastructure projects within EC regional aid has in general been much reduced, there must still be a strong case for maintaining such aid to peripheral areas.
Another element that might be expected to influence location of economic activity will be  the extent of differentials in factor costs.
It is the case, for example, that there exist wide disparities in labour costs between nations in Europe.
Greece, Spain and Portugal appear by far the "cheapest" source of industrial labour within Europe (at some 25 to 50 per cent of the EC12 average).
Consideration of such data alone is, of course, misleading because no account is taken of differentials in productivity between nations, which can substantially alter unit labour costs.
At the sub-national level, the peripheral/least favoured regions might be expected to exhibit lower labour costs relative to the core regions.
But again this is not necessarily the case since the nature of national and local labour markets and their degree of integration within national or collective bargaining frameworks might well produce a relatively even spatial distribution of wage rates.
It is apparent from the discussion above, that in the restructuring processes arising from completion of the SEM, the disadvantaged regions may suffer negative impacts in the long term.
But there may also be more immediate difficulties, such as job losses associated with closure of customs offices or with competition in the area of public procurement.
In the case of the latter, many peripheral areas within Europe are to some extent sustained economically by public procurements placed to industries within those regions.
A more open market in public procurement will place these industries and therefore the regions in some jeopardy.
The costs of a non-Europe research programme suggest that something in the region of 0.5 per cent of Community GDP may be "wasted" by nations favouring domestic public procurement policies and therefore an effective competition policy to counteract such protection measures must be accompanied by a re-distributive regional policy.
As has already been noted above, the Commission has always been concerned to examine the nature of national regional policy instruments for signs of domestic protectionism.
New schemes or amendments to existing schemes within member states have required Community approval, and more recently the Commission has recommended the abolition of some existing state aid schemes, arguing that they have little "regional" relevance.
The Commission has also applied continuing pressure over the years, particularly to the Northern European member states, to reduce their national aid expenditure and the extent of their assisted areas.
Since 1980, the proportion of the national population qualifying for aid has fallen by 25 per cent in the UK, Denmark and the Netherlands, and to a slightly lesser degree in Belgium and Germany.
Southern Europe, without this same pressure, has not reduced the size of its assisted areas.
In this way, the Commission has attempted to ensure a true regional dimension to state aid.
Coupled with regional policy instruments operating at EC level, the intention has been to create a level "playing field" within Europe, such that all member states can compete on an equal basis within the SEM.
It is therefore clear that the need for an effective EC regional policy depends upon the possibilities of adverse spatial consequences resulting from the creation of the SEM.
As noted in the previous discussion, there are reasons to suppose that the difficulties of underdeveloped regions, peripheral regions and declining industries are likely to worsen, if only in the short term, as the many structural adjustments outlined above are induced by the creation of the SEM.
What is also clear is that the drive for monetary union will compound this problem, and place even further stresses and responsibilities at the door of EC regional policy.
Monetary Union — The regional dimension
Just as the impact of the SEA may have a series of implications for the spatial distribution of economic activity and prosperity within the EC, monetary union may also impart a number of effects which will modify regional fortunes.
It is important, first of all, to note that monetary union will effectively alter the status of member nations within the EC to that of regions within the Union.
Chapter 3 discusses the overall macro-economic issues in more detail, for example the extent to which monetary union might produce faster growth, but the principal concern here is with the spatial implications.
In this context, if there exist differences in the unit cost and therefore the competitiveness of nations which are not connected in a customs or monetary union, then attempts to eliminate such differences (reflected in associated balance of payments positions) can potentially be made via trade restrictions or movements in relative exchange rates, although the effectiveness of the latter policy is by no means certain.
In fact, Stevens (1991) argues that it is just because devaluation does not work as an instrument of economic policy that the argument for a single currency is made more powerful.
What remains true, however, is that with the removal of trade barriers and the emergence of complete monetary union, the member nations of the EC will confront precisely the same issues that confronted regions within those nations prior to the union.
The fundamental issues of balanced growth, peripherality and the problems facing areas of industrial decline or delayed development will become difficulties which not only regions, but member nations as a whole, may have to address within the EC.
As one might expect from the discussion elsewhere in this chapter, there are a variety of reasons why adjustment to monetary union is not likely to be spread evenly across space.
Any "uncompetitive" region (i.e. nation) of the union that does not undertake and succeed in reducing differential unit (and particularly labour) costs will experience the same pressures commensurate with a current account deficit.
If this is not accommodated by capital inflows there will be downward pressure on income levels and subsequently increased unemployment.
If the rise in the numbers of jobless does not encourage a decline in unit costs then the deficit region/nation will continue to experience an underemployment of resources.
The President of the Commission recognises this potential outcome when he states that "with the reduction of exchange rate variability, it is important for the wage system to become more responsive to considerations of competitiveness" .
In the same report another contributor comments, "For EMU to be sustainable, the economies of countries forming the union must be similarly competitive or else some countries would be faced with the equivalent of a constant balance of payments deficit which, in EMU, would be reflected in terms of stagnation and unemployment." 
In the absence of exchange rate changes therefore, adjustments in the labour market become crucial in restoring or maintaining an economy's competitive position.
It is argued by the Commission that wage flexibility in response to employment conditions may increase with monetary union and that there is already evidence of this for those economies participating in the ERM.
Such an effect is dependent on wage bargaining procedures taking account of the implications of monetary union and it remains to be seen whether this will continue to be the case in the longer term.
However, there is no reason to suppose that regions within countries will experience increased wage flexibility either in the short or long term.
Thus, in the absence of increased or sufficient flexibility in wage formation within the "uncompetitive" member economies, it is probably the case that these economies will be forced  to suffer periods of unemployment with the onset of monetary union.
If these economies are also those with existing substantial disparities in regional prosperity then the transition to monetary union might well serve to aggravate the relative position of the latter, in that any reduction in national income arising from the processes outlined above is itself likely to have a disproportionately large effect on the disadvantaged regions of those countries.
Another response to spatial differences in unemployment might lie in labour mobility.
In this sense, monetary union also presents another potential source of imposed spatial depression on certain areas in the EC.
Following the establishment of the union there might well emerge a tendency for money wage rates to converge between member nations given a degree of labour mobility.
The problem that this might create lies in the fact that many peripheral areas within nations tend to have lower productivity levels than the core areas.
Equalisation of money wage rates would, in this scenario, raise the unit costs of production in peripheral areas, thereby reducing competitiveness and contributing to further decline.
Similarly, equalisation of wage rates or attempts to impose common conditions in labour markets through mechanisms such as the Social Charter might also have this same effect (see Chapter 6).
One further implication of monetary union stems from both the above observations.
A well-known rationale for regional policy interventions is that countries with extensive regional imbalances in economic activity appear more prone to suffer inflationary pressures, and to suffer them sooner, than more spatially balanced nations.
Any increase in aggregate demand in such an economy will hit a capacity constraint in the successful regions long before this happens in the disadvantaged areas, leading to inflationary pressure in the former.
If monetary union widens the disparities within nations, the removal of exchange rate policy options in such circumstances may necessitate other conventional policies, for example, a reduction in aggregate demand, to reduce inflation.
It is probably the case that the weaker areas of the relevant nations will lose most from this action, since regional disparities tend to widen when aggregate demand falls and narrow when demand rises.
Indeed it is ironic that the weaker regions of a country tend to "catch-up" most in times of expansion, and yet it is partly because of the regional differences that inflationary pressures emerge and induce policies which prevent further gains.
Furthermore, the pressure for convergence in inflation rates, and the requirement for more co-ordinated fiscal policy within the EC, which is implied by monetary union, may therefore impose greater constraints upon the spatially imbalanced countries.
The success of monetary union in promoting a more balanced development within the EC rests ultimately upon factors such as the degree of wage flexibility, the mobility of capital in response to differential labour costs, versus the advantages of centralisation and agglom- eration.
It is thus difficult to predict the precise spatial outcome of establishing a monetary union within the EC.
While the benefits of faster growth may spread throughout the EC, it cannot be assumed that this will occur in a balanced manner.
There is as noted above a real risk that the process will aggravate further the degree of imbalance that presently exists.
The policy implications are to some extent summarised in the contribution of the Bundesbank President to the Delors report: within the monetary union, balance-of-payments policy is replaced by regional policy, with the latter helping to finance inter-regional differences in current account imbalances through transfer payments.
The differences in the level of economic development of individual member countries of the Community suggest that extremely large funds would  be needed to finance the necessary fiscal compensation.
Only through a very effective regional policy could these differences perhaps be reduced to an extent that would be compatible with the existence of a monetary union.
This comment suggests that certain areas of the EC may well experience substantial dislocation from the process leading to monetary union.
It is not stated but it is also probably true that the greater is the haste for union the greater will be the potential dislocation.
There is, however, a danger that like the discussion of the SEM noted above, the details of the spatial impact of this process below the level of the nation state will simply be obscured by considerations of the aggregate impact on member countries.
While accepting the possibility that the effects of monetary union may create greater shocks for the less favoured regions/countries, particularly those whose economies are initially very distorted, the general belief expressed by the Commission is nevertheless that growth in the EC as a whole will be accompanied by a narrowing of regional disparities, and that "comprehensive regime change is the key for the convergence of lagging countries and regions" .
Potentially the same criticism can be levelled at the discussions of monetary union as that made above regarding the SEM, i.e. EC politicians are proceeding to adopt policies which are very vague in their analysis of spatial considerations.
In terms of the specific funding for regional development, it is debatable whether the increase connected with the implementation of the SEM programme will be sufficient to deal with the spatial problems that arise from that programme, let alone those which stem from monetary union.
Conclusion
It is widely accepted, if not empirically demonstrated, that the prospect of widening regional imbalances poses a threat to economic and monetary union.
Therefore in the pursuit of such a union, Community Regional Policy must be effective in promoting balanced development.
While the reforms of 1988/89 do go some way towards creating a more effective regional policy in that the dispersion of funds has shifted towards the poorer regions, given the gulf between the rhetoric of the commitment to balanced development and the extent of subsequent policy action, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the issue of space and the impact of EC policies over space are but a minimal consideration in the design of a greater vision.