

The French fabliaux
THE CATEGORY OF FABLIAU
Discounting variant examples of what is fundamentally the same tale, there are at least 127 fabliaux in the medieval French corpus.
This is the number of fabliaux accepted in a Nouveau Recueil Complet des Fabliaux which has been published in parts since 1983 and which is, at the time of writing, about half complete in terms of the number of fabliaux published.
The earliest French works now accepted as fabliaux date from the last decade of the twelfth century and the latest seem to have been composed about 150 years later, somewhere around 1340.
As the modern term for this genre the word fabliau can be traced back to scholarly writing of the seventeenth century.
Fabliau(s) is in fact the form this word took in the dialect of the north-eastern corner of France in the twelfth to fourteenth century (the final -s is a nominative singular case marker that is lost during this period).
The greatest geographical concentration of provenanced medieval French fabliaux lies in this area of Picardy, and the use of the resurrected dialectal form is thus justified.
The word fabliau itself is found as a label in roughly half of this group of texts.
While there are also a number of texts that claim to be fabliaux but which are not now considered to belong to the genre, the common characteristics of the type (described below) are sufficiently clear for the same number of texts again to be identified with and added to the self-proclaimed fabliaux.
It is difficult to estimate how many more of these medieval works may have once existed but have since been lost.
Joseph Bédier, the French scholar whose book published exactly a hundred years ago proved to be the inception of modern fabliau studies, inferred from the number of known authors and the number of anonymous fabliaux that only  about one-eighth of the original corpus survives.
As the Danish scholar Per Nykrog has observed, however, the corpus of fabliaux seems to be constituted of a certain stock of recognized tales rather than being the product of widespread and prolific extemporization as Bédier was inclined to believe.
This observation is based on the high number of copies that there are of certain fabliaux and the number of variants that there are of others.
It implies that we have a higher proportion of the original corpus surviving than Bédier calculated, and therefore a more representative sample.
The etymology of the medieval French word carries some suggestion of what the characteristic features of tales of this genre were originally considered to be, although nothing detailed enough to form a definition.
The root of the word is French fable, a term as broad and adaptable as Modern English "story" .
Amongst the term's more specialized medieval uses, however, is a sense that it shares with its Latin ancestor fabula.
This is the sense that is represented by the title Aesop's Fables: used of unrealistic stories (Aesop's fables are unrealistic in that they present anthropomorphized beasts and birds) which may nonetheless present a valuable and pertinent moral to their readers.
As we shall soon see, both realism and moral message are aspects of the French fabliaux that are much discussed.
It is hard to read lines such as:(This fabliau is the truth)
which is the first line of the fabliau Le Prestre qui ot mere a force, "The priest who had a mother forced upon him" , without believing that medieval French writers and readers of fabliaux could also be highly conscious, however flippantly, of the problematic nature of terms such as "truth" in the context of this genre.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FRENCH FABLIAU
Although, as we shall see, many varied and lengthy accounts of what may have been the distinguishing characteristics of the fabliaux have been produced, the short definition given by Bédier in 1893 still attracts support: the fabliaux, he declared, are "" contes à rire en vers "" .
The success of this definition is surprising, for it is a somewhat artificial expression for Modern French, and on the testimony of native French speakers on whom the phrase has been sprung its meaning is not immediately obvious.
One would most readily suppose that "" à rire "" means "to be laughed at" , throwing emphasis on to the author's intention, but it seems possible, too, that it could be interpreted as "playful" .
However we interpret the phrase it is too general: there are many "contes à rire en vers" that have never been taken for fabliaux.
This is to say nothing of the varied forms and objects of laughter that there may be: spontaneous hilarity; dark chuckles over black humour; knowing, ironic laughter; the nervous giggles of imperfect comprehension.
But by listing such possibilities we can already see how Bédier's definition may be serviceable in structuring discussion: identifying a set of three basic traits of the fabliau, each of which may be elaborated upon to produce an informative description of the subject, fabliaux.
Primarily, then, the fabliaux are contes, narrative stories.
We shall see, in fact, that it is upon relatively clear and simple structural properties of the plot that an initial identification of a text as fabliau-like depends.
The writer's intention to amuse, or the reader's amusement, are not easy issues to deal with in any summary way, but various forms of surprise and shock which may well cause a laugh or a smile will emerge as essential in distinguishing the fabliau.
The greatest significance of the fact that the fabliaux are contes en vers is actually obscured by Bédier's focusing on the regular use of the verse mode.
Prose narrative of the Middle Ages is overwhelmingly in Latin; vernacular narrative is usually in verse.
The fact that the fabliaux are versified is a reflex of the more important fact that these are stories in the vernacular to be laughed at.
Fabliau narrative is characteristically brief, and the plot is complicated and problematic only for some of the characters within the tales, not for the well-informed readers or audience of the piece.
There are frequently one or more characters within the fabliau who are as well informed of the situation as the reader may be, and in control of it.
The difference between the situation of such characters and the readers and that of the remaining characters within the fabliaux makes irony a typical feature of the experience of reading a fabliau.
Such irony is, inevitably, part of the effect of what the fullest analysis of the narrative structure of the French fabliaux published to date, that of Mary Jane Stearns Schenk (1987), finds to be an indispensable element in the fabliaux: a deception played by one or more characters on one or more other characters followed by a misdeed committed by the deceiver(s).
Such events can indeed conclude a fabliau.
Reading through the Old French fabliaux one finds persistently recurring examples of certain types of dramatic situation created and resolved by the deception and misdeed.
Rather than pursuing the discussion at an abstract level, it seems sensible to give here a brief synopsis of a selection of French fabliaux which can be regarded as highly typical of the genre, and which represent a range of subtypes within the genre: tales of sensual appetite or greed, adultery and fornication, sexual naivety and sexual fetishism; a tale of robbers, the macabre joke of the corpse that apparently either cannot or will not lie still, and a lavatorial tale of turds.
Le Bouchier d'Abeville, "The butcher of Abbeville" , is found in five French manuscripts.
It tells of a butcher returning home empty-handed from a market, and looking for lodgings in a village that lies on his route homewards as it is too late at night for him to reach home.
He is refused hospitality by the rich village priest, who lives with a concubine.
He comes across a flock of sheep belonging to the priest, one of which he takes; he then returns to the priest, pretending not to be the traveller already refused entry, and this time is accepted in as he offers the sheep in payment.
The animal is slaughtered and skinned; after a fine meal a young servant girl is ordered to ensure the guest wants for nothing.
The priest and his concubine retire; the guest soon seduces the girl with the promise of the sheepskin in payment.
Early in the morning the priest leaves to say the offices in the church.
The butcher goes to take his leave of his hostess, but finding her naked in bed soon has his will of her, again promising her the sheepskin.
Then the butcher goes to the church to take leave of the priest, and as a token of his gratitude sells him the sheepskin at a knock-down price of two sous.
By the time the priest arrives the two women are at blows over the sheepskin.
The priest soon learns why they both claim the sheepskin.
He collapses into a miserable heap, but to round things off his shepherd comes to report that one of the sheep is missing, and identifies the disputed sheepskin as that of this beast.
The priest finally concludes that the sheepskin is properly his, as he paid for it in goods not services.
The author finally asks of his readers/ audience which of the claimants had best title to the sheepskin.
Les Perdris, "The partridges" , is a shorter and rather gentler tale.
A peasant catches two partridges, takes them home to his wife to cook and sets off to invite the village priest to join them.
The birds are ready before he returns, and the wife takes a morsel of them, but cannot stop herself before she has eaten both birds.
When her husband returns, she first pretends that the cat has taken them, but when he does not believe this reassures him that the birds are being kept hot and that he should fetch his knife to cut them.
While he sharpens his knife the priest arrives.
The wife, in a panic, tells him that her husband is whetting his knife in order to castrate him, implying that the husband has some grounds for suspecting a sexual relationship between the wife and the priest.
The priest, understandably, flees; the wife tells her husband that he is running off with the partridges, with the result that the husband pursues the priest brandishing his knife, apparently confirming what the wife told the priest.
This "" fabliaus "" ends by claiming to be an example of the innate deceptiveness of woman:(Woman is made to deceive: lying she turns into truth and truth she turns into lying.)
Les Trois Boçus, "The three hunchbacks" , is a harsher tale, found, along with Les Perdris, in a single copy in the largest known collection of French fabliaux, in a manuscript in the Bibliothèque National in Paris.
A rich but ugly hunchback is able to obtain a beautiful young girl to be his wife and then guards her with consuming jealousy.
One day, three hunchback minstrels are allowed in to entertain them; they are subsequently sent off and forbidden ever to return.
But the young wife has been charmed by their singing, and when her husband is out she calls them back; unfortunately the husband returns inopportunely.
The minstrels are hastily hidden in trunks, where they suffocate.
The woman discovers their bodies after the husband has departed again, and calls in a "" porter "" to remove and dispose of one of the bodies for a rich sum.
When he returns for his payment she shows him another body, claiming the porter has not done the job asked of him.
The astonished porter disposes of this body as the previous one, but  returns for his payment only to find, apparently, the corpse waiting for him again.
This third body is disposed of, but as the porter returns he encounters the hunchback husband who he supposes to be the corpse returning yet one more time.
He seizes him and disposes of him in the river like the previous three bodies, and finally gets his pay, the wife being all the more glad for having got rid of her repugnant husband.
A moral conclusion drawn is that money is powerful but harmful, and that:(…
God never made a woman that one could not have for money.)
Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin, "The four wishes of St Martin" , a fabliau found in four manuscripts, one copy being an Anglo-Norman version in an English manuscript, represents a distinctive subset of fabliaux with a supernatural and religious setting.
A peasant who is especially devoted to St Martin meets the saint one day and is told that his devotion is rewarded by four wishes.
He goes home, to be abused by his wife for not being at work, until he tells her of his heavenly gift.
Eventually he allows his wife to make the first wish; she wishes for him:( "That you should be completely covered with penises" )
(vit, viz in fact has much more the tone of modern colloquial English prick(s): see further below).
He retaliates by wishing:( "That you should have as many cunts as I have pricks on me" )
The peasant then seeks to reverse these wishes by wishing:(That she had no cunt and he had no prick)
which of course removes every single one of these organs from their bodies.
The last wish then has to be used to restore one each of these to its proper place.
Thus all the wishes have been wasted  leaving the couple as they were.
The brief moral drawn at the end of the original French version of this tale is that he who trusts his wife more than himself will frequently regret it.
Barat et Haimet is one of the robber's tales, relatively long and preserved in four large manuscript collections of fabliaux.
It is datable to the late twelfth century and attributable to the earliest named fabliau author, Jean Bodel.
Interestingly, the manuscript regarded as providing the best text of the poem, Bibliothèque National fr.19152, labels the work a "" fable "" in the first line while the other copies read "" fabliaus "" or "" fableaus "" , suggesting that the category of fabliau may not have been so clearly defined and recognized at this early date as it was later to become.
Barat and Haimet are two brothers, who at the start of the tale are passing through a forest with a companion called Travers.
Haimet shows off by climbing a tree, first to steal eggs from a nest without the bird sitting there noticing, and then by returning the eggs likewise.
While he does the latter, his brother, whose name means "deceit" , trumps him by stealing his trousers from him, much to Travers's amusement and Haimet's embarrassment.
Travers realizes that he is not as skilled as these two and returns home to his wife, Marie, and a more honest way of making a living.
At Christmas they are able to have a pig slaughtered.
This is noticed by Barat and Haimet who happen to call on Travers while he is out, and they plan to steal the meat.
Meanwhile Travers and his wife, though unsuspecting, move and cover the meat.
Thus Barat and Haimet are nonplussed when they return in the dark of night, but Barat takes advantage of an absence of Travers to imitate his voice in the darkness and to elicit from Marie the secret of where the meat is.
When the real Travers returns his wife chides him for being so forgetful, from which Travers deduces what has happened.
He sets off after the brothers, succeeds in imitating Haimet, and relieves Barat of his burden.
Barat discovers the trick played upon him when he finds the real Haimet without the meat.
Barat then returns, encounters Travers, and succeeds in imitating Marie and obtaining the meat in order to perform a bizarre ritual to preserve it from theft:(To touch both arse and cunt three times)
Travers soon discovers that he has been deceived again, and sets off once more to retrieve his property.
This time he imitates a man  hanging from a tree, which Barat and Haimet take for the ghost of their hanged father, drop their booty and flee.
Returning with the meat, Travers and Marie decide to cook it there and then.
Unfortunately both he and Marie fall asleep, and Haimet now spears and steals a piece of bacon from the boiling cauldron.
Just then, Travers awakes, and to put an end to this to-ing and fro-ing invites his former companions to share the meat with him.
It is divided into three; the brothers take two pieces leaving Travers and Marie with one.
The conclusion of the tale is:(For this reason is this told, my lords: a robber makes bad company.)
The final example of the French fabliau to be summarized here is Jouglet, of interest to us both as an example of the scope for lavatory humour in the fabliau and for making a jongleur, a stereotyped character who is a sort of disreputable wandering entertainer, its central character.
Jouglet is a personal name based upon jongleur, which is frequently written in the form jougler in medieval French.
The tale begins with a retarded youth, Robin, whose mother succeeds in arranging for him a marriage with a beautiful young woman, Mahaut.
The mother then hires a jongleur, Jouglet, to teach her son the facts of life; i.e. what he is expected to do on his wedding night and thereafter.
Jouglet first gets Robin to eat masses of pears.
As a result Robin's stomach is in turmoil throughout the ceremony and the evening of the wedding; in the marital bed he tells his new wife what has happened.
To avenge herself on Jouglet, she directs Robin to relieve his bowels over the sleeping Jouglet, which he does, again and again, covering his sheets and clothes, filling his fireplace, water bucket and the bag for his violle, with excrement.
In the morning, Mahaut wakes Jouglet for some music; he discovers, Midas-like, the shit everywhere he turns and in or on everything he touches: he leaves in a rage of humiliation.
But as he goes, he passes a village where the villagers insist on some music from him.
Eventually he orders them to unpack his instrument themselves: two of them then plunge their hands into the contents of his bag.
He is then soundly beaten.
The moral conclusion is:(He thought to shit on another but was shitted on much more himself.)
The six fabliaux selected for summarizing here are, if in any way at all, only slightly untypical in being generally longer than average, this being an efficient way of conveying something of the range of what is to be found amongst the French fabliaux.
The most frequent type of tale found in these fabliaux is that dealing with the range of experiences of sexual gratification, marriage and adultery.
In these situations, the characters are related to one another by a basic set of human relationships: desire, friendship, hatred and rivalry.
The subset containing fabliaux with lavatory humour, tales concerning basic bodily functions of excretion or flatulence, are fewer in number.
Most of these have tales which turn around such bodily necessities alone, but Jouglet shows how this type of tale can be made to co-act with a sexual one, the motif of the sexually incompetent young husband.
Characterization and the target figure
The brevity, or, rather, the efficiency, of French fabliau narrative is reflected by the typical forms of characterization in these tales.
Most characters are simply sketched types rather than carefully constructed characters: the beautiful young wife, either licentious or honest but nearly always cunning; the prostitute; the husband, more often foolish than wise; the lover, more likely to be clever than a husband is.
The sex of the character is usually the most prominent and significant variable in characterization.
Most characters too are briefly designated in the tales by their social role: the townsman or townswoman, the peasant and the peasant's wife; the jongleur, the clerk, the priest, the knight, the squire.
Beyond this, character- ization rarely goes further than the creation of characters sufficient for the roles they play within the fabliau; there is very rarely the slightest pretence at verisimilitude in the form of feigning that the characters have experiences beyond or after those of the narrative given.
There is nothing to encourage any speculation on what the butcher of Abbeville, the peasants, their wives or the priest in Les Perdris or Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin, Barat, Haimet and Travers, or Jouglet et al.did before or after the events we are told of in the tales, and this holds for the great majority of the fabliaux.
The deception, trick or ruse that forms the one essential element in the interaction of the fabliau characters is most frequently an impromptu action, very commonly occurring in the first instance as an example of a native cunning attributed to women, an ingenuity in lying and deceit that women have.
This attribute has a place in an adverse stereotype of the woman that was promoted by a medieval tradition of antifeminist writing.
The fabliaux, however, show very much less interest in exposing the wickedness of the tricksters than in ridiculing the tricked.
Laughter is a means of expressing judgement that is directed at the characters who fail in some way in the text.
The ridicule to which the dupes are condemned may be explicitly orchestrated by the author, by providing characters within the text to laugh at the victim.
An especially clear example is in the fabliau Boivin de Provins, in which the hero, Boivin, having deluded a household of whores into providing him with a meal and a girl for free, and having set them at each other 's throats, goes off to tell the provost of the town the tale, who in turn spreads the tale around, producing much mirth and laughter.
An additional irony at the very end of this fabliau resides in the claim that Boivin himself "made" this fabliau, and was paid ten sous by the provost for it.
The provost, then, may be the last dupe of the character Boivin — or of the author?— although if the provost seeks only entertainment, not truth, out of the tale, he is hardly a ridiculous victim of this enhanced narratorial persona.
This complication is a special extension to the range of the fabliau plot rather than an incongruous exception to the confinement of the "life" of a character to the events of the fabliau story.
It has been a point frequently made that the characters exposed to ridicule are never given attributes that can have been designed to evoke sympathy from the reader; frequently quite the contrary.
The target figure is usually a character whose comeuppance, in terms of simple poetic justice, is most likely to be reassuring: types such as the avaricious or preoccupied merchant, the boorish peasant, the selfish priest, in the roles of jealous husband or cohabitor, or selfish would-be seducer.
We may note that in its targeting of a number of these figures, the fabliaux present a morality that does not offer a blanket indulgence to sexual desires; in some respects fabliau morality is very conventional.
With the illicit amorous adventures of wives in the situation of the eternal triangle (husband, wife, lover) being the most common single dramatic type in the fabliaux, the most frequent type as the object of ridicule is the deceived husband, often not merely cuckolded but on occasion beaten or otherwise degraded or abused as well; and what is more after all this sometimes so utterly deceived that he remains happy in the delusion that his wife has proved herself faithful to him.
An elegant example of this is La Bourgoise d'Orliens, "The townswoman of Orléans" , in which the husband, a merchant, suspecting his wife of having a clerk as a lover (which she has) tests her by pretending to go away but returning in the guise of a clerk.
She sees through the ruse and has the supposed clerk locked away, then beaten by her servants and dumped on a dungheap.
Meanwhile she spends the night with her lover.
The battered husband returns to be told and "" reconforté "" , "comforted" , by the tale of the treatment meted out to the would-be seducer.
The underlying value-system is clear, as the dream of a world in which the unconstrained sexuality of the favoured male and female characters converges, and is expressed without shame.
In technical terms, irony is, as noted, an important element in the amusement that can be felt at the plight of characters like this merchant of Orléans.
Irony exists as a relationship between writer and reader (two further characters?), usually created by the writer, with regard to the characters and events within the fabliau.
The two basic forms of irony found in these tales are verbal irony and dramatic irony.
It is a case of dramatic irony when we as readers recognize and share with the fabliau author a knowledge of the "realities" of the fictitious situation denied to the merchant of Orléans and may laugh at the merchant's misguided belief as a result.
It is verbal irony when some character comes out with a statement or a choice of words which have a meaning to those in the know, either within the text or outside it, that is significantly different or even contradictory to that which the character may be supposed to have in mind.
Especially rich in irony is Le Prestre et Alison, "The Priest and Alison" , in which a lecherous priest believes he has succeeded in bedding a beautiful young girl but has had, in the darkness, an elderly whore substituted for her.
When he arrives for his pleasure he is asked by the girl's mother:( "Have you brought the goods that you are to give to my girl?" )
and he replies:("Lady, I am not here by a trick!
I have brought the garments.
See them here!
Now, look for they are both fine and pleasing.
You shall see that I am truthful before I leave your house.
By the faith that I owe St Simon, I have never liked cheating.")
On top of the irony within the tales of these kinds, Schenk notes a more serious irony, involving the reader as a character or a "subject" moulded by the text, in some of the laughter that the tales may provoke.
Besides laughing with a comforting or gratifying sense of superiority when confronted with pictures of the incompetence of figures who the readers may recognize as representing their fellow men, the readers may also be regarded, she suggests, as laughing at common humankind and thus also (unconsciously) at themselves.
This is linked in her book to schools of intellectual speculation, both medieval and modern, of a kind that will be further discussed later in this chapter.
In advance of that, however, it can be noted here that as a generalization about the fabliaux, rather than a point to consider in relation to some fabliaux, her claim may go too far.
The real problem for Schenk's case is the question of how far the target figures of the fabliaux can be identified with the real humanity that both authors and readers/listeners must be part of.
The simple realism of any  characters in the fabliaux is very limited: often no more than the characters being given recognizable and common social functions.
The sort of rebounding abuse, the trickster tricked, the reader (ironically) laughing at an image he does not realize is his own, that she describes, is indeed a pattern that is found in some fabliaux.
Simple examples have been shown, for instance, in Barat et Haimet and Jouglet.
In the discussion of Chaucer's Reeve's Tale in Chapter 4 of this book, however, we shall find an argument that this sort of "measure for measure" reading has sometimes been imputed by modern critics to texts in a way that is neither strongly supported by the text itself nor an enhancement of the reading of the text.
Realism
The fabliaux do, however, maintain a number of prominent characteristics that can be called "realistic" .
Characters are most frequently involved in actions as they actively or passively deserve.
It is important to note that chance plays virtually no part in the unfolding of events within these tales.
As was noted in the context of Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin, supernatural settings and in particular the agency of supernatural forces are quite rare.
In this way the fabliaux present a consistent world of characters and events, a world that in terms of the motivation and execution of actions, of the basic set of relationships noted above, is very much a human world.
This anthropocentric view and attitude is one facet of what is frequently identified as the realism of the fabliaux.
Realism is also a feature of the characterization of time and place.
The French fabliaux are generally consistent in the setting of the action.
Most common are settings that are both urban and domestic, events taking place in or around private homes in the towns.
These form a larger group than fabliaux set in the country, largely in villages, although the latter group is still a substantial one.
It is rare for the scene to shift to a setting of higher status, in a castle, manor or abbey, etc., though some such examples can be found.
Emblematic of the limited but crucial shift the fabliaux make use of from a thoroughly familiar world to one that is somewhat different is the extent to which the stories take place in the deep darkness of the medieval French night: as, for instance, all the tit-for-tat stealing and impersonation of Barat et Haimet.
Darkness aids deception, of course, although the tricks played and misdeeds  committed seem to lose little of their quality of daring for being performed under the cover of night.
Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin stands at the edge of a relatively small, distinctive subset of irreverent fabliaux, fabliaux which powerfully exploit the inherent realism of the genre by reducing the characters and setting of the Christian heaven to a comically mundane and very human level: Heaven and Hell become just two alternatives amongst the familiar loci of the fabliaux.
A very clear example of this is Le Vilain qui conquist Paradis par plait, "The peasant who conquered Paradise by arguing" .
This tale starts with an unmistakably satirical point, on how the soul of a dead peasant is ignored:(It so befell him
that neither angel nor devil came at the hour that he was dead.
When the spirit parted from the body it found no one asking anything of it nor giving it any directions.)
St Peter first rebuffs the soul:( "We are not concerned with a peasant" )
but the unflappable soul gradually argues its way in past Peter, Thomas, Paul and finally God, nonplussing the saints by reminding them of their faults in life, but making a moral and liturgical claim on God's final grace.
The conclusion of the tale:(Trickery achieves more than force can do)
could stand as the epitome of the whole fabliau corpus.
Considerably more sacrilegious, albeit in a flippant way, is Du Con qui fu fait a la besche, "Of the cunt, which was made with a spade" , in which God is presented as having forgotten to give Eve  genitals and then allowing the Devil to remedy this, on the condition that he neither adds to nor takes anything away from God's creature.
The Devil chooses to model the appropriate part with a spade, and for good measure farts on the woman's tongue, rendering woman innately garrulous (another antifeminist commonplace).
This fabliau makes explicit a linkage between vagina and mouth that we find implied elsewhere amongst the fabliaux: e.g. in Le Chevalier qui fist parler les cons, "The knight who made the cunts talk" , or Berengier au lonc cul, "Berengier of the long arse" , where a woman disguised as a knight makes her recreant husband kiss what seems to him to be her exceptionally long arse.
Despite the damage the enticing vagina causes, it is essential not to slander women, for worse in the way of verbal retribution will come back in return.
More seriously sacrilegious is surely Saint Pierre et le jongleur, "Saint Peter and the jongleur" , in which a jongleur's soul goes off to Hell with a number of other satirically identified characters — jousting men, usurers, thieves, bishops, priests, monks, abbots, knights — but presents itself, incongruously, as that of a relatively good character, anxious, for instance, to please its new infernal master (in a witty parody of the Orpheus story) by singing.
The jongleur is left to watch over some souls, but is approached by St Peter, with whom he plays two different games of dice, gambling for the souls.
This aspect of the story has shocking implications as a representative of what might appear to be the random and unjust way by which salvation may be achieved — although St Peter always wins.
A refrain-like line:( "" Hey "" , said Saint Peter…)
renders Peter as a familiar ribaud, a colloquially-speaking gambler.
 "" Hé "" is also put into God's mouth in Du Con qui fu fait a la besche.
The games end in a brawl between the jongleur, who feels he is being cheated, and the saint.
To his further credit the jongleur has the sense to know when he is beaten.
The poem represents the interests of the poet/jongleur's party: the denouement is that the Devil bars all jongleurs from Hell.
The image of God as a cosmic gambler can also be found in Brunain, where a simple peasant and his wife find God to be good doublere, "doubler" , giving them a second beast when they naively  give their own cow to the priest who has told them that God repays gifts twofold.
 "Doubling" in the context of gambling is clearly shown in Saint Pierre et le jongleur, where during the two games the stakes played for are steadily doubled.
The verb dobler can also, significantly, carry the sense of "to deceive" .
Le Prestre et les deus ribaus, "The priest and the two wastrels" , presents us with sacrilegious puns on "d é/D; é" (die [plural dice]/God) and "douze/Dieus" (twelve [=double-six]/God).
Language
The characteristic styles of discourse and the linguistic comic devices of the French fabliaux are also related fundamentally to the tales' narrative character.
If the narrative is to be presented relatively rapidly, then brevity must be a feature of the style expected.
As with gratuitous elaboration of character or place, it is not the case that the rhetorical ornamentation of text, or emphasis of passages of text, is generally absent; rather that these are used sparingly and therefore to particular effect.
Although it is true, as Charles Muscatine has recently pointed out, that it is inappropriate and impossible to seek to classify fabliaux in toto as representing one of the styles of Latin rhetoric recognized in the medieval schools — humilis, medius or gravis: low, middle or high — fabliau authors can call up such a range of styles for good local effect.
The low style is surely recalled by the colloquial "" Hé "" given to God and St Peter as noted above, and the high by the description of the young wife in Les Trois Boçus:(a beautiful girl So beautiful that she was a delight And if I should tell you the truth I do not think that Nature ever made Any more beautiful creature.)
But the most significant point to make is that to attempt to force the fabliaux to fit some standard rhetorical classification is not just (perhaps) irrelevant, but, more seriously, distracting in respect of the frequently clever and significant exploitation of language in these texts.
In a fabliau called La Saineresse, "The female blood-letter" , for instance, the deceptive actions performed by the deceiving character are actions entirely of speech, as a wife who has had sexual intercourse with a man her dull-witted husband believes to be a female blood-letter describes her act of illicit fornication to her duped and satisfied husband entirely in metaphors:(Sir, thank you by the love of God, I have indeed been in hard labour.
I could not be bled and have been dealt more than a hundred blows so that I got a thorough grinding.)
A nice example of sophisticated linguistic play lies at the heart of Cele qui fu foutue et desfoutue: a tale in which a beautiful young woman, locked away in a tower by her jealous father, one day desires to buy a bird (a crane) from a young man passing by, and is told it will cost a foutre, a "fuck" .
She assures him she has no such thing; he enters the tower to look for a foutre and indeed finds one beneath the lady's clothes.
Subsequently the young man passes the tower again, and the lady asks to exchange the bird for her foutre back.
The fellow readily agrees; the lady subsequently tells her female guardian that he "" desfoutue m'a "" , he "has unfucked me" .
The man has managed to foutre the girl twice, and keep his bird into the bargain.
Although desfoutre is a perfectly proper grammatical construction, it is, of course, in real-world terms impossible to be "unfucked" , except perhaps in the mind of a naive woman who imagines that a second foutre can annul or return the first…or does she?
The notion of the fabliau being a form of linguistic game is one that has been extensively and productively explored in relatively recent scholarship.
Roy J. Pearcy (1977) suggested that the  fundamental comic structure of the French fabliau lay in epistemological problems: that is in failures and deceptions in understanding and communication, usually verbal as in the examples here, but by no means exclusively so.
This he further suggested was a product of the same currents that saw intense conderation of such aspects of Logic in the schools and universities of the later Middle Ages.
In her book Les fabliaux, Dominque Boutet (1985) emphasized the predominance of the "low" discursive style and the comic exploitation of antagonisms in these texts, including antagonism between low and high culture.
She describes a teasing, textual–linguistic game where, for instance, a conventionally solemn and important event such as death becomes contextually banal: just one accident amongst a hundred possible accidents that may befall Man.
This may leave the reader of the fabliau puzzling over whether this is a matter of a subconscious anarchistic attitude or a conscious perception governing the composition of the fabliaux.
For Boutet, the concluding morals of the fabliaux are a final inscription of the truth of traditional values; an ultimate retraction of such a challenge to the conventional order.
One of the most striking features of the diction of the fabliaux which the reader of this book should already have noted, and, perhaps, one of the most intriguing and intermittently popular features of the genre across the centuries, is the use of scurrilous language.
To label and discuss — or suppress — this feature of the fabliaux as "obscenity" has proved in the past to be unproductive, and it is perhaps better to talk instead of "marked terms" : colloquial and familiar terms for parts of the body or basic bodily acts which are labelled to varying degrees as vulgar and indecent, and not, normally, to be admitted into serious, careful or respectable discourse.
Frequently these words are purportedly used by the characters within the fabliaux, such as the examples quoted above from Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin, but such terms are also quite often used by the narrators propria voce: in Le Pescheor de Pont seur Saine, "The Fisherman of Pont-sur-Seine" , for instance, a tale of sexual envy in a marriage, the narrator soon bluntly tells us of the couple that the man:(He held her down
and gave the best fucking he could: if a man does not do this, a young woman's love will disappear when he has her, and he will not find ecstasy with her: for a young woman, properly brought up, wants to be fucked often.
One evening they lay in their bed.
She held the young man's prick — and he had a long and a thick one…)
It has been noted also that a particular salacious title for a fabliau, irrespective of the nature of the fabliau's contents, may have been the secret of the contemporary success of some, as measured by the number of extant manuscript copies.
We may note Le Chevalier qui fist parler les cons (seven manuscript copies), Cele qui se fist foutre sur la fosse de son mari, "The woman who got fucked on the tomb of her husband" (six copies), Cele qui fu foutue et desfoutue (six copies), La Damoiselle qui ne pooit oïr parler de foutre, "The maid who could not bear hearing talk of fucking" (five copies), La Coille noire, "The black balls" (six copies) or La Dame escoillee, "The woman who had her balls cut off" (six copies).
Only the innocently entitled Auburee, still a thoroughly sexual tale, exceeds all of these with eight manuscript copies.
Of the remaining 120 fabliaux recognized in the Nouveau Recueil Complet des Fabliaux, more than half exist in a single copy, and fewer than twenty of the more innocently titled fabliaux exist in four or more manuscript copies.
The list of such marked words is not a particularly long one: for the relevant parts of the body we have vit, coilles, con and cul which correspond in meaning, and, as far as one can tell, in tone, to current English prick, balls, cunt and arse; as actions foutre (fuck) or occasionally alternatives such as corber (lay); as bodily excretions merde and pet (shit; fart).
Just as the current English equivalents suggested here, it would appear that the Old French terms bore  different degrees of markedness.
A fine illustration of how these terms are marked occurs in L'Esquiriel, "The Squirrel" , one of a set of fabliaux, such as Le Damoisselle qui ne pooit oïr parler de foutre or Cele qui fu foutue et desfoutue noted above, in which the markedness or a related ignorance of such words is used as the basis of the drama forming the narrative.
A girl asks her mother "What is the name of the dangling thing that men have?" "; the mother is unwilling to tell her.
Eventually, after some effort to put her off with euphemisms she reveals the forbidden word: vit.
The girl bursts into incredulous laughter:( ""  "Vit" , "" she said, "" Lord have mercy, "vit" !
 "Vit" , I shall say, whoever likes it or not!
 "Vit" , dear me, "vit" says my father, my sister says "vit" and my brother says "vit" , and our chambermaid says "vit" ; and "vit" this way and "vit" that: everyone says "vit" whenever they want! "" )
Vit is a frequent homonym in Old French, appearing, as in Modern French, as the passé simple of the verb voir, "to see" , and being nearly homophonic with the nouns vis, "face" , and vie, "life" .
The deployment of these marked terms appears virtually always to be carefully controlled.
There are few examples of their being scattered extensively and repeatedly used within a single text; where this does happen, as for instance in Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin, the practice can readily be justified by its thematic significance (on which see further below), as again can be seen to be the case with the cornucopia of excrement that Robin drops on to the deservedly victimized Jouglet.
Although the employment of such terms can be regarded as a distinctive feature of fabliau language, there are several fabliaux which treat of sexual adventures even in a bawdy way without using this language.
A range of euphemisms or metaphors may be used, such as the device already noted employed by the wife to  hoodwink her husband in La Saineresse and to render him yet more ridiculous.
The tale of L'Esquiriel goes on to tell of how the girl is approached by a young man playing with his erect penis; she asks him what he has there — a squirrel, is the answer; does she want it?— yes please, let me hold it; not yet, put your hand on it carefully; it's hot!— ah, it's just got out of its nest — and so on, until, after further euphemisms and foreplay, we return to the blunt world of crude speech as the squirrel enters the girl's con to seek from her stomach the nuts she ate the day before.
The combination of such marked terms with a widespread use of word play is what we can regard as the typical exploitation of language in the French fabliaux.
The list of single words or phrases substituting for the sexual or scatological items listed above is considerably longer than the basic list; e.g. "taking medicine" for having sexual intercourse, "pipe" for penis, "nest" , "eggs" and "purse" for scrotum and testicles, "fountain" for vagina.
One of the most fascinating features of linguistic use in these works is the way in which words or syllables are used to enhance either the sensual atmosphere of the tales or the sense of scatological exposure within them.
The latter situation may be illustrated by examples of the use of the word cul, which can, as in Modern French, have a simple sense of "back" .
In La Male Honte, "Foul shame" (although the title itself is ambiguous, representing Anglo-French "The purse of Honte" , and the fabliau itself revolves around this ambiguity), the deceased Honte's friend carries the legacy due to the crown to the king "" a son col "" : simply, "on his back" , although since we know that we are reading a "" fablel "" we are especially prepared for a word such as col = "arse" , and have to carry forward in our minds to the rest of the fabliau the notion that it might be significant that the friend carries what is due to the king on his backside.
The same ambiguity is much more richly exploited in Estula, a robbers' tale, again turning on the verbal confusion between Estula, the extraordinary name of a dog, and es tu la?, "are you there?" 
When a robber's voice responds to the calling of the dog's name, "" Oui, voirement sui je ci "" , "Yes, I am indeed here" , the astonished dog's owner sends his son for the priest to witness this marvel.
The priest, somewhat contrivedly, has to have a piggy-back to the house:(And mounts without any more words On the "cul" of the boy…)
A similar effect of, on the one hand, challenging the reader to take up an alert and interpretative role, and, on the other, gratuitously creating an amorphous but strong atmosphere peculiar to the fabliau through the text, is achieved by extensive use of the homonyms vit and con, and com-/con- as a common suffix in the Romance languages:(I cannot make a long tale: in this castle there was a count and with him the countess, his wife, who was a very beautiful and worthy woman; and there were [or she had]more than thirty knights.
He who made the cunts talk went straightaway into the castle; all ran to salute him and wished to welcome him warmly, in which he could take great pleasure.)
(Le Chevalier qui fist parler les cons, 337–46; cf.
Bloch The Scandal of the Fabliaux pp 107–10.)
This sort of process can be taken even further by exploiting the suggestive potential of the bodily or sexual euphemisms.
Co-acting with the syllable con- in the passage above is the suggestive use of joie (joir)(cf. the passage from Le Pescheor de Pont seur Saine, above, where it has the clear sense of sexual ecstasy), the equally suggestive emphasis on the "entering" of the castle by the knight, and the ambiguity of the past tense of avoir, ot, meaning either "there were" or "she had" .
In Barat et Haimet the sexual innuendo of Barat approaching Marie's bed in the dark, and successfully imitating her husband, Travers, is difficult to miss, and since we may know that  bacon, the term generally used for the meat that is stolen and stolen back over and over again, can also be used of a girl's thighs, there is a strong suggestion that the actions are really a sexual allegory: is it Marie that the three men are trying to appropriate?
The final answer is no, for the text does not support a coherent allegorical interpretation, as the reader is generally aware.
This does not detract from the pleasure there may be both in recognizing the possibilities and in being able to judge them unambiguously.
Comparable psuedo-allegorizing may be found in, for example, Constant du Hamel, where Constant's wife extorts from her would be seducers a sachet (cf. bourse "purse" — "scrotum" ), a corroie ( "belt" , "money-pouch" , therefore parallel to bourse) and an anel ( "ring" — "anus" , "labia" and? "foreskin" ), or in Les trois Dames qui troverent l'anel, "The three women who found the" ring "" , which has an obvious basic parallel in Les trois Dames qui troverent un vit.
Language thus contributes to an atmosphere in the fabliaux that lies above and outside the describable details of character and setting: an all-enveloping "feeling" of sensuality, shared by the real people involved — the authors and their anticipated readers/audiences — via the medium of the tale.
That people delight in and desire the excitement and sensual pleasure found in sexual contact, food, bathing and money is an essential and straightforward assumption made in the fabliaux.
The shifting sign-value of the terms tends to emphasize the overlap, or the common power, of three of these basic sources or types of sensual pleasure: sex, food and money; of these it is sexuality that is central, overlapping with both of the others.
Philosophically, this implied recognition of the existence and power of such common pleasures could be Epicurean, or some other form of hedonism: that is, the holding of pleasure (which can be obtained in various ways, including abstinence) to be the greatest good.
We can now focus more directly on the philosophical potential of the fabliaux.
SOURCES AND TONE
Theories of social origins
Amongst many other ways in which Joseph Bédier set the pattern for subsequent scholarly study of the French fabliaux in his book of  1893, he elevated the question of the social origins of this literary form.
He saw the question of how such contrarious genres as fabliau and romance could co-exist in medieval French literature as a critical problem, and consequently tried to identify a source for a taste which could explain the proliferation and regularization of fabliau, the narrative and comical substance of which he accepted as being ubiquitous.
Amongst the most pertinent critical observations he makes of the fabliaux is that they are neither truly crude and naive, nor pretentious.
His cohesive solution was to see the spirit of the fabliaux, "" le description ironique de la vie quotidienne et moyenne "" , as having been born with the bourgeoisie, the town dwellers, and to propose that fabliaux were the literary expression of this social class, romance that of the aristocracy.
More than sixty years later, in 1957, Per Nykrog was the first to publish a thorough critique of Bédier's theory.
He, like Bédier, identified the fundamental problem posed by fabliaux to the scholar as that of identifying the social condition of the audience they were addressed to.
Rather than a bourgeois audience, however, he saw the fabliau as belonging primarily to a seigneurial, aristocratic milieu, and to be closely related to romance precisely as the antithesis of romance; as being very largely parodic.
Having done away with an earlier one-to-one social class to genre relationship, it is not so very surprising that Nykrog's substitute for it proved considerably less persuasive and durable than Bédier's had.
By 1960 Jean Rychner produced a valuable study of how certain types of variation in the textual transmission of what were essentially the same fabliaux could be explained in terms of their being aimed at specific, and differing, audiences rather than through random mutilation and degeneration.
Nonetheless Nykrog's work does demonstrate substantially the extent to which these fabliaux support and respect relative status in the existing late-feudal social scale.
More recent studies have revived the question, and tended, after a fashion, to move closer to Bédier's view.
Charles Muscatine (1986) notes that the self-indulgence and materialism of the fabliaux were symptomatic of ideas that contributed to (perhaps he should have said attitudes that flourished along with) the growth of urbanism and a concurrent commercialization of the French countryside.
Mary Jane Stearns Schenk (1987) completed the set of social classes to which the rise of the fabliaux had been attributed by proposing that an economically emancipated peasantry in north-eastern France  provided the right conditions for the genre to prosper; a group whose primary values were competence and ambition, and success in the form of profit.
The analysis of the French fabliaux up to this point has included recurrent references to the roles of readers and writers involved with these texts.
As the scholars just reviewed generally note, the social identity of the fabliau writers need not be the same as that of their typical audience.
Nonetheless the characterization of the fabliau writer in the text is a worthwhile subject of study, for an assessment of the tone of the fabliau beyond anything it might tell us of the usual origins of such texts.
The notion of "tone" here reflects a sense of the word expressed by I. A. Richards: that tone resides in the relationship between the author and his readers.
Tone here comprises implicit communications and attitudes conveyed from the author to an informed and enquiring readership through the refractive medium of the text.
The clerkly tone
The writers of fabliaux commonly draw attention to themselves by naming themselves, signing their work at beginning or end, and they don a limited number of disguises as their narratorial personae — as in the case of Boivin de Provins described above.
The most common disguise is that of the jongleur or menestrel (within the fabliau tales there is barely any discernible difference in status or respectability between these two although conventionally it is supposed that the former is lower than the latter): a disreputable itinerant entertainer living, creditably, off his wits and his talents, but only too vulnerable, and given to wasting what he gains on the temporary pleasures of drinking and gambling in the taverns; a social outcast but at the same time one called upon by the members of normal society, as Jouglet is, both to instruct the ignorant young man and to play for the villagers.
This image of the jongleur is unquestionably a stereotype, a caricature, but at the same time it is historically neither entirely true nor entirely false.
Perhaps the most important aspect of this persona is the extent to which, in terms of intratextual characterization, it overlaps with the  figure of the clerc/clers, a term that can best be translated as "student" in this context.
Clerks too tend to be travellers, temporary incomers to the towns where they study or just stay; they are indigent, and they are shown in the fabliaux to supply their wants, in terms of food, sex and entertainment, by dint of their wits.
A useful review of the clers of the Old French fabliaux by Phillipe Ménard (1983) indicates that to be a clerk is a matter of attitude and behaviour rather than simply an occupation.
A pertinent statistical table produced by Nykrog shows how clerks are always successful in the eternal triangle of sexual competition, pitted against husbands ranging from knights to peasants.
Through the clerkly sympathies of the fabliau corpus we can justifiably reach back to other forms of literature and literary theory associated with students and the universities and assess the fabliaux in that light.
Several studies have been produced that point to correspondences between French fabliaux and intellectual (scholarly) currents of the twelfth to fourteenth centuries.
Pearcy (1974) investigated the functional contrasts between explicit marked language or its detailed figurative substitutes and euphemistic language, and interpreted the results in terms of the nominalist–realist opposition in medieval philosophy.
Schenk (1987) supported her arguments on the importance of problems of language, reality and illusion by invoking "" a rising interest in the thirteenth century in the power of language and the complexities of its interpretation "" .
Particularly productive, however, is comparison with Latin literature of the twelfth century and later, all of which must belong to a learned milieu.
This includes much which has gone under the name of "students' songs" : acerbic goliardic and satiric verse, as well as a set of narrative-dramatic comoediae modelled in the twelfth century on the ancient Latin comedy plays.
For the detailed discussion of theories that have been advanced concerning the relationship of the fabliaux to these slightly earlier Latin works, the reader is best directed to studies by Edmund Faral, Jürgen Beyer and Peter Dronke, and responses in the books of Ménard and  Muscatine.
Whatever the role, if any, of this medieval Latin work in the genesis of the fabliaux, such similarities as can be found between these works and the fabliaux validate the reading of the fabliaux in the light of the medieval scholarly milieu.
As an interim measure of the significance of so doing we may recall, briefly, the irreverent verses such as Saint Pierre et le jongleur, discussed above.
In this light, these appear less as vulgar reductions of the divine from a profane angle, but sharp satires, not so much of God's ordinance of the cosmos, but rather of human understanding of the scope for salvation and damnation.
Exempla
Of quite fundamental importance to our understanding of the special nature of the fabliau is an appreciation of its relationship with the exempla (singular exemplum).
These were anecdotes, like the parables of the gospels, which were intended and used to illustrate, explain or emphasize some moral argument.
The transmission of such exempla could take any form from the imitation of an exemplum heard or read to the compilation and dissemination of greater or lesser collections of exempla intended, for a variety of possible reasons, to provide a wide-ranging, or even comprehensive, corpus of moral precept.
An important collection of exempla which we shall have reason to refer to on several occasions is the Disciplina Clericalis, an early twelfth-century collection of instructive tales put together by Petrus Alphonsus, a converted Jew, for his son.
Besides being labelled as "" fabliaus "" , "" fablel "" , etc., the tales recognized as fabliaux in Old French are often also called "" essemple "" .
We shall see, by the end of this book, that a simple and practical distinction between fabliau and exemplum can be drawn, but that the same stories often do service in both categories.
Most fabliaux, as can be seen in the summaries already given in this chapter, end on an explicit moral.
Like Boutet (above), most French fabliau scholars are inclined to take the explicit moralizing of the fabliaux very much at face value.
This includes Schenk, despite her stated belief in the essentially ironic character of wisdom  literature; a belief which seems to imply that the best lesson one can ever be taught is to be cynical (which might, sadly, be true).
The morals one finds at the end of the fabliaux are generally relevant at least in part to the tales that have been told, and on the whole appear ironic only in the sense of the contrast between the worldly-wise, pragmatic and cynical counselling they most frequently offer and the idealistic norms of Christian moralizing that the reader is otherwise prepared for.
Commonly, the tales of adulterous wives end with counsel to men not to trust what their wives tell them, not to let them out, and so on.
Warning rather than exhortation to virtue is the style of the fabliau morals.
Schenk's study accepted the fabliaux"morals as a proper element of fabliau structure, which should imply that they make a more positive contribution to the overall significance of the fabliaux than several writers on the subject would have us believe.
Nykrog, for instance, suggested the morals were a redundant, fossilized feature inherited by the fabliaux from twelfth-century precursors that were fables; Ménard sees the moral largely as a façade and Charles Muscatine is most inclined to see the moral simply as a convenient, traditional way of closing a text.
Taking the moral seriously, however, does not mean taking it at face value and ignoring the potentially ironic and certainly easily seen limitations of morals of the kind just noted.
An unquizzical synthesis of the fabliaux"explicit morals produces at best an alternative moral scheme to that which was conventional in the Christian Middle Ages — and is still, largely, conventional today; a scheme that various critics have described either as the morality of efficacy, the liberation of the instinct, a morality of pleasure, hedonistic materialism, or pragmatic warnings of the need to avoid deception and the promise or threat of retributive justice.
Yet we have already noted how, in terms of poetic justice for instance, fabliau morality is often conventional in precisely these terms.
There are several fabliaux in which the explicit moral seems to be so incongruous in relation to the narrative it accompanies as to be facetious, if not sarcastic.
This moral incongruency can draw attention to, and throw light upon, the very process of moralizing and the role of literature therein; which indeed are themselves well evidenced and clearly focused aspects of twelfth- to fourteenth- century intellectual speculation.
Approaching the fabliaux with a mind prepared to find moral instruction in the texts, however  unpromising they might superficially seem to be for such interpretation, is something that we can reconstruct as an authentic medieval mode of reading — "" All that is written is written for our doctrine "" as St Paul has it — although there is little direct evidence for the application of such literary theory to vernacular literature as well as the classics before the fourteenth century, and even then the extent of such application is difficult to assess.
The common claim made for classical secular literature in response to the analytical question cui parte philosophiae supponitur?, "to what branch of philosophy does it pertain?" , is ethice supponitur, "it pertains to ethics" , and the reason: "because it treats of human behaviour" .
As we have seen, the fabliaux treat very much of human behaviour, and regarded in the light of ethical ideals present an image of the very baseness of which humankind is capable.
As examples we may take the grotesque sexual extravagance, and the intense foolishness, of the peasant and his wife in Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin, or the state of the peasant in Le Vilain asnier, "The peasant ass-driver" , who is overpowered and anaesthetized by the beautiful scent of flowers and brought back to himself only by having dung thrust under his nose.
If we take these as emblematic of the human condition, the morals drawn at the end of these tales look conspicuously, even deliberately, inadequate.
In Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin:(Through this fabliau you may know that he does not act at all wisely who trusts his wife rather than himself: often he suffers shame and grief.)
(MS BN Paris fr. 837)
and in Le Vilain asnier:(And through this I wish to show you that he acts without sense or measure who, through pride, acts beyond his nature: nobody should disnature himself.)
The very incongruency between moral and tale in these (and other) cases can draw the reader to reconsider the moral "sentence" of both those parts of the fabliaux: initially, possibly, to see if or how far they match one another, but ultimately in respect of their own nature — to see how the narrative tale of humanity implies human baseness, while explicit human moralizing fails to match the height, or depth, of that depravity.
In so far as such tales are written for our doctrine they must be actively morally interpreted by the reader; they act through revelation, not mere instruction.
In a recent article, Pearcy (1990) has suggested that a general function of the explicit moral in a fabliau, where there is one, is to express a dialectical opposition between social convention — in particular the supposedly sanctifying constraints of Christian marriage — and individual libertarianism, in particular extra-marital sexual indulgence.
These are conflicting principles for the government of human life, the "" legitimacy "" of both of which, Pearcy claims, is recognized by the fabliaux.
Unfortunately, this is an observation made briefly at the end of his paper, and not expanded upon.
We may, however, dispute any implication that serious unresolved moral uncertainty is shared with the audience by the fabliau writer, without necessarily following Boutet in her ultimate respect for the authority of the conventional moral closure.
The fabliau through which Pearcy approaches this point, Connebert, is crystal clear in its poetic justice, with a lecherous priest being forced to castrate himself.
A recognition of the power of sexual instinct is undoubtedly implied virtually every time the fabliau form is selected by an author.
But while the breaking of convention may be agreeable, and therefore laughable (cf. certain views of Freud, below), there is never any questioning of what is "right" and what is "wrong" : for that sort of conundrum one should look rather to a romance like Marie de France's lay Eliduc.
Antifeminism
Material characteristic of medieval Latin writing that is widely exploited in the fabliaux in ways that are often both entertaining and probing is the dogma of antifeminist traditions: traditions which present woman, the daughters of Eve, as generally morally reprehensible and dangerous to man; insatiable and extravagant sexual sirens with their bodies, and perjurers, temptresses or endless naggers with their tongues.
The association of this material with the clerk is clearly exemplified by Chaucer's Wife of Bath's fifth husband, the clerk Jankyn, who, in the Wife of Bath's Prologue, reads antifeminist material to her from his book "" Valerie and Theofraste "" .
The commonplace accusations of medieval anti- feminism came to the Middle Ages as an ecclesiastical tradition.
At the root of most medieval writing on the subject was the late fourth-century figure of St Jerome, who wrote a tract adversus Jovinianum, attacking the arguments of a relatively liberal-minded monk, Jovinianus, who had denied the superiority of virginity to marriage.
Jerome included here material designed as a rhetorical dissuasion to men from marriage by warning of the weaknesses and vices of wives.
By the thirteenth century such material makes a substantial penetration of vernacular literature, with important examples in texts which we shall later meet in connection with Chaucer's fabliaux in The Romance of the Rose (8455ff.) and Eustache Deschamps' Miroir de Mariage, "Mirror of Marriage" .
It is probably a minority of medieval antifeminist writing that was meant to be taken literally rather than metaphorically; even Jerome's model diatribe was a rhetorical exercise designed for the refutation of Jovinianus and the assertion of the value of celibacy.
The antifeminist teaching of Repertoire de Science ( "the Body of Knowledge" ) in the Miroir de Mariage is similarly designed to turn the male character Franc Vouloir from contemplation of an earthly marriage to contemplation of a spiritual and divine one.
No doubt there were medieval men, and women too, who took and applied the clumsy generalizations of this tradition literally.
Anything really resembling such unalloyed antifeminism is, however, rare in the French fabliaux.
One good example of it is a fabliau called Sire Hain et Dame Anieuse, "Sir Hatred and Lady Obnoxious" , where an antagonistic husband and wife fight a crudely physical and violent battle, literally over who should have the trousers.
The trousers are destroyed; the wife is eventually overcome and forced to promise submissiveness.
A moral is drawn advising husbands:(Do just as Hain did with his wife, who would only ever show him the slightest respect, until he had beaten her to the core.)
The garrulity of women — one of St Jerome's first objections — clearly underlies the crude joke of Du Con qui fu fait a la besche, noted above, and woman's moral weakness is apparent in Cele qui se fist foutre sur la fosse de son mari, a version of a tale known as the Matron of Ephesus that can be traced as far back as to the classical author Petronius.
But more often than not the women of the fabliau are presented with admiration and respect.
They are morally no worse on the whole than the lecherous men who inhabit these tales, and intellectually much superior to them on most occasions.
There are several examples like Les Perdris, quoted earlier on in this chapter, where the conventional, antifeminist moral counterpoints the wit and ingenuity of the woman of the tale which is, after all, what makes the tale interesting and amusing — what makes it a tale at all.
A good number of fabliaux advise the husband simply to accept his inferiority to his wife and to allow her to continue to keep the passage of the world smooth; at the end of Le Chevalier a la robe vermeille, "The Knight with the scarlet robe" , a husband who has surprised his wife and made the compromising discovery of her lover's horse and robe is hoodwinked by her, and the tale concludes:(But he who keeps to the right path should believe fully, without dispute, everything that his wife tells him.)
Some women, like Constant du Hamel's wife, are splendidly loyal to their husbands; more are loyal to their lovers — and are, indeed, their saviours.
In his study of "Medieval Misogyny" , R. Howard Bloch makes the point that male distrust may depend less on a sense of the utter difference of women than on a sense of how similar women are: gender boundaries can be crossed, and men can become feminized — as Eve was created from Adam.
The fabliaux generally retain a strong sense of the sexual difference, so that either sex can find fulfilment only with the other.
But they minimize the difference in so far as they propound a thoroughgoing assimilation of male and female desires.
The fabliaux"fantasies may clearly be male ones, but fabliau attitudes are far removed from those implied by the conscious and formulaic antifeminism of medieval tradition.
Although defining fabliaux as "" contes à rire "" , Bédier did not define the comedy of the fabliaux by any positive attributes.
He presented it rather as what was left in tales that were not any of the supposed binary opposites of simple comedy, i.e. religious miracles, moralities or satire.
By the time we conclude our comparison of fabliau and exemplum at the end of this book we shall face a very similar formulation of the difference between the two as lying in the fabliau's divergence from the normal modes of exemplum, which may in itself be funny, rather than in an all-preceding intention to be funny.
Even though, as readers of the fabliaux, we may spend a good deal of time smiling at the preposterous ingenuity of gross deceptions and misdeeds — in other words things that are generically wrongs in terms of conventional Christian morality — we have already seen that substantial elements of positive Christian spirituality and conventional morality are widely represented amongst the French fabliaux.
Laughter: conventional morality, indecent comedy and pornography
It is undeniable that most readers find amusement to be part of their experience of these texts.
The superficial nature of such humour varies considerably.
There are for instance extreme examples of the inhibition or punishment of the sexual act in which laughter cannot be other than inhumane if it can be found at all: for example in Connebert, where a lecherous priest has to castrate himself in order to save his life, or Le Prestre et le leu, "The priest and the wolf" , a laconically brief tale of just twenty-eight lines relating how a peasant digs a trap for a lecherous priest, into which first a wolf, then the priest, and then the wife's maid sent to see if the priest is coming fall in turn, after which the peasant kills the wolf, castrates the priest, and chases off the maid.
The fabliaux as a whole clearly imply a system of values that in many respects is quite conventional, and it is one of these values that directs that the lecherous priest should be the type that suffers most from the poetic justice of these texts.
Writing about comedy, a term used here in its commonest current English sense of some pleasantly amusing drama, has never been easy.
Jokes that have to be explained lose nearly all their force, and no one ever laughs spontaneously at the explication of a joke; even the terms we have at our disposal in English to discuss literature of this kind — comedy, humour, amusement, ridicule — are full of ambiguities demanding pedantic caution on the part of anyone who uses them in an analytical way.
It is easy enough to identify features that are likely to provoke laughter and were presumably intended to do so amongst the common attributes of the fabliaux.
The use of marked language is a familiar enough device of modern television comedy or stage farce to raise a laugh, be that in the mild form of so-called "family entertainment" — words like knickers, pratt, plonker, etc. — or in the form of more marked terms used in later night viewing on the supposedly more serious channels.
The milder range in fact serves not to challenge but to define the limits of propriety; they set a horizon beyond which "improper" linguistic use will not go, and the audience can laugh with relief at the reassurance that they will not be shocked, as well as at the impudence of these terms.
The more marked terms, conversely, represent pretensions of freedom and anarchy in writer, performer and audience alike.
It is interesting to note how even euphemisms, symbolizing but not presenting marked terms, can be the more amusing for the conspiracy between scriptwriter, actors and  audience in recognizing the term signified at the same time as superficially recognizing that its use is a taboo not to be broken.
One thinks of examples such as "" shorthouse "" (for shortarse) or "" naff off "" (for fuck off) from post-war British comedy.
An intellectual amusement resides in the interplay between what for simplicity's sake we can represent as just two contrasting ranges of marked and unmarked language — although arse is undoubtedly less marked than fuck.
Ironically, the linguistic difference (in markedness) between the terms is emphasized at the same time as their functional equivalence — with the milder signifying the stronger — is blatantly evident.
The comic process here is conscious and intellectual rather than unconscious and psychological.
Something very similar is found in L'Esquiriel, in which the boy's figurative euphemisms — squirrel, nest, eggs — are not simply comic as signifiers of "real" objects — penis, scrotum or pubic hair, testicles — but as signifiers of the sort of language that the girl has already talked about — vit, coilles, etc. — but is discouraged from using.
Usually, however, the dividing lines in this sort of linguistic stratification are simply annihilated in the fabliaux.
With their characteristic and pervasive atmosphere of sexuality and sensuality and their erotic tales presented or disguised within verbal play, it is hardly surprising that many have considered "pornography" to be an appropriate term to describe at least a good part of what is found in these fabliaux.
Whether one agrees with this or not depends, of course, on how one defines "pornography" .
A substantial essay by Thomas D. Cooke on the subject in relation to fabliau defines pornography in conventionally evaluative and political terms as a modern form of misogyny: it is a branch of art that represents or reflects aggressive male sexuality, concerned wholly with the physical aspects of sexual experience and reducing women to the status of objects of sexual actions.
It is claimed that the fabliaux can reduce human characters to merely their genitals — perhaps best represented by the excitement of the three women who find an isolated vit — linking brutal violence with crude language and excluding emotion or affection.
One answer to this  point is that of Ménard, who notes that anything that could be interpreted as such writing belongs very much on the extreme fringes of fabliaux writing; detailed brutality is quite rare, and such as there is is not primarily sexual.
An alternative conventional definition of pornography is that it is art designed to excite and to some degree to satisfy sexual arousal.
The vision of the fabliaux offered by R. Howard Bloch (1986) seems to fit this definition squarely: he sees fabliau narrative as the origin and catalyst of sexual desire; in reading, or writing, the fabliaux, sexual experience is purely linguistic: "" if any pleasure is attached to sex in the fabliaux it comes from the deferral in speech, of speech, substituting for the act "" .
But one may reasonably dispute that the French fabliaux are pornographic by this definition either.
The euphemistic linguistic representation of sexual foreplay as in L'Esquiriel may be titillating to different readers to various possible degrees, but in general such presentations in the fabliaux are either too absurd or too blatant, or both of these, for the fabliaux to stand any serious comparison with the verbal eroticism of modern pornographic narrative.
On the surface, neither of these definitions of pornography could apply to the fabliaux if the fabliaux really are, as Bédier's definition would suggest, simply meant to be laughed at.
One general psychological theory of the intrinsic nature of indecent jokes is, however, of considerable relevance and practical value here.
This is Sigmund Freud's, as presented in a study Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten.
Freud included a study of sexual jokes as a subcategory of a major class of jokes he characterized as "tendentious" .
He traced a chain of development in the verbalization of sexual material from "smut" , "" Zote "" , which is characteristically used, he claims, by a man to excite a woman, to the joke itself as a covert expression of thwarted male sexual aggression and desire.
In "ideal" circumstances, the male joker releases his frustration by joking about the woman with a second male — an inhibitor of the desired intimacy — who thereby becomes a conspirator with the teller in the indulgence in smut as a substitute for the sexual act.
In culturally more refined society, a joke supersedes overt indecency, and is able to satisfy baser instincts in a relatively sophisticated way.
Jokes thus both acknowledge and circumvent conventional restrictions; the breaking of conventional restraint increases the pleasure of the sexual joke.
Thus comedy may merge, "pornographically" , with eroticism.
This is a useful model for an analysis and description of the use of indecent comedy in the fabliaux.
It is in the first place striking that in the Old French fabliaux, a male rival or spoiler is more commonly the butt of the humour than a female, though examples of the latter situation are reasonably numerous.
Thus a considerable proportion of the fabliaux may appear less inhibited in expressing their underlying desires than the more sophisticated sexual joke envisaged by Freud.
Freud's graded system of classification of jokes, from the crude and explicit to the refined and more abstract, implies that many of the fabliaux achieve an intriguing conflation of basic smut — in their overt expression of the dreams of masculine sexuality, with women, often other men's wives, freely available, especially to the lover who spices his indulgence with daring and danger, and their insistence on the use of diction which is the opposite of refined — and the circumstances of the more sophisticated joke: where there is an inhibitor, he becomes the butt of the joke.
In respect of the supposed vicarious eroticism of the genre, however, we may argue that the unembarrassed and disembarrassed honesty of the fabliaux"sexual fantasies largely precludes any lingering upon the process of arousal in the form of a gradual uncovering of the tale's sexual core.
Muscatine's book (1986) treats these topics in a persuasive way.
He commences upon the dismantling of assumptions of where the texts are funny or obscene based on modern suppositions of what constitutes obscenity et al., and puts forward a theory that picks up a suggestion of Nykrog's concerning the relationship of fabliau and romance: that the fabliaux flourished as a conservative reaction to new notions of gentility and decency in behaviour and especially in language; new notions that are found most clearly in the literary cult of fin amour.
THE FRENCH FABLIAU IN ENGLAND
The Norman Conquest introduced a French-speaking community and aspects of Norman French culture into England.
The full  assimilation of this population to the native English and the submergence of Anglo-Norman culture within English culture took several centuries to complete, while the political separation of English and French territory was not complete until the loss of Calais to the English crown in the mid-sixteenth century.
Anglo-Norman literature composed in what became an increasingly distinctive Anglo-Norman dialect of French was flourishing by the second half of the twelfth century.
The French fabliau in England may take one of two basic forms: fabliaux composed in Old French in France of which copies made their way to England, and fabliaux composed (in most cases re-composed) in the Anglo-Norman dialect, presumably in England.
It is difficult to ascertain whether any known examples fall into the former category.
Three manuscripts containing genuinely French fabliaux are known in English collections: in the British Library, London (Additional MS 10289), the Bodleian Library, Oxford (Douce 111) and the Middleton Library, University of Nottingham (Middleton LM6).
Douce 111 is a fifteenth-century manuscript that seems to have remained in France until being obtained by the nineteenth-century collector, Douce, and it has been deduced that the Middleton manuscript was taken as plunder from the French town of Laval during the later stages of the Hundred Years' War, between March 1428 and September 1429.
BL Additional MS 10289, which contains a copy of Jouglet, is more interesting in that it shows distinct traces of particularly Norman interest, beginning for instance with a long Roman du Mont St Michel, St Michael's Mount being situated on the coast of Normandy.
There is no record of the history of this manuscript before it was bought for the British Museum in 1836, but it appears possible that the Jouglet it contains could be one text forming a bridge between the French fabliaux and the Anglo-Norman.
A bridge of a different kind is represented by French fabliaux taking Englishmen — and their poor French — as their characters.
Examples are La Male Honte, noted already, and Les deux Anglois et l'anel, "The two Englishmen and the anel" , which turns around a joke based on an Englishman's inability to make a[g]nel (lamb) distinct from a[s]niel (young ass) in his attempt to speak French.
A  more scurrilous comic innuendo comes with the fact that these two words can be (and are in the one manuscript copy of this text) turned into phonetic or graphic homonyms with anel, "ring" , with its sexual connotations as noted above.
Similarly the text is written so as to bring out comic connotations of the word fut, the passé simple of the verb "to be" by writing it with a characteristically Anglo-Norman spelling as "" fout "" , recalling foutre.
Not only does the Englishman confuse terms; he appears ridiculously ignorant of the comic implications of his bewilderment to the initiates in French fabliau slang.
Asnele is also recorded as an adjective meaning "stupid" .
The Anglo-Norman fabliaux had been thoroughly neglected before Nico van den Boogard had a conference paper devoted to the subject published in 1981.
This paper listed seven Anglo-Norman fabliaux, collected in four manuscripts.
All bar a fragment of the Anglo-Norman version of Cele qui fu foutue et desfoutue, found on an isolated leaf in a library in Clermont-Ferrand, are in manuscripts still in British libraries.
The largest collection is of four works in a manuscript of the British Library famous, amongst other things, for a collection of English medieval lyrics it contains, British Library MS Harley 2253 (a facsimile of this manuscript has been published by the Early English Text Society, Original Series no.255).
This manuscript is dated circa 1330–1350, and was written by a scribe based in or near Ludlow, Shropshire.
The fabliaux in this manuscript are Le Chevalier qui fist parler les cons, "The knight who made the cunts talk" , Les trois Dames qui troverent un vit, "The three ladies who found a prick" , Le Chevalier a la corbeille, "The knight of the basket" , and La Gageure, "The wager" .
The first two of these are also found in genuinely French versions, but not the latter two.
Manuscripts containing single Anglo-Norman fabliaux are Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS Digby 86, with a version of Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin, a manuscript which also contains our one Middle English fabliau found outside of Chaucer's works, Dame Sirith, and Corpus Christi College Cambridge MS 50, with a fabliau, Un Chevalier, sa dame et un clerc, "A knight, his lady and a clerk" , a variant of the story found in La Bourgeoise d'Orliens.
Van den Boogard concentrated his study on revealing characteristics shared by the Anglo-Norman fabliaux which could be explained by reference to the peculiar situation of the Anglo-Norman community.
This echoes the general case made by Rychner for variation between closely related fabliau texts to be explicable on the basis of different intended audiences, although van den Boogard actually contradicted Rychner's specific findings on the Anglo-Norman fabliaux, which Rychner found to represent only the common degeneration typical of "" transmission memorielle "" .
The Anglo-Norman community was a socially isolated but powerful group: the higher aristocracy of England with their households and retinues.
Not every member of the Anglo-Norman-speaking community would have been an aristocrat, but virtually all would be linked to and dependent upon the aristocracy.
This appears to be reflected in the character of the Anglo-Norman fabliaux, which — small though their number is and therefore a rather unreliable basis for generalizations — tend to concentrate upon the adventures of knightly characters, and to develop the characters they contain in terms which, however facile, represent the aristocratic or courtly ethos: characters are frequently identified as "" bel "" , "fine" , for instance, and given "noble" motives for their actions, such as the lady of Un Chevalier, sa dame et un clerc, who, superficially at least , gives herself to the clerk as an act of pity, in order to avoid his dying of his "" maladie "" of love.
Van den Boogard suggested that in the Anglo-Norman fabliaux the author assumes what he calles the persona of the clerk, i.e. a character looking for respect and admiration for his ability to tell a fascinating tale of intrigue (inter alia), whereas a French author is more likely to adopt the persona of the jongleur, shocking by his anarchism but amusing at the same time through his self-mockery.
Both Rychner (1960) and van den Boogaard note that the five Anglo-Norman fabliaux with identifiable French counterparts tend to appear to be further removed from hypothetical original forms.
This stands in striking contrast with the Jouglet of British Library MS Additional 10289, which is described in the Nouveau Recueil Complet des Fabliaux as "" sans doute la plus proche de l'original "" .
Van den Boogaard argued that in entering Anglo-Norman, fabliaux underwent a radical transformation because they were aimed at such an isolated audience; an audience isolated from the full French literary frame of reference that a truly French audience would have had.
As his principal example (to which the effacement of the jongleur persona could be added) he noted the removal of deliberate and witty echoes of the characteristic diction of the Breton lay from the French version of Le Chevalier qui fist parler les cons: the fairy lande disappears in the Anglo-Norman version, the magic don, "gift" , becomes a mundane guerdon, "reward" , and the fées, "fairies" , become desmoisselles.
The impact of French literary tradition on the Anglo-Norman fabliaux seems to have been rather crude: van den Boogard indicates that Anglo-Norman poets saw the fabliau primarily as a mode of "obscene" entertainment.
The influence of French literary tradition was thus limited, but not, as he rather loosely stated in his article, entirely absent.
Emphasizing the isolation of the Anglo-Norman literary community can also be misleading in another respect.
The Anglo-Norman fabliaux are preserved in manuscripts that are miscellaneous literary anthologies.
Irrespective of the circumstances of their composition, the Anglo-Norman fabliaux were transmitted, eventually, and preserved for posterity because the fabliau was recognized as a genre which had its place in the full range of new and recent vernacular literary production in England.
The great majority of French fabliaux too are to be found in manuscripts that contain extensive collections of fabliaux, and other genres, reflecting a development in manuscript production of the thirteenth century that it is difficult to believe is not connected in some general way to the growth of scholarly "compilations" (compilationes) at the same time.
But the assembling of separate tales to form some larger whole is a distinctive feature of medieval literature with a history of its own, apart from the history of what can properly be called compilationes.
A range of such collections seems to develop from earlier collections with either no framework at all, or an apparently  genuine, utilitarian one, as in the Disciplina Clericalis (see above), to more imaginative and narratologically significant frameworks created by Boccaccio for his Decameron and, par excellence , Chaucer for his Canterbury Tales.
The subject of this book is the fabliau in English.
That is, it is about works of a genre that can be identified as equivalent to the fabliau in French or in Anglo-Norman.
We shall see that there is evidence that this was perceived as a genre in its own right in England, and in English.
The medieval fabliaux in English belong in the first instance to the context of medieval England, and are not to be seen as foreign intruders disguised in the clothing of the Middle English language.
One of the issues for discussion is whether or not, or how far, the Anglo-Norman fabliaux formed a bridge between the French fabliaux and the English.
We shall see, in fact, that the case for French sources and thus a possible Anglo-Norman bridge is most persuasive and pertinent in respect of the fabliaux in English with what we shall be able to identify as the "earliest" features: Dame Sirith and Chaucer's Shipman's Tale.
(Norman) French influence may also have introduced the fabliau to medieval Welsh literature.
Anglo-Norman literature was not constituted of the random dregs and splashes of French literature that landed in England; it formed an organic literary corpus of its own, and, most significantly in this context, formed part of a trilingual medieval English literary corpus, as exemplified by certain great English, Latin and Anglo-Norman manuscript miscellanies of the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
It is in Anglo-Norman that we find the earliest evidence of the concept of fabliau in England, and it is appropriate, therefore, that our earliest English fabliau is labelled a "" fablel "" in an Anglo-Norman rubric.
This is Dame Sirith, the subject of the next chapter.
DAME SIRITH
Dame Sirith
A study of the poem
Dame Sirith is the only extant Middle English fabliau by an author other than Chaucer.
It is found in a manuscript in the Bodleian Library, Oxford (MS Digby 86), that appears to have been written within the diocese of Worcester both for, and, arguably, by, a layman and is datable between the accession of Edward I in 1272 and the end of the eleventh year of his reign in November 1283.
This manuscript contains many English, Anglo-Norman and Latin works besides Dame Sirith, a clear majority of which are thoroughly serious and religious.
However, this collection also gives a good impression of the effective presence of the fabliau in the Anglo-Norman literary corpus and its context.
It contains the sole copy of the Anglo-Norman version of Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin.
The fact that Dame Sirith was introduced to this collection as a representative of a genre otherwise known as a French genre is indicated by the rubric in the manuscript which marks the beginning of the poem.
In French, this reads "" Cil comence le fablel e la cointise de dame Siriz "" , "Here begins the fabliau and the trickery of Dame Sirith" .
Besides these true fabliaux, the fabliau voice and tone are to be heard in a text rubricated Le fablel del gelous, "The fabliau of the jealous man" , which includes observations such as:(The jealous should lie in the shit)
and in the salacious La vie de un vallet amerous, "The life of a lusty lad" , which includes the lines:( "Dearly beloved one now hear my prayer; I'm brave enough to fuck you and to shove my prick up your cunt." )
The tale of Dame Sirith is as follows.
A clerk lusts after a woman who is married to a merchant.
One day, when the merchant is away on business, the clerk approaches the woman, and being courteously welcomed by her, and encouraged to state what he wants, he declares his "love" for her.
The wife, Margery, refuses him; the clerk departs and on a friend's advice takes his problem to an older woman, Dame Sirith.
She at first refuses to help him, suspecting a trap to catch her out in witchery, but as the clerk, Wilekin, persists she finally agrees to solve the problem, accepting twenty shillings in payment.
She then feeds her dog mustard, to make its eyes run, and goes to Margery's house, where she starts to lament her poverty and need.
Margery charitably takes notice of her, whereupon she continues to lament, claiming her daughter was turned into the dog Margery sees weeping by a clerk whose advances she refused.
At this Margery panics, expecting the same fate for herself, and soon begs the old woman to try to find Wilekin and bring him to her.
This is quickly done, and Wilekin prepares to bed Margery, dismissing Dame Sirith, who is no longer needed and who leaves urging Wilekin to take his pleasure of Margery aggressively:( "…see that you plough her and stretch out her thighs…" )
(440–1)
and offering her services more generally to any man who is failing to "get" the object of his desires.
There is not a substantial critical tradition relating to Dame Sirith.
It tends to be noticed in simple literary-historical terms as representative of the fabliau genre in thirteenth-century English, and presented simply as a work of little art.
The most substantial and recent discussion of the poem is that of Michael Swanton (1987), where the terminology used is amply clear and quite typical.
The story is "" frivolous "and"  "short"  ", the plot,"  "such as it is"  ", simply concerns the trick; the style is one of"  "informed immediacy"  ", with stock phrasing and stock characters; there is a"  "characteristically narrow"  "field of vision; speech is"  "plain"  "and"  "colloquial"  "; the tale, in this form, is a"  "straightforward enough tale of unedifying bawdry"  ", an"  "unadorned anecdote" ".
Swanton's presentation of the poem is an exercise in detailed précis and commentary; the only complexity of any credit that is found added to "" pure narrative at its simplest and barest "" is a little irony in the incredible moral comment passed by the narrator on the clerk's desires:(In this he was wrong!: this might, however, be translated "This caused him grief!" )
The artistry of the poem, however, deserves far more credit than this.
The prosody of Dame Sirith may be unobtrusive, but as such it represents a smooth and polished performance that itself contributes to the tone of the work.
Most of the work is composed in six-line tail-rhyme stanzas, rhyming A A B C C B. There are usually two main stresses within the line of at least six syllables which may also be made coherent by the use of alliteration, internal rhyme and assonance, as, for instance, in the first stanza:(As I travelled along a path I heard the tale of one, a spirited man, and proud; he was wise in learning and splendid under his clothes, and clothed in fine array.)
(1–6)
There are also passages of the work in octosyllabic couplets, the typical French fabliau measure.
The author of Dame Sirith was fully able to exploit such prosodic devices to good effect.
A sequence of six lines with the same rhyme are given to Dame Sirith as, initially, she professes her conventional goodness and innocence to Wilekin:("I am a holy woman; I know nothing of witchcraft but with almsgiving to good men I sustain my life each day, and offer my paternoster and my creed that God should help those in their need who help me my life to lead and should grant that all should go well with them…)
(205–12)
This conveys the glib emptiness of the persona with which Dame Sirith attempts to clothe herself.
When she finishes speaking, the blunt colloquialism of Wilekin's response emphasizes the facile and artificial nature of her self-portrait:( "Dear woman, give over!" )
(217)
The author is thus not just skilled in the use of form; he also enjoys a very productive skill in characterization: that is in the exploitation of the literary phenomenon of the production and manipulation of characters within a series of dramatic events for his own effects, rather than in the production of "memorable" or "realistic" characters.
The principal way in which characterization is thus exploited in  Dame Sirith lies in the use of formulaic language, in particular in the use of terms appropriate to the romance of fin amour.
Indeed before we even come to the characterization of characters within the drama we find the poem itself being apparently characterized one way but then characterized another in the opening three stanzas:(As I travelled along a path I heard the tale of one, a spirited man, and proud; he was wise in learning and splendid under his clothes, and clothed in fine array.
He began to love a married woman; there he was wrong!
His heart was set on her so that he could never relax — this love was so strong.
Anxiously he bethought himself how he might get her in any way at all.
It happened one day that the master went away upon his business.)
If we set the poem's rubric, which informs us that we shall be reading a fabliau, on one side for the moment, we could in the first stanza be looking at a tail-rhyme romance — a type familiar in English literature from the fourteenth century.
No respectable knight could object to being described as "" modi "" and "" proud "" , "" wis of lore "" , "" under gore "" and well dressed.
This possibility gradually breaks down in the next two stanzas.
Firstly we learn that this "one" fell for a wedded woman.
This does not disqualify the character from honourable knightly status — think of Tristram and Yseult, or Lancelot and Guinevere — but it does create a degree of tension: the service of a knight to another man's lady wife is, as the Lancelot–Guinevere tale shows, the classically subversive element within the knightly ethos.
Indeed lines 10-12 describe the restless wretched lover in terms fully appropriate to any sincere romance.
It is with stanza 3 that we really discover that we are in the fabliau mode, not the romance.
The crudity of: could just be an unfortunate clumsiness on the part of a romance versifier, but the uncourtly range of the lover's plotting: In any cunnes wise
can only be fabliau.
And then we learn that the wife is a townswoman, a merchant's wife, not a fine lady, and the stage is set for the fabliau drama by the absence of the husband on business.
The assumption of the persona of a courtly suitor is particularly striking in the clerk's language.
One should note that within the text it is not until a good three-quarters of the tale has passed that Wilekin is identified as a clerk, in the exchange between Margery and Dame Sirith over the weeping bitch.
Before that, he is simply a libidinous man.
He opens his wooing with a courteous regard for the lady's feelings (at the same time as with a pragmatic eye on the best route to success):( "I will tell you what I have to say, but to make you angry by any deed I should be loath." )
(40–2)
Similarly both courtly and ironically pragmatic is the clerk's offer to love Margery:(Both secretly and quietly)
(86)
and with "" derne love "" ( "secret love" : 130).
Wilekin appeals to the lady to show pity on him by an appeal to her "" curteisi "" and her Christian pity:("Lady, lady, change your heart: your courtesy was ever good
and shall remain so.
For the Lord who has made us amend your heart and change your mind and take pity on me.")
(109–14)
It is particularly ironic, then, that the next lady to whom Wilekin must plead, Dame Sirith, does heed his perseverance in pleading, which includes some good courtly motifs:( "Unless she changes her mind I shall go mad with sorrow or kill myself." )
(181–3)
and responds in the terms he asks of Margery:( "God knows, Wilekin, your distress finds my pity" )
(235)
Wilekin, appropriately, responds by "plighting his troth" (252) to seal the contract with Dame Sirith.
Margery is the most carefully, cleverly and unexpectedly constructed character in Dame Sirith: not much more than a dumb blonde, admittedly, but a character through which the author revels in presenting to his readers or audience a detailed comic portrayal of how a dumb blonde can act.
She has little in her mind or in her mouth other than platitudes.
Such clichés fill her first speech of welcome to Wilekin with a set of offers that for the reader and writer are ironically naive in the context of which we are aware:("If you like, come and sit, and what your will is, let me know, my dear life.
By our Lord, the king of heaven, if I can do anything you want you may find me most generous; most happily will I perform for you without grudging.")
(28–36)
Within these lines, language and style combine to highlight both the fabliau context and the construction of the character.
Margery's description of herself as "" fre "" is highly ambiguous.
The term can mean "noble" , and "generous" , and no doubt in realistic terms this should be what Margery wishes to say of herself.
It can also mean "unrestrained" in the sense either of freedom to act or prodigality in giving: what Wilekin wants is that she give herself.
 ""  "" , in the manuscript's spelling with an <o>, provides the reader of the text with the hint of a bilingual compound adverb, following the model of Middle English fol-hardi, fol-hardili, etc., allowing a reading of line 35 as: Fool-gladly shall I perform for you
which is indeed what Wilekin would like to hear.
Potentially more poignant and serious is the rhyme lef/gref, "desired, loved" / "grief" ; a linkage of glee, licence and distress that we find again shortly afterwards, with a different but phonetically similar word, "" leve "" , "leave" , "licence" , and the verb "" greve "" , "grieve" , where Wilekin takes the risk of declaring himself:( "Now that I have won leave for me to cause myself grief would be wrong." )
(58–60)
But the whole thrust of the poem militates against serious meditation here on the transient and subverted joys of human sexual liberty; rather it identifies those as facts for us to note and to submerge within the same sardonic amusement at human folly that Margery, in particular, seems to invite.
The ill-endowed Margery fails to maintain any very good face before the world.
Even when she puts an important and sensible condition upon her offers to do Wilekin's will:( "if your request is reasonable I shall do your will" )
(52–3)
she immediately undercuts herself:( "And even if you say something shameful to me I shall blame you in no way at all" )
(55-6)
Ironic, then, is Wilekin's immediate comment:( "Indeed, lady, you speak as a gracious person" )
(61)
as, indeed, in the sense of "like" rather than "being" .
We might note that the adjective hende, which we shall find extensively exploited in Chaucer's Miller's Tale, is also used of Dame Sirith, when she is first mentioned in the text, in line 154.
It is in fact when Margery is put on the spot, to produce her shocked rejection of Wilekin's advance, that the clever pitching of her character is revealed.
The immediate rebuff is in conventional and predictable terms:( "That I would do in no circumstances by our Lord, king of heaven, who is above us." )
(88–90)
Line 89 is a repetition of one of Margery's first lines, line 31.
She goes on in formulaic terms:( "He [my husband]loves me and I love him well; our love is as true as steel" )
(94–5)
Equally dull rhetoric appears in:( "Never during his life time though he were a hundred miles the other side of Rome in any circumstances would I take a mortal man to be my mate…" )
(103–7)
culminating in a banal image of the perfect married couple:( "My master is a courteous and gracious man and a man of worth and I am a wife both good and faithful…" )
(119–21)
In the meantime Margery has exposed her ability to think and indeed picture herself in the vulgar, crude terms of the fabliau world:( "That shall never be that I shall do such falsity in bed or on the floor." )
(100–2)
And in her final words to Wilekin in this exchange she manages to give an ambiguous hint that she may be prepared to entertain Wilekin — along with her husband:("You could go home, dear brother.
For if I should wish to love you and no other except for my wedded husband I shall not fail to tell you.")
(135–8)
In all of this giving away of herself (which can be taken in two modern senses), this revelation of a coarser character beneath the courtly exterior she tries to sustain, Margery follows the movement of the opening stanzas of the text down from the character of the courtly dame to the level of the townswoman, a stereotyped bourgeois Vxor, "Wife" : the label that seems to be given her by the letter "" V"alongside some of her speeches in the manuscript copy of Dame Sirith.
After Dame Sirith is introduced as a character (line 154), the terms of courtship in the conventions of fin amour become blended with persistently repeated terms of an altogether different register and semantic field: that of the marketplace and brothel.
Wilekin  wastes no time in offering Dame Sirith "" ful riche mede "" , "a most rich reward/payment" (166) if she will help him.
The term "" riche mede "" is repeated at line 191, thus enveloping Wilekin's opening speech in this dialogue and emphasizing the meretricious nature of the contract he proposes with Dame Sirith.
At the beginning of his next speech, after Sirith's defensive demurral, he has to be more specific, and perhaps more generous:( "I will give you a mighty gift, many a pound and many a mark, warm clothing and warm shoes." )
(223–5)
although in fact he ends up paying just twenty shillings (one pound) when Dame Sirith agrees to help (270).
Wilekin's offers to Dame Sirith are inverted in the next dialogue, where Dame Sirith goes to Margery and speaks with her.
Firstly, as noted, Dame Sirith laments the "" poverte "" of all old women and wins Margery's ready — and formulaic — Christian sympathy:( "For the love of God I pity your misery for I see you go ill-clothed and ill-shod." )
(317–20)
Dame Sirith's response is immediate and tellingly worded:( "God Almighty reward you" )
(322)
( "…that same Lord repay you" )
(326)
and yet more ironically Margery replies in precisely the same terms:( "God reward you for your labour" )
(330)
And so it goes on.
After Margery has swallowed Dame Sirith's trick she has recourse to the same commercial means of gaining what she thinks she needs and what she therefore now wants — indeed yearns for with an eagerness that the clerk himself could hardly have hoped for!
("Lord Christ, it grieves me
that the clerk went from me
before he had won me.
I would rather than any payment
that he had once lain with me
and got at it straightaway.
Evermore, old woman, I will be yours if you bring me Wilekin, the clerk of whom I speak.
I will give you gifts so that you are better off for ever…")
(379–89)
What is perhaps most curious about the characterization of Margery after the trick has been played is that she very soon drops all reference to — and therefore seems to be portrayed as forgetting — the threat she believes the clerk to pose.
By her next words to Dame Sirith all she says of her feelings towards Wilekin is:( "Unless you bring me Wilekin I can never laugh nor sing nor be glad." )
(400–2)
and her next speech welcomes Wilekin:("Welcome, Wilekin, sweet thing.
You are more welcome than the king.
Sweet Wilekin, I promise you my love, to do all your will.")
(425–9)
Line 428 in particular— "I promise you all my love" — may be interpreted in various ways, and it is worth reviewing, briefly, the possibilities.
Is Margery's love truly so fickle?
And does this reflect generally on womankind?
But it has also been apparent from the very beginning of the tale, where Wilekin "began to love a married woman" that "love" in this text may mean nothing more than carnal desire.
Around such points it is possible to construct a reading of Dame Sirith as an antifeminist text.
The two female characters could be read as established types of women, untrustworthy to, or just unworthy of, men, paralleled in fact in the French fabliaux.
Margery, in her swift change of attitude abandoning her loyalty to her absent husband in favour of a sexual liaison with Wilekin, is a parallel to the woman in Cele qui se fist foutre sur la fosse de son mari; and as an elderly procuress, operating through feigning grief and gaining sympathy, Dame Sirith finds a parallel in Auberee, "" la vieille maquerel "" , "the old bawd" , in the fabliau of the same name.
But it is a heavily biased reading of Dame Sirith to see only the  antifeminist direction and to ignore the unfavourable reflections upon Wilekin's base attitude and desires.
It is in the midst of the cloud of images and references to money, after Wilekin has opened negotiations with Dame Sirith, that we get the most carefully constructed implicit observation on the whole business of the procurement that Wilekin is about.
After Dame Sirith has agreed to help, Wilekin pays her:( "Take, here, twenty shillings: this I give you in reward to buy sheep and swine for yourself." )
(270–2)
Apart from the metrical need to round off the stanza, there is no contextual requirement for Wilekin to suggest Dame Sirith buy animals with the money.
The detail, then, is in this sense gratuitous, but it has its effect: Wilekin buys Margery with the same money that Dame Sirith can use to buy animals; the bargains, and the items bought, are reduced to the same level.
With this in mind it is hard to overlook Margery's first, charitable gift to the needy old lady that she sees:( "Take, here, flesh [meat]and bread as well…" )
(327)
We should not blindly make the easy moralistic assumption that whores are disgraceful and so are their customers, of course.
The French fabliau Boivin de Provins, for instance, treats the prostitutes just as one source of sexually desirable and available women, and laughs with the man who is able to con them into providing him with a whore for free.
Similar in effect is Le Bouchier d'Abeville, with his sexual purchases with the stolen sheepskin.
It is, however, the case that the man who approaches the whore as a client, on her terms that is, is usually mocked in the fabliau: see, for example , Le Prestre et Alison, described in Chapter 1, or La vieille Truande, "The old beggarwoman" , in which an old woman manipulates an  attractive young squire into either "embracing" her or carrying her across a river — an act which in fact becomes a physical embrace — to "" la grans risee "" , "the great laughter" , of the witnesses.
In the next chapter too we shall see female prostitution presented in a morally adverse manner, in Chaucer's Shipman's Tale and its Italian analogues.
The least obtrusive character in Dame Sirith — the dog and the merchant excepted — but still one that is distinctly constructed, is the narrator.
He is a character easily overlooked by the reader of the text, for the bulk of the drama is conveyed in a series of dialogues between the other three characters, and attention is naturally attracted — or rather distracted — by the probability that this text is a script for a simple sort of play and thus very different from a straightforwardly narrative text.
Nonetheless the narrator retains about 50 lines out of 450, and if, as is likely, the form of drama here is that which requires only one actor, shifting his voice to declaim all the lines, perhaps miming the actions and reactions of the characters, then the narrator's voice has to be a distinct presence in the performance of the text.
The narrator makes his presence most felt by a series of moralistic or sacrilegious apostrophes: comments on events within the text.
We have already seen how in line 6 he wrily notes of Wilekin's passion: A further moral comment appears on Dame Sirith's deceit of Margery:(Christ damn her life!)
(332)
and a mild, though still blasphemous oath appears in the brief narrative transition from Dame Sirith's dialogue with Margery to her reporting of her success to Wilekin.
Margery has begged her to try to find the clerk:(She took herself to her home; and there she found Wilekin, by our Lord!)
(406–8)
What a surprise!
All of the narrator's rhetoric is to be taken ironically, not at face value.
There is a self-characterization here that is comic, and sophisticated, all the more so for being so unobtrusive that it is usually missed.
The last three verses of Dame Sirith form a fitting climax to this skilfully constructed fabliau.
The first is spoken by Wilekin, the remaining two by Dame Sirith:("Lady, as I hope to live until nones, I also am ready and well prepared to do all that you say.
Old woman, by my faith, you must go away while I and she are to play."
"God knows, so I shall; and look that you plough her and stretch out her thighs.
God give you great care if you should her spare for the time that you are with her.
And whoever is not clever enough and not at any price can get the object of his desires, I shall, for my fee, make sure he succeeds, for I am very skillful.")
(433–50)
Wilekin reverts here to speaking in his courtly manner.
He is Margery's servant, eager and prepared to do her behest.
He addresses Dame Sirith imperiously, and with a French expression: But Dame Sirith's final words remind us that this courtliness of expression is located in a fabliau in which the actions and attitudes are as commercial (pris, mede) and as crude, sexually, as in any French counterpart: These lines do not quite move into the register of marked language that we have seen in the French fabliaux and shall see in Chaucer's English fabliaux except in so far as references to women's thighs do not find a place in the conventional rhetorical portrayal of a courtly lady.
The sentiment, however, is unmistakably marked in the same way as is marked vulgar language.
The last verse is a masterpiece.
Not only does Dame Sirith advertise her professional ability to repeat the trick, or to obtain for a man the woman he wants in the way he wants, and thus anticipate her ability to star in an extended series of fabliaux that the poet may tell, but the language and prosody convey certain points that lie at the heart of the fabliau perspective.
We have seen already how rhymes in this text can create telling juxtapositions: here we have the linkage of wis and pris, "wise" and "price" , i.e. wisdom means knowing the price of something or being able to buy it, or alternatively onwis and pris, i.e. the unwise can be bought.
There is a comparable linkage of mede and spede, "payment" and "success" .
Moreover the word con, whose French meaning we are unlikely to forget, appears twice in this verse, once as the final, rhyming word of the tale.
This clearly allows the bilingual audience — and one's knowledge of a language  does not have to be particularly broad for one to know the rude words — to appreciate a pun that tells us much of the character of the fabliau: the essential place of the con in the conte.
Dame Sirith in literary history
How far does this Middle English "" fablel "" correspond to the French or Anglo-Norman fabliaux?
In terms of basic structure there is no doubt that Dame Sirith belongs to the same genre.
The situation for the fabliau, the clerk's desire for the wife, and her vulnerability with her husband away, is rapidly set up with no superfluous details or distractions.
The plot is concluded by a deception which we see leading to a misdeed, although that misdeed is only anticipated in the speech of all three dramatis personae at the end rather than enacted in the text.
Dame Sirith also has a clear target figure, the butt of the humour.
This is not, as it might have been with such a tale, the cuckolded merchant, but rather Margery, the stupid wife, who is particularly funny because she is so unthinkingly conventionally good and who effaces any real self she may be imagined to have within a cluster of clichés.
She has no sense of her own sexuality — which stimulates the clerk — or of the value of her sexuality: though promised to her husband it becomes an easy counter to pay on the threat of being changed into an animal.
In Freud's terms, this becomes a joke when both teller and listener, writer and reader, share an appreciation of at least the potential value of that sexuality.
We also find something close to the marked language characteristic of fabliaux in Dame Sirith's parting words to Wilekin.
The performable format of Dame Sirith, however, is not what one would expect in light of the French tradition.
Although dialogue can be deftly used in scenes within the French and Anglo-Norman fabliaux, none of those fabliaux as a whole seems as well suited to performance as this.
Here we have what is clearly a well set-up series of dialogues: Wilekin with Margery; Wilekin with Dame Sirith; Dame Sirith with Margery; only in the last five stanzas do we get anything more complicated, with three characters present in the same scene.
The sort of one-man performance of such a text is neatly encapsulated in a description of the "mime" artist's skills by Vitalis of Blois, a writer in Medieval Latin:(I feigned the countenance, clothing and words of speaking characters, So that you should suppose several to speak through one mouth.)
It is, in fact, in twelfth-century Latin comoediae and some thirteenth-century Old French works that one finds the most convincing examples of works composed for performance of this kind; in the present context it is particularly interesting to note that Edmond Faral identified as Anglo-Latin comedies the two extant twelfth-century comoediae written entirely in dialogue.
On the other hand, thirteenth-century French "dramatic monologues" which provide parallels to the mixture of metres — octosyllabic couplets and tail-rhyme stanzas — of Dame Sirith have been discovered, and it is difficult to resist the case that these had some contributory influence on the form of Dame Sirith.
Of considerable potential importance too is fragmentary evidence of Anglo-Norman "plays" of the late thirteenth and fourteenth century.
These regularly include at least one actor standing in a position intermediary between the dramatic characters proper and the audience by acting as a narrator or declaiming a prologue.
The issue of theatrical performance is an important one, and one that will appear again in the next chapter.
One is obliged to note, however, that Dame Sirith does very little else to support the case that the Anglo-Norman fabliaux stand between the French tradition and English fabliaux.
The existence of possible bilingual wordplay within the poem — fol and con — suggests that Dame Sirith may have been composed with a bilingual audience in mind, but it does not match the features of the Anglo-Norman fabliaux identified by van den Boogard.
There is nothing to suggest any direct seigneurial interest in the plot or characters of the tale; although the comedy of Dame Sirith does at least assume knowledge and recognition of the conventions of chivalric behaviour, it would be absurd to suggest that knowledge of such conventions was socially limited in any significant way in the later thirteenth century.
What is more, the narrator can be seen to strike a ridiculous pose within this text in a way supposedly omitted from the Anglo-Norman fabliaux: drawing attention to himself with his unnecessary, insincere or ignored apostrophes.
The use of rhetoric  and the extensive deployment of irony are very much characteristic features of the original French tradition.
One does not, however, need to know that in order to be able to appreciate their use in Dame Sirith.
Dame Sirith does not end with a brief moral in the way that so many of the French fabliaux do.
And it is not easy to discover any more covert or sophisticated moral view of the characters and the events of the poem: it does not dwell in any suggestive way on the irremediable carnality of human desires, and only with a degree of distortion and uncalled for determination could we assert that the poem is significantly antifeminist or anticlerical.
If anything, the poem seems to create a deliberate breach of moral conventions — hence the irrelevance of the narrator's moral apostrophes — and to proclaim, in the clerk's success, the carpe diem, "take your chance" , theme.
One might surmise that Dame Sirith was written to create and fill a brief space of moral relaxation for an audience who knew well both the moral and the social conventions the tale plays with.
But one cannot overlook the point that all other known medieval European versions of this tale, written in or translated from Latin prose, present it as a moral example; it can be allegorized, with the housewife as the Christian soul, the absent husband Christ, the lover worldly vanity, the procuress the Devil.
It is in fact possible to find passages in Dame Sirith which may again recognize, and irreverently exploit, a knowledge that such was a possible presentation of this tale.
This appears, for instance, where Margery first rejects Wilekin's advances, referring to "" houre Loverd, hevene king "" and going straight on to:( "I have my lord who is my spouse who brought me a virgin to his house…" )
(91–2)
This multiplies the humour for those in the know, at the same time as it enhances the potentially shocking behaviour of the poet-narrator.
The text itself tells us more about the origins of Dame Sirith.
Localization of the tale in the eastern Midlands is suggested by the reference to the husband being absent at the fair of Boston, in southern Lincolnshire, and it is also the case that the poem was composed in the East Midland dialect.
The manuscript, however, can be attributed to the West Midlands, to the diocese of Worcester, and a small number of spellings in the text appropriate to the dialect of this region can be found, as indeed can an equally small number of spellings appropriate to the south-east of England.
The language of the text is Middle English with a typical medieval admixture of words derived from the Scandinavian language of Viking-period settlers in England and from Old French, the language of the post-Conquest aristocracy.
The level of Norse and French influence is equal in terms of a simple count of loanwords — about thirty words adopted from each language are found in Dame Sirith — but the presence of Scandinavian loanwords is dialectally more diagnostic, in this case again confirming an East Midland origin.
More noteworthy are a small number of words and phrases apparently adopted from Middle Dutch, including the name Wilekin, which has the Dutch diminutive suffix -kin.
Dame Sirith's name is of Scandinavian origin,.
Should it surprise us that this tale from the East Midlands should be taken into a largely religious anthology produced in the West Midlands?
The dialectally divergent spellings suggest that at the very least three written English versions of the tale existed: an East Midland original, a south-eastern copy and the West Midland copy that we now have.
It is also relevant here that the story of the weeping bitch was a widely known one, albeit in moralized versions, as an exemplum, rather than simply as a fabliau.
There is, however, only a fugitive, implicit (and comic) reference to the tale being an exemplum within the text, and no reference to it as it is presented in the manuscript; the tale is identified in the manuscript by the name of the character peculiar to this basically East Midland version, Dame Sirith.
The case must be, then, that the tale stands in the manuscript to represent the fabliau, in this case as an English rather than an Anglo-Norman fabliau.
The fact that the tale is such a familiar one suggests that Dame Sirith may not represent, by random survival, a substantial stock of late thirteenth-century English fabliaux.
Had a more diverse stock existed it would have been more likely for a less familiar tale to have been selected.
Thus there is no evidence as yet for any imaginative creation, development and writing up of a range of stories within the English fabliau corpus.
THE INTERLUDIUM DE CLERICO ET PUELLA
The Interludium de Clerico et Puella, "The interlude of the clerk and the girl" , appears to be a fragment of the tale of Dame Sirith, presented quite explicitly as the text of a play and preserved in an early fourteenth-century copy in a manuscript in the collection of the British Library (Additional MS 23986).
The manuscript is a strip of a vellum roll with the extant text of the Interludium on one side and an earlier eighty-line fragment of Anglo-Norman poetry on the other.
The Interludium therefore occurs in a later copy than the extant copy of Dame Sirith, and since Dame Sirith contains details that are also found in the other European versions of the tale, such as the object of the clerk's desires being a married woman, not a "girl" , it is regarded as impossible for Dame Sirith to be derived from the Interludium.
That the Interludium could derive directly from Dame Sirith is possible.
The dialect of the Interludium is distinctly Northumbrian, but derivation of a Northumbrian text from a source located in Lincolnshire presents no difficulties.
There are some remarkable verbal correspondences between the Interludium and Dame Sirith, such as the clerk's plea to the girl to "" mend  mode "" (I. 25), appearing in Dame Sirith as "" Amend  mod "(DS. 113), and in the denial by Mome Elwis (the Interludium's counterpart to Dame Sirith) of her ability to perform the tricks the clerk requires:(Interludium)(" A son!
What are you saying?
Benedicite!
Lift up your hand and cross yourself!
For it is both sinful and shameful that you have laid this accusation against me, for I am an old woman, and lame.
I lead my life in God's love; I support myself by my spinning.
I cannot do anything else except for saying my paternoster and my creed to Christ, for my sins…")
(I. 63–72)
which can be compared with Dame Sirith: Yet there are details of the Interludium that would appear very strange if solely attributable to a northern English redaction of an East Midland text identifiable as the source of the Dame Sirith that we know.
There is, in particular, the introduction of two French saints within the text: St Leonard (I. 7), a sixth-century hermit from near Limoges, and St Denis (I. 38), the first bishop of Paris in the sixth century.
Since other versions of the weeping bitch tale are known from the continent, and France is unquestionably home to the fabliaux, the divergent descent of the known Dame Sirith and  the Interludium from an English descendant of a French source — perhaps an Anglo-Norman play text — rather than the one from the other looks most likely.
It is generally assumed that both texts on British Library Additional MS 23986 are preserved there as fragments of longer originals, and this is certainly true of the Anglo-Norman ballad first written on the roll.
Regrettably this manuscript has been lost within the British Library for the last twenty years, and studies of it at present have to be based on photographic records.
The text of the Interludium ends, at the end of a sentence, about half an inch from the bottom of the roll, leaving space for at least three more lines of text.
It is impossible, from the photograph, to tell whether the surface of the vellum has been erased here.
It is quite clear that nothing is missing from the other end of the Interludium as it was copied on to this vellum: the vellum had already been cut to its surviving top edge by the time the Interludium came to be written on to it.
The start of the text is clearly signalled by a rubric about five and a half inches from the top edge of the roll: "" Hic incipit interludium de clerico et puella "" , "Here begins the interlude of the clerk and the girl" .
While the opening exchanges between the clerk and the girl are very cursory, they are sufficient to introduce all that is necessary for an audience to know: the girl is a "" damishel "" (I. 1), the interlocutor a man ( "" sir "" , I. 2), and the girl is vulnerable as she is alone:( "Where is your master, where is your mistress?" 
 "By God, neither is here at home" )
(I. 3–4)
(Line 3 could be read "Where is your father, where is your mother?" ).
The man's desires are immediately revealed:( "That man would be well off indeed who might have such a maiden as his wife" )
(I. 5-6)
and the girl's reaction is just as immediate and direct, revealing to the reader or audience too the identity of the man as a "" clerc "" :("Get off!
By Christ and Leonard I shall love no failing clerk nor do I care to receive a clerk within the house nor on the floor; let him keep his arse outside the door!
Be on your way…")
(I. 7–11)
The girl remains witty and determined throughout the extant text, and thus quite the opposite of Margery in Dame Sirith.
Individualizing traits are the girl's witty use of "" fayllard "" , meaning both "unsuccessful" (with her) and "good-for-nothing" (generally) and her vulgar but effective way of telling the clerk his place lies on the other side of the door to her.
From line 13 of the text onwards, after his sudden advance upon the girl has been rejected, the clerk becomes verbose and directionless.
His self-pitying speech reveals his worthlessness:( "I may say"  "Alas, woe is me"  ": I love you more than my life, you hate me more than a goat hates the knife." )
(I. 18–20)
His opening compliment to the girl may backfire:( "In all this land I [know]not one maiden that I love more than thee…" )
(I. 14–15)
depending on whether we take the "" mayden "" as a vocative (i.e. "girl, I love no one more than thee" ) or as the object of the lost verb of line 14, whereby the  -clause becomes a restrictive relative clause ( "I love no maiden more than you…" [but I might love some just as much or only a bit less]).
The clerk pleads:( "Ah, wonderful maiden, take pity on me…" )
(I. 23)
but cannot sustain a courtly approach with the articulacy of Wilekin: line 23, quoted here, could easily come from a prayer to the Virgin Mary, and the clerk soon concludes by a sacrilegious plea in Marian terms:( "For the love of the mother of heaven, change your mind and hear my plea!" )
(I. 25–6)
Like Margery in Dame Sirith, he cannot maintain the courtly role he attempts to appropriate, and cuts a most unimpressive figure.
The girl, fittingly, is quite unmoved, giving him two clear rejections, ending with a fine rhetorical flourish:("Go now, beggar!
Go now, go!")
(I. 35)
In so far as the Interludium is amusing, up to this point and beyond it, the humour is very much at the expense of the clerk.
He has been soundly scourged, verbally, by the girl, and can only respond by going off to Mome Elwis, and giving her another verbose and self-pitying plea (lines 39–62), repetitiously anticipating his own death if his sexual desires are not gratified.
Within this text, which ends after Mome Elwis's speech in reply, a speech that matches that of Dame Sirith when she initially protects herself, the wretched clerk finds that the only answer he gets is a speech that matches his own for its wordiness and clichéd character — a speech in which Mome Elwis well may mouth the same formulae as Dame Sirith in the equivalent situation, as quoted above.
And what is more, the clichés used by Mome Elwis are at least better suited to the cleric than anything the clerk can come out with:( "I can do no other deed but say my paternoster and my creed to Christ for my misdeeds, and my Ave Maria — I am sorry for my sins — and my de profundis for all who remain in sin, for I am good for nothing else — Christ knows that, the king of heaven." )
(I. 70–78)
The result is that the surviving text of the Interludium de Clerico et Puella looks quite different from Dame Sirith: it looks like an anticlerical play.
It does appear as if there is an incomplete text of the play surviving: we could sketch in the rest from the analogue in Dame Sirith and the continental analogues reached through that text, but what we have here is sufficiently individual to counsel caution in assuming we know what is missing.
Interrupted or not, the extant text of the Interludium ends exactly at the end of a line and sentence, which by reference to Dame Sirith we can argue is the end of this particular speech from Mome Elwis.
If the play did end at this point, the real anticlerical joke would be that the Interludium does not go on to the successful trick as the audience might have expected and the clerk might have hoped.
As well as being fully adequate at the beginning, the text ends at a suitable and sufficient point; the possible significance of this can evidently easily be missed.
Chaucer's Shipman's Tale
THE SHIPMAN'S TALE AS A FABLIAU
All of the remaining medieval English examples of the fabliau are found in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales.
We shall start our study of these with the Shipman's Tale, as that tale forms a good bridge between the non-Chaucerian fabliaux and Chaucer's other examples of this genre in certain ways, and it is as good a starting point as any for a discussion of Chaucer's complex response to the norms of fabliau tradition within the Canterbury Tales.
The Shipman's Tale and its analogues
The Shipman's Tale tells of a lovers' triangle, involving a merchant who lives at St Denis (France), his wife, and a Parisian monk who was regarded as their friend: indeed the monk and the merchant call each other cousin, as both are from the same village.
It comes about that the merchant has to go to the fair at Bruges on his business, and while he spends part of a day before departure in his counting-house reviewing his affairs the monk meets and converses with the wife.
She responds to a comment by the monk on how she appears to have passed the night in sexual "labour" by bemoaning what she suffers as a wife, implying that her husband gives her no pleasure in bed and is mean with his money.
Finally she states that she needs a hundred francs to pay a bill for her clothing.
Should the monk provide her with this money she will repay him in whatever way he pleases.
The monk subsequently borrows a hundred francs from the merchant, pays it to the wife and enjoys a night in bed with her while the husband is away.
The merchant goes from Bruges to Paris, via his home at St Denis, to raise the cash to pay a pledge made in Bruges, and in Paris asks the  monk for his hundred francs.
The monk tells him that the money has already been returned to the wife.
Later, after returning home, in bed with his wife, the merchant taxes her about not having told him the monk had given her the money; she claims that she thought the money the monk gave her was gift, and that she has already used it to buy clothing; she will pay, she says, her debts to her husband in bed.
The husband demurs only to tell his wife, in the form of a brief moral conclusion, to:…ne be namoore so large, Keep bet thy good…
(431–2)
large: extravagant; keep bet: look after better
after which the narrative ends with a concluding flourish: The only real parallels to this tale in continental literature come from Italy; in the first and second tales on Day Eight in Boccaccio's Decameron and in one of the novelle of Giovanni Sercambi.
It has been suggested that Chaucer had come across and drew upon all of these sources for his Shipman's Tale.
The circumstantial case for a related but lost version in French being the ancestor of Chaucer's tale is, however, more persuasive.
Chaucer's tale is set in the north-east of France, the true home of the French fabliaux, its geographical range stretching from Paris to Bruges.
A French ambient is added to the tale by the invocation of French saints — St Martin, St Denis and possibly St Ivo of Chartres — and by providing the merchant with a snatch of French in his conversation: "" Quy la? "" ,
 "" Who's there? "" (214).
Technically, however, the tale is distinctly similar to Dame Sirith in the use that is made of dialogue and the patterning of scenes.
More than half of the Shipman's Tale consists of dialogue (237 lines out of 434), a figure that increases if we count odd lines introducing a change of speaker or place in dialogue as part of the dialogue.
Dame Sirith has 397 lines of dialogue out of a total of 450.
Like Dame Sirith, the dialogue of the  Shipman's Tale sets in front of the reader or audience a set of vignettes in which only two characters are present at any one time: the monk and the wife (89–208), the wife and the husband (212–48), the monk and the husband (255–92 and 342–64) and the husband and the wife (380–432).
The line numbers given here give a better sense of the preponderance of dialogue over narrative in the Shipman's Tale, a ratio of about 2:1.
There is very little use of dialogue in Boccaccio's tales.
Dialogue is deftly used in Sercambi's novella, as sometimes in the French fabliaux, but, as has been noted, none of the French fabliaux are suited to performance in the way that Dame Sirith is, and as an inferrable source for the Shipman's Tale may have been.
One may tentatively suggest that at least one English fabliau version of the tale given by Chaucer to the Shipman stood between a French source and Chaucer.
The majority of the truly narrative lines are found at the start of the Shipman's Tale, where we have a careful introduction of the characters and setting of the tale.
If the Shipman's Tale is a redaction of a dramatized fabliau of the same kind as the English Dame Sirith we can expect these opening lines to convey at least some particular characteristics of the fabliau as conceived and used by Chaucer.
The merchant as target figure
All of the Italian versions of this tale make the lady the dupe, the victim of the male lover's ruse, prostituting herself for money that simply circulates from the husband to the wife via the lover.
The husband is also, of course, the victim of this ruse, but in none of the Italian versions is he built up in any way to provide a substantial target figure.
Traditional readings of the Shipman's Tale, however, suppose the husband to be a, or even the, target figure, and not without reason.
The husband's preoccupation with his commercial affairs, which might imply a neglect of his wife's conjugal and material desires, is repeatedly hinted at.
The opening couplet of the tale introduces and immediately impugns the merchant by making an obviously facile equation of wealth and imputed wisdom: His wisdom is not revealed by manifestly wise behaviour.
We are soon informed of how his wealth is made public knowledge in lines that suggest his generosity with his riches could be extravagance; an imprudent use and showing of wealth — and his wife — rather than a wise one: This noble marchaunt heeld a worthy hous For which he hadde alday so great repair For his largesse (and for his wyf was fair) That wonder is…
(20–3)
alday: all the time; largesse: generosity
The preoccupied merchant, whose attention is totally bound up with his commercial affairs and who consequently neglects his wife, is a stock figure of fabliau-type narrative (compare, for instance, La Bourgoise d'Orliens, Le Cuvier, "The bathtub" , or L'Enfant qui fu remis au soleil, "The child who was given back to the sun" ).
Here, the wife is left exposed to the monk's attentions when the husband shuts himself up in his counting-house (75–88); he delivers his wife a lecture on his "" curious bisynesse "" when she asks him to come down to eat (224–48); he must settle his affairs in Paris before he can settle back at home after his trip to Bruges (365–9).
The latter lines are introduced with an echo of the opening couplet: war: prudent, wary
with the complimentary epithets "" war and wys "" now ironic: "" war and wys "" he is, evidently, in business life, but not in keeping his wife.
The Shipman's merchant is far from uncomplicated and satisfactory as a target figure.
A perfectly rational case can be made for the merchant to be carefully and conspicuously established as the innocent and undeserving victim of a conspiracy between his wife and the monk.
Generous merchants are rare beasts in the literature of any age, and to see this merchant's generosity as entirely foolish, or purely representative of commercial self-interest, is to make a severe assumption.
This merchant refuses to be a caricature in the form of the character without individual "character" that his wife attempts to portray him as.
At one point, the wife  enumerates to the monk six qualities that women supposedly "desire" in their husbands: hardy: firm, tough, vigorous; free: generous; buxom: submissive, obedient
This is itself a formulaic list (cf. the Nun's Priest's Tale: VII: 2912–17).
The wife implies that her husband fails in every way: "As helpe me God, he is noght worth at al In no degree the value of a flye." 
(170–1)
But with the exception of a little doubt as to what the relatively vague adjective hardy might mean, the husband eventually proves a worthy man against all of these criteria: clever enough to be a successful merchant and therefore rich; hospitable and generous; and apparently able to fulfil his wife's demands of him in bed.
An engagement of sympathy on the side of the character who seems superficially to be the target figure constructs for the reader an unusual angle of vision on the events and characters of this fabliau.
The merchant is, however, a typical fabliau target figure in so far as he is ridiculous in his ignorance of how his wife and friend have deceived and cuckolded him.
This final ignorance is anticipated by an innocence in the merchant that takes the form of his persistent lack of awareness of the loaded nature of particular forms of language use, of double meanings and innuendo.
Before leaving for Bruges, he invites the monk, John: where "" pleye "" is clearly intended by the merchant in what the modern reader can identify as a particularly childish sense — "to play, have fun" — but which in Middle English, not unlike Modern English, also carries an additional sense of sexual play, and can also, appropriately, be used in the sense of playing tricks (a semantic range similar to that of Old French dobler: cf.
Chapter 1).
Naively, too, the merchant tells his wife to be "" buxom "" , "obedient, biddable" , to "" every wight "" while he is away in Flanders.
Linguistically, thereby, the merchant weaves a number of strands into the net in which he is eventually caught, innocent and unknowing to the last.
He seems crucially unconscious of potential sexual double meaning in imagery he uses to describe the commercial world: the world he faces is called a "" queynte world "" (236)(queynte as a noun is used to represent cunt in Chaucer) and he uses an obviously phallic image of merchants:(cf.
Dame Sirith lines 440–1: "And loke  hire tille/And strek out hire ).
The merchant's contribution to linguistic play becomes especially distinct in the final dialogue, in bed with his wife.
He kindly but firmly remonstrates with his wife: "Paying the debt" has a clear double meaning in the sexual/conjugal context which the wife, who is made to respond to her husband's ignorance not by laughing at him but rather by underlining his innocence/ignorance in a play of irony for the tale's readers/listeners to respond to as they think fit, picks up upon and develops into a crude pun: "" taille "" here is polysemous, reflecting two homonyms, taille, "tally, bill" , whereby line 416 reads: "I am your wife; notch it up on my account" 
and taille, "tail" , thus "rear parts, genitals" , thus giving something like: "I am your wife; notch it up on my crotch" 
Here, we might note, the wife enunciates the aggressive sexual joke that Freud supposed to originate with the man.
The subtler of the recent readings of the Shipman's Tale keeps the merchant in the position of target figure by treating him not as a realistic character, but as a functional one: a figure representing the interplay of more abstract themes and factors affecting human life.
His apparent personality as an ungeneralized individual is a literary illusion; he is regarded instead as an object of a form of general moral evaluation and judgement that probes the mores of medieval commercial and commercialized life from a conventional standpoint that is, paradoxically, radical and fundamentalist.
Common to these readings is the observation of fundamental connections and parallels between the merchant and the monk, not just as individuals but as representatives of late medieval culture in a very broad form: of economic and religious life.
Pioneering in this respect was the interpretation of the Shipman's Tale by Janette Richardson (1970), who claimed that the merchant was tied by the imagery of the tale into an inseparable pairing with the monk, and thus although "" overtly "" morally superior to the monk in several ways still essentially one with him.
At the heart of her case lies the claim that the merchant, like the monk, is not generous as a virtue but rather as a matter of "" calculated business policy "" , for the sake of appearing creditworthy: We may creaunce whil we have a name, But goldlees for to be, it is no game.
(289–90)
creaunce: be granted financial credit
At the end of the tale, the wife underlines this aspect of the merchant's lifestyle by suggesting that her spending on clothing serves the same purpose: This understanding provides a fundamentally important gloss to the moot, "must" , of the lines spoken, apparently by a female speaker, very early on in the Shipman's Tale: Both the merchant and the monk in the tale operate by borrowing money on credit in order to make profitable purchases.
The monk takes his profit in the form of sexual gratification, the merchant, to begin with, in the form of "" a thousand frankes "" .
Thus when carnal and financial imagery in the tale finally merge in the puns taille and taillynge at the very end, it is an emblem of how much deeper the "" bretherhede "" and "" cosynage "" runs that the monk and the merchant imagine exists between them in the form of play, or as a polite figure of speech, and how concrete it is.
The merchant, moreover, seems to be liberated by his financial success to take his own carnal reward: These parallels between the monk and merchant should not, however, be allowed to obscure the differences between the two, especially the moral contrast.
This contrast is most evident in the early presentation of the generosity of the monk and merchant respectively.
The monk in this tale is soon presented as a witty and skilful fellow.
Like the merchant — and, indeed, implicitly, his wife — an early-emphasized detail of his character is that he is "" free "" in the sense of "generous" , but in his case this is very much a means to an end rather than an end or a pleasure in itself: Free was daun John, and manly of dispence, As in that hous, and ful of diligence To doon plesaunce, and also greet costage.
He noght forgat to yeve the leeste page In al that hous…
For which they were as glad of his comyng As fowel is fayn whan that the sonne up riseth.
(43–7, 50–1)
The merchant's generosity, by contrast, is more genuinely giving: The merchant is a professed and, as far as we are told, an honest merchant: there is no case for any suggestion that the display of wealth in his "" largesse "" (22) is a serious form of duplicity rather than a worthy — if also pragmatic — use of his riches.
The most obvious moral interpretation of the assimilation of monk and merchant does not lie in the drawing down of the merchant to the level of the monk so much as in showing the monk to be transgressing the bounds of his special profession by entering into the commercial market place to procure a whore for himself.
The most telling point against Janette Richardson's methodical interpretation may well be that no commercial benefits to the merchant can be imputed to his generosity and hospitality towards the monk; the monk is invited to his house simply "" to pleye…in alle wise "" , "to have fun in every way" (59–61), and is able to borrow a hundred francs from the merchant even at a time when cash in hand would be particularly useful to him in his business (255–92): this, significantly, is the immediate context of the merchant's reflection: Derek Pearsall nicely describes the poignant ambivalence of a single action that is motivated simultaneously by instinctive self-interest and by the "" inner springs "" of human virtue in the Shipman's merchant's desire both to be and to be recognized as generous.
As David Aers has skilfully shown, the merchant, the monk and the very language of the Shipman's Tale do co-act at a general level  to show a society where spiritual growth has been stunted, or rather deformed and directed away from an ideal moral and spiritual state.
The merchant unwittingly parodies Christ's resurrection in his withdrawal to his counting-house to review his affairs: He descends only to join the rest of the household in a superficial scanting of Christian ritual between the call of the business world and the lure of socializing: Note the distraction and reluctance implied by the "" But… "" at the beginning of line 251 in comparison with the consecutive "" And…"'s that introduce more pleasing activities.
While the secular merchant retires for contemplation, the "religious" monk has been actively talking love and making a bargain with the wife.
The monk, indeed, has commercial dealings as part of his duties as a monk, as  and on this account he is able to request a loan of the merchant, without occasioning the slightest suspicion.
He words his request in a particularly ironic way: We may note here in passing the same coarse innuendo as in Dame Sirith, where the money is paid to the dame "" To buggen  sep and swin "" .
As wisdom is measured by wealth (see above), epithets from a human value-system, "good" , "worthy" and "noble" take on explicitly commercial significance.
The worst instance of this sort of linguistic fall from grace would seem to be that of the terms "debt" and "paying the debt" , from the figurative sense of penance due to God, through the literal sense of a financial repayment, to a figurative countersense to the religious one, of sexual indulgence.
Yet this scandalous polysemity is already potential in the words of one of Paul's New Testament Epistles, where in I Corinthians 7: 3 he creates the concept of the conjugal debt, writing , "let [the husband]pay the debt" (New English Bible: "" The husband must give the wife what is due to her, and the wife equally must give the husband his due "" ).
If the merchant in the Shipman's Tale does not easily fall into the role of the target figure, could another character do so, for instance the wife, who is unquestionably put in this position in the Italian analogues to the tale?
The most significant result of re-posing the question is to reveal how difficult it is to separate the different characters of the Shipman's Tale and to assess, and judge, them individually in these terms.
One is faced in the text by a body of material that invites interpretation as a critical examination of human action, but as a general, not a selective, critical view, that can be antimercantile and antifeminist (with the merchant and wife as target figures) and anticlerical in the satirical exposure of the monk's behaviour.
Beyond even this, however, it can be argued that the intrinsic nature of the fabliau that resides in the Shipman's Tale counteracts all of these "anti-isms" , and that the Shipman's Tale thus offers a critical disruption of these conventional categories.
Such a disruption corresponds to the critical assessment by Chaucer of the features of another category, the genre of fabliau itself, through this tale.
This in turn contributes to a thematized  exploration of literary types in fragment VII of the Canterbury Tales.
The disruption of categories in the Shipman's Tale
In the simple moralistic and realistic view, there can be little question that the interaction of the monk and the wife forms a dramatic exemplification of unworthiness in human behaviour.
In the more symbolic terms, a damning inditement of medieval culture might be found in the situation and behaviour of the wife.
Here is a character economically dependent on the opposite sex, and who has instant and sole recourse to her vagina as her bargaining counter in negotiations with these two men.
But we cannot trust this wife's claim that she is starved of cash by her husband.
We must also attribute some significance to the fact that the wife takes the lead in talking smut and negotiating with the monk.
The conspiracy of the wife and the monk is the matter of the first dialogue in the tale.
It is a passage that clearly portrays an intimate similarity between the two characters, although the wife is in some telling respects the more subtle of the two, reflecting the feminine cunning that is so typical of fabliau wives.
Her opening words, which echo a pair of lines in Chaucer's first fabliau in the sequence of the Canterbury Tales, the Miller's Tale (I: 3768–9), invite a dialogue charged with sexual connotations, not only in the obvious case of "" ryse "" , but also in the detectable reference to a conventional love-sickness: The monk's answer immediately confirms the sexual topic of the dialogue, and dispenses with any euphemistic disguises: This rapid movement to a contextually surprising level of familiarity on the topic of sexual intimacy is paralleled in the French fabliau Auburee, where the old bawd, Auburee, in procuring a young wife for a besotted admirer, visits the wife and moves smartly into the bedroom, declaring:( "I should certainly like to see your bed: then I should know for certain if you lie in the same splendour as the first wife did." )
Having surreptitiously placed the man's coat in the room, she says:("I never saw so luxurious a bed!
You indeed have more of your delight than ever the other did, it seems to me!")
Auburee, however, plays to the full here the apt role of a garrulous and clumsy, but essentially thoughtless and harmless, old woman to entrap the wife; the sexual connotations of her interest in and comments on the bed are rather different from the explicit insolence of the monk of the Shipman's Tale.
Having spoken, the monk undergoes a physical reaction to the utterance of his salacious thoughts of the wife being exercised, sexually, in bed: This response to his own thought and speech on the monk's part creates another novelty within this fabliau: a character who assumes a role parallel to that of a real reader outside the text; a listener to and responder to a text and its implications, and what is more a reader who indulges in an interpretation of the text of his thoughts as pornographic, i.e. capable of exciting vicarious, erotic sensation.
By locating the pornographic reading of these events within a character within the tale, Chaucer encourages the reader to view the pornographic relationship of text and reader with detachment and therefore thematizes it.
The pornographic monologue of the monk's expressed thoughts soon turns into a pornographic play, in the dialogue between monk  and wife whereby each tests and reassures the other that their desires, and their readiness to hide those desires under the dissimulation of a financial bargain, match.
The slow deliberacy with which the wife commences her reply, with not a hint of offence in her reaction but rather a hint of care in selecting the right mode of reply, emphasizes her willingness to converse on the topic: So does her subsequent appropriation of a rhetorical device, the occupatio, a statement emphasized by the speaker feigning unwillingness or lack of freedom to express it: The monk too takes a moment's pause before replying: again seeming to digest the implications of the wife's words, or (and?) to express, silently but with an eloquent action, astonishment at the wife's ready invitation to him to continue to converse on this topic.
The next necessary act in this play is for the two to reassure each other of their discretion; from the monk: And from the wife: Agreement on the sexual exchange is thus sealed: They can then indulge themselves in filling out the details of their play — and anticipating the events of the act to come — at a certain amount of leisure.
Although the monk does not tell the wife where the hundred francs have come from, and creates potential trouble for her by telling the husband that he has paid her this sum, the wife in the Shipman's Tale is quite the opposite of the foolish, deceived creature that Margery is in Dame Sirith.
Unlike Margery, this wife knows exactly the power and value of her own sexuality — its power to allure and gratify men (and herself), and its current exchange value in direct cash terms.
She makes the scenes in which she moves pornographic in the etymological sense of the word: prostitutes' tales (Greek  /pornos = prostitute).
In substance and spirit there is much in her portrayal that coincides with the stereotype of woman found in medieval antifeminist literature: lascivious and insatiable, alluring to men, drawing them to a fall — e.g. tempting the monk to sin, and befooling her husband (or, more seriously, tempting him to indulge in sexual intercourse for its own pleasure and indeed for its cash value).
A further seam of antifeminism may be introduced by certain early lines of the Shipman's Tale which unmistakably imply a female speaker: Most critics have accepted the assumption that the Wife of Bath is the only female pilgrim of the Canterbury Tales who would be a suitable narrator of this scurrilous narrative, usually by weighing her character up against the profession of the nuns, the only other women amongst the Canterbury pilgrims.
If we ignore, momentarily, the "" murie wordes of the Hoost to the Shipman "" at the end of the tale, and assume that the narrator of the tale is a woman — it really does not matter who she is — the narrator then becomes a close parallel to the wife within the tale: a wordsmith; a user of language who combines the sordid matere of carnal indulgence with a gilded linguistic cover.
The narration of the Shipman's Tale has its fair measure of rhetoric.
The apostrophe: is in the narrator's voice, but the greatest concentration of rhetorical ornament comes in the dialogue between the wife and the monk, particularly in the words of the woman.
There is hyperbole: or: and occupatio: and exclamation: The wife's greatest linguistic tour de force is the climactic pun on taille/taillynge at the end of the tale.
If, then, the narrator is characterized as a woman, and, moreover, a woman who boldly presents this tale of female prostitution and financial gain as a jape in which the wife as well as the monk triumphs at the husband's expense, the implication that women innately conform to the medieval antifeminist stereotype is doubled in strength.
A reading of the tale as a satire on merchants is usually supported by reference to the pilgrim-narrator to whom the tale is ultimately ascribed, the Shipman.
For the Shipman, as a pirate, the merchant is a natural enemy: It is not particularly difficult, however, to reconcile the appearance of a female narrative voice in lines 11–19 of the tale with the male narrator that it has within the dramatic framework of the Canterbury Tales, and thus to preserve the presence of both of these voices and their critical implications.
The simplest case was that put forward by Murray Copland in the 1960s, suggesting, simply, that in modern editorial terms inverted commas should be put around these lines so that we see that in these lines the Shipman is imitating (a) woman.
Contextual and generic considerations strengthen this case.
The context of the Canterbury Tales is one in which Geoffrey Chaucer, a historical poet, feigns to speak through a fictitious mouthpiece, "Chaucer" the pilgrim- narrator, who both, in turn, feign to speak through a further series of mouthpieces, the individual pilgrim-tellers.
(Conversely they have those fictitious individuals speak through them, "rehearsing every word as closely as he/they can" (I: 732–3).)
It is not so difficult, in these circumstances, to accept that at least one of the pilgrim-tellers should be represented as speaking through an incongruously feigned mouthpiece, in this case strengthening the  antifeminist line of the tale by purporting to speak as a woman.
And this need not be seen as a particularly innovative piece of verbal transvestism on the part of the Shipman.
We have already seen how the adoption of voices for the performance of the text is appropriate to Dame Sirith, and how similar the structure of the Shipman's Tale is to Dame Sirith in just this respect.
If the adoption of a female voice by a male character is a ruse intended, inter alia, to throw an oblique light upon the characteristics of womankind, the fabliau, with its characteristic representation of women in terms of their sexuality and such a capacity to allow overt changes of voice, would provide just the right mode.
But we cannot forget that in fabliau terms the wife of the Shipman's Tale can be credited as a successful trickster; in so far as the Shipman's Tale does develop an antifeminist perspective in the ways suggested above, it enhances the antifeminist possibilities of a genre that is characteristically only playfully antifeminist.
The Shipman's Tale differs from its Italian analogues with their blatant antifeminism.
It would be possible, temporarily, to laugh at the wife being landed in trouble by the monk after her meretricious bargain with him, but she extricates herself from this problem in true fabliau manner.
In the Italian analogues the wife's punishment is her realization that she has been tricked, and the implication that her "lover" did not consider her worth spending his own money on; there, this is reflected by the wife's helplessness when the trick is sprung — quite the opposite of what we have in the Shipman's Tale.
In the case of the monk, too, we have a conflict between satirical anticlericalism and creditworthiness in terms of the fabliau's comic and pragmatic standards.
This appears strikingly in the words of the pilgrims' Host, commenting on the tale when the Shipman has finished.
He condemns the monk: at the same time as he acknowledges the monk's ingenuity that has provided him with his sexual reward: This monk does not suffer the retributive poetic justice that is so frequently met with by lecherous clerics in the French fabliaux.
The teller of the tale — who in real historical terms is Chaucer the poet — presents the monk to his audience with a heavy use of irony.
This is a familiar, even rather worn-out and wearisome form of irony.
As with Wilekin in Dame Sirith, the teller is careful to describe the monk and his actions in terms of a courtly gentility, an affectation of the monk to be "" free…and manly of dispense "" (43), "" a man of heigh prudence "" (64), "" ful of curteisye "" (69), a "" gentil monk "" (195) who will be "" trewe "" to his lady (207).
The hypocritical contrast between this elegant exterior and the sordid inner man is presented in a pedestrian and predictable manner.
Between his speech which starts: and which ends: there comes a direct restatement and physical demonstration of the meretricious contract: Any aspect of his religious profession can be pressed into the service of his lechery.
He cuts an elegant figure as he: The ambiguous tone and register of thynges here, either "prayers/intercessions" or just "things" , is an effective piece of wry irony — and he swears fidelity and discretion to the wife, whom he claims to love, on his breviary (131), and on his profession as a monk (155).
It is only by overlooking details of the presentation of the monk within the verse and taking a very generalized and abstract view of the plot, as the Host does, that the monk can be mistaken for any sort of comic rogue.
While predictability in behaviour of this kind may enhance the anticlerical view of the monk, it also renders his portrait mundane.
Mundanity is a variety of realism in so far as familiar and recurrent experiences are those which the mind most readily conceives of as "real" .
Equally familiar is the device which closes this fabliau drama.
The concluding ruse of the tale, the wife's excuse for not returning the hundred francs to her husband, is not particularly novel or surprising.
There is a reversion to a concept of Biblical antiquity, that of the conjugal debt; and, most significantly, in continuing the metamorphosing of sexual and monetary transactions, the wife presents the reader at the end with more of the same in the Shipman's Tale, nothing new or refreshing.
Human turpitude of a personal kind is clearly visible in the activities of the wife and the monk — a sad human ignorance, lack of mastery and even spiritual failure in the case of the merchant — a turpitude that is not rendered comic in any distinguished way by some unexpectedly creative sleight of hand in the Shipman's Tale, nor artfully embodied in the sort of grotesque and rapid excesses that we have in Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin.
In comparison with fabliaux like that, the misbehaviour of the monk and the wife is all too deliberate and plausible.
At the same time, the characteristic attitudes of the fabliau world countermand moral antifeminist and anticlerical perspectives on the wife and the monk.
Finally, one must conclude, the tale is left in a state of moral indeterminacy and neutrality, and may thus emerge as a truly "pointless" tale.
The Shipman's Tale is quite close in its features to external models of the fabliau — to the French fabliaux and to Dame Sirith.
We have seen, in the comparison of Dame Sirith with the Interludium de Clerico et Puella, that slight modifications can crucially change the meaning of a tale.
From one interpretative angle, Chaucer makes the axioms and ethics of the fabliau models — the availability of beautiful women and their longing for fornication; the exaltation of practical cunning in the French fabliaux or the carpe diem theme of Dame Sirith — turn into a tale of prostitution with the deception of an undeserving husband who gains sympathy rather than scorn.
There is, however, one further disruptive interpretation that can be made, rendering Chaucer's Shipman's Tale as fabliau taken to an ultimate, self-destructive point of fulfilment where the dichotomy between the witty trickster and the deluded target figure collapses.
The merchant, so unsatisfactory  as a target figure, can be seen as a fabliau champion: a man consummately successful in business and in bed, enjoying the good life, and able to "cozen" a profit out of his usurious dealings.
He could be the ultimate fabliau trickster, able to convert the target figure into the victor with his triumphant indifference to the facts of his wife's dealings with the monk.
Here is a man, to anticipate terms we shall find in the next two chapters to be of lasting significance in respect of Chaucer's use of the fabliau, who can indeed find "" Goddes foyson "" in his wife's "" queynte "" without enquiring further.
THE SHIPMAN'S TALE AND FRAGMENT VII
Tales, genres and morals
The texts that we have of the whole Canterbury Tales are made up of a number of fragments or groups, which vary in contents from single isolated tales to sequences of several tales connected by link passages.
Within the fragments only a limited amount of variance in the ordering of the tales is possible; rather more diverse is the order in which the fragments can be and are found to be arranged.
From a very early date we witness the introduction of tales and links that Chaucer had not written himself, and reorganizations of the order of the tales.
The Shipman's Tale stands at the beginning of the second largest fragment of the Tales, fragment VII by the conventional numbering, a fragment which is consistently found in reliable manuscripts immediately after a fragment VI that includes the Physician's and the Pardoner's Tales.
A single manuscript, Bodleian Library Arch.
Selden B14, a later fifteenth-century and unquestionably unreliable example, makes the Shipman's Tale follow the Man of Law's Tale, and consequently names the Shipman in the Epilogue of the Man of Law's Tale where other manuscripts name either the Squire or the Summoner as the pilgrim offering to speak next.
Nevertheless, a radical editorial reorganization called the Bradshaw shift, involving the moving of fragment VII as one large block back to the end of fragment II, with these fragments then relabelled groups B2 and B1 respectively, has been eagerly accepted by some editors and critics since the nineteenth century, wishing to solve thereby certain anomalies  in the ordering of named places that the pilgrims would pass on their road to Canterbury.
Arguments over the female narrative voice in the Shipman's Tale have too often directed attention away from its usual and final context in the Canterbury Tales and its only certified narrator towards its hypothetical earlier association with the Wife of Bath.
There is little justification for assuming the uncertain earlier attribution of the Shipman's Tale to be meaningful and its final attribution to be merely a convenient slot in which Chaucer parked his tale without even bothering to make a few simple revisions to make the tale fit its new narrator.
The tale is in fact carefully tied in as the Shipman's Tale at the beginning of fragment VII, with an endlink that binds it to the Prioress's Tale that follows it.
There are also various thematic connections between this tale and the following members of the group.
A reading of fragment VII that is most congruent with the interpretation of the Shipman's Tale offered here is a combination of elements of the so-called "" surprise group "" and "" literary group "" interpretations.
Fragment VII, comprising the Shipman's, the Prioress's, "Chaucer's" , the Monk's and the Nun's Priest's Tales, can be seen as a group of consistently recalcitrant texts: texts which somehow contradict the expectations that may be brought to them, either in the light of the genre to which the tales belong or in the light of the character of the teller as we might suppose we know it before the tale is told.
The Shipman's Tale not only is part of a larger text, it is most informatively read in the light of the details of that larger text.
These show the Shipman's Tale to function as the opening section of a thoughtful exploration of the interdependent topics of narratorial character, genre and moralization.
There is a complex tension in the Prioress's Tale between the intense maternal sentimentality of the narrator's treatment of the child martyr of whom she tells, the deeply symbolic nature of the tale, and the sublimated violence meted out to the "" cursed Jewes "" .
Although no explanation is given of the stunned response of her fellow pilgrims at the end of her tale: their response is not difficult to understand.
The way in which the Prioress's Tale hangs like a shadow over the pilgrims is reflected by the continuation of the rhyme-royal verse form from the tale into the following link: a feature matched only once elsewhere in the Tales, by an apparently repressed stanza at the end of the Clerk's Tale (IV: 1212a—g).
The form that the Host's japing takes here is to turn to "Chaucer" , the pilgrim-narrator, and to demand his tale.
Chaucer uses this opportunity to present two quite contrasting tales, Sir Thopas and Melibee, the one a tail-rhyme romance, the other a moral example in prose; two tales which in turn represent quite contrasting aspects of the one narratorial character, being two quite contrasting versions of what type of tale an audience or readership might think Chaucer "ought" to tell.
Sir Thopas is the tale told by the self-mocking comedian and parodist, producing as the Host so richly puts it, "" drasty rymyng "" that "" is nat worth a toord "" (VII: 930).
 "Chaucer" is the only interrupted character who is made to take the opportunity to tell a second tale, although the Monk, too, in this same fragment, is given a second chance.
The second tale "Chaucer" tells is the persistently solemn prose of the serious moralist; a close, careful and caring translation of a French original.
It has occurred to some that Melibee too may be a self-mocking parody but to read the work like this is to read with little sensitivity.
Significantly, the tale is not interrupted either because it is stylistically intolerable — like Sir Thopas is — or unbearably dull, like the Monk's Tale, which follows it.
There is a little wry irony both in the prologue to the tale, where "Chaucer" describes it as "" a litel thyng in prose "" (VII: 937), and a touch of bathos in its epilogue, the link passage leading to the Monk's Tale, where the Host unfavourably compares his wife, with her lack of patience, with Prudence, wife of Melibee.
The point must not, however, be missed that the Host is able to grasp a moral point made in the tale.
Chaucer's self-image is that of a writer, and he reflects upon it by exploring extremes in literature.
He asserts himself as a poet (note that we still today think of him primarily as a "poet" rather than as a "writer" ) superior to the ridiculous doggerel of Sir Thopas.
But poetry can appear "light" , for instance if it lacks the explicitly solemn moralizations of a Langland.
Chaucer makes this point on more than one occasion, nowhere more emphatically than at the end of the Canterbury Tales, after the Parson's Tale, where he "revokes" in his "retractions"  "" my translacions and endytinges of worldly vanitees "" (endytinges: compositions) including "" the tales of Caunterbury, thilke that sownen into synne "" (sownen into synne: "resonate with sin" )(X: 1084–5).
He wrote a number of serious prose works besides the Melibee.
It is quite possible Chaucer's attitude to such explicitly serious literature was uncertain, appreciating its moral worth but also sensing it to be more than the "" litel hevynesse "" that "" is right ynogh for muche folk "" (the Knight, in the epilogue of the Monk's Tale, VII: 2769–70), or to be preaching the "" inportable "" (the Clerk's Tale, IV: 1144).
Nowhere do Chaucer or any of his characters mock solemn moral prose, but within the Canterbury Tales such prose always stands in a thought-provoking contrast with verse of a lighter tone.
Melibee is followed by the Monk's Tale, a collection of brief vignettes showing the tragic fall of men (and of one woman) from some high degree through the change of fortune.
A form of structure can be found in the Monk's Tale in the grouping of examples of, for instance, those whose fall is attributable to women, those whose fall is attributable to sin, those who fall through treachery, etc., but repetition rather than variation is the wearisome experience of reading this tale.
So the Knight says when he cuts the tale short.
Taking account of the full literary context of the Monk's Tale in the Canterbury Tales, it seems that the real disappointment of the Monk's performance comes from the contrast between his character as a narrator as revealed by his tale and the  presuppositions that his appearance has created in the Host and apparently in "Chaucer" .
There can be little doubt as to what in the way of topics and register the Host expects in the Monk's Tale; he concludes his observations on Melibee with: and continues with a description of the Monk that matches with the impression "Chaucer" claims to have of the Monk in the General Prologue, of a "" manly man "" , straining at the bounds of what is allowed to a monk (and not dissimilar to the monk of the Shipman's Tale): After nearly a hundred stanzas of the Monk's tragedies, the Host is prepared to give him a second chance, as "Chaucer" had, but feels this time he has to be more specific as to what is wanted: But as soon as the Monk speaks we have the opportunity to see, firstly, that his reaction does not suggest he is flattered or pleased by the Host's appraisal of him, and secondly that he sounds quite different from the bold and thrusting "man's man" that "Chaucer" and the Host would make of him: Note how the Monk's desire to offer literature that "" sowneth into honestee "" anticipates Chaucer the prosist's retraction of the tales "" that sownen into synne "" .
And even if the Host is still able to hope that the Monk will show another side to his character as a tale-teller, the Monk will not, and retreats into a sort of sulky silence after being interrupted and asked for something less serious: The Monk as a character is explicitly and repeatedly compared and contrasted with the teller who succeeds him, the Nun's Priest.
The description of the Monk in the General Prologue is a full and detailed one, even if we are subsequently invited to conclude that it is a mistaken and misleading one; by contrast, the presence of three priests with the Prioress and her nun/chapeleyne is noted in just  three words at the end of line 164 of the General Prologue.
Both the Monk and the Nun's Priest are clerics.
The first details we have of the latter, in the Host's invitation to him to follow the Monk, initially suggest, if we still believe appearances and associations can be a sign of character, that he is as likely to turn out as the threadbare and serious Clerk on his horse "" as leene as is a rake "" does (I: 284) as to prove to be what the Monk has proved not to be:
While the Monk, usually politely addressed as ye, declines the invitation of the Host to "" be myrie of cheere "" as he tells his tale (VII: 1924–5), the Nun's Priest, familiarly addressed as thou, is ready and able to provide what is wanted: The tale the Nun's Priest tells is a beast-fable: a form of literature that should observe and comment on human traits and manners in a moral light, presenting those traits and manners in a fictional drama in which the characters are of the animal world.
The Nun's Priest's Tale is a complex and supremely witty composition that has been described as a microcosm of the Canterbury Tales as a whole; I shall seek only to illustrate those points of particular relevance to our study of the Shipman's Tale's immediate literary context.
A fundamentally important way in which the Nun's Priest's Tale reflects the overarching structure of the Canterbury Tales is by inviting profound reflection on the two criteria by which the tale-telling game on the pilgrimage is to be judged: "Sentence" and "solaas" — a familiar pairing of lust and loore, instruction and entertainment — are the two aspects of literature supposed by the terms of the competition to produce the best tales.
The Nun's Priest ends his tale with a direction to the reader/listener, purportedly indicating what they must do: and supporting it with St Paul's dictum: In the Nun's Priest's Tale this is no simple directive, finally defining the purpose of a tale which the narrator has introduced as a "" myrie "" ( "merry" ) exercise, and which is truly comic and lively.
The folye (line 3458) and the doctrine (3442) of the tale combine to make it complex rather than contradicting one another.
The use of the animal characters is an unmistakable signal that the tale can be read as a moral allegory and example.
At the same time the use of animal characters is clearly one of the persistently funny elements in the Nun's Priest's Tale.
It is through the use of animal characters that epic or heroic imagery becomes mock-heroic; for instance of Chauntecleer, the cock: So too the solemnity of the debate over the significance of dreams, introduced by Chauntecleer with a pompous "" Madame "" and rhetorically conducted by the citation of a battery of learned authorities, becomes a burlesque in the mouth of this proud bird.
The dignified pose struck by Chauntecleer in response to Pertelote's unsympathetic reaction to his dream, in particular the understandable offence he takes at the embarrassing suggestion that  what he really needs is a good laxative, would be comic in a human character; that the character is a bird provides an opportunity for a greater bathetic and comic deflation when the character ends his monologue by flying down from the perch to peck, chuck and "tread" his favourite hens twenty times before dawn (3172–8).
The Nun's Priest's Tale might then offer a perfect rapprochement of sentence and solaas — qualities that are both, arguably, lacking in the Shipman's Tale.
It certainly indicates that these two are not mutually exclusive in the way that the immediately preceding tales in fragment VII, and the Nun's Priest's concluding directive, seem to imply.
But the difficulty with taking the Nun's Priest's Tale as a successful harmonization of instruction and entertainment is the fact that within the tale any explicit approaches to didactic seriousness are continually subverted.
The capacity of any writing to act as an instructive auctoritee is scrutinized within the Nun's Priest's Tale in the auctoritees cited, all but one by Chauntecleer, in the "debate" over dreams which in reality consists of two opposed monologues rather than a dialogue.
It is one of the commonplaces of interpretation of the Nun's Priest's Tale that the reader/listener is spoilt for choice of morals to be drawn from the tale at the end, when the Nun's Priest refers to the moral with a throwaway carelessness that seems to suggest the moral is so obvious that he need not state it.
These petty morals, partly overlapping, form a cascade of precepts none of which amounts to anything more than a trite platitude.
Immediately before the Nun's Priest's parting instruction to his reader comes: Immediately before this, the fox, one of the victims of flattery in the tale, has drawn his own, slightly different moral from his deception: Idle words may take the form either of praise or of abuse.
Other issues on which morals can be drawn are whether dreams are forewarnings of events to come, and the image of woman as man's confusion: the latter point, though, the Nun's Priest himself refuses to present seriously: The burlesque treatment of matters of moral seriousness in the Nun's Priest's Tale reaches its climax in the middle of the tale, with a reference to one of the crucial dilemmas or mysteries for Christian philosophers: that of reconciling human free will with the necessary truth of God's Providence.
If God foreknows all the events in the history of His creation, what real freedom is there on the part of His creatures, for us to act according to our wills not His?
This is the subject of the largest stretch of commentary on the events of the tale by the narrator, some twenty lines in the verse paragraph in lines 3215–55.
The burlesquing of the debate over this issue does not simply lie in the Nun's Priest's professions of inability to cope with such learned speculations: or in his finally declaring the problem irrelevant: Learned in-joking on one of the authorities on the subject of freewill and providence, Boethius, is also found in the fox's ability to refer to Boethius' book on music (3293–4) and the fact that the fox breaks into Chauntecleer's yard "" By heigh ymaginacioun forncast "" , "Foreseen by High Imagination" (3217).
 "Imagination" is the upper level of animal intellectual activity according to Boethius, as distinct from the Reason of humans and the Intelligence of God and angels (cf.
Chaucer's Boece, Book V, prose 5).
Briefly flashed into the minds of those in the know is the preposterous image of a doggy God foreseeing the world and events of the beast-fable.
This does not mean, however, that the Nun's Priest's Tale is an anti-academic parody.
It is rather a display of witty dexterity, depending for its effect upon a sharing of specialized learning between author/narrator and readers/listeners.
At the same time as the Nun's Priest is made to try to claim for himself in his tale the equivalent of: he, or Chaucer, reassures those who are able to share in the joke that the opposite is the case.
The Nun's Priest therefore emerges from his tale as a character — a character who adopts an amusing persona as the teller of a tale just as Chaucer does in his narrator-pilgrim "Chaucer" .
The character of the Nun's Priest is a complex of knowledge, attitude and sympathy: knowledge of learning, literature and the ars praedicandi ( "art of preaching" ), attitudes of detachment from but understanding of the rarefied world of speculative learning, and of sympathy towards the commoner run of humanity for whom this learning is mystifying and in practical terms irrelevant.
Helen Cooper notes that the inferrable character of the Nun's Priest is the same as the inferrable character of Chaucer.
We might say that the Nun's Priest represents a human character standing at the intersection of various areas of human activity and experience mirrored within the text, and that the important attributes of the construct that this character is are not least life and humanity themselves; the real individual and communal life that has to compromise between animalistic anarchy (i.e. the fabliau world?— cf.
Janette Richardson's commentary on animal imagery in the Shipman's Tale, and that to be found in the Miller's and Reeve's Tales (next chapter)) and sterile intellectualism; between the worlds of sensory experience and high auctoritee.
The final and comprehensive pose struck by the Nun's Priest is one that exemplifies the high ethic of the Canterbury Tales — a pragmatic and tolerant attitude of human good fellowship — by virtue of the truly merry tale that the Nun's Priest tells, laughing at and with his characters and readers but scorning and destroying none.
Every  potential target in this tale, like Chauntecleer, survives to ponder the events that have happened and to consider their moral.
The true moral of the Nun's Priest's Tale is a moral of character and attitude not of precept; and appropriately the Host responds by commenting on the Nun's Priest as a character who has proved to be what the Monk has turned out not to be.
In praising the Nun's Priest, however, he is limited to a motif of sexual worth that inescapably recalls the fabliau: which is what he had imagined of the Monk (VII: 1945).
What we shall see in the next two chapters is that this limitation in the Host's response cannot be seen simply as a caricaturing of the Host as an intellectually limited churl, or as an endorsement of the undoubtedly vital fabliau ethos.
Consequently, we find that the relationship between teller (pilgrim-narrator) and tale, between tale and genre and between story and moral, are consistently to the fore in the tales of fragment VII.
The importance of such aspects inferred from a reading of the Shipman's Tale is confirmed by the consistent treatment of these themes in the following group.
The feminine voice at the start of the Shipman's Tale is a conundrum that draws attention to the teller.
The conundrum may be solved, but what use is made of the character of the Shipman, thus emphasized?
The answer may again lie in the tolerant perspective on the surrounding world taken by Chaucer and "Chaucer" through and in the Canterbury Tales.
This does not mean a suspension of judgement and uncritical acceptance of the thief and murderer the Shipman is suggested to be in the General Prologue (I: 388–410); a fitting teller for a graceless tale.
It is rather a perspective that recognizes and takes full account of the reality of such crime within the world and which stands at a distance from it.
The Shipman's portrait in the General Prologue is a case, like that of the Yeoman, where a distance and unfamiliarity between "Chaucer" and the pilgrim is conveyed by a naive curiosity with which "Chaucer's" description focuses and lingers on the sharp and pointed or menacing aspects of the pilgrim's accoutrements.
With the Yeoman, attention falls rapidly on the   and returns to: After two lines on the horse and garb of the Shipman, the gaze focuses on: The constant but controlled menace of these characters and their weapons is recognized and observed by Chaucer/ "Chaucer" with a perception as keen as their daggers.
But the approach is patient, curious and explorative, not a condemnation that could, all too easily, have been staged.
As we shall see more clearly after studying Chaucer's other fabliaux and uses of fabliau, the Shipman's Tale stands out as the particular instance when Chaucer uses a fabliau to place fabliau in a critical light, examining fabliau as an extant genre rather than exploiting it for some other purpose.
This does not prevent it from functioning, at the same time, as a vehicle for social or cultural criticism.
What we find is that the virtually unadapted fabliau of this kind, a version of the world of production, religion and sexual relationships (which do not in this case imply reproduction) is a literary genre that, allowed to follow its own logic to the very end, shames the active characters within the tale, which in this case includes the feigned narrator.
One consequence of the exclusive pursuit of the selfish and self-indulgent ethos of the naked fabliau is that the Shipman's Tale, unlike the majority of the French fabliaux, contains no concluding moral, ending instead on the selfish prayer: The failure of a moral to appear here is emphasized by the fact that the Host immediately tries to draw a moral from the tale — an appropriately pragmatic one: It could and has been held that the Shipman's Tale is thereby amoral.
However, we have in fragment VII another example of amorality — the moral insignificance of the meaningless nonsense-rhyme of Sir Thopas — against which, and against the positive morality of Melibee, from which the Host is able to draw a more pertinent moral, the amorality of the Shipman's Tale becomes in itself a form of immorality, the failure of a tale to offer more than a licentious celebration of the terms of trade of the brothel and of pornography.
In the ways argued above, fragment VII on its own forms a rather more consistent group than that which is produced by the "Bradshaw shift" , which labels fragment VII as group B2 and places the Shipman's Tale immediately after the Man of Law's.
Nonetheless the Introduction to the Man of Law's Tale (II: 1–98) is particularly relevant to the themes we have just identified in fragment VII.
There is there a critical discussion of a sort of Chaucer's literary works, introduced by the Man of Law ironically declaring his own inability to tell a "" thrifty tale "" as Chaucer can with his "" lewed "" metre and "" crafty "" rhyming.
He gives a survey of Chaucer's literary products, concentrating on works dealing with lovers and noble women.
All this is supposed to contrast with his own offering, which appears to be introduced with the words "" I speke in prose "" (II: 96) although in fact his tale of a noble woman and wife, Custance (Constance), is told in rhyme-royal stanzas.
Fragment VII and the Man of Law's Tale
The direction in which the discussion of literature in the Introduction to the Man of Law's Tale points, however, is towards a comparison of Chaucer's writing with that of his contemporary John Gower rather than towards the survey of literary genres detached from the accidental circumstances of the identity of authors of specific examples of those genres that we find in fragment VII.
This emerges particularly in the verse paragraph in  lines 77–89 of the Introduction, in which the Man of Law is made to note certain tales which Chaucer has not versified — Canace and Machaire, and Appollonius of Tyre — which Gower did include amongst the tales of his Confessio Amantis.
Both these tales involve incestuous sexual relationships, which is presumably what is meant by referring to them as "" unkynde ( "unnatural" ) abhomynaciouns "" (II: 88).
A great deal could be written on the contrast between Chaucer and Gower reflected here: one might note, for instance, that incest plays a relatively small part in the tale of Appollonius, and that it is hardly condoned in the Canace and Machaire story of Gower although it is romantically treated in a tragic and sympathetic manner.
The significant point here is that this would itself be a distraction from the study of Chaucer's fabliaux, the Shipman's Tale, and fragment VII.
It is, however, a worthwhile exercise to compare the Shipman's Tale with these tales of Gower to see where Chaucer may have drawn the line between permissible and even useful scurrility in literature and unconscionable sin.
The Man of Law's "" I speke in prose "" need not be a description of the tale he is about to tell — it may be read as equivalent to "my speech is (normally) prosaic" — but several critics have looked for a prose work of Chaucer's which could be identified as the once-intended tale of the Man of Law.
Melibee, one of our fragment VII tales, is a popular solution.
If the Man of Law had a prose tale it should certainly have been a serious and learned tale like Melibee, the Parson's Tale, or Chaucer's translations of Boethius' De consolatione philosophiae or Pope Innocent III's De miseria condicionis humane, and thus a tale of the kind that found a place in fragment VII.
Likewise the comic reference to Chaucer's poetic skill: is echoed by the Host's comments on the "" veray lewednesse "" and "" drasty speche "" and "" drasty ryming "" of Sir Thopas (VII: 919–30).
The Introduction to the Man of Law's Tale does thus anticipate some of the issues that will be raised in fragment VII.
Evaluation of the editorial "Bradshaw shift" is not simply a matter of deciding whether it is right or wrong.
The Bradshaw grouping can be seen  as a variant rather than an alternative ordering of the fragments.
It makes a valid connection in a collection the order of which almost certainly varied during the process of composition and which was never completed.
The reader may "" Turn over the leef and chese another tale "" (I: 3177) constructively as well as evasively.
The Miller's and Reeve's Tales and their fictonal context
THE MILLER'S AND REEVE'S TALES: A FABLIAU DIPTYCH
Cherles tales
While variation in the ordering of tales is not merely possible but can be a critically rewarding way of reading the fragments in and around the middle of the sequence of the Canterbury Tales, the fragments at the beginning and end (fragments I and X, and, generally, II and IX) are solidly fixed in place, challenging the reader to interpret them as and where they stand.
Fragment I contains Chaucer's most highly prized and praised fabliaux, the Miller's and Reeve's Tales.
These tales call out for assessment as a pair, and critics have responded appropriately.
Extant interpretations of this diptych, however, vary radically, and the case that will be argued here appears to be the least orthodox view, at least to judge by the published criticism of the last thirty years or so.
The primary division amongst critical views lies between readings of these tales as fundamentally serious moral reflections on the state of humankind despite their undeniably comic appearance, and readings of them as essentially lighthearted tales, designed to amuse rather than to disturb, elevating solaas well above sentence.
Many would concur with the case most recently and most substantially argued by V. A. Kolve, that the Miller's and Reeve's Tales contrast with one another in these terms: the former full of liberty and light; the latter replete with dark moral shades and tones.
Several read both tales as moral dramas in which human sin is revealed, judged and punished.
Distinctly the minority view is that which allows laughter at both tales to be free of moral implications and which thus allows the tales genuinely to be fun — which would not, of course, imply that the two tales are vacuous exercises aimed at giving pleasure alone.
The immediate dramatic context of the Miller's and Reeve's Tales is an argument between the Miller and the Reeve.
It is not explicitly stated that the Miller demands to tell his tale out of spite to the Reeve.
He in fact puts himself forward "" to quite the Knyghtes tale "" after the Host has asked the Monk to do that very thing (lines 3119 and 3127).
But the synopsis that he offers of his tale: is unmistakably that of a fabliau, and with the target figure appearing as a regular element within the fabliau it is understandable that the Reeve, a carpenter, should anticipate an attack upon himself: Fabliaux are thoroughly suitable textual weapons for the two churls, the Miller and the Reeve, to beat each other over the head with.
There are, moreover, reasons for expecting an attack upon the Reeve, which in turn would mean that it is not solely his unsuccessful pre-emptive strike that establishes a state of enmity between these two characters.
In the General Prologue portrait of the Reeve — a portrayal which leans heavily on conventional attitudes of hostility towards the lords' men, the peasant officials amongst the peasants, in medieval English satire — the Reeve is presented as a man who provokes suspicion and fear: and as a man who, by being identifiable as one of a type rather than an individual, attracts the prejudices associated with that type.
Much of the critical antipathy towards the Reeve derives from the ingestion of such prejudice as opposed to detached examination of it.
The proposition that the fabliau is an appropriate mode for an argument between two churls is explicitly Chaucer's.
The only term he uses to characterize the content of these tales in advance is "" harlotrye "" , and this appears after he has not once but twice emphasized the purported social origin of these tales.
The Miller, he states: and immediately before the tale commences he repeats the point: However doubtful we should be about attempts to associate the emergence of the medieval fabliau with any particular social class, it is significant that Chaucer wishes to represent the fabliau in precisely such terms.
The point is well made by Kolve, that what the Miller says does not, realistically, sound very much like an inebriated medieval churl.
This is even true, contra Kolve, of what he says for most of his prologue.
But what he has to say in his tale may represent what we might like to believe such a character's ribald attitudes towards women, towards his fellow men, and towards conventional morality would predictably be.
A good part of the wit of these two fabliaux lies in the incongruous mixture of the urbane and sophisticated amusement they have to offer with the notionally rude and crude character of the churls' minds.
The serious side of this entertaining situation lies in Chaucer's crediting these two churls with intellects far higher than those of brute beasts.
Of particular relevance to such a potentially egalitarian levelling of differences between social classes is the great emphasis that is laid upon role-playing in fragment I. Chaucer is especially concerned to draw attention to his persona, "Chaucer" , towards the end of the General Prologue and in the Miller's Prologue (725–6; 3170–86).
His ironic protestations — "" My wit is short; ye may well understonde "" ; "" Blameth nat me… "" — serve only to remind us of the fact that here we have a court poet playing first the pilgrim-narrator "Chaucer" and then playing a churl.
It seems, curiously, to have remained generally unnoted that there is no explicit change of speaker between the end of the Miller's Prologue, where "Chaucer" is speaking: and the opening of the Miller's Tale: perhaps because the transition is marked in written or printed editions by rubrics and headings such as the Ellesmere manuscript's "" Heere bigynneth the Millere his tale "" .
This unmarked transition from "Chaucer" to another pilgram-narrator where a tale begins is unparalleled in the rest of the Canterbury Tales, and, be it by accident or design, it encourages us to reflect upon how far the Miller's Tale is also Chaucer's.
THE MILLER'S TALE
Narrative tone
Full comprehension of the Miller's Tale, by its teller or its audience, requires a mind well stored with esoteric, learned knowledge.
Sophisticated technical vocabulary from medieval astrological procedures and psychology is deftly deployed, and even woven into the rhymes of the verse: thus "" conclusiouns/ interrogaciouns "" (3193/4) and "" affecioun/ymaginacioun…impressioun "" (3611/12—13).
An informed mind is needed to  appreciate the circumstantial detail of this Oxford fabliau: the relationship between the town and Oseney, for example, and the carpenter's calling upon a local saint, St Frideswide.
The narrator of the tale is made a rhetorician, apostrophizing both his audience: and one of his characters: It has been pointed out that a skilled mastery of the "idiom of popular poetry" , embodied in the witty appropriation of familiar poetic epithets such as hende, jolif and gent, which are used of Nicholas, Absolon and Alison respectively, is not simply a characteristic of Chaucerian style, but is especially exploited by Chaucer for this one tale.
A role is created for the reader to play beyond that of the simple suspension of disbelief required by all fiction in the face, for instance, of such instances of an extraordinary control over his tale-telling by a supposedly drunken Miller as those just noted.
By the very act of reading on into the tale from the Miller's Prologue we as readers allow ourselves to be manipulated into supposing ourselves somehow different from the readership of "" every gentil wight "" that is offered a warning and an invitation to: We know ourselves to be more complex beings.
In our case, of course, it is a mature, open and enquiring critical mind that leads us to read on into the churls' tales of "harlotrie" , not a degrading taste for such material and a lack of interest in: We might see the combination of the intrinsically low status of the Miller and the consequently low expectations of what he will produce with the sophistication of his narrative performance as simply an entertaining absurdity, or perhaps a burlesque, like Chauntecleer's discursive pomp and display in the Nun's Priest's Tale.
But Chauntecleer slips and gives himself away: and the Miller does not.
A very much richer reading is obtained, by way of alternative, by stressing how a perception of the arbitrary nature of social divisions and of socio-cultural class stereotypes underlies Chaucer's composition here, and that he invites his readers — those who do not wish to conform to the naive stereotype of the "" gentil wight "" — to share this insight.
Exactly how far the Miller's Tale is Chaucer's composition we do not know.
A number of close analogues to the tale are known, a particularly close one being a Middle Dutch fabliau Heile van Beersele, apparently virtually contemporary with Chaucer's composition.
This tale is set in Antwerp, and the major difference between it and the Miller's Tale is that the woman concerned is not a wife but a prostitute, who lives in Coperstraten (apparently Merchant Street, although it has been suggested it should really be Coeperstraten, Cow Gate Street).
Three further versions known in sixteenth-century copies from Germany combine the three major elements of the tale: the Second Flood, the kissing of the arse (in all cases the male lover's arse, not the woman's) and the retaliatory branding.
The kiss and branding also appear in a fifteenth-century Italian novella.
It would not detract anything from Chaucer's achievement if the whole plot were derived from some external source: it is generally the case that Chaucer's skill lies in the  handling and shaping of extant material rather than in original composition.
The plot of the Miller's Tale is, however, a complex one, more complex that either of the English fabliaux we have looked at so far in this book, and unsurpassed in complexity amongst the French fabliaux.
There are multiple tricksters and dupes.
The carpenter, John, Alison's "" old "" husband, is the most obvious target figure of the piece, but Absolon is tricked into kissing Alison's arse "" savourly "" and being farted upon, and Nicholas is led to put his bare behind out of the window little knowing he does so for it to be branded with a plough-coulter hot from the forge.
The only character in the tale who cannot be regarded as the target figure in any way is Alison, the woman, who sails through "" upright "" , laughing and unscathed.
The construction of the fabliau
An emphasis upon the characters within the tale is established from the start of the Miller's Tale, where there are three character portraits replete with significant detail.
The carpenter, the "" riche gnof "" , is mentioned in the first three lines but the narration moves swiftly on to the portrait of Nicholas.
This portrayal confirms the expectations of a fabliau that have been raised in the Reeve, and with him the reader, by the Miller's Prologue.
This principal character is a "" poure scoler "" (3190), a "" clerk "" (3199), liable, therefore, to be living by his wits, including, it is hinted (3191–6), by forecasting the weather on the strength of his astrology.
This clerk is amorously alive and even experienced:— "" deerne love "" is as double in meaning here as it is at the beginning of Dame Sirith, and the same must hold for the semantically similar "" privee "" ; slyness is very much more the quality of a fabliau lover (cf.
Dame Sirith 159) than of a courtly suitor.
Evidently emblematic of Nicholas's priorities in life is the description of his psaltery, a stringed musical instrument, lying above all else in his chamber — his books, astrolabe and counters.
After the introduction of Nicholas (3190–220) we turn back to the carpenter, of whom, too, we are instantly given details making him a perfect fabliau character: he is married, newly and ill-matchedly so, and thus perhaps green and inexperienced as well as old and jealous: The fabliau formulae themselves produce an unjust stereotyping in this case, as the carpenter's jealousy, although referred to again by Alison (3294), is nowhere evident in his words or actions in the tale.
The carpenter's sincere love for his wife is, however, reflected in his subsequent actions (i.e. 3522–3; 3614–17).
From the description of the carpenter (3221–32) the narrative moves on to a glorious and often-analysed effictio, an external portrait such as was conventional in introducing ladies in romance literature, of the beautiful and sensuous young wife, Alison.
She is a child of nature, likened to several animals, particularly, in some cases, to their young: a weasel (3234), a wether (3249), a kid and a calf (3260) and a colt (3263); and also to flowers (3268).
Her whole self appeals to all the senses.
She has an apron "" whit as morne milk "" (3236), a mouth as: She is "" blisful on to see "" (3247), soft to the touch (3249) and even present to the sense of hearing with her song (3257–8).
Her clothing moulds itself to her body so as to reveal or to promise as much of the delights within as it conceals; it too includes silk, soft to the touch (3235) and the fresh warm taste of morning milk (3236).
Both body and clothing are made up of the black and the white — uncomplicated but striking — and her complexion shines like gold (3236–41; 3246; 3255–6).
Her clothing shows the shape of her body — her apron is seen "" upon hir lendes "" (3237), where it is "" ful of many a goore "" : full, we may interpret this, of pleats, leading the attention further in to the apron, and towards what lies beyond/behind it.
So too the embroidery on her smock leads the reader to turn her round in his gaze, "" al bifoore/And eek bihynde "" (3238–9).
The mind's eye is drawn to move down, just a little, below her waist, where there "" heeng a purs of lether "" (3250)(compare, here, the sexual connotations of Old French bourse, "purse" ), and likewise up her legs from her shoes (3267).
She is indeed a transcendent figment of the creative literary imagination: According to Janette Richardson (1970), Alison escapes any punishment in the tale because she acts purely in accordance with "nature" .
Another difference between the characterization of Alison and that of the three men is that she is seen totally from the outside — one sees her appearance in her face and her clothes; we see what actions she does.
All the men, by contrast, have some psychological character, however simple, associable with their actions — love, lust, malice, and so on; Alison's mind, her attitudes, what she "" thoughte in hir herte "" (cf. the Merchant's Tale, IV: 1851), remain absolute mysteries.
Many women in the French fabliaux are described as beautiful, and thus alluring in such a way as to motivate the fabliau plot, but none is made poetically truly so within the text to the extent that Chaucer's Alison is.
Immediately after her portrait is completed Nicholas woos her in a typically crude, fabliau manner, presented by the narrator in appropriately marked, fabliau language: Alison puts up some resistance to this rude assault (3282–7) but as Nicholas persists, crying mercy and speaking fair, she seems in the end to be a relatively easy conquest for him (3288–93).
From here, the notion that the husband's jealousy requires the lovers to perform a fabliau trick is made explicit (3294–302), after which Nicholas takes up his psaltery, excitedly making music as he mentally rejoices in his conquest and the promise of sexual delight it holds (3305–6).
That next we see Alison going to church: yet prepared for adultery, and, who knows, anticipating it in her mind, and with one of her attractions, her shining complexion, emphasized with her newly-washed forehead, might well be taken as creating an adverse moral perspective on Alison.
Equally we might take "nature" as being so predominant in Alison's whole being and actions that we thus recognize church-going to be a part of medieval culture that has become so instinctive an act as to be part of the essential rhythm of medieval life.
Whatever the case — and the religious context is a problem that will be considered with wider reference in due course — it is at church that the parish clerk, Absolon, is introduced.
He, too, is presented with a description of his appearance, dress, behaviour and character that is clearly an exercise similar to the drawing of Alison, and which encourages the comparison of the figures thus drawn.
In Absolon's case, this emphasizes, not quite his effeminacy, but rather his daintiness, with his Pre-Raphaelite fan of golden curly hair, his rosy cheeks and grey eyes, "" yclad…ful smal and proprely "" , "dressed tightly and fashionably" , and his dancing, like Alison (3312–38).
He has, however, the same sexual appetite as Nicholas — and, correspondingly, has his musical instruments: a "" smal rubible "" (there is, no doubt, a bawdy joke in the smal, "thin" , here) and a "" giterne "" .
Particularly striking is how far Absolon's image is the product of nurture, not nature: his hair "" crul "" , "curled" , "" strouted "" , "made to stick out" , and with a "" shode "" , "parting" , which we read of him combing later on (3691); his shoes and clothing "" corven "" , "carved" and "" set "" ; not, like Alison, skipping like a kid or a calf, but tripping and dancing "" in twenty manere…after the scole of Oxenforde tho "" (a wonderful image of the "school" !).
Absolon's portrait thus ends with particular bathos when it transpires that he still cannot escape the vulgar facts of the body's nature, try as he might: This second instance of a marked word in the Miller's Tale encourages a recall of the context of the first, Nicholas's grabbing of Alison, and thus even before it has been dramatically explicated completes the second fabliau triangle, Nicholas—Alison—Absolon, which forms a symmetrical reflection of the first, Nicholas—Alison—John.
If we are alert to textual detail — and all studies of the reverberations of imagery in the Miller's Tale tell us that it is a tale that encourages us to be so (see below)— then we can also find a suggestive parallel between Absolon's inability to detach himself entirely from the vulgarities of the human world and the Host's failure to impose an elegantly hierarchical structure on the tale-telling competition.
 "" This gooth aright: unbokeled is the male "" , he says, praising the tale of the Knight, the highest-ranking pilgrim, and proceeding, with deferential patronization, to call on the Monk to "" quite "" , to "answer" , the Knight's Tale (3115–19).
The vulgar Miller intrudes, and, with his fabliau and the nature of the genre and of fabliau language in mind, we can find some amusement in contemplating the possible sexual reading of "" unbokeled is the male "" , "the purse is unbuckled" , a vulgarity that the Host, playing the role given him at this point, would no doubt have considered excluded from his words.
We see Absolon submit to nature once more, when despite his reported courtly wakefulness in his desire for Alison (3373), he decides upon a couple of hours' nap before his waking and playing on the fateful night (3685–6).
Absolon's artificiality can be seen as the root of his failure within the tale.
He fails with all his devices to attract Alison: where Nicholas succeeds with his direct and unambiguous seizure of Alison (3276–8).
Absolon's unfortunate request for a kiss — which he hopes will be a sign of things to come — itself comes as the conclusion of a pastiche of literary models and sources including the lover's complaint and the Old Testament's Song of Solomon (3698–726).
Nicholas succeeds because he is different, with naked and unambiguous phallocentric maleness.
Thus, too, Nicholas absolutely displaces the deluded John: There is a wealth of detail in the imagery of the Miller's Tale, a wealth to be measured in terms of the narrative or thematic relevance of the individual images.
Charles Muscatine wrote memorably of the fulfilment of a "" fabliau entelechy "" in this tale: an actualization in the course of the fabliau of a potential residing in the elements of its composition from the start.
Nicholas's weather- forecasting (3193–6) anticipates the Flood trick.
The "" lycorys "" that Nicholas is as sweet as (3207) is echoed by the "" likerous ye "" of Alison (3244) and the liquourice that Absolon, less favoured by nature, chews: before approaching Alison's window on the night of the denouement of the tale.
The inverse of the use of this sweet spice comes with the kissing of Alison's arse, "" ful savourly "" (3734–5) and Absolon's attempts to take the taste of that away:— note here the details appropriate to this action taking place in a carpenter's yard.
 "" Woodnesse "" , "madness" , itself becomes a theme of the tale, as Nicholas screams "" as he were wood "" (3814) on being branded, and Alison and Nicholas assert that John was "" wood "" after crashing to the ground in his tub (3833).
The pun on "" wood "" in its sole surviving modern sense makes the imputed insanity of the carpenter — a would-be second Noah, the shipwright — adhere to John the more firmly.
When Alison requires Nicholas to be "" ful deerne "" (3297) we already know that he can be (3200).
The association of sex and musical imagery reaches a splendid climax in this tale as Alison and Nicholas enjoy "" revel "" and "" melodye "" in bed to a devout musical accompaniment as: The use of animal imagery to describe Alison prepares us for her response to Nicholas's first assault: while the images of the trave, a frame for holding a horse to be shod, and of the final night of the tale "" derk…as the cole "" , prepare us for the brief scene at Gerveys the blacksmith's forge (3760–85).
Around the blacksmith's forge, too, there is assembled another cluster of imagery with sexual connotations.
We have already seen the phallic symbolism of the plough in Dame Sirith and the Shipman's Tale; it is thematically appropriate that the Miller should swear by "" the oxen in my plogh "" when considering in his prologue whether he may be a cuckold or not (3151–62).
When Absolon brands Nicholas with the hot coulter there is an unmistakable innuendo that he disgraces the rampant Nicholas, who has replaced Alison at the window, with a homosexual assault.
Perhaps the most poignant echo in the tale comes towards the end where the townspeople, laughing at John, "" kiken and…cape "" , "peer and gape" , into his roof (3841), repeating the verb used of Nicholas pretending to be transfixed by his astrological vision (3444): the "" folk "" here align themselves with Nicholas — and with Nicholas the trickster, not Nicholas of the branded bum.
As at the end of Dame Sirith, the cycle of fabliau narrative is ready to roll around again.
Many more details of this kind of exploitation of imagery could be picked out of the Miller's Tale; the above, however, is sufficient to make the point that the composition of the tale is extremely well organized, wasting no details, and indeed harmonizing the disparate plots in the magnificient denouement of the tale.
The dramatic climax of the tale is reached when Nicholas foolhardily puts his backside out of the window: he farts like thunder upon the "" squaymous "" Absolon, the roll of the "" thunderdent "" being an audible sign of the imminent storm.
He is then "" scalded in the towte "" and screams for water; John wakes up and interprets Nicholas's cry in his own deluded way.
It is several critics' testimony that John's awakening re-awakens the reader to John's sleeping presence (or, rather, immanence).
As in the French Jouglet, it seems that Nicholas's tricks are rebounding on him.
The comparison with Jouglet, however, helps us in our analysis to see the Miller's Tale as a pre-eminent example of a fabliau in which trickery really is the essence of the narrative.
Despite, realistically, plenty of opportunity, there is no illicit sex between Nicholas and Alison until the pleasure of their union can be enhanced by Nicholas truly having replaced John by tricking him into a contrived "absence" .
Even the reported jealousy of John, which is the intratextual spur to Nicholas's applying his wits to "" bigyle "" him (3294–00), is left looking like a contrivance, validated by its function which is to excuse what is "really" a gratuitous trick.
The joke of the Miller's Tale is not the cuckolding of John; the bedding of Alison by Nicholas.
Rather it is how those results are achieved, and the series of discomfitures that are a consequence of Absolon's intrusion and creation of an antitype to the cosy lovers' triangle in the carpenter's house.
Sex, thus, is not a theme of the Miller's Tale in the way that it is of Dame Sirith and the Shipman's Tale.
In its complexity and coherency, however, the process of composition of the Miller's Tale mirrors the plotting and  contrivances within the tale.
This is a further twist to the problem of the identities of the tellers of the tale, which Chaucer conspicuously, and apparently ingenuously, labels with a subjective genitive as a "" cherles tale "" .
We do not need to wait for the Reeve's Tale for a fabliau in which the Miller can be identified with a target figure: the Miller's Tale itself links its dramatic teller, the Miller, with John the carpenter as John repeats the Miller's axiom found in the Miller's Prologue: in his own homespun wisdom:— a valuing of ignorance which Nicholas is able to play upon (3558).
We can read this assimilation of characters either as an irony beyond the Miller's ken, confirming the limits of his churl's intellect, or as a droll piece of self-examination and reflection on the character's part: the Miller might, as he says in his prologue, be a cuckold as John is.
Again the reader is offered choice; here a choice of what sort of Miller the reader wishes to have.
Very much part of the truly amusing comedy of the Miller's Tale is the swift chain of cause and effect that links the three familiar plots — what is euphemistically called "the misdirected kiss" , the branding, and the Second Flood trick — together in the dramatic climax in lines 3798 to 3823 of the tale.
Here, we may claim, the clusters of imagery in the tale reach their fulfilment in a hilarious fabliau denouement, not in a climax in which they convert to solemn symbolic meanings in an implicit moral scheme.
Ranges of imagery such as that of the plough may be symbolic, but are only so in a particular type of fabliau symbolism: disgraceful or phallic in their symbolic reference in a manner that is the very antitype of Christian moralization.
The hilarious final rush of actions dominates the tale, and may provide a form of comic catharsis by which not only are potentially grave moral images and considerations emptied of their solemnity, but also the sympathy that it is difficult at times not to feel for the poor dupe, John, faithfully and helplessly in love with his wife, is overwhelmed by  the sheer absurdity of this all-embracing climax.
What is more, the funny side of John's situation is made explicit in the tale by lines which indicate the fundamentally urbane and clerkly bias of the humour of the fabliau: The laugh is on the uneducated man who thought his common sense better than the clerks' sophistry (3448–91).
We can, moreover, hear the urbane inflection of the voice where Nicholas and Alison briefly take up the fabliau narrative within the narrative, spinning the yarn of John's foolishness: The joke is enhanced by their attribution of the elegant French phrase, par compaignye, to this "" lewed "" character.
The Miller's tale concludes as a fabliau, not only with appropriate, marked fabliau language: but also with a general and amiable benediction: The more recent moral—allegorical readings of the Miller's Tale have seen John, Nicholas and Absolon as type figures, representing the sins of Avarice, Lechery and Pride respectively, all of whom come to judgement and punishment in their discomfiture.
It would clearly take considerable mental agility to square this reading with that emphasizing the comedy of the fabliau put forward here, even in terms of the black humour of the exposure of human baseness as suggested for the French Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin.
More arresting are readings which note the inescapable presence of the Christian religion in the ambient of the tale, embodied in the church — to which Alison goes on the "" haliday "" and where Absolon "" gooth with a sencer "" , or where the "" freres in the chauncel gonne synge "" — and in the Bible: echoes of the Song of Solomon in the descriptions of Alison and Absolon, and in Absolon's love song (3698–707).
There is also the identification of John and Alison, an old carpenter and a young carpenter's wife, with Joseph and Mary, especially as Nicholas's early sweet singing includes the Anunciation, Angelus ad virginem, "The angel [coming]to the Virgin…" (3216).
R. E. Kaske puts it extremely neatly by claiming only for the Miller's Tale an "" implicit orientation "" towards "" a controlling set of [moral and religious]values "" creating a framework within which, ultimately, the actions within the tale and the actions of writing, telling and reading the tale, are to be evaluated.
Kolve, however, would argue even this moral content away, suggesting that possible religious images are systematically emptied of their moral potential in the telling of the tale, to celebrate "" the possible sovereignty of comic order within the world of daily life, a world temporarily — by an act of imaginative exclusion — unshadowed by Last Things "" : Noah's Flood really is transformed into "" Nowelis flood "" .
This reading of the effect of the "fabliau entelechy" on religious imagery can also be applied to what appears as a singularly stark, socially satirical statement in this tale, the concluding lines to the portrait of Alison: These could focus critically on the selfish pleasure-taking of lords with town "wenches" , whom yeomen of lower status have to wed.
The lines could, of course, be read as reflecting on Alison: "she was there for any man" .
But they can also be interpreted in accordance with the overriding thematic interpretation of the Miller's Tale suggested here.
Alison's favours break down the boundaries of class; any man who can lay her in his bed is like a lord, as Absolon says as he anticipates her kiss: Kolve's interpretation of potentially religious images within the tale is fine as far as it goes, and can justly be quoted against the allegorizers, but there is at least one aspect of the tale that refers irreducibly to a moral frame within which the tale is set: recurrent swearing of oaths by "" Seint Thomas of Kent "" , which reminds us of the framing narrative with its realistic and morally symbolic journey towards Becket's shrine in Canterbury and the judgement of the tale-telling game just as much as John's calling upon St Frideswide locates the tale effectively within Oxford.
From here, a futher interpretation of the Miller's Tale may be proposed which is similar in form to that of Les quatre Souhais Saint Martin recalled just above, although far less severe, morally, than either that proposed for the French fabliau or that of the allegorizers.
This takes as its theme "" Goddes pryvetee "" : a phrase appearing three times in the Miller's Prologue and Tale (3164, 3454, 3558) and recalled again when John tells his wife his so-called "" pryvetee "" in line 3603.
We can find in this tale a sharp focusing of the contrast between the far-off histories of the Old Testament and the mysteries of God's will and intelligence, and the vulgarities of the human condition and the spectrum of personal relationships with the church from Nicholas and Absolon through Alison to John.
The tale thus appropriately represents an early station in the Canterbury pilgrim-community's road towards a religious goal that they can approach in  fourteenth-century England, Becket's shrine.
And prayer may span the divide between the mundane and the transcendental:
Moral interpretation
THE REEVE AND HIS TALE
When the Miller has finished telling his tale, Chaucer characterizes its contents once more, this time describing it as a "" nyce cas "" , "a foolish state of affairs" (3855): an apparently neutral moral description which nonetheless contrasts significantly with the more clearly marked "" harlotrye "" that has formerly been used to label the contents of the pair of fabliaux we are now halfway through.
The responses of the pilgrims to the Miller's Tale, we are told, were various: but the majority of the pilgrims simply laugh (3858).
If we imagine the situation at the end of the Miller's Tale in realistic terms, we can suppose that the divisions amongst the pilgrims in terms of their appreciation of the tale are as likely to reflect different sensibilities to the marked, fabliau language the Miller's Tale makes use of as shock at the possible moral implications of the tale (compare the response to the Prioress's Tale, noted in Chapter 3).
The one dissenting voice that is made explicit to us is the Reeve's: As has been noted, the Reeve's Tale is often read as a much darker piece than the Miller's Tale, and such readings are usually rooted in the reading of the Reeve's character: a character who may be presented as corrupt, as well as frightening, in his General Prologue portrait.
The elusiveness of the Reeve in this respect, while he knows fully the sleights of those around him (603–4), makes him the more troubling.
He is then described as irous as he comes to tell his tale: Kolve contrasts the obsessiveness of sin and punishment in the Reeve's Tale with the freedom and lightheartedness of his Miller's Tale.
At the end of both the Reeve's Prologue and of his Tale, a measure-for-measure attitude to the governing of human affairs, and, most significantly, human relationships, is enunciated: and: with no sense anywhere of grace, mercy or forgiveness, the essentials for human salvation in the Christian view.
Particular attention has correspondingly been drawn to the manner in which moral blemishes in Symkyn the miller and his relatives by blood and marriage pervade the Reeve's Tale and govern — or are implicit in — the unfolding of the narrative.
Symkyn's father-in-law is the village parson, which means, of course, that Symkyn's wife is of illegitimate birth.
This is the "" noble kyn "" of Symkyn's wife and their daughter that Symkyn and his wife are so proud of.
Symkyn's daughter, Malyne, physically inherits from her father a characteristic "" kamus (pug) nose "" (3934 and 3974), while the main feature of her role in this fabliau, to be "" swyved "" by one of the clerks, mirrors the extra-marital "swyving" by which her mother was conceived.
An important question in our interpretation of the moral structure of the tale must, however, be whether we regard the "swyving" of the two women as the visitation of some form of punishment upon them.
To insist that that is so would seem to be a hard claim to substantiate.
The women may be "disparaged" (4271) but are not shown to be outraged at what has happened to them.
There is a touch of pathos in the scene when the clerk leaves Malyne: but it is Alayn's going, not his coming, that upsets her.
In the case of the miller's wife:(She had not had so pleasant a time for many a long year)
The women appear rather to get a share of the compensation for the "" il fit "" , the "unpleasant trick" (4184) that the clerks had suffered during the preceding day.
P. A. Olson's article of 1962, identifying the Reeve's Tale as Chaucer's Measure for Measure, was especially severe on the Reeve as a character, and has proved to be the foundation stone for much subsequent interpretation of the Reeve's Tale.
In particular, Olson suggested that the truly comic element in the tale is an ironic one: that the moral criticism implicit within the tale applies more to the Reeve that to his dramatic adversary, the Miller.
He claimed too that the Reeve is presented as indicting the Miller for a judgement he does not make, i.e. that he had criticized the Reeve for being over-ready to see himself as a priest, the agent of God's punishment, through John's naive readiness to see himself as a second Noah.
Chaucer's Reeve, for Olson, is revealed as a judge who will not temper strict retributive justice with mercy, and thus becomes a character who is liable to strict justice himself.
But in casting himself as judge rather than criminal the Reeve himself is the beguiler beguiled by the partiality of his moral vision: that is, his own self-righteousness, and his ire towards his fellows.
It is undeniable that the individualized character of the Reeve is very prominent as a result of his self-reflexions in his prologue, and that the common theme of the scales of justice in Prologue and Tale invites us to make our own assessments of characters and actions there portrayed.
Apart from the general fitness between what most would see as a hostile and acerbic tale and a bitter and unlovely character, one is constantly reminded of the Reeve's provincial origins by his own dialect speech — in particular the occasional use of the Scandinavian-derived first person pronoun ik, "I" , against Chaucer's standard ich — and by the northern speech of his two clerks, Alayn and John of Strother (perhaps modelled on  two northern characters known to the English court), which was yet further removed from the London standard of Chaucer's day.
But if this reading of the Reeve's character, and of the relationship between teller and tale, were true, it would leave the Reeve almost uniquely condemned amongst the Canterbury pilgrims.
He would not, of course, be alone in being exposed in the General Prologue and enhancing the adverse view of himself by his own Prologue — consider, for instance , the Pardoner — but he would be alone in then telling a tale which clinches the destruction of any claim to a good character he might have; a tale without any redeeming features, which the tales of even the worst of the corrupt clerics, the Friar and the Pardoner, have.
After reminding ourselves, once more, that the General Prologue portrait of the Reeve contains its ambiguities — possibly sinister ones — we can start our examination of the portrayal of the Reeve with his Prologue.
Most of what he says here is a reflection upon old age, which is also a reflection upon himself: "" ik am oold "" (3867).
He considers the loss of physical potency and attractiveness with age, without any compensatory waning of physical lust, and lists four vices in which the old can still show some vitality: without, however, developing the discussion of these in any systematic and thematic way.
Some of his self-portrayal is admittedly utterly unattractive: But are we required or invited to follow or even to surpass the Reeve in hostile judgement of his character?
In the Miller's Prologue, the Miller's supposed drunkenness should not blind us to the measured good sense and balance of the mind implied within the character who speaks as the Miller.
The Miller knows himself: He recognizes too how it is that that his tale may offend the Reeve, and responds to the Reeve in conciliatory terms: Most pertinently, he eschews the generalization of the fabliau image of the world: The Reeve, too, in his Prologue, speaks more in relative than in absolute terms.
Although he momentarily speaks of "" eelde "" , "old age" , in general terms (3885) he is quite clearly presented as speaking of old age as he knows it, on the basis of his personal experience: he starts his speech with a reference to himself, "" I "" , which by line 3874 is expanded to "" we olde men "" .
Immediately after his generalization about "" eelde "" he returns to the first person plural — "" owre olde lemes "" (3886)— and within two lines is back to "" ik "" .
The Reeve's speech is measured, not a splenetic outburst: only "" a litel ire is in his herte ylaft "" and he finds fault with the Miller's Tale just "" a lite "" .
The Reeve's speech is indeed serious, but it is serious because it is a reflective examination of his self; the Reeve's Prologue is precisely where the Reeve does judge himself.
Or, one might say, the Reeve's Prologue is where the Reeve makes his confession, publicly, and thus frees himself from the charge of seeing motes in the eyes of others and ignoring a beam in his own: which is just the figure he ends his Prologue with in commenting upon the Miller.
Reflexivity in the Reeve
Olson, however, sees this confession as ingratiating and artificial; a hypocritical show of feigned humility.
He places particular stress upon contextual details which can be interpreted as the Reeve's appropriation of the role of priest.
In the General Prologue the Reeve is thus described: and: and the Host responds to the serious reflections of the Reeve's Prologue accordingly: But the Host too has appropriated a character, as judge and ruler of the tale-telling game, that takes him beyond the predictable attributes of his normal station in life: while in the fiction of the Tales, the Miller has just been attributed with the strengths of the court poet Chaucer as a narrator.
When the Reeve likens himself to an "" open-ers "" he associates himself with Nicholas in the tale just passed, and can thus be attributed with the same wry self-reflection as the Miller shows in attaching himself to John the carpenter.
The Miller, in his tale, re-emerges in the target figure that superficially seems meant to represent the Reeve; the Reeve then retrospectively identifies himself with a trickster and target figure: the trickster who makes a fool of the character supposed to represent him but who is subsequently made a fool of himself from another quarter.
Altogether, the ironies of the passage read far more plausibly as a challenge to the categories in which the Reeve, the Host and the Miller superficially belong than as a re-assertion of the impropriety of such characters acting out of their places.
The style of the Reeve's Tale is in keeping with the openness — the honesty, of a kind — that is introduced in his Prologue.
The moral fault of his miller is stated directly and without delay: a point which is equally straightforwardly repeated with reference to the miller's wife: And she was proud…
The Reeve's Tale
Conspicuous rhetorical devices are used to underline the moral viewpoint; sarcasm in treating of the magnificence of the miller's wife and daughter; the wife: and the daughter: and amplification in treating of the parson's simoniac behaviour: Quite unlike anything in the Miller's Tale, the moral faults of the characters are explicit in the Reeve's Tale: simony, indeed, names itself in the name of the miller, Symkyn or Symond.
Pride, which is the major of these two moral themes, emerges in some bizarre and therefore entertaining forms in the course of the fabliau narrative.
When the absurdly naive theatricals by which the clerks seek to cloak their scheme for preventing the miller's stealing — which has increased from the "curteis" to the "outrageous" with the  illness of their college's manciple — reveal their design to him, he determines to steal yet more, out of pride, and out of his own version of measure for measure, but not out of covetousness: As soon as the two clerks can stop and consider the trick that has been played on them, we see that the miller's action, motivated by his pride, hits directly at the pride of the clerks: Another offence to John's pride leads him later to attempt to bed the miller's wife, hearing the success of Alayn with the daughter (4199–209).
And when the clerks have taken their "" esement "" by "swyving" the miller's wife and daughter it is clear that this hurts the miller first and foremost in his family pride.
Alayn, unwittingly, boasts to the miller himself of having three times "" swyved "" the miller's daughter.
The miller roars in reply: Thus pride answers pride.
But can we turn the Reeve's Tale into a closed and exemplary moral piece showing how pride causes its own fall, and thus how one man's pride is corrected by conflict with another man's?
Perhaps not; the tale hardly encourages us to suspend all other responses to indulge in such abstract mathematical balancing of measures of vice and their products.
The inconclusive moral closure of the Reeve's Tale is nicely exemplified by the ambiguity of the word "" ybete "" in the tale's summing up of the miller's fate: Ybete can mean either "beaten" or "corrected" .
In other respects, however, the style of the Reeve's Tale is very similar to that of the Miller's Tale, supporting the view that the tone of the two tales is more a matter of continuity than of contrast.
Like the Miller's Tale, the Reeve's Tale is characterized by the coherent use and significant exploitation of certain fields of imagery.
As in the Miller's Tale, most prominent amongst these is animal imagery.
Not only are characters within the tale likened to animals — for instance the miller, proud as a peacock, with his skull "" piled as an ape "" , or his wife, "" peert as is a pye "" (3926, 3935, 3950)— but an animal has a substantial role to play in the story: the clerk's horse, a stallion, who even has a name, Bayard.
Interestingly, the two clerks are first introduced to us as "" testif "" , "testy" , "headstrong" , a French-derived adjective with horsy connotations of its own and which can indeed be used of horses in French.
It has often been noted that Chaucer differs from the various continental analogues of the Reeve's Tale in having this horse a stallion, thematically an astute adaptation, if adaptation it be.
Through the horse, we have emphasized for us the animalistic and instinctive nature of the male (or human?) sexual appetite.
When the miller unleashes this stallion to plunge straight off after the wild mares in the fen (4057–66) he unwittingly unleashes the whole course of events that will lead to the "swyvinges" in his family's bedchamber that night.
As Janette Richardson has noted, the transition from the horse's frolics to the clerks' night-time escapades is marked by the collocation of the miller's retying the horse, and making the clerks a bed: To make the point absolutely explicit, when the clerk John has leapt on top of the miller's wife in bed:— the verb priken, in Middle English, is a standard term for riding or spurring a horse.
Alayn, too, immediately afterwards, manages to remind us of the sexual sense of "to ride" in his farewell to Malyne: The miller, too, is like a horse in his sleep; in his case, however, in his unselfconscious drunken snoring and farting (4162).
In the same way as Bayard has, finally, been bound, the miller, for all his pride and show, is proved to be impotent and emasculated by event after event, image after image, in the tale.
Various effects can be attributed to other instances of recurrent imagery besides that of merely providing a satisfactory feeling of unity in the narrative performance.
When Alayn, for instance, rouses the miller, who he thinks is John, to brag of his success with a familiar and confiding jest: "" …thou swines heed, awake! "" (4262), the epithet is ironically appropriate to the miller, especially as sixteen lines later the clerk and the miller are fighting "" …as doon two pigges in a poke "" .
Most important in terms of the overall interpretation of the Reeve's Tale in relation to the Miller's Tale, however, are examples of imagery that achieve some form of fulfilment in terms of the reading of the tale as a fabliau, complete with the characteristic fabliau attitudes, rather than as a moral example.
Most prominent amongst these are terms that mock the miller as an impotent and inadequate cuckold.
It is difficult to miss the phallic connotations of the weapons the miller seems to make such a show of having about his person:— the diminution in scale to the "" joly poppere "" may already hint at the bawdy belittling the miller is to suffer.
That the miller's knives substitute for his sexual potency rather than reflect it is indicated by  the superiority of the clerk's performance in bed with his wife to anything he has managed for a long time: He has fathered two children, but, like Bayard, his sexual energy is now exhausted.
As a result, when it comes to his turn to be on top of his wife again, he falls down backwards on to her (4281), the wrong way around for sexual intercourse, as she sleeps with John after their night-time labours.
There are many elements which establish a broad and strong line of continuity from the Miller's Tale into and through the Reeve's Tale.
Contrastive, in a sense, is the Varsity match they play, pitting an Oxford fabliau against a Cambridge one, but common to both is the urbane and clerkly perspective in which the comedy of the tales is made explicit.
Just as "every clerk's" unanimity of opinion directs the laughter of "" every wight "" at the end of the Miller's Tale (3847–9), the text of the Reeve's Tale brings its readers to view and laugh at the miller and his family through the clerks' perceptions, their attitudes and their frame of reference: We may particularly note, for instance, how the incongruous "" par compaignye "" that Nicholas and Alison put in the mouth of the unfortunate John recurs in this urbane rendering of the family's vulgar cacophany, and how the somewhat different "" melodye "" recalls the "" revel "" and the "" melodye "" that Alison and Nicholas enjoy.
Thus, too, the "" complyn "" in this passage, the last service of the monastic day, matches the "" laudes "" sung out by the bells and  sung by the friars in Oxford as Nicholas and Alison consummate their passion.
In this light, anyone who would still assert that the attribution of a northern dialect to the clerks by a London court poet was simply meant to render them intrinsically absurd must surely think again.
Continuity between the two fabliaux in the case of animal imagery is a matter of more than just a general resemblance.
The ape that Alison makes of Absolon, the excluded potential lover (3389), re-emerges as John the clerk after Alayn has jumped into bed with Malyne (4202), while throughout the night the miller, with his skull "" piled as an ape "" (3935) is left in the same position.
The drunken miller's incoherency, "" as he were on the quakke "" (4152) recalls how Nicholas puts the equivalent of an ass's head on John the carpenter by portraying him, absurdly, as a duck swimming above the Second Flood (3575–6).
The linguistic echoes of the Miller's Tale in the Reeve's are intense, and, usually, located near the very heart of the tales' character as fabliaux.
The marked language of the Miller's Tale, swyve and pisse, is found again in the Reeve's Tale; fartynge is not named as such in the Reeve's Tale, but is included with a circumlocution that uses a marked term we have seen in the Shipman's Tale: The miller's boast: is no doubt intended to be simply proverbial, but has a richly ironic meaning in light of the "beard" that Absolon finds upon obtaining his kiss from Alison (3730–43).
Perhaps the most telling of such echoes is that between the stallion's ecstatic animal cry of "" wehee "" as it races off towards the mares (4066) and Alisons's gleeful cry of "" tehee "" after making such a fool, in her way, of Absolon (3740).
One may truly get the sense of the Reeve's Tale being played by the same company with the same costumes on the same stage as the Miller's Tale: Absolon's red hose for the "" halyday "" (3319–40) re-appear early on (3952–5), and the daughter has the same grey eyes as the delicate Absolon (3317, 3974).
The Absolon who mourns   may be recalled when we see the suckling child in the cradle at the foot of the miller and his wife's bed (4156–7).
For such reasons, one may argue that there is a continuity of comic tone between the Miller's and Reeve's Tales which counteracts such contrasts as may be produced by cold moral calculation.
It may be objected that the identification of such continuities bases a far-fetched proposition on simple coincidences, against which one can argue that it simply extends to the Reeve's tale an alert manner of reading which has become absolutely orthodox in respect of the Miller's Tale.
One may indeed go further, and find the tales to be firmly linked by some remarkable but amusing instances of interference and confusion with one another.
Twice, in the Miller's Tale, we hear a cock crow, as Absolon presents himself at the "" shot-wyndowe "" of Alison's bedroom (3357, 3687).
A crow is heard once more in the Reeve's Tale, identified as the "" thridde cock "" (4233).
It has been noted that the grounds on which the miller's wife strikes her husband over the head with a staff as he fights with John are somewhat absurdly contrived: This can be interpreted as the contrived excuse for the wife to help her welcome lover to escape, as appears in some continental analogues of the tale.
Irrespective of this, we have seen a character wearing a white volupeer earlier in the text: not in the Reeve's Tale, but Alison, in the Miller's Tale (3241).
It is as if the wife remembers a detail out of the Miller's Tale but misattributes it (deliberately or by accident) to the wrong context.
Realistically, this would be possible if the wife were on a different narrative "level" to the Miller's Tale, i.e. a character within the framing narrative rather than within one of the tales.
That she is in fact on the same  narrative level as Alison, but in a different tale, is a joke.
Rather more serious, although not, therefore, more grave, is the way in which this draws attention to the conventional rather than the real distinction between characters — especially tale-tellers — at different levels of a framed narrative.
The fiction may be spoken at different times by characters such as "Chaucer" , the Miller and the Reeve.
But all the time it is Chaucer's composition.
These are not the only potentially significant examples of intertextual interference affecting the Reeve's Tale and its pairing with the Miller's Tale.
Two further instances bring into the picture the various analogues to the Reeve's Tale.
In many of the analogous medieval fabliaux of a miller and two clerks, the one clerk's designs upon the daughter are motivated by simple lust, because she is beautiful, and involve her deception too, as she is given, in the dark, what she is told is a gold ring but which is simply an iron ring off an andiron in the fireplace.
There is no such ring in the Reeve's Tale, but it is hard not to notice that the motif seems to have been displaced and taken over by Absolon as he approaches Alison's window for the second time that night, in order to deceive her: A sure example of intertextual inference is found in John's use of the cradle trick; he envies Alayn's success with Malyne, and decides he will "" arise and auntre [chance]it "" himself.
So: In most analogues, the cradle-switch is performed, quite logically, after one of the characters has gone out to relieve him or herself: an action which allows the cunning clerk to perceive an opportunity and to take advantage of it.
What John "auntres" , by contrast, is a  trick he must know from elsewhere — he decides to try out what he can have learnt only from a fabliau such as the related English, French, Dutch, Italian and German examples, banking on the sure expectation that either the miller or his wife will eventually get out of bed to allow the plot to be fulfilled.
If we need any further confirmation of Chaucer's ability to play with and confuse levels of narrative in this sort of way, we can cite line 1685 of the Merchant's Tale, where Justinus reminds January of the teaching of the Wife of Bath's Prologue.
It would be silly to try to represent the duel between the Miller and the Reeve as merely good-natured fraternal leg-pulling.
But just as the "Miller's" energies are concentrated in his sustained and masterful display as a raconteur, the spleen of the Reeve is released in his self-reflection and in his pointed but ultimately harmless fabliau.
The pair of fabliaux assimilates the two tellers; it leaves them standing virtually hand-in-hand rather than at blows; they are reconciled by the tit-for-tat of fabliau tale-telling.
Such an interpretation is not merely a case of reading some preferred assumption into the silence on the subject of the Miller's relationship with the Reeve that descends after the Reeve has finished his tale.
The Reeve is able to round his tale off by repeating the socially integrative prayer with which the Miller ends his tale, and stating that all is now square: