

THE TORT OF NEGLIGENCE
8 Causation and remoteness of damage
INTRODUCTION
The third element in the plaintiff's case in negligence is damage.
This is an essential ingredient of the tort as it is not actionable per se.
The plaintiff must prove that his damage was caused by the defendant's breach of duty and that the damage was not too remote.
The first element is sometimes called causation in fact, and the latter causation in law.
Causation in fact deals with the question of whether as a matter of fact the damage was caused by the breach of duty.
Example
A railway company has instructed its engine drivers that before they go over a crossing, they must sound their whistle, to give warning to anyone crossing.
One morning a person is found dead on the crossing as a result of being run over by a train.
During the night a train has failed to sound its whistle.
All the elements of negligence are present.
The railway company owes a duty of care to crossing users.
There has been a breach of duty by an engine driver in failing to sound his whistle.
There is damage.
But as yet there is no negligence action.
It is necessary for the plaintiff to establish that the train that caused the damage was the train that failed to sound its whistle.
The question of remoteness of damage arises where causation in fact is established, but the court holds that as a matter of law the damage is too remote.
The court will not want the defendant to be liable indefinitely for damage and will impose a cut off point beyond which the damage is said to be too remote.
Example
The defendant drove negligently on the motorway and his car swerved and left the road.
The car landed on a railway line.
A mainline railway train was derailed by the car.
The train struck a dam, which burst, flooding a small town.
On this kind of scenario the bill for damages potentially runs into millions of pounds.
What the defendant has done is to set in motion a chain of events.
This will establish factual causation.
The court will probably wish to terminate the defendant's liability at a particular point.
This may be after the damage to the train.
Any damage beyond this point is too remote.
An event which occurs after the breach of duty and which contributes to the plaintiff's damage, may break the chain of causation, so as to render the defendant not liable for any damage beyond this point.
Where this occurs the event is known as a novus actus interveniens.
FACTUAL CAUSATION
The but for test
The starting point for assessing whether the defendant's breach of duty is a factual cause of the plaintiff's damage is the but for test.
This basic test is whether the damage would not have occurred but for the breach of duty.
The plaintiff's husband attended the defendant's hospital and complained of vomiting.
The doctor in casualty refused to examine him and he was told to see his own doctor in the morning if he still felt unwell.
Five hours later he died of arsenic poisoning.
The defendants owed the deceased a duty of care which they had breached by failing to examine him.
They were held not liable, as the evidence established that even if he had been examined, he would have died before diagnosis and treatment could have been carried out.
As the deceased would have died regardless of the breach of duty, the breach was not a cause of his death.
Barnett v Chelsea and Kensington Hospital Management Committee [1969]1 QB 428
In most cases the but for test presents no difficulties.
However there are areas where the test presents problems.
These are in relation to the degree of probability of damage occurring, negligent omissions and multiple causes of harm.
Degree of probability of damage
If there is uncertainty as to whether the defendant's negligence has caused the damage, it has to be determined what degree of probability of damage occurring has to be established by the plaintiff.
Where the injury is traumatic, such as a person being struck by a car or having a hand cut off in a machine, there is usually no difficulty.
The presence of the car on the road or the existence of the machine will be treated as a cause.
But where a disease is contracted by the defendant, more intractable difficulties arise.
Medical science may not be able to specifically pinpoint the cause of the disease or link negligent conduct to its appearance.
The plaintiff worked in the defendant's brick kilns.
Conditions were very hot and dusty.
He had to cycle home unwashed as no washing facilities were provided at work.
The plaintiff contracted dermatitis, a skin disease.
He argued that if the defendant had provided washing facilities he would not have caught the disease.
The medical evidence did not establish that the plaintiff would not have caught the disease if washing facilities had been provided.
The House of Lords held that the plaintiff could succeed on the ground that the defendant had materially increased the risk of the plaintiff contracting the disease.
The defendants (who had admitted negligence) had increased the risk of particular damage occurring and that damage had occurred.
McGhee v National Coal Board [1973]1 WLR 1
The McGhee decision has proved to be controversial as the plaintiff never established that the defendant was a cause of his damage.
It can perhaps best be viewed as a policy decision.
Where the defendant has created a risk of particular damage and that damage has occurred, the defendant should not be allowed to escape liability because the medical evidence is inconclusive.
The case has been subjected to analysis by the House of Lords in the more unfriendly climate of the 1980s.
The plaintiff was born prematurely and suffered from an oxygen deficiency.
Due to the admitted negligence of a doctor, the plaintiff was given excessive oxygen.
The plaintiff suffered from deteriorating eyesight and became almost blind.
The allegation was that the excess oxygen negligently administered had caused the blindness.
The medical evidence showed that excessive oxygen was a cause of blindness in premature babies but it was not the only factor which caused blindness.
The House of Lords held that the plaintiff had to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the defendant's breach of duty was a cause of the injury.
A retrial of the action was ordered.
Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988]1 All ER 871
The House considered the decision in McGhee and stated that the judgment of Lord Wilberforce in that case was a minority one and did not represent the law.
Lord Wilberforce had said that where a person created a risk and injury occurred within that area of risk, the burden of proof was reversed and the defendant had to prove that his negligence was not a cause.
The House held that the burden of proof of causation remained on the plaintiff throughout the case.
The plaintiff had to prove that the breach of duty was at least a material contributory cause of the harm.
The House also distinguished McGhee, as in that case the plaintiff's injury was caused by the brick dust.
The only question was whether earlier washing would have prevented the dermatitis.
In Wilsher there were a number of different possible causes of the plaintiff's blindness and the plaintiff had not been able to establish the defendant's negligence as the cause.
What the defendants had done, was not to enhance the risk that the known factors would lead to blindness, but to add to the list of factors which might lead to blindness.
If the plaintiff cannot establish that the breach of duty was a material contributory cause of his damage, could the question be approached on the basis of loss of  chance?
Instead of taking an all or nothing approach based on causation, look at the question in terms of measure of damages and award a percentage.
This approach was taken by the Court of Appeal in the following case but failed on the facts in the House of Lords.
The plaintiff fell and was taken to hospital, where his knee was X-rayed.
A hip injury was not diagnosed.
Five days later he returned to hospital, when the hip injury was discovered.
By this time the hip injury had resulted in a deformity of the hip joint.
The defendants argued that deformity would have occurred as a result of the injury, whether or not it had been properly diagnosed on the first trip to hospital.
The trial judge found that the delay denied the plaintiff a 25% chance of avoiding the hip deformity and awarded 25% of the damages he would have awarded had the injury been solely caused by the delayed diagnosis.
This approach was approved by the Court of Appeal.
The plaintiff's claim was for loss of the benefit of timely treatment rather than the chance of successful treatment.
The House of Lords held that the issue was one of causation, not quantification of damage.
As the plaintiff had failed on balance of probabilities to prove that the delayed treatment had at least been a material contributory cause of the deformity, the plaintiff's action failed.
The House did not, unfortunately, deal with the question of whether a claim framed as a loss of chance claim was acceptable.
Hotson v East Berkshire Area Health Authority [1987]2 All ER 909
The burden of proof to establish causation therefore rests on the plaintiff throughout the case.
If he fails to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the defendant's negligence was a material contributory cause of his damage, his action fails.
Where there is only one possible cause of the damage and the defendant's breach of duty has exposed the plaintiff to the risk of damage which has materialised, then causation is established.
It is not yet known whether a claim in tort can be framed in terms of loss of chance.
Negligent omissions
The but for test also presents problems where the breach of duty consists of an omission to act.
This is apparent in the cases on industrial safety equipment.
The plaintiff was a steel erector who fell to his death at work.
When the accident occurred he was not wearing a safety belt.
The defendants were in breach of their statutory duty in failing to provide safety belts but advanced evidence to show that the plaintiff would not have worn one if it had been provided.
The defendants were held not liable, as it was probable that the plaintiff would not have worn a safety belt and would therefore have fallen, even if one had been provided.
The burden of proof is on the plaintiff to show that the defendant's breach of duty is a cause and this had not been established.
The decision in Wilsher would appear to be consistent with this reasoning.
McWilliams v Sir William Arrol & Co Ltd [1962]1 WLR 295
More than one cause
Where the plaintiff's damage is the result of more than one cause, the but for test does not appear to provide an answer to causation problems.
Example
A and B simultaneously fire guns and C is struck by bullets from both guns.
An application of the but for test will mean that neither A nor B will be liable.
This would be clearly unjust so A and B will both be held liable.
If C was struck by only one bullet but could not prove whose gun the bullet came from, a Canadian case has held that both A and B were liable (Cook v Lewis [1952]1 DLR 1).
The reason for the decision was that the burden of proof lay on the defendants to prove that they had not been negligent and they had failed to discharge this burden.
How do you think an English court would decide this case?
Multiple causes may be either successive or concurrent.
Where the causes are successive and the second defendant's breach of duty has caused the same damage as that of the first defendant, the but for test will exonerate the second defendant.
The second defendant negligently collided with the plaintiff's Rolls-Royce.
The car had previously been in a collision caused by the negligence of the first defendant.
The second defendant damaged the same part of the car as the first defendant.
The court held that the second defendant was not liable for the cost of a respray, as at the time of the accident the car was already in need of one.
Performance Cars v Abraham [1962]1 QB 33
What is the position when the first defendant is sued and the second defendant has caused similar or greater damage?
The plaintiff suffered injuries to his left leg as a result of the defendant's negligence.
The plaintiff went to work in a new job after the accident and while at work he was shot in the left leg during an armed robbery.
As a result, the plaintiff's leg had to be amputated.
The armed robber, needless to say, did not stay around to be sued.
The defendant argued that any liability which he had, extended only from his breach of duty until the armed robbery.
At this point the effects of his negligence were overtaken by the effects of the second tort (the armed robbery).
Applying the but for test would have produced this result.
But the House of Lords refused to apply the but for test.
Firstly, the plaintiff was compensated for the loss he suffered as a result of the injury, not for the injury itself.
The second tort had not reduced the plaintiff's suffering or his reduction in earning capacity.
Secondly, even if the plaintiff could have sued the armed robbers, they would only have been liable for depriving the plaintiff of a damaged left leg.
So if the defendant's argument succeeded, the plaintiff would be left under-compensated.
Baker v Willoughby [1970]AC 467
The plaintiff suffered an injury to his back at work in 1973, caused by the defendant's breach of duty.
The injury reduced the plaintiff's earning capacity by 50%.
Before the trial of the action in 1979 the plaintiff was discovered to be suffering from a back disease, unrelated to the  injury, which rendered him totally unfit for work by 1976.
The House of Lords applied the but for test to restrict the defendant's liability for loss of earnings to the period before the onset of the disease.
Jobling v Associated Dairies [1982]AC 794
The House of Lords criticized the reasoning in Baker, but the decision survives.
Where there are two successive torts, the first tortfeasor's liability is unaffected by the second tort.
Where the tort is followed by a disabling illness, this must be taken into account in assessing the tortfeasor's liability.
Both the above cases are personal injury cases and tort damages are not the only form of compensation available.
Baker is based on a policy of not under-compensating the plaintiff.
Jobling is based on not over-compensating the plaintiff.
The House of Lords pointed out in Jobling, that the plaintiff in Baker would have been entitled to compensation from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme and there was therefore a danger of over-compensation.
This is not entirely correct, as the only compensation would have been for the damage caused by the armed robbery.
Had the defendant been found not liable in Baker, the plaintiff would still have remained uncompensated for his original injuries.
In Jobling, the plaintiff might have been able to claim social security benefits to partially compensate for his losses.
But it is still possible to fall between tort damages and entitlement to social security.
The distinctions between the two cases are not convincing and the apparent conflict and the difficulties posed by causation in the medical negligence cases show the drawbacks of using the tort system as a method of compensating for personal injuries.
REMOTENESS OF DAMAGE
Introduction
Damages may be denied even where the plaintiff is able to establish a factual link between the breach of duty and his damage.
This will be on the ground that the breach of duty was not the legal cause of the damage and will be expressed by saying that the damage was too remote.
This area of law is affected by policy considerations, as the court will not wish to impose too heavy a burden on the defendant or his insurers.
The basic test for remoteness of damage remained the same until 1961 and was then changed by a Privy Council decision.
The earlier test will be considered here for reasons of comparison and because it still provides the basis of the remoteness test in some other torts.
The direct consequence test
This is the test for remoteness of damage that held sway until 1961.
It was laid down by the Court of Appeal in the following case.
Charterers of a ship loaded it with benzine.
The benzine leaked and this caused the ship's hold to fill with vapour.
A stevedore negligently dropped a wooden plank into the hold of the ship.
This caused a spark, which ignited the vapour, causing an explosion which destroyed the ship.
The Court of Appeal held that the stevedore's employers were vicariously liable for the stevedore's negligence and that the damage was not too remote.
The test for remoteness of damage in negligence actions was stated to be whether the damage was a direct consequence of the breach of duty.
An indirect consequence was damage due to the operation of independent causes having no connection with the negligent act, except that they could not avoid its results.
Re Polemis and Furness, Withy & Co [1921]3 KB 560
It is important to note that in order for the defendant to be liable at all, he must owe the plaintiff a duty of care.
For a duty to arise, some damage to the plaintiff must be reasonably foreseeable.
In Polemis some damage was foreseeable as a result of the plank being dropped.
Duty was therefore established.
The explosion was a direct consequence of the breach of duty, therefore the damage was not too remote, although the kind of property damage that occurred could not have been foreseen.
Reasonable foreseeability test
The test for remoteness of damage was changed by the Privy Council in 1961.
The defendants negligently discharged fuel oil into Sydney Harbour.
The oil spread to the plaintiff's wharf where welding was taking place.
The plaintiffs were assured that there was no danger of the oil catching fire on water and continued welding.
Two days later the oil caught fire and the wharf and ships being repaired there were damaged by the fire.
There was also some damage by fouling to the wharf.
The trial judge found that it was not foreseeable that fuel oil on water would catch fire but there was some foreseeable damage in the fouling.
This was sufficient to establish duty and as the fire damage was a direct consequence of the breach of duty, the defendants were also liable for the fire damage.
Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound No 1)[1961]AC 388 (Hereafter Wagon Mound 1)
On appeal, the Privy Council held that the defendants were not liable for the fire damage.
The test for remoteness of damage was whether the kind of damage suffered by the plaintiff was reasonably foreseeable by the defendant at the time of the breach of duty.
Is there any difference between Polemis and Wagon Mound?
Reasonable foreseeability is always a necessary ingredient of a negligence action as it is required to establish duty of care.
What needs to be reasonably foreseeable for this purpose, is a broad type of damage such as personal injuries or property damage.
The key to the  Wagon Mound test is what is meant by a kind of damage.
If this is taken in a very broad sense, then there is no difference between the direct consequence and the reasonable foreseeability test.
But if kind is interpreted more narrowly, then it will have the effect of limiting the defendant's liability.
In Wagon Mound the kind of damage that needed to be foreseeable was fire damage.
This is clearly narrower than property damage.
Had the reasonable foreseeability test been used in Polemis, it is likely that the defendants would have been not liable.
Damage by explosion was probably not a foreseeable kind of damage.
It is now necessary to see how the courts have interpreted the reasonable foreseeability test.
Kind of damage
A number of principles have emerged on remoteness of damage.
(a) If the kind of damage suffered is reasonably foreseeable, it does not matter that the damage came about in an unforeseeable way.
The defendant's employees erected a tent over a manhole and surrounded the tent with paraffin lamps.
The hole was left unguarded while the men were on a tea break.
The ten year old plaintiff dropped one of the paraffin lamps down the hole and due to an unusual combination of circumstances there was an explosion and the plaintiff was badly burned.
The defendants argued that they were not liable, as the way in which the damage came about was not foreseeable and the damage was therefore too remote.
This was rejected by the House of Lords.
They asked what kind of damage was foreseeable as a result of the breach of duty.
The answer was burns.
What kind of damage had occurred.
The answer was burns.
The damage was therefore not too remote.
The fact that the burns had come about in an unforeseeable way did not render the damage too remote.
Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963]AC 837
However, the plaintiff friendly approach in Hughes can be contrasted with the approach in the next two cases.
A workman at the defendant's factory dropped an asbestos cover into some molten liquid.
The asbestos reacted with the liquid, there was an eruption and the plaintiff was burned.
The court held that the damage to the plaintiff was too remote.
Damage by eruption was not foreseeable in the circumstances but damage by splashing was.
Doughty v Turner Manufacturing Co Ltd [1964]1 QB 518
Did the court ask the right question on kind of damage here?
Or should the kind of damage have been burns?
Does this case contradict Hughes?
One view of this case is that no damage to the plaintiff was foreseeable because of the angle at which the cover fell into the molten liquid.
The decision could be supported on this basis.
The plaintiff was employed by the defendant as a herdsman.
He contracted Weil's disease, a rare disease contracted from rat's urine.
The defendant had allowed the rat population on his farm to grow too large.
The court held that the damage suffered by the plaintiff was too remote as Weil's disease was unforeseeable, although it was foreseeable that the plaintiff would have suffered damage from rats.
Tremain v Pike [1969]1 WLR 1556
It is thought that this decision is doubtful in view of the Court of Appeal decision in Parsons v Uttley Ingham & Co [1978]QB 791.
(b) Provided the the kind of damage is reasonably foreseeable, it does not matter that it is more extensive than could have been foreseen.
The defendants supplied a chemical to the plaintiffs but failed to warn that it was liable to explode on contact with water.
A scientist working for the plaintiffs placed the chemical in water.
This caused a violent explosion resulting in extensive damage.
The defendants were held liable.
Some property damage was foreseeable and the fact that it was more extensive than might have been foreseen did not matter.
Vacwell Engineering Co Ltd v BDH Chemicals Ltd [1971]1 QB 88
The extent of damage principle is also illustrated by the "egg shell skull rule" .
This states that the defendant must take the plaintiff as he finds him, as regards his physical characteristics.
The plaintiff suffered a burn on his lip as a result of the defendant's negligence.
The burn caused the plaintiff to contract cancer, as the tissues of his lips were in a pre-malignant state.
He died three years after the accident.
The defendants argued that they were not responsible for his death, as it could not have been foreseen.
The court stated that they had to take the plaintiff as they found him.
The question for remoteness was whether the defendants could have foreseen a burn, not whether they could have foreseen cancer.
The defendants were held liable.
Smith v Leech Brain & Co [1962]2 QB 405
The principle also applies where the plaintiff's damage is a combination of the defendant's negligence and medical treatment to which he was allergic.
The plaintiff was employed by the defendant.
He fell down a ladder as a result of the defendant's negligence and cut his leg.
The doctor gave him an anti-tetanus injection to which the plaintiff was allergic.
As a result he contracted encephalitis, an inflammation of the brain.
The defendants were held liable for both the original injury and the encephalitis, as it was foreseeable that the plaintiff would be given an anti-tetanus injection.
Robinson v Post Office [1974]1 WLR 1176
If the medical treatment was given negligently, i.e. if the doctor should have been aware that the plaintiff was allergic, then it is likely that the court would treat the medical negligence as a novus actus interveniens which broke the chain of causation.
There is no case in civil law which extends the egg shell skull rule beyond physical characteristics.
This could arise if the plaintiff suffered negligently inflicted injuries and then refused to have a blood transfusion because of his religious beliefs.
If the plaintiff died, the court would then have to determine whether the defendant was liable for the death.
Degree of probability of damage
There has been little discussion on the necessary degree of probability of a kind of damage occurring.
In cases of personal injury it has been seen that the courts generally take a broad view of the question of kind of damage and also of the degree of foreseeability necessary.
The egg shell skull rule and rule on extent of damage make the remoteness rules plaintiff friendly where personal injuries are suffered.
Broadly speaking, provided the plaintiff can establish that personal injury was reasonably foreseeable as a real risk, the damage is not too remote.
In property damage cases the courts have generally been more restrictive.
We have seen that in Wagon Mound they did not define the kind of damage necessary as property damage but distinguished between damage by fouling and fire damage.
This case was concerned with the same facts as Wagon Mound (No 1) and the same defendants.
The action was brought by the owners of the two ships which were being repaired at the time of the fire and were damaged.
The action was brought in negligence and nuisance.
The trial judge found that there was a bare possibility of fire damage but that this was so remote it could be ignored.
The Privy Council reversed the decision, stating that provided fire damage was foreseeable as a kind of damage, the degree of likelihood was irrelevant to the question of kind of damage suffered.
The reason for the different decisions in the two cases was the different finding of fact at first instance.
The Wagon Mound (No 2)[1967]1 AC 617
The Privy Council held that the test for remoteness of damage in nuisance was the same as that in negligence.
The narrower approach to remoteness of damage in property damage cases could be explained on the grounds that the plaintiff is likely to be insured against such damage and that the extent of the damage in such cases could be great.
Impecuniosity
The plaintiff's initial loss may be made greater by his financial inability to take steps to minimise his loss.
Is such loss too remote or not?
A dredger was sunk due to the defendant's negligence.
The owners of the dredger required it to complete a contract which contained an onerous penalty clause.
The plaintiffs could not  afford to buy a new dredger and had to hire one.
The question was whether the cost of hire was recoverable or was too remote.
The House of Lords held that the cost of hire was an indirect consequence (note the date of the case) and therefore too remote.
The Liesbosch Dredger [1933]AC 448
This decision has not proved popular and has frequently been distinguished.
Where the plaintiff delayed having his car repaired until he knew the defendants would pay the cost, the cost of hire of a replacement car was recoverable (Martindale v Duncan [1973]2 All ER 355).
Torts where Wagon Mound does not apply
The Wagon Mound test is now established as the remoteness test for negligence and nuisance.
There are torts where a different test is used.
If the defendant intends to do harm, e.g. in trespass, then liability will be more extensive than where he is negligent.
Policy factors which restrict liability in negligence cases do not apply in intentional torts.
The defendant will generally be liable for all damage flowing from the tort once factual causation has been established.
In deceit cases the defendant will be held liable for all the loss flowing from the fraudulent statement (Doyle v Olby (Ironmongers) Ltd [1969]2 QB 158).
The reasonable foreseeability test should not apply in strict liability torts as foresight of damage is not generally required to establish liability.
It must be said that the position is far from clear in torts such as Rylands v Fletcher.
NOVUS ACTUS INTERVENIENS
Introduction
The defendant's breach of duty may be a cause of the plaintiff's damage in the sense that it satisfies the but for test, but some other factual cause, intervening after the breach, may be regarded as the sole cause of some, or all, of the plaintiff's damage.
Where this happens the intervening cause is known as a novus actus interveniens and breaks the chain of causation between the defendant and plaintiff.
Any damage occurring after the novus actus interveniens will be regarded as being too remote.
Example
A negligently runs over B, who is then run over by C. C's action is unlikely to break the chain of causation, as this is a risk to which A's negligence exposed B. But if C stole B's wallet, the court would be unlikely to find A liable, as this was not a risk to which A had exposed B.
The law in this area is far from clear.
One of the difficulties is created by the courts obscuring policy factors with legalistic reasoning.
The problem is not unique to this area but is particularly acute here.
The key policy factor is the court's determination of where the loss should lie.
The legal (formalistic) tests used can be demonstrated by two cases.
Due to the negligence of the defendant's employees, borstal trainees escaped and caused damage to neighbouring property.
The majority of the House of Lords treated the case as being concerned with duty of care.
Lord Reid considered that the case was one of remoteness of damage.
He considered whether the boys' acts broke the chain of causation.
In order to do this they had to be something very unlikely to happen or they would not be regarded as a novus actus interveniens.
As it was very likely that if the boys escaped, nearby property would be damaged, the boys' acts did not break the chain of causation.
The escape took place in Dorset and the damage occurred nearby.
Had the boys boarded a train to Carlisle and caused damage there, this might have been regarded as too remote.
Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co Ltd [1970]AC 1004
The defendants negligently broke a water main.
The water damaged the plaintiff's house and caused it to be left empty.
Squatters broke in and caused damage.
The question was whether the defendants were liable for the damage caused by the squatters or whether the squatters' actions amounted to a novus actus interveniens.
Lamb v Camden Borough Council [1981]QB 625
Lord Oliver took up and modified Lord Reid's test.
If the act should have been foreseen by a reasonable man as likely, it would not break the chain of causation.
He found that the squatters' actions were not foreseeable in this sense and therefore did amount to a novus actus interveniens.
Lord Denning decided the case on the basis of policy.
He thought that as the plaintiff was more likely to be insured against the risk, then the loss should lie with the plaintiff.
This illustrates one of the problems of judges making policy decisions.
In fact, the defendants were more likely to be insured on an all risks policy for council employees.
As the plaintiff had ceased to occupy the house, it was likely that she was not covered by insurance.
A novus actus interveniens may take one of three forms.
(a) A natural event
The courts will generally be reluctant to find that a natural event breaks the chain of causation as the plaintiff has no-one else to sue if the defendant is exonerated.
If the defendant negligently starts a fire and strong winds then cause the flames to spread to the plaintiff's property, the court will not find that the winds break the chain of causation.
However, if the natural event causes damage simply because the breach of duty has placed the plaintiff or his property in a position where the damage can be caused, the chain of causation will be broken, unless the natural event was likely to happen.
Example
The plaintiff is injured in a road accident caused by the defendant's negligence.
An ambulance is called to take the plaintiff to hospital.
On the way a strong wind gets up and blows a tree down.
The tree lands on the ambulance and causes further injuries to the plaintiff.
The  defendant will not be liable for the injuries caused by the tree.
This will be treated as a novus actus interveniens which breaks the chain of causation.
What would the position be if there was an exceptionally strong gale blowing at the time of the original road accident?
Should the defendant have foreseen damage caused by a falling tree?
This principle is illustrated in relation to property damage by the following case.
The plaintiff's ship was damaged in a collision for which the defendant's ship was responsible.
After temporary repairs the ship set out for the United States on a voyage it would not have made had the collision not occurred.
The ship suffered damage due to heavy weather conditions.
The storm damage was not treated as a consequence of the collision but as an intervening event in the course of an ordinary voyage.
It is important that the decision of the ship's owners to put to sea was voluntary.
Carslogie Steamship Co v Royal Norwegian Government [1952]AC 292
(b) Intervening act of a third party
Where the defendant's breach of duty is followed by a third party act which is also a cause of the plaintiff's damage, the court has to determine the extent of the defendant's liability.
If the third party act is held to be a novus actus interveniens, then the defendant is not liable for any damage occurring after the act.
Where the defendant's duty was to guard the plaintiff or his property from a third party, then the third party act will not relieve the defendant from the consequences of his negligence.
The defendant was employed as a decorator by the plaintiff.
He was told to lock the door if he went out.
He failed to do this and a thief (third party) entered the house and stole property belonging to the plaintiff.
The defendant was held liable for the loss, as the thief's act did not break the chain of causation.
Stansbie v Troman [1948]2 KB 48
Recent cases in this area have tended to concentrate on the aspect of duty rather than remoteness.
(See "Liability for omissions and third parties" , pp. 58–61.)
Where there is no duty to guard the plaintiff or his property, the situation is more difficult.
In order to break the chain of causation the third party act must be independent of the breach of duty.
A collision at sea was caused by the negligence of the Oropesa.
The captain of the other ship put out a boat to discuss salvage.
At the time there were very heavy seas.
The boat overturned and a sailor was drowned.
The question was whether the captain's decision to put out the boat amounted to a novus actus interveniens.
The court held that the action of sending the boat out was caused by and flowed from the collision.
As this act was not independent of the defendant's negligence it did not break the chain of causation and the defendants were liable for the sailor's death.
The Oropesa [1943]P 32
The third party act must be voluntary in order to amount to a novus actus interveniens.
The captain's action in The Oropesa was not voluntary in this sense.
Where the third party act is negligent, it may or may not break the chain of causation.
The negligence of the first defendant caused an accident.
The second defendant also drove negligently and collided with the vehicles that had been involved in the first accident, killing the plaintiff.
The court held that the first defendant's negligence was a cause of the death and he was held 25% responsible.
The second accident did not break the chain of causation as it was a natural consequence of the first accident.
Rouse v Squires [1973]QB 889
The negligent driving of the defendant caused an accident and blocked a road tunnel.
A police officer negligently sent the plaintiff, another police officer, into the tunnel, against the traffic flow.
The defendant was held not liable for the injury to the plaintiff.
The court stated that "negligent conduct is more likely to break the chain of causation than conduct which is not" .
Stephenson LJ stated that the courts sought refuge in "common sense rather than logic on the facts and circumstances of each case" .
Knightley v Johns [1982]1 WLR 349
Where the third party act consists of deliberate wrongful conduct the courts will use the tests set out in Home Office v Dorset Yacht and Lamb v Camden (see above).
(c) Act of the plaintiff
Cases where the plaintiff's conduct is called into question are normally concerned with contributory negligence.
Where the plaintiff has been found to have been contributorily negligent, his damages will be reduced by the proportion that he is found to be to blame for his damage.
However, the defendant may allege that the plaintiff's conduct breaks the chain of causation, so as to render the defendant not liable for some, or all, of the plaintiff's damage.
The test applied by the courts in these cases is whether the plaintiff was acting reasonably in the circumstances.
The plaintiff injured his leg as a result of the defendant's negligence.
As a result of his injury he sometimes lost control of his leg.
He attempted to descend a steep staircase which had no handrail, whilst holding a small child by the hand.
His leg gave way and he pushed the child to safety.
He then jumped to avoid falling and broke his ankle.
The defendants were held not liable for this injury, as the plaintiff's unreasonable conduct broke the chain of causation.
It was not the decision to jump that was unreasonable, it was placing himself unnecessarily in a position where he might be confronted with such an emergency.
McKew v Holland & Hannen & Cubbitts (Scotland) Ltd [1969]3 All ER 1621
The plaintiff was unable to adjust her bi-focal spectacles as a result of a neck injury inflicted by the defendant's negligence.
She was worried about catching public transport in such a  condition and went to her son's office to ask him to drive her home.
On the way into the office she fell down a flight of stairs and was injured.
On these facts the plaintiff was held to have acted reasonably and the defendant was liable for her injuries.
Weiland v Cyril Lord Carpets Ltd [1969]3 All ER 1006
TIGHT = CONCLUSION
It can be seen that this area raises many difficult issues for the courts to decide.
The factual circumstances that can arise are infinite and the judges rely on a mixture of legal principle, policy and common sense to guide them through the maze.
An illustration of the problems and possible solutions is provided by the following example.
This also highlights the way in which a court may choose from a number of doctrines in coming to a solution.
Example
Fred received head injuries at work as a result of his employer's negligence.
As a result of his injuries Fred became depressed and two years after the accident committed suicide as a result of his depression.
The medical evidence establishes that but for the accident, Fred would probably not have committed suicide.
Legally there are a number of ways in which the court could approach this, but the basic question is whether the court wishes to compensate the estate and dependants of a suicide.
This is the policy issue.
Factual causation based on the but for test is established.
The court could determine that the death was too remote.
The plaintiff's husband was injured in an accident at work.
The injuries led to anxiety neurosis and depression, as a result of which the defendant hanged himself.
The claim by the widow was allowed by the court applying the direct consequence test for remoteness.
Pigney v Pointer's Transport Services Ltd [1957]1 WLR 1121
This case was decided under the Polemis test.
Would the death be reasonably foreseeable?
If the deceased was prone to depression, the court could treat it as an example of the egg shell skull rule.
The plaintiff suffered severe head injuries in a car accident caused by the negligence of the defendant.
As a result he underwent a personality change and started to attack women.
Two of his victims successfully sued him and the plaintiff then tried to recover the damages from the defendant.
The action failed as the damage claimed was too remote and on policy grounds it would not be right to allow an indemnity for the consequence of a criminal act.
The court considered Pigney and distinguished it.
There the widow was recovering damages for the death of the original victim of the defendant's negligence.
Meah v McCreamer [1985]1 All ER 367
An attempt was made by Lord Denning to avoid giving damages following a suicide (Hyde v Thameside Area Health Authority (1981) 2 PN 26).
However, consider the following case.
The action was brought against the police on the grounds that they failed to inform the prison authorities of the deceased's suicidal tendencies.
The deceased had committed suicide at a remand centre.
It was held:(a) When the police took the deceased into custody they assumed certain responsibilities, including that of passing on information which might affect his well being when he was transferred to the prison authorities.
(b) As the deceased had been suffering from clinical depression which impaired his judgment, his act had not been voluntary and the defence of volenti failed.
(c) The defence of ex turpi causa would not apply having regard to the changing public opinion of suicide.
(d) Suicide was not too remote a consequence of the breach of duty.
(e) The suicide did not amount to a novus actus interveniens.
Kirkham v Chief Constable of the Greater Manchester Police [1989]3 All ER 882
9 Defences to negligence
INTRODUCTION
It is traditional to find a chapter on defences at the end of a tort textbook.
However the development of negligence doctrines means that it is convenient to consider certain defences which have particular relevance to negligence at this stage.
There are three defences to a negligence action.
Volenti non fit injuria means that the plaintiff voluntarily agrees to undertake the legal risk of harm at his own expense.
This is a complete defence to an action.
Contributory negligence is where the plaintiff's fault has contributed to his damage and the damages awarded are reduced in proportion to his fault.
Ex turpi causa means that from a bad cause no action arises.
A person who is involved in a criminal act at the time he is injured may be denied an action.
Example
John and Brian had been drinking together.
John offered Brian a lift home and Brian accepted.
Due to John's negligent driving the car crashed and Brian was injured.
Brian was not wearing a seat belt, was thrown forward and hit his head on the windscreen.
If Brian sued John for negligence he could be met with the defences of volenti non fit injuria and contributory negligence.
The defence of volenti would fail as Brian may be aware that John is drunk but he did not consent to him driving negligently.
Knowledge of a risk does not equal consent to run that risk.
There is also a statutory provision which prevents volenti operating in these circumstances.
Brian would have his damages reduced for contributory negligence in riding with a driver who he knew was drunk and in failing to wear a seat belt.
If Brian and John were engaged in a get-away from the scene of a crime at the time of the accident, John could also raise the defence of ex turpi causa(illegality) to the action.
VOLENTI NON FIT INJURIA
Introduction
The requirements for a defence of volenti non fit injuria in a negligence action are a matter for some controversy.
It must be shown that the plaintiff acted voluntarily in the sense that he could exercise a free choice.
Some judges are of the opinion that there must be an express or implied agreement between the parties before the defence can operate.
The other view is that where the plaintiff comes across a danger which has already been created by the defendant the defence can operate.
If the defence is successful then the plaintiff will recover no damages at all.
This was also the case where contributory negligence was established before 1945.
In cases before that date there was no practical difference for the plaintiff in being found to be volenti or contributorily negligent.
The pre-1945 cases must be read with this in mind.
Before this defence has any role to play it must be shown that the defendant has committed a tort.
The plaintiff was a professional photographer.
During a horse show he positioned himself at the edge of the arena.
He was knocked down and injured by a horse when the rider lost control while riding too fast.
The Court of Appeal held that the defendant rider's failure to control his horse was simply an error of judgment which did not amount to negligence.
The standard of care owed by a competitor to a spectator was not to act with reckless disregard for the spectator's safety.
As this duty had not been broken there was no room for the defence of volenti non fit injuria to operate.
Wooldridge v Sumner [1963]2 QB 43
The standard of care laid down in this case has been doubted in subsequent cases.
(See e.g. Condon v Basi [1985]2 All ER 453 where a standard of reasonable care was applied to participants in a football match.)
The defence applies in cases of intentional and negligent infliction of harm, although it operates in different ways.
In intentional torts the defence operates in the form of consent.
Where the plaintiff has consented to the defendant's act he will have no action.
So a boxer who is struck by his opponent cannot sue him for battery.
A patient who signs a consent form for a surgical operation cannot later sue the surgeon for battery.
Where the harm was negligently inflicted the defence gives rise to greater difficulties.
The defendant has to show that the plaintiff assumed the legal risk of injury in circumstances where the defendant's act would otherwise amount to negligence.
The effect of the defence is that the plaintiff consents to exempt the defendant from a duty of care which would otherwise have been owed.
There are certain requirements before the defence will apply.
Voluntary
The plaintiff must have had a genuine freedom of choice before the defence can be successfully raised against him.
A man cannot be said to be truly willing unless he is in a position to choose freely, and freedom of choice predicates, not only full knowledge of the circumstances on which the exercise of choice is conditioned, so that he may be able to choose wisely, but the absence from his mind of any feeling of constraint so that nothing shall interfere with the freedom of his will (Scott LJ in Bowater v Rowley Regis Corporation [1944]KB 476).
The approach to this point in employer—employee cases has changed.
In the early part of the nineteenth century employees were assumed to consent to the risks in the work that they did.
The courts did not accept that the employer—employee relationship was not an equal one and that an employee might have continued to work in the face of danger for fear of losing his job.
At the end of the nineteenth century judicial attitudes changed.
The plaintiff was employed by the defendants on the construction of a railway.
While he was working, a crane moved rocks over his head.
Both he and his employers knew there was a risk of a stone falling on him and he had complained to them about this.
A stone fell and injured the plaintiff and he sued his employers for negligence.
The employers pleaded volenti non fit injuria but this was rejected by the court.
Although the plaintiff knew of the risk and continued to work, there was no evidence that he had voluntarily undertaken to run the risk of injury.
Merely continuing to work did not indicate volens.
Smith v Baker [1891]AC 325
The approach in this case has been continued by the courts and it is very rare for a volenti plea to succeed in an employee—employer case.
Such a plea might be successful where the employee had been paid danger money to undertake precisely that risk.
The defence has also succeeded where the employee was under no pressure to take a particular risk but deliberately chose a dangerous method of working.
The plaintiff and his brother were both experienced shotfirers employed by the defendants.
They jointly chose to ignore their employer's orders and statutory safety regulations, by testing detonators without taking shelter.
There was an explosion and the plaintiff was injured.
He sued the defendants on the grounds of their vicarious liability for his brother's negligence and breach of statutory duty.
The question for the House of Lords was whether an employer who was under no statutory duty could be vicariously liable for an employee's breach of statutory duty to another employee.
Had the plaintiff acted on his own, rather than in combination with his brother, no action would have lain.
The House held that the plaintiff was volens to the risk of harm and his action therefore failed.
Had the plaintiff sued his brother then the action would have failed on the grounds of volenti.
There had been no pressure brought by the employers to adopt that method of working.
Therefore there was no reason why volenti should not succeed for the employer.
ICI Ltd v Shatwell [1965]AC 656
There is a difficult problem posed by a person who commits suicide.
Is he acting voluntarily or not?
It has been held that volenti will provide a complete defence in actions against the police or hospital authorities where the deceased was of sound mind.
If the deceased's judgment was impaired by mental illness and he was incapable of coming to a balanced decision, his act is not voluntary and volenti will not apply (Kirkham v Chief Constable of Greater Manchester Police [1990]3 All ER 246).
This approach seems to beg the question as to whether a suicide can ever be regarded as being in their right mind.
The issue of voluntariness also arises in the rescue cases.
A rescuer who acts to save a person in danger and is injured, cannot be said to exercise the free choice which is necessary for volenti.
(See under "Rescue cases" , p. 103.)
Agreement
Where the parties have reached an express agreement that the plaintiff will voluntarily assume the risk of harm and this agreement is made before the negligent act, then the defence will operate.
This point is subject to any statutory restriction which is placed on the parties' freedom to agree.
If the agreement is subject to the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, then it is important that it does not contravene its provisions: e.g. in certain circumstances it is not possible to exclude liability for death or personal injuries at all.
The defendant will not be allowed to get round the Act by saying that the plaintiff was volenti.
(See s. 2(1), s. 2(3).)
In limited circumstances the courts may be prepared to imply the agreement to run the risk (e.g. ICI v Shatwell).
The reluctance of the courts to imply an agreement can be seen in the cases where the plaintiff has accepted a lift with the defendant who is incapable of driving.
The defendant drove the plaintiff and her mother to London to see the Coronation lights.
They visited several public houses and the defendant's ability to drive was clearly impaired.
One passenger decided that the driver was drunk and got out of the car.
The plaintiff said she would take the risk of an accident happening.
A few minutes later there was an accident and the plaintiff was injured.
It was held that volenti did not apply on these facts as the plaintiff had not consented to or absolved the defendant from subsequent negligence on his part.
Dann v Hamilton [1939]1 KB 509
Asquith J stated that the defence of volenti was applicable where the plaintiff came to a situation where the danger had already been created by the defendant's negligence.
The plaintiff gave the defendant driving lessons.
On the third lesson the defendant drove negligently and hit a lamp post.
The plaintiff was injured and sued in negligence.
The action was successful and the defence of volenti failed.
The plaintiff had not consented to run the risk of injury as he had checked on whether the car was covered for passenger's insurance.
Nettleship v Weston [1971]2 QB 691
Lord Denning stated: "Nothing will suffice short of an agreement to waive any claim for negligence.
The plaintiff must agree, expressly or impliedly, to waive any claim for any injury that may befall him due to the lack of reasonable care by the defendant."
Owens v Brimmell [1977]2 WLR 943
The plaintiff and defendant spent the evening on a pub crawl together.
The plaintiff accepted a lift home with the defendant although he knew the defendant was drunk.
The defendant drove negligently and the plaintiff received serious injuries in a crash.
The defence of volenti was held to be inappropriate but the plaintiff's damages were reduced for his contributory negligence in riding with a drunken driver and failing to wear a seat belt.
In these cases the plaintiff is aware of the risk but does not consent to the act of negligence that causes his injury.
It was pointed out in Dann v Hamilton that the defence could apply in cases where: "the drunkenness of the driver at the material time is so extreme and so glaring that to accept a lift from him is like engaging in an intrinsically and obviously dangerous occupation, intermeddling with an unexploded bomb or walking along on the edge of an unfenced cliff" .
The plaintiff went for a ride in a private plane piloted by the defendant, despite the fact that he knew the defendant was drunk.
The plane crashed and the plaintiff was injured.
It was held by the Court of Appeal that the pilot's drunkenness was so extreme and obvious that participating in the flight was like engaging in an intrinsically and obviously dangerous occupation.
The defence of volenti succeeded.
Accepting lifts with drunken pilots is more dangerous than with drunken drivers.
Morris v Murray [1990]3 All ER 801
The position with drunken drivers is affected by a statutory provision.
The Road Traffic Act 1988, s. 149 provides that volenti is not available where a passenger in a car sues the driver in circumstances where insurance is compulsory.
At one time it was thought that the section only applied to express agreements and not to an implied agreement.
This view has now been rejected by the Court of Appeal.
The plaintiff was a pillion passenger on a motor bike driven by the defendant.
The defendant was drunk, had never passed a driving test, was uninsured and drove dangerously.
The plaintiff encouraged him in this behaviour.
The statutory provision was held to prevent the defendant from relying on any form of the volenti defence.
Had it not been for the section, the court was of the view that the claim would have been defeated by volenti.
Pitts v Hunt [1990]3 All ER 344
The plaintiff's claim was held to have been defeated by the maxim of ex turpi causa.
This would appear to defeat the intention of the statutory provision.
Problem
Is it necessary for the defendant to prove that the plaintiff agreed to waive his legal rights in order for him to succeed in a volenti plea?
Judicial views on whether an agreement that the plaintiff will waive any claim against the defendant is necessary, are mixed.
At one extreme Diplock LJ stated in Wooldridge v Sumner: "The defence of volenti in the absence of express contract, has no application to negligence simpliciter where the duty of care is based solely on proximity or"  "neighbourship"  "in the Atkinian sense." 
Where there is an express agreement to such effect there is little difficulty.
Whether the agreement takes the form of a contract term or notice, it will be regulated by statute.
Such waivers are probably covered by the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
An express agreement by a passenger in a car to waive his rights to sue the driver for negligently inflicted injuries is, as we have seen, negated by statute.
Slightly less extreme was Lord Denning's view in Nettleship v Weston: "Nothing will suffice short of an agreement to waive any claim for negligence.
The plaintiff must agree, expressly or impliedly, to waive any claim for any injury that may befall him due to the lack of reasonable care by the defendant."
The courts are understandably reluctant to imply an agreement.
It is necessary that there should be some kind of previous relationship between the parties.
We have seen this in cases such as Dann v Hamilton.
However, in Morris v Murray the Court of Appeal held that the defence of volenti should have succeeded.
This was on the basis that the act of the plaintiff relied on as consent preceded, and licensed in advance, a possible subsequent act of negligence.
The plaintiff had waived the defendant's duty to take care.
A similar view may be taken where the parties embark on a criminal act together and the plaintiff is injured as a result of the defendant's negligence.
The trend in such cases is, however, to apply the maxim ex turpi causa.
Can volenti be raised where the plaintiff encounters a risk which has already been created by the defendant's negligence?
The defendant's employees had been placed in danger by being required to work in a confined space with a petrol driven engine producing poisonous fumes.
A doctor attempted to rescue the men and was killed by the fumes.
He was aware of the danger at the time he attempted the rescue.
Volenti was held to be inapplicable as the doctor could not be said to have agreed to the risk.
He had only become involved after the defendant's negligent act.
Baker v T E Hopkins & Son Ltd [1959]1 WLR 966
This case can perhaps be explained on policy grounds as the plaintiff was a rescuer and the courts do not wish to deter rescue.
It could also be argued that the doctor was not acting voluntarily.
Judicial support for the view that volenti can be raised in these circumstances exists in Dann v Hamilton, Morris v Murray and Pitts v Hunt.
This presents certain problems.
The fact that the plaintiff chose to run the risk should not give rise to volenti, as knowledge of the risk is not sufficient.
In these circumstances the plaintiff's conduct amounts to contributory negligence as he acted negligently.
This confuses the two defences which have different outcomes.
Volenti operates to defeat the claim completely.
Contributory negligence reduces the plaintiff's damages.
Statutory provisions also exist which suggest that a volenti plea can succeed in the absence of agreement.
These provisions are the Occupier's Liability Act 1957, s. 2(5), Animals Act 1971, s. 5(2), Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, s. 2(3).
However, these provisions could be viewed as one off examples of voluntary acceptance of risk.
Knowledge
In order for volenti to operate, the plaintiff must have knowledge of the existence of the risk and its nature and extent.
The test for knowledge is subjective.
If the plaintiff should have been aware of the risk but was not, the defence will fail (Smith v Austin Lifts Ltd [1959]1 WLR 100).
This raises problems where the plaintiff was drunk at the time.
If he was so drunk that he could not appreciate the nature of the risk, he will not be volenti.
The relationship between volenti and exclusion clauses
In cases where volenti is based on agreement, that agreement may amount to an exclusion clause.
If it does, then it will be subject to the provisions of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
Attempts to exclude liability for negligence are governed by s. 2.
This section operates where the clause attempts to exclude or restrict business liability as defined in s. 1(3).
Section 2(1) will operate to defeat any attempt to exclude or restrict liability for death or personal injuries caused by negligence.
Section 2(2) applies a test of reasonableness to other types of damage caused by negligence.
Section 2(3) states: "Where a contract term or notice purports to exclude or restrict liability for negligence a person's agreement to or awareness of it is not of itself to be taken as indicating his voluntary acceptance of any risk." 
As any agreement between the parties will be covered by the rest of the section, this subsection will only apply where there is no agreement between the parties and the plaintiff comes upon an already existing risk.
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Introduction
This defence will apply where the damage which the plaintiff has suffered was caused partly by his own fault and partly by the fault of the defendant.
In order to establish the defence, the defendant must prove that the plaintiff failed to take reasonable care for his own safety and that this failure was a cause of his damage.
If contributory negligence is established, the modern position is that the plaintiff will have his damages reduced by the court in proportion to his fault.
If he would have received £10,000 but was found to be 25% contributorily negligent, his damages will be £7,500.
This was not always the case.
At common law, if the court found that the plaintiff was partially to blame for his injuries, he received nothing at all.
Contributory negligence operated as a complete defence.
The plaintiff rode his horse violently and collided with a pole which the defendant had negligently left in the road.
It was held that if the plaintiff had used ordinary care the accident would not have happened.
The plaintiff was therefore guilty of contributory negligence and could recover nothing.
Butterfield v Forrester (1809) 11 East 60
This rule proved too severe for the courts and exceptions were developed to it.
One of these was the rule of lost opportunity or effective last chance.
The plaintiff negligently fastened his ass up on the highway.
The defendant drove his wagon too fast and collided with the ass, which was killed.
The defendant was held liable as if he had driven more slowly he could have avoided the accident.
Davies v Mann (1842) 10 M & W 546
After this the law became increasingly convoluted as the courts tried to escape the rigours of a rule which meant that the court had to make a finding in favour of one party or the other.
The rule was all or nothing.
In 1911 courts were given a statutory power to apportion damages in cases of collision at sea (Maritime Conventions Act 1911).
In 1945 a general power to apportion damages was given to the courts by the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945.
Section 1(1) provides: Where any person suffers damage as the result partly of his own fault and partly of the fault of any other person or persons, a claim in respect of that damage shall not be defeated by reason of the fault of the person suffering the damage, but the damages recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced to such an extent as the court thinks just and equitable having regard to the claimant's share in the responsibility for the damage.
The scope of the 1945 Act
The Act will only apply where a person has suffered damage.
Damage is defined by s. 4 as including loss of life and personal injury.
Property damage would appear to be included as this was the case before the Act was passed.
Whether economic loss is included is unknown but it would be logical if it were.
The Act will only apply where the damage was caused partly by the fault of the defendant and partly by the fault of the plaintiff.
In the absence of fault the court therefore has no power under the Act to apportion damages.
Fault is defined by s. 4: "negligence, breach of statutory duty or other act or omission which gives rise to a liability in tort or would, apart from the Act give rise to the defence of contributory negligence" .
It must be remembered that fault is referred to in two contexts, the fault of the defendant and the fault of the plaintiff.
Fault of the defendant means negligence, breach of statutory duty or other act or omission which gives rise to a liability in tort.
This causes no problem, as the defendant can be said to be at fault whenever he commits a tort.
The fault of the plaintiff means an act or omission which would, apart from the Act give rise to the defence of contributory negligence.
This causes problems of interpretation.
A narrow view would be that if contributory negligence was not a defence at common law, then it will not be available under the Act.
This would mean that the defence was not available for torts such as deceit and intentional trespass to the person.
The other view is that where the conduct of the plaintiff would have given rise to the defence at common law if he was suing for negligence, the defence is applicable.
What is clear is that the Act does not apply to conversion or intentional torts against goods by virtue of of the Torts (Interference With Goods) Act 1977, s. 11.
The Act does apply in negligence, nuisance, and actions under the rule in Rylands v Fletcher.
The Act does not apply to actions in deceit.
It is unclear whether the Act applies to trespass to the person but apparently it does.
The defendant was convicted of the manslaughter of the plaintiff's wife.
A civil action for trespass to the person followed.
The defendant raised contributory negligence as a defence (amongst others), on the grounds that he had been provoked.
The Court of Appeal considered that the defendant's response was out of all proportion to the alleged provocation but on appropriate facts contributory negligence could be relied on as a defence to battery.
Barnes v Nayer, The Times 19 December 1986
Elements of contributory negligence
The defendant must prove that the plaintiff failed to take reasonable care for his own safety and that this failure was a cause of his damage.
It is not necessary for the plaintiff to owe the defendant a duty of care: Although contributory negligence does not depend on a duty of care, it does depend on foreseeability.
Just as actionable negligence requires the foreseeability of harm to others, so contributory negligence requires the foreseeability of harm to oneself.
A person is guilty of contributory negligence if he ought reasonably to have foreseen that, if he did not act as a reasonable, prudent man, he might be hurt himself; and in his reckonings he must take into account the possibility of others being careless (Denning LJ in Jones v Livox Quarries Ltd [1952]2 QB 608).
A motorcyclist does not owe a duty to other road users to wear a crash helmet but in failing to do so he is guilty of contributory negligence if he suffers head injuries in an accident.
He should foresee harm to himself, although there is no risk of harm to anyone else.
The plaintiff's conduct
In considering whether the plaintiff was contributorily negligent the court will take into account factors similar to those which would render the defendant negligent.
The test is basically an objective one, although subjective factors are introduced when looking at child defendants and persons under a disability.
The plaintiff's failure to take care for his own safety may be a cause of the accident which results in his damage.
This occurs where two motorists are held to be equally to blame for a collision and the plaintiff is injured.
A person who plies a driver with drinks and then accepts a lift and is injured will also be liable under this head.
Alternatively, a person may place himself in a dangerous position which exposes him to the risk of involvement in the accident in which he is harmed.
The plaintiff's husband rode on the offside step of a dust-cart.
He was aware of the danger of such a practice.
The dust-cart was being overtaken by one of the defendant's buses when a collision occurred the husband was killed.
The driver of the dust-cart, the driver of the bus, and the husband were all held to have been negligent, the husband because of the dangerous manner in which he was riding on the dust-cart.
He was therefore held to have been guilty of contributory negligence and the widow's damages reduced.
Davies v Swan Motor Co (Swansea) Ltd [1949]2 KB 291
The plaintiff was riding on the tow bar at the back of a traxcavator on his way back to the canteen.
Another vehicle was driven negligently into the back of the traxcavator, causing injury to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff's damages were reduced on the grounds of his contributory negligence.
Lord Denning said that the result would have been otherwise if the plaintiff had been e.g. hit in the eye by a shot from a negligent sportsman.
Jones v Livox Quarries Ltd [1952]2 QB 608
Similar reasoning could be applied where the plaintiff puts himself in a position which is not dangerous in itself but he is aware of circumstances which make it more likely that he will suffer harm.
This would explain the cases where the plaintiff accepts a lift with a driver whom he knows is drunk.
In these circumstances the courts will find that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence but not volens to the risk (Owens v Brimmell [1977]QB 859).
The third possibility is that the plaintiff may take up a position which is not in itself dangerous but where his failure to take precautions increases the risk of the extent of harm which he may suffer.
The plaintiff's car was in a collision with the defendant's car caused by the defendant's negligence.
At the time of the accident the plaintiff was not wearing a seat belt.
His injuries were worse than they would have been if he had been wearing a seat belt.
It was held by the Court of Appeal that his damages should be reduced by 20%.
The standard of care was to be judged objectively and the prudent man would wear a seat belt unless there were exceptional circumstances.
Froom v Butcher [1976]QB 286
Since this case it has been made a criminal offence not to wear a seat belt in the front seat of a car.
There are certain exceptions to this such as pregnant women.
There are a number of areas where problems are caused in trying to ascertain the appropriate standard of care for the plaintiff.
Children
The traditional view is that there is no age below which a child cannot be held to be guilty of contributory negligence.
This view has been challenged by Lord Denning.
The plaintiff was aged 13 years.
A lorry driver signalled to her to cross the road.
She did so without stopping to see if the road was clear.
She was run over by a car travelling at excessive speed and overtaking on the wrong side.
It was held that the plaintiff was not guilty of contributory negligence.
If she had been an adult the position would have been different.
Lord Denning stated: A very young child cannot be guilty of contributory negligence.
An older child may be; but it depends on the circumstances.
A judge should only find a child guilty of contributory negligence if he or she is of such an age as reasonably to be expected to take precautions for his or her own safety; and then he or she is only to be found guilty if blame should be attached to him or her.
Gough v Thorne [1966]1 WLR 1387
A nine year old child bought petrol from the defendants after falsely stating that his mother needed it for her car.
The child used the petrol for a game in which he was burned.
The defendants were held to have been negligent in selling the child the petrol but the child was not contributorily negligent.
He did not know and could not have been expected to know the qualities of petrol.
Yachuk v Oliver Blais [1949]AC 386
Dilemma
When assessing the plaintiff's conduct the court will make allowance for the fact that the defendant's negligence has placed the plaintiff in a dilemma.
If the plaintiff chooses a course which carries a risk of harm in order to avoid a reasonably perceived greater danger he will not be contributorily negligent.
The plaintiff was a passenger on the defendant's coach.
A coupling rein broke loose and thinking that the coach was about to crash, the plaintiff jumped out and broke his leg.
The coach did not in fact crash and if he had remained on it he would have suffered no harm.
As his actions were those of a prudent and reasonable man, he was not contributorily negligent.
Jones v Boyce (1816) 1 Stark 493
Where the defendant's negligence has placed a person in danger and the plaintiff has attempted a rescue, the court will be slow to find the rescuer contributorily negligent.
(See "Rescue cases" , p. 103.)
Workmen
In cases where an employee sues his employer for breach of statutory duty, the court  will be slow to find that the employer was guilty of contributory negligence.
Regard must be had to the fact that the employee's sense of danger will have been dulled by familiarity, repetition, noise, confusion, fatigue and preoccupation with work (Caswell v Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd [1940]AC 152).
The reason for this lenient approach is that the court will not want to undermine the statutory regulations which are often designed to protect workmen from the consequences of their own carelessness.
The courts will hold employees liable for their contributory negligence however.
The plaintiff, an experienced workman, was cleaning a machine when his hand was pulled into the machine and he lost the tip of a finger.
The machine had had its safety guard removed.
The plaintiff, in an action under the Factories Act 1961, s. 14, was held to have been 100% contributorily negligent after he admitted that what he had done had been extremely foolish.
Jayes v IMI (Kynoch) Ltd [1985]ICR 155
Whether this lenient approach applies in actions for negligence is not clear but the employer's personal non-delegable duty to the employee to take into account the possibility of the employee's carelessness for his own safety is relevant in such a calculation.
Causation
In order for contributory negligence to constitute a defence, the plaintiff's fault must be a legal and factual cause of the harm suffered.
It is not necessary that the plaintiff's fault be a cause of the accident itself.
In Jones v Livox Quarries, the plaintiff's position on the traxcavator was held to be one of the causes of his damage, although the most obvious risk to the plaintiff was that he would fall off.
His action in riding on the tow bar had sufficient causal potency to be regarded as a cause of his injuries.
Factual causation was established and the damage was not too remote.
Had the plaintiff been shot, then this would have been too remote a consequence and causation not established.
In the seat belt cases the plaintiff's failure to take precautions for his own safety is regarded as a contributing cause of his injuries, but it is necessary for the defendant to prove that the failure to wear a seat belt was a cause of the injuries.
If the plaintiff was thrown forwards and injured, then clearly failure to wear a seat belt is contributory negligence.
But for the failure, either the plaintiff would not have been injured or his injuries would not have been so severe.
However, if something enters the vehicle and crushes the plaintiff backwards against the seat, the failure to wear the seat belt would appear to be irrelevant and fail the test of causation.
The plaintiff would have suffered the injuries even if he had been wearing a belt.
The first test that must be passed is the but for test for factual causation.
Would the alleged consequence have occurred but for the negligent cause.
If the plaintiff's alleged contributory negligence fails this test it is not necessary to go any further (s. 1(1)).
The Act itself does not change the rules on causation, so it is still necessary to use common law rules.
This can give rise to some difficult problems.
Two miners had been instructed to bring down an unsafe part of the roof which presented a danger to the miners.
They disobeyed instructions by continuing to work when they had failed to do this.
The roof collapsed and one of the men was killed.
His widow sued the defendants for negligence.
The court had to decide whether the damage was solely as a result of the negligence of the plaintiff's husband or whether the negligence of his workmate was also a factor.
The House of Lords approached the question in a commonsense manner and held the actions of both workmen were causes.
The plaintiff's action succeeded but his damages were reduced by 80% on the grounds of contributory negligence.
Stapley Gypsum Mines Ltd [1953]AC 663
It is important to remember that if one act is held to be the sole cause of the damage and that act is one of the plaintiff, then the plaintiff will recover nothing.
The act could be regarded as a novus actus interveniens.
See e.g. McKew v Holland Hannen & Cubbitts.
Apportionment
The Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act, s. 1(1) directs the court to reduce the plaintiff's damages to the extent that the court thinks just and equitable having regard to the claimant's share in the responsibility for the damage.
There are two possible ways of assessing the claimant's share in the responsibility for the damage, causation and blameworthiness.
If a test of causative potency is used then logically every case should end with a 50/50 apportionment, as each of the plaintiff's and defendant's conduct is a cause.
The courts however take a commonsense view, rather than a philosophical view, and arrive at apportionments other than 50/50.
(See Stapley v Gypsum Mines Ltd.)
Where the comparative blameworthiness or culpability of the parties is taken into account, then the test is an objective one of deviating from the standard of behaviour of the reasonable man.
It is not a moral test.
The reasonable man, for example, would wear a seat belt.
The requirement that the reduction should be just and equitable means that there is no single test for determining the level of reduction of damages.
The courts treat it as a question of fact and take an ad hoc approach.
Can there be a 100% reduction for contributory negligence?
If there can be then there is no practical difference between this defence and volenti, as the plaintiff receives no damages.
In Pitts v Hunt [1990]3 All ER 344, the trial judge felt he was unable to apply volenti non fit injuria because of the statutory provision.
However, he held the plaintiff to be 100% contributorily negligent.
The Court of Appeal stated that it was impermissible to make a finding of 100% contributory negligence, as the Act states that the plaintiff must suffer damage partly as a result of his own fault and partly as a result of the defendant's fault.
The trial judge must therefore apportion blame between the parties.
A finding of 100% contributory negligence does not do this.
Multiple defendants
Difficulties arise where there is more than one defendant.
In cases where the plaintiff was not at fault, he can recover his full loss against any of the defendants.
That person will then have to seek a contribution from the other defendants under the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978.
Where the plaintiff was at fault and contributed to his own injuries, is it necessary to balance the plaintiff's contributory negligence against each defendant separately?
The plaintiff stepped out into the traffic on a busy road.
He was struck by a vehicle driven by the first defendant.
This pushed him into the path of an oncoming vehicle driven by the second defendant.
Both defendants were accepted to be negligent and the plaintiff was contributorily negligent.
At first instance the three parties were held equally to blame and the plaintiff's damages were therefore reduced by one-third.
This was held to be the wrong approach by the House of Lords.
It was necessary to distinguish two questions.
First, the contributory negligence of the plaintiff and the amount by which his damages should be reduced.
Second, the amount of contribution recoverable between the two defendants.
The plaintiff's culpability was in setting the scene for the accident.
The response of the defendants then had to be looked at.
The plaintiff's conduct and the totality of the tortious conduct of the defendants were compared.
As the plaintiff was as much to blame for his injuries as the defendants, his damages were reduced by 50%.
Fitzgerald v Lane [1988]2 All ER 961
One final point to be remembered about contributory negligence is that it differs in effect from a finding of negligence.
The latter does not usually directly affect the defendant's pocket as he will be insured.
A finding of contributory negligence on the other hand has a direct financial effect on the plaintiff.
He gets less in damages.
EX TURPI CAUSA The court may deny an action to a plaintiff who suffered damage while participating in a criminal activity.
In negligence actions the court may find that no duty of care was owed in the circumstances.
The defence may be referred to as illegality or ex turpi causa non oritur actio.
This means that an action cannot be founded on a bad cause.
(For facts see volenti non fit injuria).
Beldam LJ reviewed the authorities and stated that deciding whether the defence applied involved answering two questions.
First, had there been any illegality of which the court should take note.
Second, would it be an affront to the public conscience to allow the plaintiff to recover.
A robust approach should be taken to these questions.
The fact that there had been unlawfulness should not mean that a remedy should be denied.
Taking account of the view of drunk driving, the plaintiff should be precluded on grounds of public policy from recovering compensation.
Pitts v Hunt [1990]3 All ER 344
A different approach was taken by Dillon and Balcombe LJJ.
Dillon LJ dismissed the conscience approach as it would be difficult to apply and would inevitably be affected by emotional factors.
This would lead to a graph of illegalities graded according to moral turpitude.
Dillon and Balcombe LJJ agreed that a preferable approach would be to deny a duty of care in certain cases of joint illegal enterprises.
The defence would have this effect where first, the plaintiff's action is directly connected with the joint illegal enterprise and not merely incidental to it.
Second, the circumstances of the illegal venture must be such that the court cannot determine the standard of care to be observed.
An objection to the use of the defence in this case was that it enabled the court to evade the statutory prohibition on applying volenti non fit injuria.
This cannot have been the intention of Parliament when it prevented drivers from contracting out of their liability to a passenger.
The first point raised by Dillon and Balcombe LJJ can be illustrated as follows.
Two safebreakers are on their way to open a safe and they have a fight.
One is injured.
Ex turpi causa would not provide a defence.
(But see Murphy v Culhane [1977]QB 94 for a case involving a criminal affray where the plaintiff got more than he bargained for and it was stated that the defence could apply.)
If the safebreakers were actually trying to open the safe and one was injured by the other's negligent use of explosives, then the defence could apply.
The second point is shown by cases where two criminals are engaged in attempting a getaway from the scene of the crime.
The car is driven negligently at speed and the passenger is injured.
The court would be unwilling or unable to determine what speed would be expected from a competent getaway driver.
(See Ashton v Turner [1980]3 All ER 870.)
Which test will be followed remains to be seen.
Despite the criticism levelled at the public conscience test it has been used in a number of cases.
For example in Kirkham v Chief Constable of the Greater Manchester Police [1990]3 All ER 246, the court refused to bar the claim on the grounds of suicide.
This was no longer an affront to the public conscience, where the suicide resulted from mental instability.
The test of difficulty in setting the appropriate standard of care poses problems.
One is that the defence applies in torts other than negligence.
A second is that cases arise where there is no doubt about the appropriate standard.
The allegation of negligence was that the defendant had failed to observe a foetal abnormality during pregnancy and the plaintiff had been denied the possibility of an abortion.
Such an abortion would have been illegal under the then existing law.
There would have been no difficulty in establishing the appropriate standard of care for the medical defendant.
It was held that there had been no negligence, but on grounds of public policy the court would not award compensation where the plaintiff would have had to have broken the law.
Rance v Mid-Downs Health Authority [1991]1 All ER 801
It is not clear what kind of conduct will bar an action.
The fact that a tort was committed is not sufficient.
A duty of care can be owed to a trespasser (see "Defective Premises" , p. 116.)
The conduct does not even have to be illegal.
The decision in Kirkham leaves open the possibility that a suicide in their right mind could be ex turpi causa.
The conduct will usually be criminal but not all crimes will  be sufficient to raise the defence.
For example, a breach of statutory duty will not bar a claim.
THE RESCUE CASES
We have seen that issues of causation and blameworthiness raise problems for the courts when deciding whether the plaintiff's conduct was sufficiently serious to deserve a reduction in his entitlement to damages, or to deserve no damages at all.
Public policy plays a part in a number of these decisions and a student could be forgiven for confusion at the complexity of the area and the number of legal doctrines used.
This chapter will be concluded by looking at the so called "rescue cases" and seeing how the various doctrines apply.
The public policy issue in these cases is that the courts do not want to deter rescue and it has been held that a duty of care is owed to rescuers (Chadwick v British Railways Board [1967]1 WLR 912).
Example
A's negligence has placed B in danger and C is injured in attempting a rescue of B. C sues A in negligence.
Assume that a duty of care is owed by A to C as a rescue was reasonably foreseeable in the circumstances.
There are three possible "defences" that A can raise to C's action.
He could argue that C's action in attempting a rescue was a novus actus interveniens of the plaintiff which broke the chain of causation.
A's negligence would not then be a cause of C's injuries.
The court will apply a test of whether the plaintiff's rescue attempt was likely as a result of the breach of duty and whether the plaintiff acted reasonably.
Alternatively, A could argue that in attempting a rescue C was volens to the risk of injury.
Because of the nature of rescue cases, the danger will usually have been created by the defendant's negligence before the plaintiff comes on the scene.
If the view is taken (see volenti) that an agreement is necessary for volenti, then it will usually be inapplicable in rescue cases.
The courts do not always take this view.
Finally, A could attempt to prove that C was contributorily negligent in that his fault was a cause of his injuries.
The courts will generally be reluctant to invoke any of these defences to deny the rescuer compensation.
A horse van was left unattended by the driver in an area with three schools.
There were always a number of children in the street.
A child threw a stone at the horse, which bolted.
The plaintiff, a police officer, saw that highway users were in danger and tried to stop the horse.
He suffered personal injuries.
The court held that volenti non fit injuria did not succeed as a defence as the plaintiff did not exercise the freedom of choice which was necessary.
(There is also a problem as to whether the defence applies where the plaintiff encounters an  already existing danger.)
There was no novus actus interveniens as what occurred was a likely result of the original breach of duty by the defendants.
Haynes v Harwood [1935]1 KB 146
Contrast this case with Cutler v United Dairies [1933]2 KB 297.
Here a horse had bolted into a field.
Nobody was in any danger from the horse but the plaintiff entered the field and tried to calm the horse and was injured.
The plaintiff was volenti as he had freedom of choice as to whether to attempt a rescue and there was a novus actus interveniens as the danger had passed.
The defendant attempted to board a moving train.
The plaintiff guard saw the defendant on the outside of the train and gave the incorrect signal to the driver.
It should have been a signal to stop but was the accelerate signal.
The guard attempted to pull the defendant into the train but both fell out and the guard was injured.
The court held that where a person places himself in danger and it is foreseeable that another person may attempt a rescue, the rescued person owes a duty of care to the rescuer.
However, the defendant was found to have been contributorily negligent in pressing the wrong signal and his damages were reduced by 20%.
Harrison v British Rail Board [1981]3 All ER 679
The court pointed out that it was rare that a rescuer would be found to be contributorily negligent.
This case supports the view expressed in Baker v Hopkins that a person who places himself in danger may owe a duty of care to a rescuer.
If a climber ignores safety advice and a member of the mountain rescue team is injured attempting a rescue, that person could sue the climber for negligence.
Would a rescuer be denied an action on the ground of ex turpi causa, e.g. if one burglar was injured attempting to assist another who had been placed in danger by the dangerous condition of the house they were breaking into?
(See Pitts v Hunt for possible tests.)
SPECIFIC AREAS OF NEGLIGENCE AND BREACH OF STATUTORY DUTY
10 Defective premises
INTRODUCTION
A specialised area of negligence is provided by liability for defective premises.
This chapter is divided into three parts.
First, the liability of an occupier of the premises to a visitor or trespasser to the premises.
Second, the liability of a landlord for defects in the premises.
Finally, the liability of a person involved in the construction process.
OCCUPIER'S LIABILITY
Introduction
Liability in this area is governed by two statutes.
Where the plaintiff was a visitor to the premises, the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 applies.
Where the plaintiff was a trespasser, the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 will be applied.
The fact that the law is statute based means that attention must be paid to the wording of the relevant sections in answering questions.
A common factor in either action is the defendant, who will be the occupier of the premises.
There is no statutory definition of occupier so it is necessary to turn to the common law.
The term occupier is rather misleading, as it is the person who controls the premises, rather than the physical occupier, who is responsible.
The defendants were the owners of a public house which was run by a manager and his wife, who had a licence to live on the first floor and to take in paying guests.
The manager occupied the premises on the basis of being an employee rather than a tenant.
A paying guest was killed when he tried to get to the bar on the first floor by an emergency staircase.
The House of Lords considered who was the occupier.
They held that it was both the manager and the owners.
Lord Denning stated: Wherever a person has a sufficient degree of control over premises that he ought to realise that any failure on his part to use care may result in injury to a person coming lawfully there, then he is an occupier and the person coming lawfully there is his visitor.
Wheat v E Lacon & Co Ltd [1966]AC 522
Lord Denning identified four categories of occupier:(a) A landlord who lets premises.
The landlord has parted with control of the premises so the tenant will be the occupier.
(b) The landlord lets part of a building but retains other parts such as a common staircase.
The landlord remains as occupier for the parts of the building he has retained.
(c) Where a landowner licenses a person to use premises and the owner has a right to enter on the premises to do repairs, the owner retains control and is the occupier.
(d) Where independent contractors are employed to do work on premises, the owner will generally retain sufficient control to be an occupier.
It is possible that the contractors will also be occupiers.
This will depend on the amount of control which they have while the work is in progress.
In the event neither the manager nor the owners were held to be in breach of duty.
There had been a bulb on the staircase but this had been removed by a stranger, for whose actions the defendants were not responsible.
The case established that there can be more than one occupier of the same premises, although the duty required of each might be different: e.g. a seaside promenade might be under the control of a local authority and the water authority as part of the sea defences.
If a person was injured by broken glass left there, the relevant occupier would be the local authority.
If the injury was due to the state of repair of the structure, the water authority would be the relevant occupier.
An estate in land is not necessary in order to be an occupier and neither is physical possession.
The key factor is whether a person exercised a sufficient degree of control.
A local authority issued a compulsory purchase order on a house and a notice of entry which enabled them to take over the premises after 14 days.
The house was not vacated for several months.
When it was vacated no steps were taken to have it boarded up by the local authority.
The plaintiff, a four year old child, entered the house through an unsecured door and fell from a second floor window.
The Court of Appeal held that actual physical possession was not necessary for there to be control.
The fact that the local authority had the legal right to control the premises made them occupiers to the exclusion of the previous owners of the house.
The local authority was in the best position to avoid accidents.
Harris v Birkenhead Corporation [1976]1 WLR 279
Once the relevant occupier or occupiers have been identified the next stage is to ascertain the status of the plaintiff.
If he is a lawful visitor it is necessary to go to the 1957 Act.
If the plaintiff was a trespasser, then the 1984 Act is appropriate.
Occupier's liability to visitors
The scope of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957
At this stage it is necessary to make three points about the scope of the Act.
(a) A plaintiff may claim for personal injuries and damage to property.
The scope of property includes property of persons who are not themselves visitors (s. 1(3) (b)):(b) Before the Act, the courts had drawn a distinction between the occupancy duty and the activity duty.
The former was concerned with dangers due to the state of the premises.
The latter with dangers created by the occupier's activities on his premises, such as driving a vehicle.
In cases of occupancy duty the special rules on occupier's liability applied.
For activity duty the ordinary rules of negligence applied.
It is not clear whether this distinction has survived the Act.
Section 1(1) refers to dangers due to the state of the premises or things done or omitted to be done on them.
This could be interpreted as meaning that the Act applies to the activity duty.
However s. 1(2) refers to harm suffered, in consequence of a person's occupation or control of premises.
This only appears to include the occupancy duty.
There is no conclusive case on the point but in Ogwo v Taylor [1987]2 WLR, Brown LJ (obiter) was of the opinion that where a fireman was injured fighting a fire at the defendant's premises, which was not due to a defect in the premises, the Act had no application.
The distinction is unlikely to make much difference, as once a duty has been found to exist, the standard of care will be the same, reasonable care in all the circumstances of the case.
(c) The Act applies not only to land and buildings but also to fixed and moveable structures, including any vehicle or aircraft (s. 1(3) (a)).
The Act has been held to apply to a digging machine used to construct a tunnel (Bunker v Charles Brand & Son Ltd [1969]2 QB 480).
Who is a visitor?
The duty of care under the 1957 Act is owed to visitors (s. 1(2)).
All lawful visitors to the premises are covered by this term.
It includes invitees and licensees and those who have a contractual right to enter, where there is no express contractual duty of care (s. 5(1)).
Where a person enters under a contractual right, the common duty of care under the Act will be implied into the contract, unless the contract expressly provides for a higher standard of care.
A person who enters under a right conferred by law is treated as a visitor, whether or not they have the occupier's express permission to enter (s. 2(6)).
Policemen, firemen and employees of public utility companies may come into such a category provided they do not exceed their power of entry.
Four problem areas arise with visitors:(a) Rights of way Persons who lawfully exercise a private right of way are not treated as visitors and are therefore not covered by the 1957 Act (Holden v White [1982]2 WLR 1030).
Such people are now covered by the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984, s. 1(1) (a) and will be owed a duty of care under that Act.
Persons exercising a public right of way are not treated as visitors (Greenhalgh v British Railways Board [1969]2 QB 286).
Neither are they covered by the 1984 Act, as s. 1(7) of that Act specifically excludes them.
Any duty owed to such a person would therefore have to be at common law.
(b) Implied permission A person who claims that he had implied permission to enter premises must prove that there was such permission.
There is implied permission for a person to enter premises and state their business to the occupier.
If the occupier then asks them to leave, they must be allowed a reasonable time to leave, after which they will become trespassers.
Reasonable force may then be used to eject them.
This presumption can be rebutted by the occupier putting up a notice specifically excluding certain types of person, such as salesmen and politicians.
When the occupier's duty to a trespasser was a limited one of not intentionally or recklessly injuring the trespasser, the concept of implied permission was an important one.
The success or failure of the action would depend on whether the plaintiff was classed as a trespasser or not.
In deserving cases the courts would sometimes find implied permission.
People regularly used the defendant's unfenced land to take a short cut.
The defendant had taken no serious steps to prevent them as most were his customers.
The defendant then allowed a wild horse on his land, which attacked the plaintiff.
The plaintiff was held to have implied permission and therefore was not a trespasser.
Lowery v Walker [1911]AC 10
The court's willingness to find an implied licence or permission was particularly strong in the case of children, especially where there was something attractive to children on the land.
The passing of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 means that there should now be an insignificant number of cases where the court is asked to find implied permission.
There is little difference, for example, between the position of a child trespasser whom the occupier knows to be present and a child visitor.
(c) Limitations on permission The occupier may place limitations on the permission to enter.
A person who is allowed to enter one part of a building only, will become a trespasser if he enters another part "When you invite a person into your house to use the stairs you do not invite him to slide down the bannisters" (The Calgarth [1927]P 93 per Scrutton LJ).
However, any usage incidental to that permitted will be covered.
A person entering a public house will be allowed to enter the toilet.
If a person is given permission to enter a building at a particular time, then entry at another time may render him a trespasser.
This is a question of interpretation.
A visitor to a public house who is asked to stay on for a private party by the landlord will remain a visitor.
Finally, a person who is given permission to enter for a particular purpose will be a trespasser if he enters for a different purpose.
The decorator who is given the keys for the purpose of working, will be a trespasser if he lets himself in in the middle of the night to watch a video.
(d) It is possible for a person to be visitor in relation to one occupier and a trespasser to another
The council owned land and employed demolition contractors to do work there.
The contractors sub-contracted the work to another firm.
An employee of the sub-contractors was injured during the demolition work.
The cause of the accident was held to be the unsafe system of work used by the plaintiff's employers rather than use of the premises.
As the sub-contracting was unauthorised, the plaintiff could have been a trespasser to the council.
Ferguson v Welsh [1987]3 All ER 777
What is the duty?
The occupier of the premises owes a common duty of care to all lawful visitors to the premises.
The duty is in s. 2(2) of the Act: The common duty of care is a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited or permitted to be there.
Whether the duty has been broken is a question of fact in each case.
The factors which are applicable to the standard of care in common law negligence are applicable.
However, the section makes two things clear.
It is the visitor and not the premises that have to be reasonably safe.
The circumstances of the particular visitor have to be taken into account.
The duty only extends to the purpose for which the visitor was allowed entry.
The Act gives specific guidance on certain points in relation to the duty of care.
(a) Children Section 2(3) (a) states: "An occupier must be prepared for children to be less careful than adults.
If the occupier allows a child to enter the premises then the premises must be reasonably safe for a child of that age."
The plaintiff aged seven died after eating poisonous berries from a tree in a public park.
The tree was not fenced and no warning was given.
The defendants were held liable.
The danger was not obvious to a child of that age.
Glasgow Corporation v Taylor [1922]1 AC 44
Very young children present a problem in that there may be a question as to whether their parents should have exercised supervision over them.
In such cases it may come down to allocating liability beween the parents and the occupier.
The five year old plaintiff was injured while out with his seven year old sister.
He fell into a trench on land which was used by children as a play area.
The defendants were aware of this but took no steps to keep the children out.
The defendants were held not liable on the facts.
The court stated that reasonable parents will not send their children into danger without protection and that both the parents and the occupier must act reasonably.
Phipps v Rochester Corporation [1955]1 QB 450
(b) Persons entering in the exercise of a calling Section 2(3) (b) states: "An occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so." 
Two chimney sweeps were killed by carbon monoxide gas while attempting to seal a sweep hole in the chimney of a boiler.
The defendant occupiers were held not liable, as they could assume that sweeps would be aware of this particular danger and also because the sweeps had been warned of the danger.
Lord Denning stated that the position would have been different if the stairs leading to the basement had given way.
That would not have been a risk incidental to the trade of chimney sweep.
The occupier was held not liable to a window cleaner who was injured when a defective window closed suddenly, causing him to fall.
Defective windows were a risk which window cleaners should guard against.
Roles v Nathan [1963]1 WLR 1117
General Cleaning Contractors v Christmas [1953]AC 180
The plaintiff did recover against his employer for using an unsafe system of work.
(See "Employer's liability" , p. 152.)
The fact that the visitor has a specific skill is not in itself sufficient to absolve the occupier where he has not exercised the requisite degree of care.
Firemen who exercise reasonable care in attempting to extinguish a negligently started fire will be able to recover against the occupier, if they are injured in the process of extinguishing the fire (Salmon v Seafarers Restaurant [1983]1 WLR 1264; Ogwo v Taylor [1988]2 WLR 988).
(c) Independent contractors Section 2(4) (b) states: Where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger due to the faulty execution of any work of construction, maintenance or repair by an independent contractor employed by the occupier, the occupier is not to be treated without more as answerable for the danger if in all the circumstances he had acted reasonably in entrusting the work to an independent contractor and had taken such steps (if any) as he reasonably ought in order to satisfy himself that the contractor was competent and that the work had been properly done.
A number of points need to be made about this section, which was passed to reverse a common law rule, which placed an occupier under a non-delegable duty to certain types of entrant.
This duty could not be discharged by entrusting the work to an independent contractor.
(i) The facts of the case must come within the section, which only applies to, the"faulty execution of…construction, maintenance or repair…
"
Where a case falls outside the section the common law rule will apply.
(ii) It must be reasonable for the occupier to entrust the work to an independent contractor.
The more technical the work is, the more likely it will be reasonable to do so.
The occupier must also be looked at.
If the occupier is a layman with no technical skill then most jobs will be reasonably entrusted to contractors.
The situation might be different with occupiers such as local authorities.
(iii) The occupier must take reasonable steps to check that the contractor was competent to carry out the work.
A lay person would appear to be able to do little in this direction, except perhaps check with local trade associations.
Large corporate bodies and local authorities may have to take more exhaustive steps.
(iv) The occupier must take reasonable steps to check that the work has been properly done.
With technical work, the appointment of a competent contractor may be sufficient to discharge the duty.
The plaintiff was killed when a lift fell to the bottom of its shaft.
The occupiers had appointed a normally competent firm of engineers to maintain the lift.
In doing so they had discharged their duty of care.
The technical nature of the work meant that they could not be expected to check it had been satisfactorily done.
Haseldine v Daw [1941]2 KB 343
The plaintiff child slipped on a snow-covered step at a school.
The step had been negligently cleaned by a cleaner.
There was some doubt as to whether the cleaner was an independent contractor, but the occupiers were held liable as they had failed to take reasonable steps to check that the work had been reasonably done: "The craft of the charwoman may have its mysteries but there is no esoteric quality in the nature of the work which the cleaning of a snow covered step demands." 
Woodward v Mayor of Hastings [1945]KB 174
If the section bars the plaintiff from suing the occupier, he may still be able to proceed against the contractor, either as an occupier, or under the common law negligence rules.
(d) Warnings Section 2(4) (a) states: Where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he has been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe.
The legal effect of a sufficient warning under this section is to discharge any duty of care which might have been owed by the occupier.
The mere fact that a warning has been given will not be sufficient to absolve the occupier.
The warning must enable the visitor to take reasonable care for his own safety.
An example was given by Lord Denning in Roles v Nathan.
Where a house has a river in front of it and a bridge across the river with a sign saying the bridge is dangerous, this is not an adequate warning, as any visitor has no choice as to whether to use the bridge.
If there were two bridges and one of them said "Danger use other bridge" , then a person injured using the dangerous bridge would have no claim.
Where the danger is not obvious, then the warning must indicate its nature in sufficient detail for the visitor to take reasonable care for his own safety.
A simple notice saying "Danger" will not discharge the duty.
Defences
(a) Volenti A defence of volenti non fit injuria is provided by s. 2(5).
 "The common duty of care does not impose upon an occupier any obligation willingly accepted as his by the visitor." 
This defence is covered by the general principles of volenti.
(See defences to negligence.)
The plaintiff must act voluntarily, so any person who has no choice as to whether they enter premises is not volenti.
Knowledge of the danger does not amount to the defence.
(b) Contributory negligence This defence will apply in actions under the Act, and a visitor who has failed to use reasonable care for his own safety and that failure was a cause of his damage will have his damages reduced.
Section 2(3) provides that in considering the common duty of care, the circumstances include the degree of care and want of care which would ordinarily be looked for in such a visitor.
(c) Exclusion Section 2(1) states: An occupier of premises owes the same duty, the "common duty of care" to all his visitors, except in so far as he is free to and does extend, restrict, modify or exclude his duty to any visitor or visitors by agreement or otherwise.
The reference to agreement or otherwise, means that the duty can be excluded etc. by means of a contract term or by a notice communicated to the visitor.
There are certain restrictions on the occupier's freedom to exclude etc.
(i) The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
The Act will apply where the premises are being used for business purposes as defined in s. 1(3).
It is the purpose that the premises are being used for, rather than the purpose of the visitor, that is important.
Business will include professions, government and local authority activities.
It does not include the granting of access for recreational or educational purposes, unless the granting of such access falls within the business purposes of the occupier (Occupiers' Liability Act 1984, s. 2).
The occupier cannot exclude liability for death or personal injuries caused by negligence (s. 2(1)).
Any attempt to exclude liability for property damage will be subjected to a test of reasonableness (s. 2(2)).
The fact that a person was aware of an exclusionary term or notice does not in itself mean that he has voluntarily accepted the risk (s. 2(3)).
Example
Alan is a sales representative for a company.
As part of his job he is required to visit building sites.
He enters a site occupied by Bob.
There is a notice on the gate which says: "Danger, building sites are dangerous places.
The occupier accepts no liability for injuries suffered by visitors or for damage to their property."
While on the site, a wall collapses on Alan, causing him injuries and damaging his car.
This notice could take effect in three ways.
First, as a warning discharging the duty of care.
As it fails to enable Alan to take reasonable care for his own safety it will not have this effect.
Secondly, to exclude the common duty of care.
As Bob is using the premises for business purposes, the Unfair Contract Terms Act will apply.
Section 2(1) means that the notice will fail to exclude Bob's liability for Alan's personal injuries.
As regards Bob's liability for the damage to Alan's car, the exclusionary notice would be subjected to a reasonableness test.
Finally, if Bob claims that Alan was volenti to the risk.
The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, s. 2(3) will prevent any claim that Alan's awareness of the attempted exclusion rendered him volens to the risk.
As Alan had to enter the site as part of his job, he lacked the necessary degree of voluntariness necessary for the defence.
(ii) It may not be possible for the occupier to exclude liability to a person who enters under a right conferred by law.
(iii) If it is correct that the duty owed to trespassers is a minimum standard which cannot be excluded, then this minimum standard cannot be excluded against visitors.
(See "Liability to trespassers" , p. 119.  (iv) Section 3(1) provides that where an occupier is bound by contract to permit strangers to the contract to enter or use the premises, the duty of care owed to the stranger as a visitor cannot be restricted or excluded by the contract.
A landlord who retains control over common parts of a building such as the stairs and puts an exclusion clause in the lease, cannot exclude liability to the tenant's visitors by virtue of this clause.
Liability to trespassers
Introduction
A trespasser is a person who goes onto land without an invitation of any sort and whose presence there is either unknown to the occupier, or if known, is objected to.
The common law was traditionally hostile to trespassers.
The original duty owed was the basic one of not intentionally or recklessly injuring a trespasser known to be present (Addie v Dumbreck Collieries [1929]AC 358).
This remained the law until 1972.
The judiciary were forced to resort to legal fictions such as implied licences and allurements to turn trespassers into visitors in deserving cases, mainly involving children.
In British Railways Board v Herrington [1972]AC 877, the House of Lords introduced a new duty.
The occupier owed a duty of common humanity to a trespasser known to be present.
The duty was a subjective one, as in considering whether it had been broken, the court had to take account of the resources of the occupier.
The Herrington decision was subjected to a certain amount of criticism and was referred to the Law Commission, whose report (Law Commission No 75, Cmnd 6428) formed the basis of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984.
The law on trespassers presents certain difficulties.
To what extent should the occupier be aware of the presence of the trespasser?
How can a distinction be made between trespassers of differing degrees of culpability, such as burglars and stray children?
What standard of care should be owed and which defences should be applied?
The Act attempts to answer these problems.
Scope of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984
The Act will apply to persons other than visitors (s. 1(1) (a)).
This covers trespassers; persons entering land under an access agreement or order under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949; persons lawfully exercising a lawful right of way.
The rest of this section will concentrate on the occupier's liability to trespassers.
The Act will apply in respect of any risk of their suffering injury on the premises by reason of any danger due to the state of the premises or to things done or omitted to be done on them (s. 1(1) (a)).
The Act will therefore apply to the activity duty as well as the occupancy duty.
When is a duty owed?
Once the relationship of occupier and visitor is established, the occupier owes the common duty of care to the visitor.
Once the relationship of occupier and trespasser is established, there is not automatically a duty.
It is necessary to apply s. 1(3) which states: An occupier of premises owes a duty to another (not being his visitor) in respect of any such risk as is referred to in subsection (1) if —(a) he is aware of the danger or has reasonable grounds to believe it exists;(b) he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the other is in the vicinity of the danger concerned or that he may come into the vicinity of the danger (in either case whether the other has lawful authority for being in that vicinity or not); and (c) the risk is one against which, in all the circumstances of the case, he may reasonably be expected to offer the other some protection.
This section poses some problems.
(c) is objective but (a) and (b) may be subjective.
If the test is objective, then it is based on the beliefs of the reasonable occupier.
If it is subjective, then it is based on the beliefs of the defendant.
A likely interpretation is that knowledge of the primary facts is subjective.
Once it is established what the defendant knew, then the inference to be drawn from these primary facts is objective.
Would a reasonable occupier have drawn the inference that there was a danger and that the presence of the trespasser was likely.
This would mean that there is no duty on the occupier to inspect his premises for dangers or trespassers.
The content of the duty
Section 1(4) states that the duty is: "to take such care as is reasonable in all the circumstances of the case to see that he does not suffer injury on the premises by reason of the danger concerned" .
This is the usual objective negligence standard.
Unfortunately, the division of the test into whether a duty exists and whether it has been broken, means that the court will have to consider similar factors for both.
The factors will be the age of the entrant, the nature of the premises, the extent of the risk and the practicability of precautions.
The Occupiers' Liability (Scotland) Act 1960 took the approach of imposing a duty of care on occupiers to all entrants.
The standard of care varied according to the nature of the entrant.
When Parliament was considering the 1984 Act they were only concerned with trespassers.
The decision to split the test may have been a political one.
The word trespasser has anti-social connotations, and to say that a duty was automatically owed to a trespasser but qualified by the standard, may have been too sophisticated.
The key factor would appear to be the age of the entrant.
Between 1972 and 1984  there was no case where an adult trespasser succeeded.
The rules on warnings and volenti give an indication why.
Warnings
Section 1(5) states: Any duty owed by virtue of this section in respect of a risk may, in an appropriate case, be discharged by taking such steps as are reasonable in all the circumstances of the case to give warning of the danger concerned or to discourage persons from incurring the risk.
Whether such a warning will discharge the duty of care will depend on the age of the entrant.
In the case of an adult, a warning notice will normally discharge the duty.
Almost any notice will be sufficient.
With children there is a problem of their not appreciating the danger, or not being able to read.
If the occupier has reason to anticipate the presence of a child trespasser he would do well to erect an obstacle to entry that is not in itself dangerous.
Volenti non fit injuria
Section 1(6) states: No duty is owed by virtue of this section to any person in respect of risks willingly accepted as his by that person (the question of whether a risk was so accepted to be decided on the same principles as in other cases in which one person owes a duty of care to another).
In the case of trespassers the courts have adopted an objective rather than a subjective test of agreement.
Where the plaintiff is an adult, then knowledge of the risk accompanied by entry on the land will render the plaintiff volenti (Titchener v British Railways Board [1983]3 All ER 770).
If this principle applies to the 1984 Act then it would mean that the defence of volenti will vary according to the category of entry.
In the case of visitors, knowledge of risk plus entry is not sufficient to amount to volenti.
The visitor must know enough to be reasonably safe.
Exclusion
The 1984 Act is silent on the question of exclusion, which means that any duty owed may or may not be excludable.
There are three points in favour of any duty being unexcludable.
The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 does not apply to the 1984 Act as it only has application to common law duties and the statutory duty under the 1957 Act.
It was thought that the common law duty to trespassers was unexcludable as a minimum standard below which the law would not go.
If this was the case and that principle was carried forward to the Act then the duty under the Act would be  unexcludable.
Against this is the fact that the standard under the Act is reasonable care, the normal negligence standard, whereas the common law duty was a lower one of common humanity.
The 1957 Act has specific provisions on its excludability whereas the 1984 Act is silent.
If the duty were held to be unexcludable, this would have the odd effect that a trespasser to premises not in business use could be better off than a visitor.
The occupier could exclude his duty to the visitor but not to the trespasser.
Example
Charles is the owner of a piece of waste ground adjacent to his house.
He has used the waste ground to dump old cars, which he intends to renovate.
The waste ground is separated from a park by some old fencing which is in need of repair.
Charles, who has just failed the first year of a law degree and is hard up, put up a notice on the fence: "Danger — Keep Out — No Liability Accepted." 
Damian, an adult, entered the waste ground through a hole in the fence, intending to burgle Charles' house.
On his way across the waste ground he tripped over some rusty car parts and was injured.
His action would be determined by whether a duty was owed.
One does not normally anticipate the presence of a burglar.
If a duty was held to be owed, then it would probably be discharged by the warning notice.
In any event Damian would probably be volenti or the court could apply the maxim ex turpi causa.
Elvis, an eight year old, entered the waste ground by a hole in the fence to explore.
He was injured by drinking petrol from a can left in the boot of one of the cars.
The court would have to consider whether a duty was owed.
The key factor would be whether the presence of the trespasser should have been anticipated by Charles.
Warning and volenti would not appear to have any chance of success in this case.
If the duty is unexcludable Elvis would appear to have a good chance of success.
Floella, the child of an ex-friend of Charles, was left in Charles's care.
She wandered into the waste ground to play and was injured by rusty metal.
Floella is a visitor and would be owed the common duty of care.
It appears likely on the facts that the duty would be broken.
But if Floella's parents were aware of the notice, would Charles have succeeded in excluding liability?
LANDLORD'S LIABILITY
Introduction
The liability of a landlord to a person injured as a result of defective premises is complex.
The tenant may have a remedy in contract based on the lease if he is injured and the landlord has broken a covenant to repair.
The landlord could be an occupier of part of the premises and be liable under the Occupier's Liability Acts.
(See "Occupier's liability" , pp. 107–9, for the test for occupier.
Normally the landlord will part with control of the premises after the lease and no occupier's liability action will be possible against him.
The common law was opposed to actions in tort and the landlord was immune from a tort action in respect of dangerous premises (Cavalier v Pope [1906]AC 428).
Liability in negligence
The immunity of a landlord from actions in negligence was confirmed by the Court of Appeal in 1984.
The plaintiff was a tenant in a council flat designed and built by the defendants.
He put his hand through a glass panel and was injured.
He sued the council for letting a flat with a dangerous feature.
It was held that there was no duty of care on landlords to ensure that premises were reasonably safe at the time of the letting.
Rimmer v Liverpool City Council [1984]1 All ER 930
It was held that the defendants owed a duty of care as designers and builders of the flat and were liable under that head.
Statutory liability
The Defective Premises Act 1972 contains two provisions in relation to the landlord's position.
Section 3
Section 3 states: Where work of construction, repair, maintenance or demolition or any other work is done on or in relation to premises, any duty of care owed, because of the doing of the work, to persons who might reasonably be expected to be affected by defects in the state of the premises created by the doing of the work shall not be abated by subsequent disposal of the premises by the person who owed the duty.
This section does no more than restate the common law position and could be considered superfluous.
It does not apply to a failure to do work or to work carried out after the letting.
Section 4
Of more practical importance is s. 4.
(1) Where premises are let under a tenancy which puts on the landlord an obligation to the tenant for the maintenance or repair of the premises, the landlord owes to all persons who might reasonably be expected to be affected by defects in the state of the premises a duty to take such care as is reasonable in all the circumstances to see that they are reasonably safe from personal injury or from damage to their property caused by a relevant defect.
(2) The said duty is owed if the landlord knows (whether as the result of being notified by the tenant or otherwise) or if he ought in all the circumstances to have known of the relevant defect.
For this section to apply, the landlord must be under an obligation to the tenant for the maintenance or repair of the premises, or he must have an express or implied right or power to enter the premises to carry out any description of maintenance or repair.
The obligation may arise from an express term in the lease or may be implied by statute: e.g. the Landlord and Tenant Act 1985, ss. 11 and 12, which require the landlord to repair the exterior and structure of premises, where the lease of a dwelling house is for less than seven years.
This provision cannot be contracted out of.
The duty will be owed where the landlord knows, or ought to have known, of a defect which would constitute a breach of his obligation to the tenant to repair the premises.
The duty will be owed to the tenant, residents, neighbours and passers-by on the highway.
Whether a trespasser would be a foreseeable plaintiff is not known.
It should be noted that in the case of injury to neighbours and highway users there is an overlap between this section and the law of nuisance.
(See "Nuisance" , p. 180.
Example
Albert let a dwelling house on a monthly tenancy to Brenda.
Due to high winds the chimney stack became unsafe.
Brenda pointed this out to Albert, who took no remedial action.
The chimney collapsed and fell to the ground.
Part of the chimney fell through the roof and injured Carol, Brenda's daughter.
Albert is under a statutory obligation to repair the structure.
He was aware of the need for repair and did nothing.
He is therefore in breach of s. 4 and Carol would have an action under this section.
Donald was sitting in a deck chair in his garden next door, when part of the chimney fell on him.
He would have an action under s. 4 and in private nuisance.
Edith was walking on the highway outside the house when she was injured.
Edith would have an action under s. 4 and an action in public nuisance.
BUILDER'S LIABILITY
Introduction
The expression builder is used in the sense of all persons involved in the construction and sale of buildings.
This includes developers, builders, sub-contractors, architects, surveyors, civil engineers and local authorities.
In a typical example, the land will be bought by a development company; a geological survey done by surveyors; plans drawn up by architects; the plans  submitted to the local authority for approval and to check that they comply with the Building Regulations, which lay down minimum standards for public health and safety; a builder engaged to construct the houses, who may sub-contract certain aspects of the work to specialist firms.
The builder and the development company may be the same entity.
Each house will then be sold to a purchaser,(P1) who after a number of years may sell it to another purchaser (P2).
The house may show a defect a number of years after construction.
A recurring problem is cracks caused by the fact that the foundations were of the wrong depth or made from the wrong materials.
The house needs remedial action to make it safe, but who has to bear the cost of this work?
If no work is done, then the house will eventually collapse and may cause personal injuries to the occupants.
Take an example.
The house was built by B and completed in 1987.
The plans were approved and work in progress inspected by LA.
In 1987 the house was sold to P1.
In 1989 P1 sold the house to P2.
In 1990 a crack appeared in one of the walls.
An engineer's report states that the foundations are defective and that the house will need underpinning and the foundations repaired.
The cost of this work is £30,000.
What category does the damage fall into: physical damage or economic loss?
The courts have taken the view that this is economic loss.
If, for example, the house had collapsed and damaged an adjacent property, the damage to the adjacent property would be classed as physical damage, damage to other property.
In practical terms P2's most important protection would be the National House Building Council Scheme.
This scheme applies to registered builders and developers.
A purchaser of such a house obtains a House Purchaser's Agreement from the vendor.
This provides that the house will be built in an efficient and workmanlike manner, with proper materials and be fit for human habitation.
The vendor agrees to remedy any defects at his own expense in the first two years, where the defect arises from a breach of NHBC standards.
Any major damage to the building which occurs within ten years is covered by an insurance policy.
The agreement can be transferred with the house.
If the house is covered by the scheme, then P2 may be able to have the work done on this basis.
If not, what legal remedies does P2 have?
The diagram sets out the situation.
It can be seen that any contractual remedy that P2 has would be against P1.
However, private sales of houses are subject to the doctrine of caveat emptor(let the buyer beware).
P1 is not under a contractual duty to tell P2 of any defects he is aware of, unless P2 specifically asks.
The defect in any case may not have been known at the time of the sale.
The chances are that P2 will have no contract action against P1.
As P2 is not in privity of contract with B, he has no contract action against him.
This leaves two possibilities.
Statutory liability
Parliament created a limited form of protection from builders with the Defective Premises Act 1972.
Section 1(1) imposes on builders, sub-contractors, architects and other professional persons a three part duty: that the work will be done in a workmanlike manner, proper materials will be used, and the house will be fit for human habitation.
The duty only applies in respect of dwellings and does not apply to commercial or industrial properties.
The duty is owed to the person to whose order the building is provided and to every person who acquires an interest in the dwelling.
This means that the doctrine of privity of contract does not apply, and P2 in the example would have a theoretical claim against B.
Liability under the section is strict, in the sense that fault does not have to be proved against the builder.
The duty cannot be excluded.
The limitation period is for six years from the date on which the dwelling was completed.
P2 would therefore have until 1993 to commence proceedings under the section.
In many cases of defective buildings, however, the defect does not become apparent until many years after the building was completed.
By the time the occupier realises that there is an action he is statute barred.
The major drawback with the section is that it does not apply where the dwelling is protected by an NHBC scheme (s. 2).
As the scheme applies to nearly all new dwellings, the Act is usually limited to alterations and conversions.
If the house in the example was covered by the scheme, P2 would have no action under the section.
The Court of Appeal has recently held that the section applies to nonfeasance as well as misfeasance (Andrews v Schooling [1991]3 All ER 723).
A failure to carry out necessary work would give rise to liability.
If the dwelling was without some necessary attribute such as a damp course or a roof, then it would be unfit for habitation, even though the problems resulting from the lack of the attribute had not then become apparent.
Negligence liability
In the 1970s the courts embarked on a massive extension of the builder's liability in negligence.
They created a duty of care imposed on builders and owed to foreseeable victims of their negligence.
As the loss to an owner-occupier was economic loss, the courts sidestepped the problems this presented by framing the duty in terms of not constructing a building which was a danger to the health and safety of the occupier (Anns v Merton London Borough Council [1978]AC 728).
In the example, P2 would have had a negligence action against B. The measure of damages would have been the amount required to make the house safe for occupation, i.e. £30,000.
As the building trade is notoriously unstable financially and B might have gone out of business, many actions were brought against local authorities for negligently approving plans or negligent inspection of houses under construction.
From about 1983 the courts started to rein back the development they had unleashed.
The specific reasons for this are not known but are connected with the wider trend of not allowing claims for economic loss in negligence actions.
The courts may also have been influenced by the rising premiums which had to be paid by anyone involved in the construction of buildings.
This rise was a result of successful actions being brought under the negligence principle.
The retrenchment by the courts took place in two House of Lords cases but it is unlikely that the problem has been solved.
A firm of builders undertook construction work on a block of flats and sub-contracted the plastering work, which was carried out negligently.
The result was that 15 years later the plaster was loose and needed replacement.
The plaintiffs, who were lessees and occupiers of a flat in the block, sued the builders for the cost of remedial work already performed and the cost of future remedial work.
D & F Estates Ltd v Church Commissioners for England [1988]2 All ER 992
The House of Lords held that in the absence of a contractual relationship between the parties, the cost of repairing a defect in the structure, which was discovered before the defect had caused personal injury or physical damage to other property, was not recoverable in a negligence action.
The cost of doing the repairs was economic loss which was not recoverable in a negligence action, except within the Hedley Byrne principle, or on the unique proximity of Junior Books v Veitchi.
A number of doubts were left by this decision.
The idea of a complex structure was introduced.
If the building is regarded as a complex structure, then damage to one part of the structure, caused by a hidden defect in another part, could be treated as damage to other property.
The position of local authorities was also left unclear until the next case, which represents the present law.
The plaintiff purchased a pair of semi-detached houses from a construction company.
The houses had been built on a concrete raft on an infilled site.
The raft was defective and settlement occurred causing serious cracks to appear in the houses.
It was alleged that the defendant council had negligently approved plans for the construction of the raft.
The plaintiff's case was based on the argument that repair was necessary in order to avert a present or imminent danger to the health or safety of the occupant.
Gas and drainage pipes had broken as a result of the settlement and there was a risk of further breaks.
Murphy v Brentwood District Council [1990]2 All ER 908
The House of Lords held that the council was not liable for the plaintiff's loss, which was economic and not within the accepted categories.
The decision is logical, in the sense that it places local authorities in the same position as other builders.
They are not liable in negligence for the cost of remedial measures caused by a defect in the building's construction.
The House considered the complex structure point in D & F Estates.
They considered that a building or product cannot be regarded as a complex structure if it has been wholly constructed or manufactured by one person, so as to form a single indivisible unit.
The idea of a complex structure can be applied to equipment manufactured by different suppliers, e.g. central heating boilers.
A number of points remain unclear after the decision.
(a) Whether a local authority is liable for breach of statutory duty and to what extent.
(b) Whether the local authority will be liable for personal injury or property damage suffered by occupiers of houses which have been inspected and the Building Regulations not complied with.
The decision has since been applied in Department of the Environment v Thomas Bates & Son Ltd [1990]2 All ER 943.
In the example, neither B nor the local authority would be liable in negligence for the cost of repair to P2's house.
The cost of remedying the defect is economic loss and neither party owes a duty of care to P2 in that respect.
QUESTION
Peabody Park is owned and maintained by the Peabody Trust.
Admission to the public is granted on payment of 50 pence.
This done by placing a 50 pence piece in a ticket dispensing machine.
Each ticket bears the words: "For conditions of entry see notice in Park office." 
The conditions referred to include the clause: "The Trust shall not be liable for damage to visitors or their property whether caused by negligence or otherwise." 
Bertram paid his 50 pence and entered the park.
He was badly injured when a rowing boat, which he took on the lake sank, because it had not been properly maintained by the Trust.
Clarence entered the park at the request of the Trust to repair the gas cooker in the cafeteria.
He suffered personal injuries when the cooker exploded.
Dick, an eight year old boy, entered the park through a hole in the fence, after the park had closed.
He was attracted by some bright red berries on a bush.
The berries were poisonous and a notice to this effect was attached to the bush.
Dick suffered personal injuries after eating the berries.
Advise Bertram, Clarence and Dick as to their legal position.
Suggested approach
This question is on occupier's liability for defective premises.
Although an area of negligence, liability is governed by statute, the Occupiers' Liability Acts 1957 and 1984.
Liability in such case falls on the occupier of the premises.
This term is not defined by either Act and was considered by the House of Lords in Wheat v Lacon (1966).
In order to be an occupier a person had to have sufficient control over the premises.
In this case the Peabody Trust will be the occupier.
In order to determine which Act is applicable it is necessary to determine the status of the plaintiff.
If the plaintiff is a visitor, then the 1957 Act will apply.
If the plaintiff is a trespasser, the 1984 Act.
Bertram and Clarence would be classed as visitors as they come lawfully onto the land.
Dick is a trespasser, as the occupier was unaware of his presence and if he had known of his presence, would have objected to it.
As Bertram is a visitor, the Trust will owe him the common duty of care under s. 2(2) of the 1957 Act.
This is a duty to take reasonable care for the visitor's safety for the purposes for  which he was permitted to be there.
Bertram is also a contractual entrant.
If the contract is silent as to the duty owed to the visitor, then the common duty of care in the Act will apply.
Prior to the Act the courts had drawn a distinction between the occupancy duty, which was concerned with dangers due to the state of the premises, and the activity duty, which was concerned with the occupier's activities on his premises.
Is a rowing boat within the occupancy or the activity duty?
There is no clear case as to whether the Act applies to the activity duty.
However, s. 1(3) (a) states that the Act applies to fixed and moveable structures, this could include a rowing boat.
Bertram might be well advised to bring his action in the alternative, under the Act and in common law negligence.
What effect would the notice on the ticket have?
As Bertram is a contractual entrant, any terms of the contract would have to be brought to his attention at or before, the time when the contract is made.
This would be when the money was placed in the ticket machine.
It would appear that the Trust have failed to include the notice in the machine as a term of the contract (Thornton v Shoe Lane Parking).
If they have, what is the effect of the term?
It attempts to exclude liability.
Would the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 apply?
This would depend on an interpretation of s. 1(3).
Are the premises being used for business purposes?
If they are then the Act will apply.
Under s. 2(1) liability for death or personal injuries caused by negligence cannot be excluded.
The notice does not appear to operate as a warning and neither could it raise the defence of volenti non fit injuria (Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, s. 2(3)).
As Bertram is owed a duty of care, the Trust would appear to be in breach of duty by failing to maintain the boat, and Bertram has suffered damage as a result.
Bertram would appear to have an action.
Clarence is also a visitor to the premises and is owed the common duty of care.
Section 2(3) (a) of the 1957 Act provides that where a person enters in the exercise of his calling, the occupier may expect that that person will appreciate and guard against risks which are ordinarily incident to that calling (Roles v Nathan and General Cleaning Contractors v Christmas).
However, the fact that a person has a specific skill will not absolve an occupier who has not exercised a sufficient degree of care (Ogwo v Taylor).
Liability in this case would depend on why the cooker exploded.
If Clarence had lit a cigarette and that caused the explosion, then the Trust would be under no liability.
But if Clarence had exercised reasonable care, the court would have to decide whether the Trust were at fault.
Dick is a trespasser and any duty owed would be under the 1984 Act.
The fact that the relationship of occupier-trespasser is established does not establish a duty of care.
It is necessary to apply s. 1(3) of the Act.
If the plaintiff satisfies these three requirements then a duty will be owed.
(NB in an examination a student would be expected to set out and apply these requirements.)
If a duty is owed, the court would have to determine whether there had been a breach.
The standard of care is the usual negligence one of reasonable care (s. 1(4)).
Would the notice displayed next to the berries suffice as a warning within s. 1(5)?
This would appear to depend upon the age of the trespasser.
If a duty had been held to be owed to Dick then the occupier had cause to appreciate the presence of the child and the premises would have to be reasonably safe for a child trespasser and an obstacle to entry erected.
Although the case is similar on the facts to Glasgow Corpn v Taylor, the approach on the statute might be different from the old common law approach.
What may be important is how Dick got into the park and whether reasonable steps were taken to prevent this.
11 Defective products
INTRODUCTION
After a product is manufactured and put into circulation liability is governed primarily by the chain of contracts between the manufacturer and the ultimate user.
Example
Alice bought a hot water bottle from a retailer which did not give off any heat.
The product is defective in the sense that is not of the standard that Alice expected.
Alice would have an action for breach of contract against the retailer and could utilise the Sale of Goods Act 1979, ss. 14(2) and 14(3).
The product is not of merchantable quality and it is not fit for the purpose for which it was sold.
The retailer in turn would have an action for breach of contract against the wholesaler and the wholesaler against the manufacturer.
The loss would then be carried by the person responsible for the defect.
This theory has two problems which arise when the chain of contracts breaks down.
First, if the retailer became insolvent, then Alice would have no contractual remedy.
Similarly, any insolvency along the chain would destroy the particular contract action.
Further up the chain there may be an exclusion clause which would prevent any contract action.
The manufacturer may have sold to the wholesaler on the basis that he would not be responsible for any claims for defective quality.
Second, if Alice gave the hot water bottle to Bert as a present, then Bert would be a donnee and have no contract with anyone.
This was the position of the plaintiff in Donoghue v Stevenson.
So far we have looked at the defectiveness of the product.
What would be the position if the product was dangerous rather then merely defective.
If Alice or Bert filled it with hot water and it leaked causing injury, would either of them have an action?
The modern position is that they may have an action for negligence, or under the Consumer Protection Act 1987.
Looking at the claims in terms of types of damage.
A claim that the product is not as good as the purchaser expected is a claim for economic loss, which traditionally should be brought in contract.
A claim that the product is dangerous and has caused personal injuries or damage to other property (i.e. other than the product itself) is a claim for physical damage and can be brought in either contract, tort or under statute.
Prior to 1932 the courts refused to allow the chain of contracts to be disturbed by tort actions.
The view was that people ordered their affairs on the basis of their contractual liability and to allow a third party to sue in tort would upset this arrangement.
This was the privity fallacy (see "Duty of Care" , p. 28).
Developments before 1932 were limited to where the product was dangerous in itself or where the danger was actually known to the transferor.
In Donoghue v Stevenson in 1932 the House of Lords shaped a general theory of manufacturer's liability in tort for products.
This is known as the narrow rule.
The tortious principle gives protection to the ultimate consumer of a product where the product has caused physical damage.
The action lies against the manufacturer of the product where he has been negligent.
Generally speaking, there is no tort action where the product is merely defective and has not caused any physical damage.
In the example, no claim in tort would lie if the hot water bottle did not give off enough heat.
A claim would lie for scalded feet.
Either Alice or Bert could bring such a claim if they suffered damage.
The common law was perceived to have certain defects and there was pressure from the EEC to harmonise consumer safety law across the Community.
This resulted in the passing of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 which introduces a strict liability regime for defective products.
A consumer who suffers physical damage from a defective product now has a choice between the common law and the statutory actions.
THE NARROW RULE IN DONOGHUE v STEVENSON
Introduction
Lord Atkin laid down the narrow rule in Donoghue v Stevenson [1932]AC 562: A manufacturer of products, which he sells in such a form as to show that he intends them to reach the ultimate consumer in the form in which they left him with no reasonable possibility of intermediate examination, and with the knowledge that the absence of reasonable care in the preparation or putting up of the products will result in  an injury to the consumer's life or property, owes a duty to the consumer to take reasonable care.
This quotation sets out all the points required for an action.
The relevant points will be looked at in turn.
Who owes the duty?
The duty is owed by manufacturers.
This expression has been widely interpreted by the courts as meaning anyone responsible for putting into circulation a product which is not reasonably safe.
It has therefore been applied to manufacturers in the conventional sense: retailers, wholesalers, repairers of products (such as garages), assemblers and those who hire and lease goods.
It might appear strange to classify a retailer as a manufacturer but this will only happen where he is under a duty to inspect the goods and fails to do so.
It would also appear that the rule applies to realty and could be applied to the builder of a house and possibly a local authority building inspector.
A duty to whom?
The duty is owed to consumers.
The consumer is anyone whom the manufacturer should foresee would be affected by the product.
This will include purchasers, donnees, borrowers, employees of a purchaser and bystanders who happen to be injured.
The plaintiff pedestrian was struck on the leg by a part of the wheel of the defendant's lorry, which came off as it was being driven along the road.
The defendants had repaired the wheel shortly before the accident and were held to be manufacturers.
As the repair had been carried out negligently and the plaintiff was a consumer, the action succeeded.
Stennett v Hancock [1939]2 All ER 578
Products
The original rule applied to food and drink but has now been extended to cover all manufactured products.
It has been held to cover motor vehicles, lifts, clothes, cleaning fluids and buildings.
The rule extends to the packaging in which the goods are supplied.
Breach of duty
The plaintiff must prove that the manufacturer failed to take reasonable care in the preparation or putting up of the product.
In practice this will mean identifying a breakdown in the production process, failure to give adequate instructions for use or a defective design.
Problems with the  production process may be demonstrated by showing an impurity which should have been removed before the product was put into circulation.
The plaintiff contracted dermatitis because of excessive sulphites in underwear manufactured by the defendants.
The sulphites had been negligently left in the underwear by the defendants during the manufacturing process, although they could not have been detected by any reasonable examination.
The defendants were held liable in negligence.
It was important that the underwear was intended to be worn as supplied and no instructions to wash before using were given.
Grant v Australia Knitting Mills Ltd [1936]AC 85
Alternatively the plaintiff may complain that the product was in itself inadequately constructed.
If a car manufacturer becomes aware of a significant number of a particular fault on one of its models, then a failure to recall the cars for a check may amount to negligence (Walton v British Leyland (1978)).
Design defects may pose more serious problems.
If the manufacturer is producing at the limits of scientific knowledge, then he may not be able to foresee injury being caused by his product.
This is particularly acute with the development of new drugs, as adverse side effects may not be foreseeable.
The product must be supplied with instructions for use and adequate warning of any known danger.
If a warning has been given, then on causation grounds this may mean some other person is liable.
Typical examples of instructions and warnings can be found on household paints.
The consumer will be informed to keep the product away from his eyes but if it does get in the eyes, to wash them out and seek medical advice.
Proof of negligence
The burden of proof is on the plaintiff to establish that the product was defective, that the injury was caused by that defect, and that the injury was caused by the manufacturer's lack of reasonable care.
This may appear to place a heavy burden on the plaintiff but it has been held that he does not have to identify the exact person responsible for the defect (Grant v Australian Knitting Mills).
Negligence may be inferred from the fact that the product left the manufacturer in a defective state.
This leaves the manufacturer with the problem of proving that his employees were not negligent and that he was using a safe system.
This appears to be very close to the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
Causation
Causation in defective product cases works on the basis of showing that the goods were intended to reach the consumer in the form in which they left the manufacturer (alternative cause) and that there was no reasonable possibility of intermediate examination.
(a) Alternative cause The manufacturer is only liable for damage caused by his own negligence.
If another person in the chain of distribution or natural wear and tear has caused the defect, then the manufacturer will be not liable.
It is important that the product reaches the plaintiff in the same form that it left the manufacturer.
This is not to be taken literally.
The product does not have to remain in the packaging and the mere possibility of someone having tampered with the goods is not sufficient to exonerate the defendant.
If the product has been assembled, checked or altered, then this may provide an alternative explanation for the defect.
The plaintiff bought a car fitted with a windscreen made by the defendants.
One year later the windscreen shattered and injured passengers in the car.
It was held that the plaintiff had to show it was more probable than not that the injury was due to faulty manufacture.
He was unable to do this as it was possible that the cause of the defect was faulty fitting.
Evans v Triplex Glass Co Ltd [1936]1 All ER 283
(b) Intermediate examination Where it is reasonable to expect someone to inspect the goods before they are used, the manufacturer may not be regarded as the cause of the damage.
If the goods were examined and the defect was negligently not identified, this makes the examiner a cause of the damage.
It is not sufficient that someone had an opportunity to examine the goods, it must be shown that the manufacturer could reasonably expect that person to make an examination.
For example, it would not be reasonable for a manufacturer to expect that a person would wash underwear before using it.
The first defendants lent a grinding tool owned by the second defendants to the plaintiff.
An employee of the second defendant had fitted an incorrect part to the tool and the plaintiff was injured.
The first defendants were liable because they had an opportunity to examine the tool.
The second defendants were liable because they could not rely on such an examination taking place.
Griffiths v Arch Engineering Co [1968]3 All ER 217
Where the manufacturer has issued a warning that tests should be carried out before use, it is reasonable to expect an examination.
The manufacturers sold chemicals to the second defendants with a warning that they should be tested before use.
The second defendants sold the chemicals to a teacher without the warning.
The plaintiff child was injured when the chemical exploded during a school experiment.
Her action against the school (the first defendants) failed but she recovered from the second defendants.
Their claim for an indemnity from the manufacturers failed as they had been given an adequate warning and ignored it.
Kubach v Hollands [1937]3 All ER 907
The narrow rule states that the manufacturer's negligence must result in damage to the consumer's life or property.
A claim under the rule will therefore be for physical damage, consisting of personal injuries or damage to the consumer's property.
It would also appear that any consequential economic loss may be recovered.
Damage
The plaintiff cannot recover damages if his claim is that the product is not worth as much as he expected.
This is classed as economic loss and subject to Junior Books v Veitchi, is only recoverable in a contract action.
The plaintiff's lobsters died after the failure of a pump to oxygenate the water where they were kept.
The pump manufacturer was held liable for the value of the lobsters (property damage) but not for the costs of buying and attempting to repair the pumps.
Neither was there any liability for loss of profit on the sale of the lobsters.
Muirhead v Industrial Tank Specialities Ltd [1985]3 All ER 705
Problems with the common law
The common law on defective products was subjected to a number of criticisms.
The plaintiff may have great difficulty in proving causation as in Evans v Triplex Glass.
Proof of fault also presents difficulties, especially in cases where the state of technical knowledge was not sufficient to enable the manufacturer to avoid injury, or where the cost to the manufacturer of taking precautions outweighed the risk.
The law on recovery of economic loss presents problems where the consumer was a donnee, or where insolvency prevents a contract action.
Finally it is usually difficult to establish a negligence action against a supplier of goods, although a contract action may often be available.
The European Economic Community produced a Directive on product liability in 1985 (Directive 85/374/EEC) and member states were given three years to introduce national laws which complied with the directive.
In 1987 the Consumer Protection Act was passed with the intention of bringing English law into line with the provisions of the Directive.
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT 1987
Introduction
Liability for defective products is covered by Part I of the Act.
Its purpose is to introduce a strict liability regime on producers of defective products.
The intention is that the producer should insure the product against its potential for causing harm.
The basic principle of the Act is in s. 2(1): "Where any damage is caused wholly or  partly by a defect in a product, every person to whom subsection (2)…applies shall be liable for the damage." 
The Directive allowed a margin of discretion in introducing national laws but where problems arise over interpretation of the Act reference may be had to the Directive.
Who can be sued
Section 2(2) provides a list of those who can be sued under the Act 
(a) Producers
A producer is defined by s. 1(2) as:(i) the manufacturer (ii) the person who wins or abstracts products (iii) the person who carries out an industrial or other process which adds an essential characteristic to a product which has not been won, abstracted or manufactured.
An example of this would be the freezing of vegetables.
A problem arises with a product finished by one producer but defective because of parts supplied by another.
The supplier of the finished product will normally be liable for the supply, provided the finished product is covered by the Act.
Where the finished product is exempt from the Act, then the manufacturer is not liable where the defectiveness arises solely from the component part (s. 1(3)).
An important exception to this principle exists in the case of buildings.
The builder is not liable in respect of supply of the building but is liable for defective components used to construct the building (s. 46(3)).
(b) Suppliers and importers
In order to make the plaintiff's task easier, the Act makes provision for him to sue own-branders, suppliers and importers in certain circumstances.
(i) Own-branders.
A person who puts his own name on a product, thereby holding himself out as a producer, will be treated as a producer.
This would apply to supermarket chains who sell goods under their own name which are manufactured by someone else (s. 2(2) (b)).
(ii) Importers.
A person who, in the course of a business, imports a product into the European Community from outside, is deemed to be a producer (s. 2(2) (c)).
(iii) Suppliers.
If it is not possible to identify the producer or importer of a product, the Act provides for liability on the part of another supplier (s. 2(3)).
This is likely to be the person who supplies the consumer.
It is necessary that a person supplied a defective product for there to be liability and this supply must be in the course of a business.
The supply does not need to be to the ultimate consumer.
For a supplier (as opposed to a manufacturer) to be liable, four requirements have to be satisfied.
(a) The consumer must have asked the supplier to identify the producer (s. 2(3) (a)).
(b) The request by the consumer must have occurred within a reasonable time of the occurrence of the damage (s. 2(3) (b)).
(c) It must have become impracticable for the consumer to identify the actual producer (s. 2(3) (b)).
(d) The supplier must have failed within a reasonable time of the request, to comply with it or to identify the person who supplied him with the product (s. 2(3) (c)).
Example
James purchases a tin of baked beans from Megastores.
The beans contain an impurity which causes James to become violently ill.
The beans were sold as Megabeans but were manufactured for Megastores by Beaneasy.
Megastore will be liable under the Act to James as suppliers/own-branders unless they comply with the four conditions.
Compliance with the conditions means that Megastore are not liable, even if Beaneasy are insolvent and James has no effective remedy against them.
Products
Products are defined in s. 1(2): "any goods or electricity and…includes a product which is comprised in another product, whether by virtue of being a component part or raw material or otherwise" .
Further definition is provided by s. 45(1) to include substances, growing crops, things comprised in land by virtue of being attached to it, ships, aircraft and vehicles.
Certain things are specifically exempted:(a) A building supplied by way of a creation or disposal of an interest in land is exempt (s. 46(4)).
(b) Nuclear power is also exempt (s. 6(8)).
(c) Agricultural produce which has not undergone an industrial process is exempt (s. 2(4)).
This would cover processes such as packaging, canning and possibly freezing.
The Act requires that the process change the essential characteristics of the product.
Whether freezing does so is questionable.
Where a process has been undertaken, then the producer is liable for pre-existing defects in the product, as well as those he introduces himself.
Defectiveness
Section 3(1) provides: "there is a defect in a product…if the safety of the product is not such as persons generally are entitled to expect" .
In considering what is meant by "safety" , s. 3(2) provides that all the circumstances shall be taken into account including:(a) the manner in which, and purposes for which, the product has been marketed, its get-up, the use of any mark in relation to the product and any instructions for, or warnings with respect to, doing or refraining from doing anything in relation to the product;
(b) what might reasonably be expected to be done with or in relation to the product; and
(c) the time which the product was supplied by its producer to another.
The gist of the section is that the product must be safe but the Act has no application if it is useless.
Marketing and get-up etc.
The court will have to consider a number of factors.
What was the market that the product was aimed at and what sort of advertising was used?
If the product is a child's toy then the target market will clearly be important.
The instructions supplied with the product will need to be taken into account.
A more controversial point is the court taking into account the purposes for which the product has been marketed.
Does this enable the court to take into account the comparative social utility of the product and apply a cost-benefit analysis?
In the case of drugs, would the court be able to say that the risk was worthwhile given the benefits that the drug would bring?
It is clear from the section that the producer can negative his liability by providing a suitable warning of any danger, and the warning enables the consumer to avoid the danger.
Reasonable expectations as to use
Where the defect arises from a production defect which renders the product unsafe, then liability will attach under the Act.
If the defect is in design then greater difficulties are created.
The court may have to balance the risk against the benefits in deciding whether the decision to market the product was justified.
The conduct of the consumer may also be relevant where he has put the product to a use for which it was not intended.
A producer of microwave ovens would not be liable where the consumer used the oven to dry a poodle and the dog died.
The question of warnings may be relevant here.
A failure to warn that a product is not suitable for a particular purpose may give rise to liability: e.g. that fireworks are not suitable for indoor use.
If the use of the product is clearly out of line with reasonable expectations (e.g. the poodle) then failure to give a warning will not be fatal.
Time of supply
Safety is to be judged in terms of the time when the product was supplied.
Developments in safety after that time will not make the producer liable if his product has not conformed to them.
If furniture was supplied by a producer in 1988 with a certain type of filling and in 1992 a series of fires involving that filling gave rise to new safety features, the producer would be judged by safety standards in 1988 not 1992.
This, of course, is subject to the question of whether the producer should have recalled the furniture if the risk was great, or issued warnings to retailers to pass on to consumers.
Causation
The plaintiff must prove that the producer has put the product into circulation, that the product was defective and that the defect has caused damage within the meaning of the Act.
Actions under the Act differ from those at common law in that the consumer does not have to prove fault, but causation still needs to be established and the burden of proof is on the consumer.
The defect need not be the sole cause of the damage.
It is sufficient that it was partly responsible for the damage.
Where the damage results partly from a defect in the finished product and partly from a defective component, this will be sufficient to make the producer liable.
In some cases it may be the consumer's conduct that is regarded as the sole cause of the damage: e.g. the poodle in the microwave oven.
Damage
Losses which can be claimed for under the Act are death, personal injuries and any loss of or damage to property (s. 5(1)).
Certain limitations are placed on property damage.
(a) No award may be made where the amount is less than £275.
(b) The property must have been intended for private use, occupation or consumption.
There is no liability under the Act for damage to business property.
(c) The claim may not include damages for damage to the defective product itself.
Defences
The defences are contained in s. 4.
(a) If the product complies with a mandatory Community or statutory obligation, this is a defence (s. 4(1) (a)).
(b) If the producer can prove that the defect came about after the time of supply  by him, this will provide a defence (s. 4(1) (d)).
To establish this defence the producer must prove that the defect was not present at the time of supply by him.
(c) Where the defendant can show that: "the state of scientific and technical knowledge at the relevant time was not such that a producer of products of the same description as the product in question might be expected to have discovered the defect if it had existed in his products while they were under his control" (s. 4(1) (e)).
Member states were allowed a discretion as to whether to include a state of the art defence and its inclusion is controversial as states which do have the defence could become testing grounds for new products.
If the defence is used by a drug manufacturer where a new drug has caused damage to users, then provided he can show that laboratory tests showed no defects, he would be justified in marketing the drug while testing is still under way.
It would appear that the effect of the section will be to apply a fault based regime to new products.
The producer will only be liable where he knew or ought reasonably to have known of the defect.
The burden of proof will however rest on the defendant.
(d) Contributory negligence.
The Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945 applies (s. 6(4)).
The court therefore has the power to apportion damages where the plaintiff has been partly to blame for the harm suffered.
Limitation
The limitation period for actions under the Act runs for three years from the date on which the damage was caused by the defective product.
Alternatively for three years from the date on which the damage could have reasonably been discovered (Limitation Act 1980, s. 11A(4)).
There is a long stop provision which prevents any action against the producer more than ten years from the date on which the product was first put into circulation (s. 11A(3)).
QUESTION
Pyro buys from Dynamight Ltd a box of fireworks manufactured by Sparky Ltd.
Pyro asks whether any of the fireworks can be used indoors.
Harriet, the shop assistant says, "I don't suppose the sparklers would cause any harm inside." 
On Bonfire night, Pyro puts on a firework display.
He reads the instructions on a firework called a roman candle.
These state, incorrectly, that the firework can be held in the hand.
As a  result of this Pyro and his daughter Nancy, who is standing beside him, are both badly injured.
At the same time Harry, Pyro's son, takes a lighted sparkler into the house.
A spark from this firework starts a fire in Pyro's kitchen which causes considerable damage.
Dynamight Ltd have now gone into liquidation.
Advise Pyro and Nancy.
Suggested approach
The primary remedy of the purchaser of a defective product lies in contract against the retailer.
Pyro has a contract with Dynamight Ltd and terms of merchantable quality and fitness for the purpose would be implied into the contract under the Sale of Goods Act 1979, ss. 14(2) and 14(3).
However, any contract action against Dynamight would be pointless as the judgment could probably not be enforced.
Does Pyro have an action against Sparky Ltd?
There are two possibilities.
An action under the Consumer Protection Act 1987 or under the "narrow rule" in Donoghue v Stevenson in negligence.
The purpose of the Consumer Protection Act was to introduce a strict liability regime on producers of defective products.
The basic principle of the Act is in s. 2(2).
Where any damage is caused wholly or partly by a defect in a product, any person to whom subsection (2) applies shall be liable.
The action is brought against producers of defective products.
A producer is defined by s. 2(2) as the manufacturer.
Sparky Ltd are the manufacturers of the product and therefore the defendants.
The producer will be liable for any defect in the product which causes damage.
A defect is defined by s. 3(1).
There is a defect if the safety of the product is not such as persons generally are entitled to expect.
Section 3(2) states that all the circumstances are to be taken into account.
These include the purposes for which the product has been manufactured and any instructions or warnings with respect to doing or refraining from doing anything in relation to the product.
What might reasonably be expected to be done with the product?
Pyro has suffered two items of damage.
As regards his personal injuries there is no warning that the firework cannot be held in the hand.
This could amount to a defect.
If so, Pyro has an action under the Act as personal injuries are covered by the Act (s. 5(1)) and none of the defences would appear to be relevant, unless Pyro is held to be contributorily negligent, when his damages would be reduced.
The damage to the kitchen is more difficult.
Again the case would turn on whether the sparklers were defective.
Should a warning have been included that they were not suitable for indoor use?
Probably it should have been, as this is a use which the producer should expect the product to be put to.
A failure to give the warning may amount to a defect.
Provided Pyro's loss exceeds pound; 275, Pyro would have a claim.
If Pyro has a claim under the Act for his personal injuries, then Nancy will also be successful.
The Act does not define consumer, but Nancy definitely falls into this category.
Both Pyro and Nancy may have a claim in negligence for their injuries under the narrow rule in Donoghue v Stevenson.
Pyro may also have a claim for his property damage.
Sparky is a manufacturer within the rule and Pyro and Nancy are consumers.
A consumer is anyone that the manufacturer should foresee would be affected by the product.
The fireworks are products within the rule.
The difference between an action under the Act and a negligence action, is that in the latter the plaintiff must show that the defendant was negligent, i.e. that he failed to take reasonable care in the preparation and putting up of the product.
This covers  instructions for use and warnings.
The defendant may escape liability if there is an alternative cause for the defect, or the damage could have been avoided by intermediate examination.
Would the retailer's failure to warn of the dangers amount to reasonable examination?
12 Breach of statutory duty
INTRODUCTION
Where a statute imposes a duty on a person, breach of that duty may give rise to an action for damages by a person injured as a result.
This is known as the tort of breach of statutory duty.
The tort is sometimes referred to as statutory negligence but it is preferable to treat the action as separate from negligence as the standard of care owed may differ.
The action has played a strong part in industrial safety but attempts to introduce it into other areas have been less successful.
Example
Alan employs Brian as a machine operator.
Statutory regulations applying to the industry state that all machines must be fitted with a guard.
The guard on Alan's machine was removed for cleaning and inadvertently not replaced before the machine was used.
Brian put his hand into the machine and lost a finger.
Brian would have an action for breach of statutory duty against Alan.
He could also sue Alan for negligence.
The difference in the actions would be that in the former, the absence of the guard establishes breach of duty, whereas in negligence, Brian would have to prove that Alan had failed to exercise reasonable care.
It is normal for actions in such cases to be pleaded in the alternative.
The action for breach of statutory duty is advantageous to the plaintiff when the statutory duty is strict or absolute.
However, statutory duties have a limited sphere of operation.
If a piece of metal had flown out of the machine and blinded Brian, the court could hold that the purpose of the statute was to keep the employee out, not the machine in.
The action would then fail.
In a negligence action, the damage has to be a  foreseeable risk.
The negligence action could therefore succeed where the statutory action failed.
In an action for breach of statutory duty the plaintiff must prove the following points.
(a) That the statutory duty in question gives rise to an action for damages.
(b) That the duty was owed to the plaintiff.
(c) That the duty was broken.
(d) That the damage was caused by the breach of duty.
The defendant can raise the defences of volenti non fit injuria or contributory negligence to the action.
DOES THE STATUTE GIVE RISE TO AN ACTION FOR DAMAGES?
Introduction
Not all breaches of statutory duty will give rise to an action for damages by a person injured as a result.
The court must first determine whether the particular statute gave rise to the right to sue for damages.
This is said to depend on the intention of Parliament.
The intention is to be discovered by interpretation of the statute.
Sometimes the statute will give guidance on this question.
The wording, "nothing in the Act shall be construed as conferring a right of action in any civil proceedings" , is conclusive that no action exists (Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, s. 47(1) (a)).
Alternatively the statute may create an action by specific wording, either as a substitute for a common law action (Nuclear Installations Act 1965), or in addition.
(Mineral Workings (Offshore Installations) Act 1971, s. 11).
In many cases the statute will be silent on the question and the search for Parliamentary intention will be illusory as Parliament never considered the question.
Tests
The leading modern statement on the test used was given by Lord Diplock.
Lord Diplock laid down a presumptions approach to the question: One starts with the presumption…that where an Act creates an obligation, and enforces the performance in a specified manner…that performance cannot be enforced in any other manner…
(T) here are two classes of exception to this general rule.
The first is where on the  true construction of the Act it is apparent that the obligation or prohibition was imposed for the benefit or protection of a particular class of individuals, as in the case of the Factories Acts and similar legislation…
The second exception is where the statute creates a public right…and a particular member of the public suffers…particular, direct and substantial damage other and different from that which was common to all the rest of the public.
Lonrho Ltd v Shell Petroleum Co [1982]AC 173
His Lordship added that where the presumptions created a result which was contrary to the intention of Parliament then the presumptions had to give way.
The defendants were subject to a fine of £100 for breach of statutory duty in failing to fence factory machinery.
Part of the fine was payable to the plaintiff at the discretion of the Secretary of State.
The plaintiff was held to have an action for breach of statutory duty when he was injured as the result of no fencing.
Groves v Lord Wimborne [1898]2 QB 402
The decision is justified on the grounds that there was no guarantee that the plaintiff would receive any of the fine and that Parliament could not have intended a workman to be deprived of the chance to seek compensation for his injuries.
In terms of presumptions, the Act did enforce performance in a specified manner (a fine) but this gives way to the first exception, the obligation was imposed for the benefit of a class of people, factory employees.
The defendants supplied water to Newcastle.
They were required by statute to keep their pipes at a certain pressure level.
Failure to do this could result in a £10 fine.
The plaintiff's premises caught fire and as there was insufficient pressure in the pipes, the premises were burned down.
In an action for breach of statutory duty it was held that the penalty imposed by the statute was an exclusive one.
No action for damages lay.
The fact that no part of the fine was payable to an individual damaged was regarded as evidence that Parliament did not intend the statute to give rise to an action.
Atkinson v Newcastle Waterworks Co (1877) 2 Ex D 441
This case could be regarded as an example of the first presumption applying and neither of the exceptions being relevant.
The manner of enforcement was laid down by the statute.
A statute created an obligation on the defendant council to provide housing for homeless persons.
No remedy was provided by the statute for enforcement.
The plaintiff was held to have an action for breach of statutory duty where the council failed to provide housing.
Thornton v Kirklees Metropolitan Borough Council [1979]QB 626
Although this case provides an example of an action succeeding where no method of enforcement is provided by the statute, it appears unlikely that it will be followed in this area.
In Cocks v Thanet District Council [1983]2 AC 286 it was held that challenges to administrative decisions made by local authorities must be made by application for judicial review, rather than by actions for breach of statutory duty.
The defendant's vehicle was in breach of the Construction and Use Regulations for motor vehicles.
The vehicle was involved in an accident in which the plaintiff's van was damaged.
The plaintiff claimed for breach of statutory duty.
The enforcement method for the regulations was a criminal penalty.
It was held that the regulations did not give rise to an action for damages.
Phillips v Britannia Hygienic Laundry Co Ltd [1923]2 KB 832
A suggested reason for this decision is that to grant an action would have subverted the common law negligence action which lay in these circumstances.
An action for breach of statutory duty would have given a strict liability action in many cases of road traffic accidents.
This would have subverted the fault based negligence action.
If the action would reinforce the common law action it may be allowed.
The defendant gave permission to an uninsured driver to use his vehicle.
This was in breach of the Road Traffic Act.
The driver's negligence caused an accident in which the plaintiff was injured.
It was not worth the plaintiff suing the driver as he was uninsured and had no money.
The court allowed an action for breach of statutory duty against the defendant.
In this case the action did not subvert the common law but supplemented it.
Monk v Warbey [1935]1 KB 75
A case on these facts would now be covered by the Motor Insurance Bureau Scheme, whereby motor insurers provide a fund to meet claims against uninsured drivers.
Benefit of a class
This was a controversial issue before the Lonrho case.
Atkin LJ criticised the idea in Phillips v Britannia: "it would be strange if a less important duty which is owed to a section of the public may be enforced by an action, while a more important duty which is owed to the public at large cannot be so enforced" .
The Lonrho case establishes this as an exception but leaves the court with the problem of determining what is meant by an ascertainable class.
In industrial safety cases there is a well established jurisprudence and unless the statute specifically excludes liability the court will hold that an industrial safety statute gives rise to an action.
Employees are an ascertainable class.
In other areas, the test has been less successful.
The Court of Appeal held that residential occupiers were not a class for the purpose of the offence of harassment created by the Rent Act 1956 (McCall v Abelesz [1976]QB 585).
The House of Lords held that a provision in the Betting and Lotteries Act 1934 that required track owners to provide available space for bookmakers on the track, was passed for the benefit of the race-going public rather than bookmakers (Cutler v Wandsworth Stadium [1949]AC 398).
Public right and special damage
The second exception in Lord Diplock's statement has close analogies with public nuisance.
(See, "Nuisance" .
There must be a public right, the breach of which will constitute a public nuisance and a member of the public must suffer special damage.
In the Lonrho case, there was a breach of the sanctions order which prevented the supply of oil to Southern Rhodesia.
This was held not to create a public right to be enjoyed by all Her Majesty's citizens.
It was an instrument of state policy which prevented members of the public from doing what had previously been lawful.
The distinction between a statute creating a public right and a statute prohibiting what had previously been lawful is not a satisfactory one as it does not appear to be  based on any particular principle.
At present some criminal legislation will give rise to an action on proof of special damage and some will not.
How the distinction is to be made is unclear.
Conclusion
The present position outside of industrial safety legislation is clearly unsatisfactory in terms of certainty.
It is far from clear, even using the Diplock test, which statutes will give rise to civil liability.
The test of benefit of a class leaves the courts considerable discretion as to how to define the class.
Other tests have been suggested.
The Law Commission suggested that if the statute provided no remedy for its enforcement, there should be a presumption of an action (Law Commission No 21 (1969) para 38 and Appendix A(4)).
This was not adopted and is unlikely to be, as it conflicts with the court's ability to take into account policy factors and whether the civil action furthers the aims of the legislation.
The same criticism though could be directed at the presumptions approach.
The court's decision as to what constitutes a class conceals the policy issues in the decision.
In the USA and Canada the action for breach of statutory duty is regarded as a species of negligence called statutory negligence.
This has two versions.
The first is negligence per se.
This is that a breach of a statutory requirement constitutes negligence where the statute was passed to prevent a mischief in respect of which the defendant was already under a duty at common law.
The standard of care is set by the statute.
The second approach is that breach of the statute provides only prima facie evidence of negligence.
The statutory negligence approach has not been adopted in England and this is probably a good thing.
It would restrict actions to existing tort law and would reproduce the problems which have been encountered with liability for omissions.
Perhaps the most honest judicial statement in this area came from Lord Denning: The truth is that in many cases the legislature has left the point open…
The dividing line between the pro-cases and the contra-cases is so blurred and ill defined that you might as well toss a coin to decide it.
(Ex Parte Island Records [1978]Ch 122).
WAS THE DUTY OWED TO THE PLAINTIFF?
The plaintiff must show that the duty was owed to him.
Industrial safety legislation will normally confer a right on persons employed.
It follows therefore, that a fireman fighting a fire at a factory which is not his place of employment, will not be able to sue for breach of such a statutory duty (Hartley v Mayoh & Co [1954]1 QB 383).
The plaintiff must also show that the type of injury that he suffered was the type the legislation sought to prevent.
The defendant shipowner was under a statutory duty to provide pens for cattle on board his ship.
The purpose of the statute was to lessen the risk of cattle catching a contagious disease while in transit.
The defendant was held not liable for breach of statutory duty when the plaintiff's sheep were swept overboard when not in pens.
The purpose of the statute was not to protect the animals from the perils of the seas.
Gorris v Scott (1874) 9 LR Exch 125
BREACH OF DUTY
This is a question of statutory interpretation.
There is no single standard of care.
The court must look at the words used in the statute, which may impose an absolute, strict or fault based standard.
It is possible that the statute may create absolute liability on the defendant, although the court will be wary of creating a strict liability criminal offence in the absence of clear language.
The Factories Act 1961, s. 14(1) requires every dangerous part of any machinery to be securely fenced.
The plaintiff's hand came into contact with a moving grinding wheel which was not fenced.
The defendants argued that if the machine was securely fenced it would be unusable.
This was rejected by the court, which refused to read the words, so far as reasonably practical, into the statute.
John Summers and Sons Ltd v Frost [1955]AC 740
Some statutes are so specific that there can be no qualification.
The statutory regulations provided that any working platform from which a person is likely to fall more than 6ft 6in, had to be at least 34 inches in width.
The defendants were not liable for breach of statutory duty when the plaintiff fell from a 9in wide platform 6ft above the ground.
Chipchase v British Titan Products Co Ltd [1956]1 QB 545
A form of strict liability may be created by wording that allows for the practicability of precautions.
This means that the employer must prove the impracticability of precautions.
This may not be easy to prove, as if the precaution is possible it must be taken, even if the risks involved in taking it outweigh the benefits.
Alternatively, the statute may provide for the reasonable practicability of precautions.
This wording allows the court to balance the time and expense involved in taking the precaution against the risk of injury.
This is similar to a negligence test, but in the statutory action the burden of proof is on the employer.
CAUSATION
It is necessary for the plaintiff to prove that the defendant's breach of statutory duty was a cause of his injuries.
Generally speaking, there is no difference between actions for breach of statutory duty and actions for common law negligence.
The plaintiff must prove that but for the breach of statutory duty he would not have suffered the injury.
The defendant employer was in breach of statutory duty in removing safety belts from a building site.
The plaintiff scaffolder was injured when he fell and was not wearing a safety belt.
The action failed, as the defendant proved that even if the safety belt had been provided, the plaintiff would not have worn it.
McWilliams v Sir William Arrol & Co Ltd [1962]1 WLR 295
The action for breach of statutory duty raises one specialised issue of causation.
The statute may impose a duty on an employer to provide safety equipment and ensure that it is used.
If the equipment is provided but the employee does not use it, this may have the effect of placing both the plaintiff and the defendant in breach of statutory duty.
The plaintiff was an experienced workman employed by the defendant roofing contractors.
Statutory regulations binding on both parties required crawling boards to be used on fragile roofs.
The defendants provided the boards but the plaintiff did not use them.
The plaintiff fell through a roof and was injured.
The plaintiff's claim failed as the defendant had done everything possible to ensure that the statutory duty was complied with.
The sole reason for the breach was the plaintiff's omission to use the equipment.
Ginty v Belmont Building Supplies Ltd [1959]1 All ER 414
This decision was somewhat controversial and a gloss was placed on it in Boyle v Kodak [1969]1 WLR 661.
If any causal responsibility rests with the employer, he will be liable.
Proving the breach of statutory duty establishes a prima facie case.
The defendant can escape liability if he proves that the only act or default which caused the breach was that of the plaintiff.
But if any blame can be attached to the defendant he will be liable.
This could occur if the plaintiff was asked to do a job beyond his competence, the equipment was not easily accessible, or pressure was brought to bear on the plaintiff not to use the equipment.
DEFENCES
Volenti non fit injuria is not usually available as a defence in the industrial safety  cases.
The exception is where an employee is in breach of his statutory duty and this has the effect of making the employer vicariously liable.
If the defence of volenti would have been available against the employee, it will be available against the employer (ICI Ltd v Shatwell [1965]AC 656.
See "Defences to negligence" , pp. 90–1.
Contributory negligence is a defence and the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945 will apply.
The courts are usually slow to attribute contributory negligence to an employee where the employer is in breach of statutory duty.
(See "Defences to negligence" , pp. 98–9.
A person who is subject to a statutory duty cannot discharge that duty by entrusting responsibility for its performance to someone else.
BREACH OF STATUTORY DUTY AND NEGLIGENCE
The two actions should be treated separately.
In a breach of statutory duty action the duty is imposed by the statute.
In negligence actions the courts must determine whether a duty is owed.
In negligence actions the standard of care is reasonable care in all the circumstances of the case.
In breach of statutory duty, the standard of performance is fixed by the statute and may be strict.
It is normally easier for the plaintiff to succeed in an action for breach of statutory duty but not always.
The employer was under a statutory duty to provide safety goggles, which he did.
The plaintiff employee did not wear them and was injured.
The action for breach of statutory duty failed, but the negligence action succeeded.
The evidence showed that the plaintiff would have worn the goggles if he had been firmly instructed to do so and supervised.
Rux v Slough Metals Ltd [1974]1 All ER 262
13 Employers' Liability
INTRODUCTION
During the nineteenth century the response of the courts to claims by employees injured at work tended to be hostile.
Liability tended to be seen in terms of contractual duties.
As the employer dictated the contract of employment there was usually little or no liability.
To counter claims in tort the courts erected the unholy trinity of defences of common employment, volenti non fit injuria and contributory negligence.
A claim for negligence by an employee injured by the negligence of a fellow employee, would be met by the defence of common employment.
If the risk had been created by the employer, a defence of volenti could usually be mounted by the employer, if the employee was aware of the danger and continued to work.
Any contributory negligence on the part of the employee would be fatal to his claim.
From the end of the nineteenth century a change in approach is noticeable.
The decision in Smith v Baker (1891) made it difficult for employers to rely on a volenti defence.
(See "Defences to negligence" , p. 90.)
An action for breach of statutory duty on the part of the employee was created by Groves v Lord Wimborne (1898).
(See "Breach of statutory duty" , p. 143.)
In 1945 contributory negligence ceased to be a complete defence and became grounds for apportioning liability.
(See "Defences to negligence" , p. 95.)
The defence of common employment was finally abolished in 1948 by the Law Reform (Personal Injuries) Act 1948.
By this time it had lost most of its effect because of the introduction of a personal non-delegable duty on the employer in Wilsons and Clyde Coal v English (1938).
Where the employer was in breach of this duty he could not rely on the defence of common employment.
This resulted in a strict demarcation between the employer's personal duty and his vicarious liability.
It should be observed that the most significant contribution to compensation for injured workmen has been through insurance rather than the tort system.
The <pb n=150 Pearson Commission found that only 10-15% of industrial injuries are compensated through the tort damages system (Vol 1 Table 5).
Insurance compensation started with the Workmen's Compensation Act 1897.
The Act enabled workmen to recover compensation without the necessity of proving fault on the part of the employer.
The employer became an insurer for injuries received out of and in the course of employment.
This scheme was replaced in 1946 by a state scheme for victims of industrial accidents and prescribed industrial diseases.
It is not possible to consider this scheme in a tort book and students should consult a specialist work for detail.
At present an employer's tortious liability for the safety of his employees may take one of three forms:(a) The employer may be vicariously liable for the negligence of an employee which leads to the plaintiff employee being injured.
The employer's liability here is strict, in the sense that there need be no fault on his part.
(See "Parties to an action" , p. 251. (b) The employer may be in breach of statutory duty and the employee suffer injury as a result.
(See "Breach of statutory duty" , pp. 141–8. (c) The employer may be in breach of his personal duty of care owed to the employee.
This is a particular example of negligence liability but is owed only to employees and not to independent contractors.
The system is backed up by the Employers' Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 which makes it compulsory for employers to have insurance for personal injury to their employees.
Any employee who can establish a claim in tort is therefore guaranteed to have the judgment met and not be defeated by an insolvent employer.
THE EMPLOYER'S PERSONAL DUTY OF CARE
The duty is to take reasonable care for the safety of employees in the course of their employment.
The duty is personal as it cannot be delegated and is discharged by the exercise of due skill and care.
This duty does not extend to protecting the economic welfare of the employee by taking out insurance or warning them of the need for insurance cover.
In Reid v Rush and Tompkins [1989]3 All ER 228 the plaintiff was injured in a road accident while working in Ethiopia.
He could not obtain compensation from the person who had caused the accident and sued his employer for failing to provide insurance or advising him of the need to take out insurance.
The court held that the employer owed no such duty in tort.
If such a duty was to be owed it would have to be based on an express or implied term in the contract of employment.
The classic exposition of the duty was given by Lord Wright in Wilsons and Clyde Coal Co Ltd v English [1938]AC 57.
The employer must provide a competent staff, adequate material, a proper system and effective supervision.
It is probably not accurate to regard the employer's duty as a series of separate obligations but rather as a single duty to take reasonable care for the safety of employees.
For the sake of exposition the duty will be analysed here in four parts.
However, when the courts are considering new situations, they will not be constrained by trying to fit them into existing categories.
Competent staff
The employer may be liable when he uses an employee with insufficient experience or training for a particular job and a fellow employee is injured as a result.
The employer may also be liable for a practical joker whom he knows about and fails to take steps to deal with (Hudson v Ridge Manufacturing Co Ltd [1957]2 QB 348).
The abolition of the doctrine of common employment has rendered this area of comparatively little importance, as in most cases the employer will be vicariously liable for the torts of his employees.
However, where the employee was acting outside the course of his employment, then the employer would not be vicariously liable, but could be personally liable.
Adequate material
The duty is to provide the necessary plant and equipment and take reasonable care to maintain it in proper condition.
At common law the employer did not guarantee the safety of the equipment and could not be held liable for latent defects in the equipment which could not be discovered with reasonable care.
This placed the employee at a disadvantage.
Where he was injured as a result of equipment having such a defect, he had the onerous task of suing the manufacturer of the equipment under the defective products rule.
The Employer's Liability (Defective Equipment) Act 1969, s. 1(1) now provides: Where…an employee suffers personal injury in the course of his employment in consequence of a defect in equipment provided by his employer for the purposes of the employer's business and the defect is attributable wholly or partly to the fault of a third party (whether identified or not) the injury shall be deemed to be also attributable to negligence on the part of the employer.
This section has the effect of imposing a form of strict liabilty on the employer for defective equipment.
This relieves the employee of the need to identify and sue the manufacturer of the defective equipment.
The employer will have a contract with the person who sold him the equipment and will probably be able to recoup his losses through a contract action.
Equipment is defined by s. 1(3) as including any plant and machinery, vehicle, aircraft and clothing.
It has been held that a ship is equipment.
It comes within the definition machinery or plant (Coltman v Bibby Tankers Ltd [1988]AC 276).
Safe place of work
Where the employee is working on the employer's premises, the employer must act in the same manner as a reasonably prudent employer.
Reasonable care must be taken for the employee's safety (Latimer v AEC [1953]AC 643.
See "Breach of duty" , p. 67).
There is no guarantee that the premises are safe.
Safe system of work
The employer must devise a suitable system, instruct his employees what to do and supply any implements they may require.
In doing this he must take care to see that the system is complied with and bear in mind that employees are often careless for their own safety.
The plaintiff window cleaner was instructed by his employers in the sill method of cleaning windows.
He was to hold onto the window sash while cleaning.
A window fell on his fingers and he fell to the ground.
It was held that the employers were in breach of their personal duty of care, as they should have told the plaintiff to test the sashes to see if they were loose and provided him with wedges.
They had failed to provide a safe system.
General Cleaning Contractors v Christmas [1953]AC 180
The defendants employed the 18-year-old plaintiff as a deckhand, a job in which the plaintiff had no experience.
While the plaintiff was working under the control of an associated company he was injured.
The House of Lords stated that the employer had to devise a safe system and operate it.
On the facts, a safe system had been devised but when the operation of the system was delegated to the other company it was not operated properly.
McDermid v Nash Dredging and Reclamation Co Ltd [1987]AC 906
Certain factors were relevant in determining whether reasonable care had been taken.
These were: the skill and experience of the employee; the nature of the work on which he was employed; the place where the employee was employed; the degree of control exercised over him by the tortfeasor; the relationship between the tortfeasor (associated company) and the employee; and the relationship between the employer and the tortfeasor.
It was held that as the employer's duty was a personal one it could not be discharged by delegation.
Performance of the duty was not discharged by delegation.
DEFENCES
The defences of volenti non fit injuria and contributory negligence are available to the employer.
Volenti will rarely succeed and the courts are generally slow to find contributory negligence.
(See "Defences to negligence" for details.
QUESTION
Arthur, Bert and Charlie are employed by Chartist plc as welders.
The Welding Regulations 1970 impose a statutory duty on employers and employees that: "safety goggles must as far as is practicable be worn at all times when welding operations are being carried out" .
Arthur developed a skin complaint, unrelated to his employment, which made the wearing of goggles painful.
He stopped wearing the goggles and was struck and blinded in one eye by a piece of metal.
Bert was told by Arthur, who was known in the firm as a practical joker, that wearing goggles could result in loss of libido.
Bert took this seriously, stopped wearing his goggles and suffered partial blindness caused by the glare from the welding torch.
Charlie was wearing his goggles when a piece of molten metal struck them, shattering the protective glass and causing him eye injuries.
Advise Arthur, Bert and Charlie as to any rights of action they might have in tort against Chartist plc and as to any defences with which they might be met.
NB The Welding Regulations 1970 are fictitious.
Suggested approach
An employer can incur tortious liability in respect of his employees in one of three ways.
The employer may be in breach of statutory duty, in breach of his personal duty of care, or vicariously liable for the tort of one of the other employees.
Arthur may have an action for breach of statutory duty.
He must establish that the statute in question gave rise to an action for damages.
This is said to depend on the intention of Parliament but the test is fictitious as Parliament frequently gives no thought to the question.
The most generally accepted test is that put forward by Lord Diplock in Lonrho v Shell Petroleum, based on presumptions.
If the statute provides a means of enforcement then it can only be enforced in this manner, unless the obligation is imposed for the benefit of a class and the plaintiff is a member of that class.
This is used with industrial safety statutes such as the Welding Regulations to give employees injured by a breach of statutory duty an action in damages.
Arthur is a member of the class (employees) for whose benefit the statute was passed.
It is necessary to prove that there was a breach of the statutory duty.
This depends on interpretation of the statute.
The duty imposed may be strict or fault based.
This duty is neither absolute nor negligence based.
It is a form of strict liability.
The word practicable means that the employer must prove the impracticability of precautions.
The word has been interpreted as meaning that the precaution must be taken even if the risk involved in taking it outweighs the benefit (Boyton v Willment Bros Ltd (1971)).
It would appear that Chartist are in breach of statutory duty.
It is also necessary for the plaintiff to prove causation.
The normal causation rule of "but for" applies unless the sole reason the employer is in breach was the plaintiff's omission to use the safety equipment (Ginty v Belmont Building Supplies (1959)).
As Arthur is in breach of his duty by omitting to wear the goggles, it may be that the court will find that causation is not established.
If it is, then Chartist may attempt to raise volenti non fit injuria or contributory negligence as defences.
Volenti would not appear to be applicable but the court might hold that Arthur has been contributorily negligent in respect of his injury and reduce damages accordingly.
Arthur may also have an action in negligence under the employer's personal duty of care.
This is a duty to provide competent staff, adequate material, a safe place of work and a safe system of work (Wilsons and Clyde Coal v English (1938)).
On the facts of the problem he is more likely to succeed in the action for breach of statutory duty as that duty on the employer is stricter.
Bert may have an action for breach of statutory duty but may fail for the same reason as Arthur.
The damage was caused by Bert not wearing the glasses.
Applying the Ginty test the cause of the damage was Bert's breach of statutory duty.
Bert's best chance of success is the personal duty of care, under the head of competent staff.
An employer has been held liable where he failed to take steps to deal with a practical joker whom he knew about (Hudson v Ridge Manufacturing (1957)).
Alternatively, the employer could be vicariously liable if Arthur was negligent in respect of his statement to Bert.
Arthur would probably be outside the course of his employment though.
Again the question could be raised as to whether Bert was volenti or contributorily negligent.
Charlie's case raises the question of the employer's personal duty of care and the duty to provide adequate equipment.
At common law the employer did not guarantee the safety of the equipment and could not be held liable for a latent defect in it.
The Employer's Liability (Defective Equipment) Act 1969, imposes a form of strict liability on the employer.
Charlie could sue the employer for his injury and the employer would then have to recover from the manufacturer/supplier of the goggles.
No defence is available in this action on these facts.
14 Medical negligence and related issues
INTRODUCTION
Actions in tort against members of the medical profession increased considerably during the 1980s.
This has had the effect of increasing the premiums paid by doctors for medical insurance.
This increase has raised fears that the United Kingdom may be about to experience a medical malpractice crisis on the lines of the USA.
This crisis, caused by successful damages actions against doctors, is said to result in defensive medicine.
This is medicine practised not for the benefit of the patient but to protect the doctor from litigation.
A commonly cited example of defensive medicine is the rise in the number of caesarean section births, as opposed to natural births.
This fear may be exaggerated as there are significant differences in the USA and UK legal and health systems.
In the USA a lawyer is allowed to work on a contingent fee system.
If the client recovers nothing, the lawyer receives no fee, but in a successful case the lawyer receives a percentage of the damages recovered.
In the UK, the client must either be eligible for legal aid, or fund the action himself and risk not recovering costs.
The existence of a National Health Service paid for out of taxpayers' money in the UK is also thought to affect the claims level.
There is no single reason for the rise in numbers of claims.
It may be that the public have more compensation awareness.
This means that they are aware of the right to damages for negligently inflicted injury.
This is coupled with a change in the doctor–patient relationship.
Evidence shows that family doctors are less likely to be sued than hospital doctors, as the former are more likely to have a relationship of trust with their patients than the more anonymous hospital doctors.
From the point of view of the doctor, even an unsuccessful action can have negative effects on career, and the action will be time consuming.
The plaintiff in such an action will be faced with a difficult task in establishing matters such as breach of duty and causation, but the action may be the only way in which he can obtain any compensation for the injury.
Research shows that many injured patients simply want to find out what went wrong.
Ironically, the system means that they are unlikely to be told, in case they use the information as evidence in an action.
In legal terms actions against doctors are likely to be brought in either battery (trespass to the person) or negligence.
The battery action protects personal integrity and guards against treatment without consent.
The negligence action acts as a form of compensation for a negligently injured patient and as a deterrent to doctors.
A doctor's duty of care can be divided into three areas: advice, diagnosis and treatment.
THE BATTERY ACTION
Consent is central to the idea of medical treatment and to the doctor–patient relationship.
There is a general principle that a person cannot complain of that which he has consented to.
A battery is the infliction of unlawful force on another person.
(See "Trespass to the person" , p. 213.)
A doctor who treats without consent may be guilty of a battery on the patient.
The patient may give express consent, for example, by signing a consent form for a surgical operation, or there may be an implied consent, for example by holding out an arm for an injection.
The patient's consent must be real.
Once the patient has been informed in broad terms of the nature of the intended procedure and gives consent, then that consent is real.
The plaintiff suffered a trapped nerve after a hernia operation.
She consulted the defendant specialist who performed an operation to free the trapped nerve.
As a result of the operation, the plaintiff lost all feeling in her leg.
She sued the plaintiff in battery, on the ground that she had not truly consented to the operation, as its effect had not been properly explained to her.
The claim failed.
A battery action could only succeed where her consent was not real.
As the defendant had explained the nature of the operation in general terms, her consent was real for the purposes of battery.
Chatterton v Gerson [1981]QB 432
NB Any alleged failure by the doctor to disclose risks about the treatment, which might have enabled the patient to give an informed consent, does not invalidate the consent.
Any such action must be brought in negligence.
Consent problems may arise with certain kinds of patients.
The unconscious
Where a patient is unconscious and therefore incapable of giving a consent, the doctor will be entitled to give treatment on the basis of necessity.
The test for whether treatment is necessary is whether it is in the best interests of the patient.
What is in the best interests of the patient will be judged by the standards of a responsible body of medical opinion.
The decision would appear to give the medical profession considerable latitude in deciding what is necessary.
F v West Berkshire Health Authority [1989]2 All ER 545
Lord Goff stated that where the unconsciousness was temporary, the doctor may not proceed contrary to the stated interests of the patient, provided the patient was rationally capable of forming such a wish.
Neither should the doctor do more than is reasonably necessary in the interests of the patient.
Lord Brandon stated that an operation or treatment would be in the patient's best interests if it was carried out to save the patient's life, ensure improvement, or prevent physical or mental deterioration.
One problem in this area is that of the patient who for religious reasons objects to a blood transfusion.
If the patient is conscious and capable, then the doctor must observe his wishes or be liable in battery.
If the patient is unconscious and the doctor is unaware of the objection, then provided the best interests of the patient test is satisfied, no liability attaches.
If the doctor is aware of the objection, then it would appear from Lord Goff's judgment that the doctor may be liable if he goes ahead with the transfusion.
Minors
In order to give a valid consent, it is necessary that the patient had the capacity to do so.
At what age will a child be capable of giving a valid consent?
There are two possibilities: status or understanding.
If a status test is used, then a particular age is fixed at which consent may be given.
This has the advantage for the medical profession of certainty, but does not allow for children maturing at different ages.
The consent of a minor aged 16 years or more is effective and there is no need for parental consent (Family Law Reform Act, s. 8(1)).
In the case of children under 16 years, the court have adopted a test of understanding (Gillick v West Norfolk & Wisbech Area Health Authority [1986]AC 112).
The case was concerned with whether a child under the age of 16 years could be given contraceptive advice without the consent of her parents.
The House of Lords ruled that she could, provided she had sufficient understanding.
The problem with this test is what is meant by understanding.
In Gillick, a high test of understanding was set, but it is not clear whether this applies to all forms of medical treatment.
Where the child is incapable of giving a valid consent, it is standard practice to seek parental consent where this is possible.
If such consent is withheld, then the doctor could seek to have the child made a ward of court.
The court can then give  consent to the proposed treatment or withholding of treatment, if it thinks this is in the best interests of the child.
Mental disorder
The fact that a person is suffering from a mental disorder within the Mental Health Act 1983 does not preclude a legally effective consent (ss. 57 and 58) The question in each case is whether the person was capable of understanding.
Where a person was not capable of understanding, the doctor must apply the best interests of the patient test.
In F v West Berkshire Health Authority [1989]2 All ER 545, Lord Goff stated: where the state of affairs is permanent or semi-permanent, as…in the case of a mentally disordered person…there is no point in waiting to obtain the patient's consent…the doctor must act in the best interests of his patient, just as if he had received his patient's consent so to do…the lawfulness of the doctor's action is to be found in the principle of necessity…the doctor must act in accordance with a responsible and competent body of relevant professional opinion…it may be good practice to consult relatives and others who are concerned with the care of the patient.
THE NEGLIGENCE ACTION
Introduction
If negligence is alleged against a general practitioner the plaintiff can sue the doctor directly, as general practitioners are solely responsible for the treatment of patients.
If the patient has been referred to a hospital or has sought emergency treatment at a hospital, then he may proceed either against the negligent individual, the relevant Health Authority, or both.
The individual will be primarily liable and the health authority vicariously liable for its employees' negligence.
The vicarious liability of hospitals for all their full-time staff was finally established in Cassidy v Ministry of Health [1951]2 KB 343.
There is some doubt as to whether a health authority is primarily liable, i.e. that it owes a non-delegable duty to its patients.
There is no direct authority in English law, but the Court of Appeal has remarked, obiter: "can see no reason why, in principle, the health authority should not be [directly]liable if its organisation is at fault" (Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1987]QB 730).
This could occur where a mistake is made by a junior doctor who has been required to work long hours because of his contract of employment and made the mistake through exhaustion.
Until 1990, an agreement between the Ministry of Health and the medical defence societies (who provide indemnity insurance for doctors) allowed for the costs of any action to be shared between the two parties.
From January 1990, the entire cost of a negligence action will be borne by the National Health Service.
In structure, the negligence action against a doctor is no different to any other negligence case.
The plaintiff must prove that a duty of care was owed to him, that this was broken and that reasonably foreseeable damage was caused as a result.
The duty of care
Duty of care presents few problems in this area.
The question of whether a duty of care exists is not in dispute.
The only problem is what the duty is, i.e. what did the doctor undertake to do, and when the duty came into existence.
One problem area is the primary liability of Health Authorities (see above, p. 158.)
One point is clear on this.
If the authority can show that a lack of sufficiently qualified staff is due to overall financial problems, then an action would be unlikely to succeed.
The issue has, to date, arisen in the context of public law cases alleging misuse of statutory powers.
Patients sought a declaration that the Secretary of State and health authorities were in breach of duty as they had had to wait an unreasonable time, because of a decision not to build a new block for a hospital on grounds of cost.
The application failed, as the decision could only be challenged if the decision was thoroughly unreasonable.
R v Secretary of State for Social Services ex p Hincks (1979)
Similar decisions were reached in the cases involving hole in the heart babies who had to wait for treatment because of a shortage of trained specialist nursing staff.
It is thought that these cases were brought more for publicity, to force the health authority to act, than in the hope of legal success.
Courts will only interfere with a spending decision of a public authority in the most unusual circumstances.
Breach of duty
As this is a negligence action, liability is based on proof of fault.
The plaintiff must prove that the defendant fell below the relevant standard of care.
The doctor does not guarantee a cure, he only undertakes to use reasonable care.
The standard of care expected of a doctor was laid down in the following case.
The allegation was that a doctor had been negligent in administering electro-convulsive therapy to a patient without a relaxant drug or restraining convulsive movements.
The plaintiff suffered a fractured jaw.
McNair J stated: The test is the standard of the ordinary skilled man exercising and professing to have that special skill.
A man need not possess the highest expert skill at the risk of being found negligent.
It is a well established law that it is sufficient if he exercises the ordinary skill of an ordinary man exercising that particular art.
Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957]2 All ER 118
On the facts, the defendant was found not liable, as he had conformed with a practice which was approved by a responsible body of medical opinion.
The courts therefore allow the medical profession to set their own standard.
A doctor accused of negligence by a patient can defend himself by showing that what he did was accepted practice, provided that practice was approved by responsible opinion in the medical profession.
The Bolam test has come under criticism (not least because it allows the profession to set its own standard) but has survived intact.
Negigence was alleged on the part of a senior registrar in charge of a child birth.
It was claimed that he had pulled too long and too hard in a trial of forceps delivery and this had caused the plaintiff's head to become wedged or stuck, resulting in asphyxia and brain damage.
At the trial the mother gave evidence that when the forceps were applied she was lifted off the bed.
The questions for decision were:(a) in what manner did the defendant use the forceps?(b) was that manner consistent with the degree of skill which a member of his profession is obliged by law to exercise?
On (a) the evidence was held not to establish the allegation.
On (b) the House of Lords re-stated the Bolam test and rejected any test based on errors of clinical judgment.
Whitehouse v Jordan [1981]1 All ER 267
In the Court of Appeal Lord Denning had attempted to qualify Bolam by saying that an error of clinical judgment was not necessarily negligence.
Two consultants believed that the plaintiff was suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis but also considered the possibility that she might have Hodgkin's disease.
She was in fact suffering from tuberculosis.
Tests were carried out but it was decided to operate before the results of the tests were known.
The plaintiff claimed damage to the vocal chords as a result of the operation.
It was held by the House of Lords that the defendants were not negligent as they had conformed to a practice approved by one responsible body of medical opinion.
Where there are conflicting practices (as there were in this case), negligence is not established by proving that the defendant has not followed one practice.
Maynard v West Midland Regional Health Authority [1985]1 All ER 635
The Bolam test applies to advice, diagnosis and treatment.
(But see "Informed consent" , p. 161, on advice.
The degree of skill will vary according to the post held by the doctor, rather than the experience of the individual.
A consultant will be expected to show the degree of skill normally exhibited by a consultant in that field.
A novice is expected to show the degree of skill exhibited by a junior doctor, even if it is the first day on the job.
The inexperienced should be able to call on the advice of their superiors.
Where there is a failure in supervision, then the superior could be negligent.
If the system does not provide for supervision, then the health authority could be primarily liable because it is well established that doctors need to do their training on the job.
The duty of care is imposed by law but the standard is a matter of medical practice.
Where there is only one accepted practice, then following this practice will not amount to negligence.
In exceptional cases the courts may take the view that established practice is unsatisfactory and find negligence.
However, there only appears to be one reported case since Bolam where this has occurred (Hucks v Cole (1968) 112 Sol Jo 483).
Where there is more than one accepted practice, then following a practice approved by a responsible body of medical opinion will exonerate the doctor.
Proof of negligence
The burden of proof is on the plaintiff to prove negligence and this may be difficult as he may not know what happened.
The courts may allow the plaintiff to rely on the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
(See "Breach of duty" , p. 161.)
The precise nature of the negligence must be unknown and no explanation of the way in which the injury was inflicted offered by the defendant.
The injury must be of the kind that does not normally happen unless there is negligence.
If the injury sustained was an inherent risk of the procedure, then the doctrine will be inapplicable.
In general, the courts are reluctant to allow the doctrine to be used in medical negligence cases unless there is a clear inference of negligence from the known facts.
The plaintiff went into hospital with two stiff fingers and came out with four stiff fingers.
The court held that this should not have happened if due care had been used and the doctrine was applied.
As the defendants were unable to rebut the inference of negligence they were liable.
Cassidy v Ministry of Health [1951]2 KB 343
The doctrine has also been used in cases where swabs have been left in patients after operations (Mahon v Osborne [1939]2 KB 14).
Informed consent
In the USA, a doctor will not avoid litigation by simply informing the patient of the nature of the treatment in broad terms.
He will be under a duty to warn of dangers in the proposed treatment and to give the information which the patient has the right to expect.
The duty is one of reasonable disclosure of the choices available.
This duty to disclose is not limited by medical practice, it is set by law.
The view is that a consent is not valid unless the patient has enough information to make an informed choice.
Any information material to the patient's decision should therefore be revealed.
The doctor may exercise therapeutic privilege if he thinks that revealing a particular risk would be adverse to the patient's health (Canterbury v Spence (1972) 464 F 2d 772).
Is there such a doctrine in England?
This will depend on whether the Bolam test applies to the giving of information as well as diagnosis and treatment.
The key decision in England is the following.
The plaintiff had pain in her neck, shoulder and arms.
A neuro-surgeon examined her and recommended an operation.
What the plaintiff was told is not clear, as the surgeon had died by the time of the trial.
The operation carried with it a 1% risk of damage to the spinal cord and a 1-2% risk of damage to the nerve roots.
The surgeon had apparently told the plaintiff about  the risk of damage to the nerve roots but not of that to the spinal cord.
The operation was carried out without negligence by the surgeon but the plaintiff was severely disabled as a result of damage to her spinal cord.
Sidaway v Board of Governors of the Bethlem Royal Hospital [1985]AC 871
The House of Lords held that the surgeon had followed approved practice of neuro-surgeons in not disclosing the risk of damage to the spinal cord and was not negligent.
The majority of the House (Lord Scarman dissenting) was prepared to accept a modified version of the Bolam test for the giving of information.
The major modification was that where the judge thought that disclosure of a particular risk was obviously necessary but it was not medical pactice to disclose, then following standard practice would not avoid liability.
The example given was a 10% risk of a stroke.
If medical practice was not to disclose the risk, then a court would probably declare practice to be wrong.
Lord Scarman rejected current medical practice as the test for what a patient needs to know and asserted the patient's right to know based on self-determination.
He thought the doctor should be liable where the risk is such that a prudent person, in the patient's position, would have regarded it as significant.
A doctor would have a defence of therapeutic privilege, if disclosure would have posed a serious threat of psychological detriment to the patient.
The position where the patient specifically asks questions is not clear.
In Sidaway, Lord Bridge said there was a duty to answer as truthfully and fully as the questioner requires.
However, in Blyth v Bloomsbury Health Authority (1987), the Court of Appeal said there was no duty to pass on all the information available to the hospital.
The reply would be satisfactory if it conformed to standard practice.
Finally, it should be noted, that even if the plaintiff manages to overcome the hurdle of proving a duty existed to give him the information, he must still establish causation.
This requires him to prove that if the information had been given, his decision as to treatment would have been different.
Causation
The plaintiff must prove that his damage would not have occurred, but for the defendant's breach of duty.
(See "Causation and remoteness" , p. 73.)
In practice, medical negligence cases present problems in causation, as medical science may not be able to identify the precise cause of the plaintiff's damage.
The plaintiff was born three months prematurely.
He suffered from retrolental fibroplasia (RLF).
This is an incurable condition of the retina which caused almost total blindness.
He sued the defendants on the ground that his RLF was caused by an excess of oxygen in his bloodstream, due to lack of proper skill and care in the management of his oxygen supply.
The first allegation was that a misplaced catheter gave misleading readings of oxygen pressure.
The trial judge found this amounted to negligence.
The second allegation was that medical staff allowed the oxygen level to remain above the accepted safety level.
The trial judge relied on the causation test in McGhee v NCB (1973).
Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988]1 All ER 871
The House of Lords allowed the defendant's appeal with the result that the case had to go back for a retrial eleven years after the plaintiff had suffered damage.
The problem was in the conflict of medical evidence as to the cause of RLF.
It can be caused by a high level of oxygen in premature babies, but it can occur without artificial administration of oxygen.
The  trial judge had found that the plaintiff's exposure to high levels of oxygen had materially increased the risk of suffering RLF and the defendants had to show on the balance of probabilities that the exposure did not cause the RLF.
The House of Lords held that the onus of proving causation lies on the plaintiff.
Where the plaintiff is unable to establish what the cause of his injuries was, then the action will fail.
Torts Based on Land
15 Trespass to land
INTRODUCTION
Trespass to land is an unjustifiable interference with the possession of land.
It is important to note that, for historical reasons, the tort is committed against possession and not ownership of land.
As this is a form of trespass the injury must be direct rather than consequential.
The latter form of interference may give rise to liability in nuisance.
The captain of an oil tanker ran the ship aground and in order to save the ship and the crew large quantities of oil were discharged.
The oil was carried by the tide onto the shore.
The court held that necessity was a defence to the claim in trespass and nuisance.
Two judges in the House of Lords thought that the damage was consequential, not direct, and therefore not capable of constituting a trespass.
Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Southport Corporation [1956]AC 218
The tort is actionable per se and the plaintiff need not show any damage to the land as a result of the defendant's act.
The remedy sought will in any case often be an injunction to prevent any repetition of the trespass.
As most trespasses are self-evidently intentional because the defendant intends to be there, the question of the state of mind of the defendant is not often of importance.
Two points may be noted at this stage.
First, if the plaintiff did not intend to be on the land, i.e. if he was thrown there, no trespass is committed (Basely v Clarkson (1681) 3 Lev.
37).
Second, the fact that the defendant thought that the land was his own will not be a defence (Smith v Stone (1647) Sty 65).
It has been clear for a long time that where land adjoining the highway is unintentionally entered, i.e. as a result of a car accident, that the plaintiff must prove negligence (River Wear Commissioners v Adamson (1877) 2 App Cas 743).
It was held that where a hunt entered land after permission to enter had been refused, then the master would be liable if he intended the hounds to enter; or, if the entry was caused by his failure to exercise proper control over them, when there was a real risk of entry.
If this decision is correct it means that the tort may be committed negligently.
League against Cruel Sports v Scott [1986]QB 240
FORMS OF TRESPASS TO LAND
The tort may be committed by entry on land, remaining on land, or by placing objects on land.
Trespass by wrongful entry
This is the commonest form of trespass and consists of a personal entry on the plaintiff's land by the defendant.
The slightest crossing of the boundary will be sufficient, such as putting a hand through a window.
Plaintiff alleged that officers of the king broke into his house and searched and took documents.
The defendants said that they were authorised by a warrant granted by the Secretary of State.
The court held that the Secretary of State had no jurisdiction to grant a warrant and the defendants were guilty of trespass.
Entick v Carrington (1765) 19 State Trials 1029
This form of trespass may also be committed by abuse of right of entry.
A person who uses the highway for any purpose other than that of passage becomes a trespasser against the owners of the subsoil.
Where the highway across land in the possession of the plaintiff was used by a racing tout for the purpose of taking notes on the form of a racehorse, a trespass was committed.
Hickman v Maisey [1900]1 QB 752
Trespass by remaining on land
A person commits trespass if he remains on land when his right of entry has ceased.
To refuse or to omit to leave is as much a trespass as to originally enter without any right.
A person who holds over at the end of a lease is not a trespasser until demand is made, as only the person in possession can be trespassed against (Hey v Moorhouse (1839) 6 Bing NC 52).
Trespass by placing objects on land
It is a trespass to place any chattel on the plaintiff's land.
This form of trespass is known as continuing trespass, as the trespass continues as long as the offending article remains on the land.
Successive actions will lie from day to day until the article is removed.
The defendants erected buttresses to support a sinking road.
To do this they had to trespass on the plaintiff's land.
The plaintiff sued and recovered damages.
The defendants failed to remove the buttresses and the plaintiff sued again.
The defence was that the action was time barred.
This was rejected as it was a case of continuing trespass which continued as long as the buttresses were on the land.
Holmes v Wilson (1839) 10 A & E 503
Trespass ab initio Where the defendant's entry is by authority of law as opposed to the plaintiff's authority and the defendant subsequently abuses that right, then he becomes a trespasser ab initio(from the moment of entry)(Six Carpenters Case (1610) 8 Co Rep 146A).
The rule only applies where the subsequent abuse is a positive wrongful act as opposed to an omission.
The modern application of this doctrine lies in the use of police search warrants.
The usefulness has been removed by modern cases, which have held that partial abuse of an authority does not render everything done under it unlawful (Elias v Pasmore [1934]2 KB 164).
Police searching the plaintiff's premises for stolen goods seized goods which they mistakenly thought to be stolen.
The seizure was held to be lawful as police entering premises with a warrant had authority to remove anything which they believed to have been stolen.
The Court of Appeal doubted the validity of trespass ab initio, as it meant that lawful acts could be made unlawful by subsequent events and the lawfulness of an act should be judged at the time it took place.
Chic Fashions (West Wales) Ltd v Jones [1968]2 QB 299
Despite this criticism the doctrine was applied without criticism in the later case of Cinnamond v British Airports Authority [1980]2 All ER 368 to mini-cab drivers who were unlawfully touting for business.
Trespass above and beneath the surface
The person who owns the land also owns the sky above and the subsoil beneath.
Trespass can therefore be committed by a person who digs a tunnel under land or who abuses the airspace.
The defendants erected an advertising sign which projected into the plaintiff's airspace by eight inches.
This was held to be trespass to land.
Kelsen v Imperial Tobacco Co [1957]2 QB 334
This principle could clearly cause severe difficulties to aircraft.
The Civil Aviation Act 1982, s. 76(1) and s. 76(2) therefore makes special provision for civil aircraft.
No trespass is committed where the aircraft flies at a reasonable height, having regard to wind, weather and all the circumstances of the case.
A form of strict liability is also created for damage caused by articles falling from an aircraft whilst in flight.
The position of aircraft has also been clarified at common law.
The defendants took an aerial photograph of the plaintiff's house and were sued for trespass to land.
The court held that trespass to air space was not committed where the flight took place at a height which did not affect the use of the land.
The plaintiff was in any case prevented from bringing an action by the statutory provision, which is not limited to a bare right of passage and is not lost by the taking of a photograph.
Lord Bernstein of Leigh v Skyviews and General Ltd [1978]QB 479
A distinction has since been drawn between aircraft and a structure which overhangs land.
In the latter case a trespass is committed even if the structure (a crane) was at a height which did not affect the plaintiff's use of the land (Anchor Brewhouse Developments Ltd v Berkley House (Docklands Developments) Ltd (1987) 38 BLR 82).
TITLE OF THE PLAINTIFF
Trespass to land is normally only actionable by the person who is in possession of the land.
This includes a person who is entitled to immediate and exclusive possession.
A landlord cannot normally bring an action for trespass as the tenant is the person who has possession.
The landlord may sue if he can prove that actual harm has been caused to the reversion or in the circumstances illustrated in the next case.
A landlord brought an action against persons who were alleged to be squatters.
It was held that where an absolute owner brings an action for trespass he must prove title and an intention to regain possession.
The slightest act by the owner indicating an intention will be sufficient.
The defendant must then show title or a right to possession consistent with the plaintiff's ownership.
Portland Management Ltd v Harte [1977]QB 306
The mere use of land without exclusive possession is not sufficient.
A lodger or boarder will generally not be able to sue.
Trespass by relation
A person who has the right to immediate possession of the land and enters in exercise of that right, is then deemed to have been in possession ever since the  accrual of the right of entry.
That person may sue for any trespass committed since the accrual of the right of entry.
This doctrine enables a lessee to sue for any trespass committed between the granting of the lease and his entering in pursuance of it.
A landlord who is entitled to enter on the determination of a lease may, on re-entry, sue for any trespass since the lease determined.
Co-owners
A tenant in common or joint tenant of land cannot sue his co-tenant in trespass, unless the defendant's act amounts to the total exclusion or ouster of the plaintiff or destructive waste of the common property.
Each of the co-tenants is entitled to possession of the land.
DEFENCES
Licence
A licence is that consent which, without passing any interest in the property to which it relates, merely prevents the acts for which consent is given from being wrongful.
Trespass is therefore not committed when the defendant enters with the authority of a licence.
This is unless he exceeds the terms of the licence or the plaintiff has legally revoked the licence.
A bare licence, which is one granted other than for valuable consideration, may be revoked at any time on the giving of reasonable notice.
A contractual licence may also be revoked at any time, but this may involve the grantor in an action for breach of contract.
This appears to be subject to an exception where the licence was granted for a limited period of time and for a specific purpose.
If a person bought a ticket for the cinema then he would probably have an irrevocable licence for the period of the film (Hurst v Picture Theatres Ltd [1915]1 KB 1).
The person ejected could then mount an action for battery and the defence of reasonable force to eject a trespasser would fail.
A licence coupled with an interest, e.g. a profit, is irrevocable, as although the licence itself is only a right in personam, it confers a right in rem to do something once an entry has been made.
Justification by law
Acts which would otherwise be trespass are not so when justification is provided by law.
For example, the police have powers under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to enter premises and to search them.
Necessity
It is a defence to show that it was necessary for the defendant to enter the plaintiff's land.
Fire broke out on X's land.
X's servants attempted to put the fire out and Z's gamekeeper set fire to land between the fire and some of Z's nesting pheasants.
The gamekeeper was sued for trespass.
He was held not liable as there was a real and imminent danger and he had done what was reasonably necessary.
Cope v Sharp [1912]1 KB 496
Police fired CS gas into a shop in an attempt to force a psychopath out.
As a result, the plaintiff's shop was burnt down.
The court held that necessity was a defence to trespass provided there was no negligence on the part of the defendant.
On the facts of the case, the police were held liable in negligence as they had no fire fighting equipment present when the CS gas was fired.
The defence of necessity succeeded in the trespass action as the police had not been negligent in creating the emergency.
Rigby v Chief Constable of Northamptonshire [1985]2 All ER 985
REMEDIES
Re-entry
A person who is entitled to possession can enter or re-enter the premises.
By the Criminal Law Act 1977 s. 6, it is a crime to use or threaten violence for the purposes of securing entry to any premises occupied by another, except by a displaced residential occupier.
At civil law reasonable force may be used to evict a trespasser.
The plaintiff, a tenant of the defendant, was served with a notice to quit and refused to leave.
The defendants entered the plaintiff's cottage and removed the plaintiff and his furniture using reasonable force.
Defendants were found not liable in trespass.
Hemmings v Stoke Poges Golf Club [1920]1 KB 720
Ejectment
A person who has been dispossessed may bring an action for ejectment where he can establish an immediate right to possession.
The plaintiff can only recover on the strength of his own title and not on the weakness of the defendant's.
The defendant only needs to assert that he is in possession and the plaintiff must then show that his title is better than the defendant's.
Mesne profits
An action lies for damage which the plaintiff has suffered through being out of possession of land.
This includes profits taken by the defendant during his occupation and damages for deterioration and the reasonable costs of getting possession.
Distress damage feasant
Where a chattel is unlawfully on the plaintiff's land and has caused actual damage, the plaintiff may retain the chattel until the damage has been paid for.
If a football is kicked through a window then the football can be retained until the window is paid for.
The principle used to have particular importance in relation to damage caused by straying livestock but there is now a specific statutory rule in Animals Act 1971, s. 7.
The remedy is generally only available where the chattel is unattended and must be made while the chattel is trespassing.
This is an alternative to an action and no action can be maintained while there is distraint of the chattel.
Injunction
Where a trespass is threatened or where the trespass is of a continuing nature, then the plaintiff may seek an injunction.
The plaintiff is prima facie entitled to the injunction but it may be refused where the interference is trivial.
The council sought an injunction to prevent a clergyman trespassing by holding services on the plaintiff's seashore.
The application was rejected on the grounds of triviality.
Llandudno UDC v Woods [1889]2 Ch 705
Damages
Where the trespass is trivial then the damages will be nominal; but where the trespass involves some beneficial use of the land, the plaintiff is entitled to a reasonable remuneration for the use of the land, as if the use had been made under an agreement, such as a lease or a contract.