

The Barbarians in Gaul
In 476 the west Roman Empire came to an end with the deposition of Romulus Augustulus.
It was replaced by a number of states ruled by barbarian kings.
By the early sixth century Italy was in the hands of the Ostrogoths; France was divided between the Franks, the Burgundians and the Visigoths, who also controlled Spain; what had been the Roman province of Africa had been transformed into the Vandal kingdom.
A century later the map had been slightly redrawn, with the Lombards controlling northern Italy, the Franks unchallenged in France, and peoples known variously as Angles and Saxons dominant in much of the old diocese of Britannia.
It was the kingdom of the Franks which was to exercise most influence for the longest period of time.
For the first three centuries of its existence, until 751, it was ruled over by a single family, that of the Merovingians.
Merovingian history deserves detailed study in its own right, but it also needs to be understood in the broader context of Late Antique and early medieval history.
This broader context is particularly important for an understanding of the earliest stages of the creation of the Frankish kingdom, for the Franks and the Merovingians were relatively late participants in the crisis which saw the collapse of the western Empire and the establishment of the successor states.
The collapse of imperial power in Gaul and Germany, and the activities of the Visigoths and Burgundians provide a necessary background for early Merovingian history.
The coming of the barbarians
The Roman dioceses of Gaul and the Seven Provinces, which were to constitute most of the Frankish kingdom, essentially covered what is now France, Belgium, Germany west of the Rhine, and most of Switzerland.
Geographically this territory is extremely varied, including Mediterranean, Atlantic and Channel coasts, the river valleys of northern France, of western Germany and of Burgundy, together with the western Alps and the  mountains of central France.
Culturally it was equally diverse.
To a large extent the areas nearest to the Mediterranean were the most civilized, but there were cities further north with important cultural traditions, including Lyons, Bordeaux and Autun, and there were other cities, including Trier and Paris, which had at times been the residences of emperors.
Taken as a whole, by the late fourth century the two dioceses had gained much from four centuries of Roman rule.
Not that those centuries had been times of uninterrupted peace.
There had been civil wars in plenty, and major barbarian incursions, particularly in the north-eastern provinces of Germany and Belgica.
Even in times of peace it required constant vigilance to keep the peoples across the Rhine in check.
But for the most part the frontier troops had succeeded in their task of keeping the barbarians at bay.
Then, on the last night of the year 406, or so one of our sources claims, the frozen Rhine was crossed by a number of barbarian groups, including Vandals, Alans and Sueves.
As a result the German frontier was broken, and for the next two years the provinces of Germany and Gaul were plundered by the invaders.
Although the majority of these barbarians moved on to Spain in 409, some stayed behind: there were Alans active in Gaul under their leader Goar for the next thirty years; they were to be settled in Gallia Ulterior, that is on land to the north of the Loire, in the 440s.
Elsewhere, any respite that was felt in 409 was short lived; in 412 another barbarian people, the Visigoths, crossed to Gaul from Italy, where they had sacked the city of Rome in 410.
They established themselves in the south-west, and their king, Athaulf, held court in Narbonne.
The Visigoths
The Visigoths had been a sedentary people living north of the Danube.
In the sixth century they were said to have come originally from the island of Scandza, to have migrated to the Black Sea, and thence to have come into contact with the Roman Empire.
The historical value of their origin legend is open to question; a national migration from the Baltic is unlikely, but the story may have been built out of traditions relating to specific groups which had played a part in the formation of the Gothic nation at various stages in its history.
From the mid-third century the Goths certainly impinged on the Empire, launching raids against the Balkans and Asia Minor.
Subsequently relations between the Romans and Visigoths improved and the latter were relatively peaceful.
In 376, however, the Visigoths found themselves under extreme pressure from the Huns, an Asiatic people from the steppes.
The majority of them negotiated entry into the Roman Empire under the  leadership of Fritigern.
Harsh treatment by the Romans over the next two years transformed the refugees into a people fighting for survival, and in 378 they defeated and killed the Roman Emperor, Valens, at the battle of Adrianople.
Thereafter they moved around the Balkans, sometimes in open war with the Romans, sometimes bound by treaty.
In 401 they entered the western part of the Empire, under the leadership of Alaric I. Once again they oscillated between friendship with the Romans and outright hostility, depending on the possibility of imperial recognition and acceptance.
The sack of Rome in 410 marked the most hostile period in the relations between Alaric and the imperial court.
Within a year of the sack Alaric died and in 412 his brother-in-law, Athaulf, led his people out of Italy and into Gaul.
At first Athaulf joined a confederacy of Burgundians and Alans, which had established the usurping emperor Jovinus in power, but he soon abandoned the usurper and his brother for an alliance with the legitimate emperor, Honorius.
What he wanted was a position within the Empire — according to the historian Orosius, he wished to support Rome with barbarian arms.
When negotiations with Honorius failed to bring rewards Athaulf showed both his anger and his desire to be associated with the Empire by marrying the emperor's sister, Galla Placidia, who had been a captive since 410.
Then, in 415, he moved to Spain, where he was murdered.
His successor but one, Wallia, made an attempt to lead his people across to Africa, but failed, and instead came to terms with the Roman leader Constantius, for whom he campaigned against the Vandals and Alans in Spain.
Subsequently, perhaps in 418, perhaps in 419, a new treaty brought the Visigoths back to Aquitaine.
After they had been settled in Aquitaine the Visigoths were relatively loyal to the Roman state, although in 422 they deserted the Romans during a campaign against the Vandals in Spain.
At the same time, the conflict between competing factions among the Romans themselves meant that the Visigoths could intervene against one or other party, or try to exploit the situation for their own gain.
Thus, they took advantage of the confusion surrounding the usurpation of the emperor Joannes in 423, and the subsequent establishment of Valentinian III, to attack Arles in 425.
They did the same in 430 when trouble was brewing between the two Roman generals, Aëtius and Boniface, and in 433 they supported Galla Placidia against Aëtius.
In 436 the Visigothic king Theoderid tried to expand his territory towards the Rhône valley, but was checked by Aëtius and his general Litorius.
In 438, however, Litorius was captured and killed when he attacked the Visigoths at Toulouse.
Nevertheless, Theoderid did fight for the Romans against the Sueves in Spain in 446, and in 451 he provided the most substantial portion of the confederacy which  faced Attila and the Huns at the battle of the Catalaunian Plains.
The battle saw the defeat of Attila, and the end of his invasion of Gaul.
It also saw the death of Theoderid.
The causes of Attila's decision to attack Gaul in 451 are obscure, although legends explaining it circulated from very early on.
Some thought that he had been paid to attack the Visigoths by Gaiseric, king of the Vandals, who were now settled in North Africa; others that he was making good a claim to be the husband of princess Honoria, daughter of Valentinian III, or that he was intervening in a dispute over the succession to the kingship of the Franks.
What is certain is that Attila's decision to invade Gaul marked the failure of Aëtius's policies, which had depended on using the Huns to further his own career in Italy, and to keep the barbarians in check in Gaul.
Having been a hostage among the Huns himself, he had called in Hunnic troops to support the usurper Joannes in 425; he fled to them after his defeat at the hands of Boniface in 432; and he was probably behind their destruction of the Burgundian kingdom in the mid-430s.
Granted this set of policies, Aëtius can scarcely have been well placed to gather the confederacy which kept Attila in check at the Catalaunian Plains.
A man better placed to gain the support of the Visigoths was Avitus, praetorian prefect of Gaul from 439.
In 455 the Goths were to be the prime movers in his elevation to imperial office.
The Burgundians
The Visigoths were the first of the barbarian peoples to be formally settled within Gaul.
The Alans, who were given land around Valence in c. 440, and in Gallia Ulterior two years later, were the second.
The third major group to be settled were the Burgundians, who were apparently given Sapaudia a year after the grant of Gallia Ulterior to the Alans.
Although the name Savoy later developed out of Sapaudia, the area in question seems to have lain to the north of Geneva.
By the ninth century the Burgundians were thought to have come from Scandinavia.
This legend was probably developed in emulation of those relating to the early years of the Goths.
In reality, like the Visigoths, they had long been neighbours of the Romans.
Pliny knew of the Burgundians, and  Orosius thought that they had reached the Rhineland in the days of the emperor Tiberius, receiving their name because they lived in settlements called burgi.
His account of their arrival and his etymology for their name cannot be trusted.
The Burgundians first come fully into view in the pages of Ammianus Marcellinus, where they are to be found to the east of the Rhine.
The emperor Valentinian I enlisted their support against the Alamans in 369.
Ammianus also thought that they were descended from the Romans.
Biologically this cannot be true, but it may be an assertion of political friendship and thus relate to Valentinian's diplomacy.
Burgundians may have been involved in the crossing of the Rhine in 406.
Six years later their ruler Guntiarius joined Goar, ruler of the Alans, to set up Jovinus as emperor.
Guntiarius appears again as ruler of a Burgundian kingdom in the Rhineland which was destroyed by the Huns in c. 435.
Shortly after, at a date given both as 443 and 447 by the same chronicle source, they were settled in Sapaudia.
The seventh-century chronicler Fredegar thought that they were given lands by the Gallo-Roman aristocracy, who thereby gained tax exemption in the days of Valentinian I. It may be that this information actually relates to the reign of Valentinian III, and therefore that it is the same as the grant of Sapaudia, but this is by no means certain.
More than one treaty is known to have been made with the Burgundians, although some may not have had imperial approval.
Thus, Marius of Avenches records a land division made with Gallo-Roman senators, under the year 456, that is at the time of the fall of the emperor Avitus.
His successor, Majorian, apparently overthrew this arrangement, pushing the Burgundians out of the environs of Lyons in 458.
The behaviour of those Burgundians who settled within the Empire is similar to that of the Visigoths.
They campaigned for the Romans, for instance at the battle of the Catalaunian Plains.
At the same time they also exploited the current political situation for their own ends.
In 455, the year after Aëtius's murder, and the year in which Valentinian III was assassinated, they were clearly extending their territory, since they are recorded as being driven back by the Gepids.
The expansion recorded by Marius under the following year was probably made with the connivance of Avitus, or in the aftermath of his deposition.
For the most part, from the reign of Valentinian I through to the early fifth century, the Burgundians were among the most  loyal federates of the Empire, and they were proud of their connections with the Romans.
The conflict with Majorian was caused by his reversal of the policies of Avitus, rather than any hostility towards the Empire held by the Burgundians themselves.
The settlement of the barbarians
An outline of the settlement of the barbarians in Gaul up until the 450s is necessarily made up of fragments from a variety of sources, not all of which are in agreement.
Thus, according to the Spanish chronicler Hydatius the settlement of the Visigoths in Aquitaine took place in 418; according to the Gallo-Roman Prosper, it happened a year later.
The difference may seem slight, but it could affect interpretation of the event, since the most important assembly of the Gallic provinces, the Council of the Gauls, was re-established in the former year.
The Council may have played a major role in planning the transfer of the Visigoths to Aquitaine.
A third source, the Chronicle of 452, gives a date of 415, which is plainly wrong, although the error may result from confusion of Athaulf's period of rule in Narbonne with the later settlement.
Subsequently, however, the Chronicle of 452 complicates matters more seriously, not only by being in conflict with other sources over the dating of events, but also by itself providing two alternative dating systems, wrongly correlated.
This would be of little significance if the Chronicle in question were not the only source to record some important episodes.
The grants of Valence and Gallia Ulterior to the Alans, and that of Sapaudia to the Burgundians are not attested elsewhere.
Any narrative of the settlements in Gaul, therefore, is inevitably tentative.
So too is any interpretation of the nature of the settlements.
It used to be assumed that the barbarians were settled according to the Roman practice of billeting, whereby a soldier was given one-third of a house.
Recently this has been challenged, and it has been suggested that the third which was allocated was one-third of the taxation due on a property.
The evidence is not detailed enough to sustain either argument.
The chronicles, which provide our only evidence on the first phases of the settlements, speak about grants of land to live in, of seats of habitation, and about the division of territory.
Visigothic and Burgundian law-codes are more precise, but they date from later generations.
Thus the Burgundian Code, or Liber Constitutionum, was issued in 517.
It contains an important law on settlement, which is likely to predate the promulgation of the code itself, although by how much is  unclear.
The law itself envisages a number of phases in the settlement of the Burgundians.
Some barbarians had already received land from the king who issued the law, others had been endowed by his predecessors; those who had not benefited in this way were to receive two-thirds of a property, one-third of the slaves and half the woodland.
This implies grants stretching over at least two generations.
A later law dealing with landless newcomers, specifies that they should receive half the property, and not two-thirds.
Although the references to property could imply tax yield rather than real estate, related laws which deal with land clearance make this unlikely.
The Burgundian legal evidence, therefore, suggests that land rather than tax revenue was granted.
At the same time, it reveals a succession of different grants, none of which can be shown to be associated with the original concession of Sapaudia.
Just as the barbarians themselves seem to have changed their policies about settlement, so too the Romans are unlikely to have had a monolithic system for settling the barbarians within the Roman Empire.
At times taxation may have been a significant factor, either because the barbarians were simply allocated revenue, or, as in the case misrecorded by Fredegar, because Romans gained tax exemption as a result of conceding land to the barbarians.
In addition the practice of billeting was used on occasion; it is described plainly in a poem written by a Gallo-Roman landowner, Paulinus of Pella, who originally thought himself lucky not to have had Visigoths billeted on him, but afterwards regretted not having them to protect his estates.
Later, another Gallic aristocrat, Sidonius Apollinaris, objected to the smell and the noise of a group of Burgundians who were established on his estate.
The settlement of the barbarians was plainly varied, and our sources provide only a hint of its complexities.
The same holds true when it comes to a consideration of the reasons for the individual grants made by the Romans.
The Visigothic settlement in Aquitaine is usually seen as proof of the success of the Roman general Constantius, in blockading Wallia and his people when they were in Spain.
The choice of Aquitaine is then linked variously to the ability of the people of that part of Gaul to pay, the possibility that they may have backed the wrong side in the recent usurpations against the emperor Honorius, and the threat from separatist groups north of the Loire, who were known as Bacaudae.
The evidence is not good enough to support any one of these interpretations to the total exclusion of either of the others.
Moreover, it is possible that they underestimate the position of the Visigoths at the time of the transfer.
Although Wallia had come to terms with Constantius in 416, he  had subsequently campaigned on the emperor's behalf, against other barbarian groups in Spain.
The settlement, therefore, was not the direct result of any capitulation.
Further, when the Visigoths did return to Gaul, it was to an area where Athaulf had once established his court.
Wallia may have had some say in the grant made to his people.
In the case of the Alans, the extent of the deserted countryside round Valence is unknown; so too are the circumstances of the concession.
The fact that the land was deserted, however, may have been significant.
The settlement of the Alans near Valence may have more in common with imperial attempts to solve the problem of abandoned land, agri deserti, than with other grants to the barbarians.
It is possible to reconstruct the circumstances of the second concession to the Alans, of land in Gallia Ulterior, with rather greater certainty.
Here the Bacaudae were unquestionably a factor.
At about the time of the settlement of the Visigoths in Aquitaine there had been unrest north of the Loire, which had been suppressed.
This unrest is sometimes seen in terms of the class war, but strictly speaking this is unlikely to have been the case, since the rebels appear to have included dispossessed aristocrats.
Problems flared up again in the 430s, when the Bacaudae gained a leader called Tibatto.
Aëtius sent the Alans under Goar against Tibatto and his followers.
This mission was briefly halted by Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, but Tibatto was subsequently captured and the Bacaudae suppressed.
The area of Gallia Ulterior conceded to the Alans may well have been that area which had supported Tibatto, and the grant may well have been a means of punishing the rebels and keeping them under surveillance, as well as being a reward for the followers of Goar.
The Alans certainly treated the inhabitants of the region ruthlessly.
Although the land was meant to be divided between Romans and barbarians, many of the former were forcibly ejected, and there was a further uprising, led by a doctor called Eudoxius.
The settlement of Sapaudia is less easy to understand.
A Burgundian kingdom on the Rhine ruled by Guntiarius had been destroyed by the Huns not long before.
The survivors can scarcely have been in a strong position to demand territory from the Romans.
Nor can they have been substantial enough to have provided defence against further attacks from the Huns or from the Alamans.
Nevertheless, Sapaudia was divided up between the Burgundians and the native population.
Moreover, a few years later, the Burgundians did provide troops to fight against Attila at the Catalaunian Plains.
Aëtius certainly gained manpower through his grants to the Visigoths, Burgundians and Alans.
Imperial weakness
Manpower may hold a key to many of the policies adopted by the Romans in dealing with the barbarians.
The successes first of Constantius and then of Aëtius in dealing with the Germanic invaders obscure the real weakness of the Roman position.
Had they been stronger, the Romans would doubtless have dealt more forcefully with the barbarian threat.
In fact the western Empire was probably in a much weaker position after 406 than the sources suggest.
From 395 onwards the rivalry between the advisers of Honorius in the west and Arcadius in the east had ensured a lack of cooperation, if not downright hostility, between the two halves of the Roman Empire.
It was in this context that the Visigoths moved from the Balkans into Italy.
The subsequent breaking of the Rhine further exacerbated matters.
When Honorius failed to respond to the new problem, a usurper, Constantine III, decided to deal with the defence of Gaul himself.
In this way the barbarians encouraged usurpation, and the usurpers drew attention away from the barbarians.
Indeed, the Ravenna Annals seem to suggest that the court did not recognize the barbarians as a significant problem; they concentrate on recording and depicting the failures and executions of usurpers.
To some extent the priorities of Honorius and his advisers may have been justified.
However, the result of the civil wars caused by the usurpations of the first two decades of the fifth century appears to have led to a considerable decline in the Roman, as opposed to a federate, army.
Roman troops as such scarcely appear after the first decade of the fifth century in any source, except the Notitia Dignitatum, which appears to be an idealized list drawn up in the 420s, and not a statement of the reality of the imperial fighting forces.
Writing in the sixth century the Gothic historian Jordanes knew of only one Roman squadron at the battle of the Catalaunian Plains.
In the light of this Constantius is perhaps unlikely to have been in a position to destroy Wallia completely in 416: Stilicho, who had been in a position at least as strong, had failed to destroy Alaric.
Besides, there was the possibility that the Visigoths could be used to shore up the Empire.
The same was true of the Alans and the Burgundians in the 430s and 440s.
To survive, the western Empire depended on federates, and the early barbarian settlements were a way of ensuring a supply of federate forces.
Athaulf's wish, to support the Empire with Visigothic troops, had effectively been granted.
The last emperors
The battle of the Catalaunian Plains was proof that the imperial policy could work, if only for a limited period of time.
The events of the next decade were to show just how weak was the western Empire.
In 454 Valentinian killed Aëtius, supposedly with his own hand, accusing the general of treachery.
Although this has been seen as a crucial error on the emperor's part, he may not have been wrong in his assessment of his magister militum.
Besides, it was not the general's assassination so much as that of the emperor a year later which was vital.
Some of the barbarian federates are known to have understood their loyalty as being to Valentinian; his death, therefore, absolved them from any treaty with the Empire.
Further, with the murder of Valentinian the house of Theodosius came to an end in the West; as a result there was no clear heir to the imperial throne, which was open to competition.
Inevitably the confusion that followed tested even the most loyal barbarians, who could suddenly discover that the emperor they supported had been overthrown by a palace coup, and that there was a hostile ruler in his place.
Valentinian's immediate successor, Petronius Maximus, was killed in the commotion preceding the Vandal sack of Rome in 455.
In response the Visigoths raised the Gallic aristocrat Avitus to the imperial office.
He, however, was unpopular in Italy, and was soon opposed by his own general, Ricimer, who sided instead with Majorian.
Ricimer more than anyone else dominated the politics of the last twenty years of the Roman Empire in the west.
A soldier of mixed Visigothic and Suevic extraction, he came to power under Avitus, was responsible for his fall, and was effectively involved in the appointment of all the western emperors to hold office between 457 and his own death in 472.
Avitus's fall alienated the Visigoths.
His successor, Majorian, is unlikely to have gained the support of the Burgundians in 458, when he drove them out of the lands which they had received with the approval of the Gallo-Roman senators.
Nor was he immediately popular with large sections of the Gallic aristocracy from whom Avitus himself had come.
Nevertheless he managed to establish his authority over Gaul and its barbarian settlers, until he fell foul of Ricimer, who had him executed in 461.
The emperor's death in its turn alienated his supporters, most notably the Gallo-Roman Aegidius, who  began an independent career in Soissons, in the north of Gaul, which was to hold some significance for the early history of the Franks.
After the execution of Majorian, Ricimer appointed Severus as emperor; four years later he agreed to the elevation of Anthemius, but in 472 he had Anthemius executed and replaced him with Olybrius.
The appointment and overthrow of individual emperors were largely matters of Italian politics, but they had significant repercussions in Gaul, not least because of the close personal connections between Ricimer and the Burgundian royal family, the Gibichungs.
One of Ricimer's brothers-in-law, Gundioc, appears as the leading military official, the magister militum, in Gaul during the reign of Severus (461–5).
The family connection was enhanced when Gundioc's son, Gundobad, became Ricimer's right-hand man, and as such he was responsible for the execution of Anthemius.
Gundobad's importance was further enhanced when Ricimer died, for he took over his mentor's position at court.
After Olybrius's death in 472 it was he who appointed Glycerius as emperor.
Meanwhile other members of the family benefited from his position.
During Glycerius's reign Gundobad's uncle, Chilperic I, became magister militum, and was to be found exercising authority in Lyons and Geneva.
When Glycerius died in 474, however, Gundobad seems to have returned to Gaul.
The move may have been connected with the fact that the new emperor, Julius Nepos, was an eastern appointment.
Certainly his authority was not recognized by Gundobad's uncle, Chilperic, who appears to have regarded support for him as treasonable.
Chilperic's rule in the Rhône valley and the region to the east provides a rare insight into the complexities of provincial government in the 470s.
Although his authority was undoubtedly derived from the Roman office which he held, the area over which he exercised control seems not to have been determined by any Roman administrative division, but rather by the presence of the Visigoths to the west and by other smaller groups, including Aegidius and his followers, to the north.
The Roman poet and letter-writer Sidonius Apollinaris coined the phrase Lugdunensis Germania to describe it.
In some respects Chilperic seems to have been well regarded.
Relations between him, his wife and bishop Patiens of Lyons were particularly cordial, according to Sidonius in a letter which provides the only depiction of the Burgundian ruler's cultural and religious connections: Chilperic admired the banquets provided by Patiens and his wife admired the bishop's fasts.
Nevertheless, Sidonius did fear for the safety of his own family in the aftermath of the accession of Nepos.
And there were others who saw Chilperic's rule as something new.
According to the early-sixth-century Life of  the Jura Fathers, abbot Lupicinus attacked Chilperic's power as being a type of kingship (condicio regia) rather than an exercise of public justice (ius publicum).
That it was something new is further indicated by Sidonius's extraordinary description of Syagrius as "a new Solon of the Burgundians in interpreting law" , implying that a Roman aristocrat had devoted himself to drafting edicts for Chilperic and his Burgundians.
Nevertheless, the Gibichung family remained attached to the idea of the Roman Empire.
Gundobad and his son Sigismund both wanted the title of magister militum in the sixth century, long after the last emperor in the west had been deposed.
The creation of the Visigothic kingdom
By 476 the Visigothic position was very different.
The immediate result of the battle of the Catalaunian Plains in 451 had been the succession of Theoderid's eldest son, Thorismund.
His policies looked back to the more aggressive activities of his father; he fought the Alans, and he attacked Arles.
His reign, however, was short-lived, and his brother and successor, Theodoric II, cooperated rather more closely with the Empire, sending a third brother Frideric against the Spanish Bacaudae in 454 and appointing Avitus emperor in the following year.
Sidonius describes the Visigothic court in a letter of this period.
He paints a picture of the king's day, starting with his religious observance, and running through his holding court, surrounded by barbarian troops and approached by foreign legates, his tour of the royal stables, his restrained lunch, followed by a game of dice, his hearing of litigants, and dinner.
Sidonius, perhaps for political reasons, is concerned to portray a restrained and civilized man, with a good deal of power and authority.
After the overthrow of Avitus in 456 Majorian had to use force to bring the Visigoths into line, but thereafter they fought for him against the Sueves in Spain.
In the confusion following Majorian's death in 461, however, they found themselves fighting against one of his closest supporters, Aegidius, first in the south, and subsequently in the Loire valley, where Frideric was killed in 463.
Two years later Aegidius himself died, providing opportunity for Visigothic expansion in the Loire valley.
Despite this territorial expansion Theodoric was still technically a federate of the Roman Empire, working in the service first of Severus and then of Anthemius.
This relationship between the Visigoths and the Romans was broken by Euric, who murdered his brother Theodoric in 466 and seized the Visigothic throne.
The first clear indication of a real shift in attitude towards the Roman Empire comes not from evidence relating to Euric himself, but rather from a letter of Sidonius discussing the accusations levelled against the prefect of Gaul, Arvandus, in 468.
The latter was accused of treason on account of a letter he had sent to Euric, advising him not to make peace with the Greek emperor, that is Anthemius, but rather to attack the Britons who were stationed on the Loire, and to divide Gaul with the Burgundians.
Sidonius depicts the scheme as madness; nevertheless he maintained his friendship for Arvandus, and he may even have given up his office of prefect of the City of Rome in order not to be involved in sentencing his friend.
Arvandus's scheme was premature.
But Euric did take some of the advice offered.
He attacked and defeated the British forces which Riothamus had brought to the Loire in support of the emperor.
The events of the next few years are recorded in considerable detail by Sidonius.
Having returned from Rome at the end of 468, he was suddenly consecrated bishop of Clermont in 470.
Since the Auvergne was central to Euric's strategy between 469 and 475, Sidonius is a well-informed, and involved, witness.
Already at the start of the period Euric moved to isolate the Auvergne, by annexing the territories to the south and west.
In so doing he seems to have been acting in concert with a Roman official called Seronatus.
Despite his determination to maintain his friendship with Arvandus, Sidonius shows nothing but hostility towards Seronatus, whose plans impinged too closely on his own life.
In 471 Euric launched his first onslaught against Clermont.
Military resistance was organized by Sidonius's brother-in-law, Ecdicius, son of the emperor Avitus.
In response, Anthemius sent an army from Italy under the command of his son, but Euric's forces crossed the Rhône, destroying it and killing its general.
The Burgundians then intervened, pushing the Visigoths back across the river.
The following year Euric attacked Clermont again; once more Ecdicius organized the defence, probably using Burgundian troops.
Anthemius intended to acknowledge his achievements by giving him the title of patricius, but the emperor was himself killed by Gundobad.
Under his successor, Olybrius, the Burgundians seem to have continued to defend the Auvergne against the Visigoths.
Sidonius, suspected by the Burgundians, and threatened by the Visigoths, thought the situation intolerable; but worse was to follow.
With the death of Olybrius and the appointment of Julius Nepos the Burgundians under Chilperic found themselves in opposition to the emperor; presumably they withdrew from any involvement in the defence of the  Auvergne.
Nepos at first delighted Sidonius by conferring on Ecdicius the patriciate which Anthemius had promised.
Shortly afterwards, however, in 475 the emperor conceded the Auvergne to Euric in return for Provence, which the Visigoths had apparently overrun two years previously.
Clermont was taken over by the dux Victorius, a Gallo-Roman whom Euric had appointed as governor of Aquitania Prima; Sidonius was sent into exile.
The treaty agreed between Euric and Julius Nepos was one of the last imperial acts to affect Gaul.
The deposition of Nepos and then that of Romulus Augustulus in 476 saw the end of the line of western Roman emperors.
Euric moved to reconquer Provence, which he did, despite the opposition of the Burgundians.
In the immediate aftermath of annexation or conquest Euric's rule was far from pleasant.
Laymen who had opposed the Visigoths are likely to have suffered; so too did ecclesiatics.
Here there was an additional complication in that Euric and his people were arian Christians, who believed that the Holy Trinity was a hierarchy, in which the Father, Son and Holy Ghost were not equal, while the majority of the Gallo-Romans, including Sidonius, were catholics, and insisted on the equality of the three persons in the Godhead.
Euric, therefore, was able to combine politics and religion, in persecuting the catholic Church.
Just before his own exile Sidonius described to bishop Basil of Aix-en-Provence the state of the Church in the areas under Visigothic rule: Bordeaux, Perigueux, Rodez, Limoges, Javols, Eauze, Bazas, Comminges and Auch were all without bishops, and it was impossible to enter basilicas because their doorways were overgrown with brambles.
A century later Gregory of Tours treated this description as representing the normal state of the catholic Church under Euric.
In fact there is plenty of evidence to suggest that the oppression was merely temporary, being imposed while the king established his grip on the country.
Thereafter the sees were filled; Sidonius himself returned to Clermont, where the chief opposition to him came from his own clergy.
The kingdom which Euric created was substantial.
It occupied most of the land of France south of the Loire and west of the Rhône.
In addition, regular campaigns within Spain had brought much of the area to the south of the Pyrenees under Visigothic control, even if as yet there were few Gothic settlements in the region.
Further, Euric's court was clearly a place of far-reaching importance.
In a somewhat panegyrical poem Sidonius described some of those in attendance on the king; Saxons, a Frank, a Herule and a Burgundian; Ostrogoths seeking help and Roman protection.
Elsewhere he refers to a treaty imposed by the king on the peoples who lived on the river  Wahal, that is the Franks.
Whether Euric really could enforce a settlement so far away is open to question, but clearly he tried to exert influence considerably to the north-east of his own territories.
The Gallo-Romans quickly reached accommodation with the new rulers, despite differences in culture and religion.
Some like Seronatus and Victorius moved to do so even before 476.
Numerous others must have done so as well.
Sidonius wrote to a number of Romans who achieved eminent positions under Euric, including Leo, who became one of the king's leading advisers.
In a letter addressed to him in 476 or 477, Sidonius talks of Euric restraining weapons with laws.
If the laws in question were the great legal compilation known as the Codex Euricianus, then the king must have had the support of numerous Roman lawyers from relatively early in his reign.
Syagrius likewise collaborated with the Burgundians in legal matters before 469.
Within a mere twenty years of the murder of Valentinian III the Romans had accustomed themselves to new political circumstances, and the barbarian rulers had taken over many of the duties which had formerly been exercised by provincial governors as well as military leaders.
The new establishment was to be more durable than the experiment envisaged by Athaulf and attempted by Constantius and Aëtius, where a traditional Roman government was supported by barbarian arms.
Literary Continuity and Discontinuity: Late-Fifth- and Sixth Century Culture
The impact of the barbarian invasions and settlements in Gaul can be seen in the substantial literary output of the fifth century.
This literature, however, presents considerable problems for the historian.
First, it is geographically confined: it almost all comes from southern and central Gaul.
Very little of it relates to the north and north-east, although Salvian does describe the sack of Trier.
It is also the product of a single class.
Indeed the majority of fifth- and early-sixth-century writers whose works have survived were related to each other.
Despite these limitations the surviving evidence for the fifth century depicts the period in two radically different ways.
Most of the works produced in the first half of the century portray a period of social and religious cataclysm, which is arguably compatible with the archaeology of the north-eastern provinces, where evidence for decline in the cities, towns and villas, and dramatic changes in burial practices, gives a picture of disruption.
By contrast Sidonius Apollinaris, the most prolific writer of the second half of the century, implies almost total continuity with the imperial past.
This discrepancy makes any assessment of the extent of dislocation caused by the barbarian invasions extremely difficult.
It also points to a third limitation within the sources; that of genre.
To a very large extent the sources of the first part of the period which suggest calamity are moralizing tracts intended to prompt spiritual and social reform.
Sidonius's writings are verse panegyrics addressed to emperors, and letters: both literary forms which tend to emphasize the traditional values of the senatorial aristocracy and imperial court.
Although this poses a very particular problem for understanding the history of Gaul in the fifth century, similar evidential difficulties continue into the Merovingian period.
The contemporary evidence for the generation after Sidonius, that is the last decades of fifth- and the first of sixth-century Gaul, is  largely made up of letter collections.
These again imply considerable social and cultural continuity at a senatorial level.
They impose a particular perspective on the period, albeit one that is often ignored, because it does not provide a narrative framework for understanding late Roman and early Merovingian history.
Such a framework is provided only by sources written towards the end of the sixth century, by the short chronicle of Marius of Avenches and, above all, by the Decem Libri Historiarum, or Ten Books of Histories, of Gregory of Tours.
The Ten Books of Histories have determined the outlines of early Merovingian history.
They are, nevertheless, unique.
Indeed in the preface to his work Gregory appears to proclaim their uniqueness.
Inevitably there is a danger of relying too much on Gregory.
Despite their importance, for much of the period for which they provide the chief narrative, the Decem Libri Historiarum are not strictly speaking contemporary.
Moreover, they are not representative of the culture of early Merovingian Gaul.
It is, therefore, important to be aware of the changing nature of the evidence for the period, before turning to the narrative of early Merovingian history.
At the same time the cultural history of the late fifth and sixth centuries is worthy of attention in its own right.
Sidonius Apollinaris and the last days of the Empire
Sidonius Apollinaris was born into one of the leading senatorial families in Gaul in the early 430s.
He was well educated at Lyons and Arles.
He married the daughter of Avitus, then praetorian prefect of the Gauls.
When in 455 his father-in-law became emperor, Sidonius accompanied him to Italy and delivered a panegyric in his honour in 456.
Shortly afterwards Avitus was overthrown, and Sidonius, back in Lyons, had the problem of welcoming the new emperor Majorian, again with a verse panegyric.
Subsequently Sidonius seems to have retired from the limelight until the fall of Majorian, and the elevation of Anthemius, for whose first consulship in 468 he also delivered a panegyric.
In recompense Anthemius created Sidonius prefect of the city of Rome.
Within a year, however, the latter had returned to Gaul, and in somewhat mysterious circumstances he became bishop of Clermont in 471.
Thereafter he was one of the prime figures in the resistance to Euric, until Nepos conceded the Auvergne to the Visigoths.
For Sidonius the immediate result was exile, but after one or two years he did return, and lived out his life as bishop, albeit harassed by his own clergy, until the late 480s.
Granted his education and career it is not surprising that Sidonius, both in his panegyrics and also in his letter-collection, was able to see the last days of the imperial court within a traditional perspective.
It is difficult, nevertheless, to assess the extent to which this perspective is actually appropriate to the reigns of Avitus, Majorian and Anthemius.
The confused events of the 450s  and 460s are not easily squared with the literary image of the period purveyed by Sidonius.
Equally problematic is the validity of Sidonius's very cultured presentation of the barbarian courts of Theodoric II, Euric and Chilperic I. Here, the author might have had political reasons to present the barbarians in as positive a light as possible.
Except in very specific cases Sidonius's attitudes and style encourage the reader to see continuity where there may have been disruption.
Thus his writings give the opposite impression to those of the earlier moralists like Salvian, and even of that conveyed by Paulinus of Pella, a member of the senatorial aristocracy who collaborated with the Visigoths in the early years of their settlement in Aquitaine, but eventually lost the majority of his property, as he relates in his autobiographical poem, the Eucharisticon.
Asceticism and culture in the fifth and sixth centuries
The question of the dislocation in the literary evidence for the fifth century can be approached from a different angle.
Paulinus of Pella provides an unusual example of a member of the senatorial aristocracy known to have been bankrupted by the barbarian invasions.
A number of his contemporaries, however, willingly gave up their wealth during the opening decades of the fifth century.
One of the most notable features of the first years of the invasions was the development of monasticism in southern Gaul.
The patrons of this monastic movement were largely members of the Gallo-Roman aristocracy.
Of these the most influential was Honoratus, the founder of the island monastery of Lérins, just off the southern coast of Gaul.
Lérins itself was important in two ways; first it played a major part in the promotion of monastic ideals in Gaul, and second it trained a succession of bishops who made a substantial impact on the Gallo-Roman, and later Frankish, Church.
It was not the only important monastic centre in Gaul; already Martin, bishop of Tours at the end of the fourth century, had established an ascetic tradition in the Touraine and Poitou, and in Marseilles John Cassian, an easterner with first-hand knowledge of Egyptian asceticism, wrote two of the classics of monastic literature, the Institutes and the Conferences.
Cassian, however, was associated with Lérins, as was Salvian, himself a priest of Marseilles.
This tradition of aristocratic asceticism spread through Gaul largely as a result of the episcopal careers of certain Lérinian monks.
One of the most influential of these was the Briton Faustus, bishop of Riez.
Among those who regarded Faustus as their spiritual master was Sidonius, whose brother had been in some way saved by the bishop.
The religious culture of Lérins and of Faustus in particular seem at first sight to be at odds with the rhetorical culture of Sidonius's own writings.
Even when the latter does raise religious matters, he seems to deal with them from a different perspective than that of the ascetic theology of Faustus or the spiritual philosophy of another great writer and friend, Claudianus Mamertus.
Again, however, the problem is a matter of style as much as one of substance.
On the one hand the theologians of the fifth century were also experts in rhetoric, even if the style they chose as being appropriate to their religious works was different from that used by Sidonius in his letters and poems; on the other, Sidonius is known to have composed some ecclesiastical works including an epitaph for the ascetic Abraham, poems for various churches, as well as a version of the Mass which appears not to have survived.
Sidonius's letters and poems portray a world in which imperial values and late Roman rhetorical culture flourish.
The relationship of this picture with that provided by Salvian and his fellow moralists, who saw the early fifth century as a period of destruction, is not immediately apparent.
Yet Sidonius belonged to the same aristocratic class as Salvian and the early ascetics of Lérins, although he belonged to a younger generation.
He was also closely connected with some of those bishops who had spent time in the island monastery.
Taken together, this evidence indicates some of the complexity of cultural responses to the developments of the fifth century, even though it relates to only one particular section of society.
The ascetic culture of Lérins was to continue to be of significance.
One of the island's greatest pupils was Caesarius, bishop of Arles from 503 to 543.
Born of noble family in territory controlled by the Burgundians, he left his parents and went to Lérins, where his ascetism was too severe for his health.
As a result he was sent to Arles, where he came into contact with the rhetorician Julianus Pomerius.
Meanwhile he attracted the attention of bishop Aeonius of Arles, who negotiated his release from the community of Lérins, and ordained him.
Thereafter he became abbot of one of the city's suburban monasteries, and then bishop.
In that office he had to deal first with the Visigothic king Alaric II and then with the Ostrogoth Theodoric I. He was twice accused of treason, but was exonerated on both occasions.
Subsequently he witnessed the transfer of Provence to the Franks.
His writings include two monastic rules and a large number of sermons, notable for the simplicity of their style as well as their message.
Despite his connections with Julianus Pomerius, whom he influenced greatly, Caesarius was able to disregard the  rhetorical traditions of his own class.
As a preacher who cultivated an accessible style of preaching, as a monastic legislator, and as the convenor of a number of major church councils, he was perhaps the most influential product of Lérins.
Letter-writing in the sixth century
In the literature to have survived from the sixth century, however, the legacy of Sidonius is as significant as that of Lérins.
Indeed, Caesarius apart, the major writers of the next generation looked back to Sidonius as their model.
In so doing they extended the problem of determining the relationship between rhetoric and reality into the early barbarian period.
Two writers whose letter-collections survive, Ruricius of Limoges and Avitus of Vienne, openly revered the style of Sidonius, and a third, Ferreolus of Uzès, is known to have modelled his own writings on those of the bishop of Clermont.
Ennodius of Pavia, whose career took him to Italy, but whose family came from Provence, wrote in a similar style.
Among the writings of Ruricius, Avitus and Ennodius are numerous letters of friendship, or amicitia, which were one of the traditional means of cultivating and maintaining contact with one's peer group.
Sidonius, like the Late Antique authors on whom he modelled himself, had written such letters to ensure the existence of a pool of friends on whom he could count in times of need.
The writers of the next generation did the same.
Both Ruricius and Avitus were close relatives of Sidonius, as well as literary followers.
Avitus was also related, if only as godson, to bishop Mamertus, brother of the theologian Claudianus.
He succeeded his father, Hesychius, as bishop of Vienne, in or about 490.
His cathedral city was one of the favourite centres of the Burgundian kings, and he therefore had much to do with both Gundobad and his son Sigismund.
With the former, who like Euric was an arian, he corresponded at length over questions of doctrine.
Sigismund converted to catholicism before becoming king in 516.
The bishop of Vienne was probably not responsible for his conversion, but he undoubtedly exercised considerable influence at the start of the new reign.
He even seems to have been responsible for Sigismund's most formal letters, those  addressed to the eastern emperor.
He was not, however, simply a political figure.
In his letters to Gundobad, in some of his sermons, and in his versification of the first two books of the Bible, he showed himself to be a reasonable theologian.
And in his lengthy poem on virginity, the Consolatoria de castitatis laude, he revealed the commitment of himself and his family to the ascetic life.
A comparison of Sidonius and Avitus reveals something of the continuities and discontinuities of the late fifth and early sixth centuries, and thus of the period which saw the transformation of the barbarian settlements into fully fledged kingdoms.
Avitus, like Sidonius, was a master of rhetoric; if anything his style is more complex than that of his model, although his grammar is less classical.
Also like Sidonius he found a career in the Church, although this seems to have been a matter of choice at a relatively early age, whereas Sidonius became bishop after a major secular career, without any obvious preparation.
Avitus's father, who was perhaps a tribune in 456, experienced the same shift from secular to ecclesiastical office as Sidonius.
A generation later the political opportunities which had been available in the middle of the fifth century were closed, but equally the restrictions of the 470s had lifted.
As bishop of a major city Avitus was involved in court politics to an extent that Sidonius, cut off from the centre of Visigothic power in Clermont, was not.
He was also more adept at using his rhetorical skills in the service of theology and asceticism.
In so doing he combined the religious culture of Lérins and the rhetorical culture of Late Antiquity more successfully than had Sidonius.
Avitus's generation is the last for which a full Roman education in the schools of Gaul can be assumed.
Nevertheless the culture of Sidonius and his followers was preserved among the surviving Gallo-Roman aristocracy.
Ferreolus of Uzès, who died in 581, was the author of a letter-collection in the manner of Sidonius.
His name suggests that he was the scion of one of the great families of fifth-century Gaul, a family, indeed, which Sidonius held in great esteem.
Like Avitus, he appears to have combined rhetoric and asceticism.
Although his letters have not survived, a monastic Rule which he composed is still extant.
In addition, Parthenius, nephew of Ennodius of Pavia, and husband of a granddaughter of Ruricius, was highly regarded by his contemporaries for his skill in rhetoric.
How he obtained this skill is not recorded, but it may be significant that he visited Ravenna, where he befriended the poet Arator.
He was to become one of the leading advisers of the Merovingian king Theudebert I, and was lynched after the king's death as being responsible for taxing the Franks.
Another family to boast a continuing literary tradition was that of the late-sixth-century patrician, Dynamius, who numbered Venantius Fortunatus, the greatest poet of the period, and pope Gregory the Great among his correspondents.
The esteem in which the literary ability of these men was held can be seen in a collection known as the Epistulae Austrasiacae, which contains two of Dynamius's letters and also a passing reference to the skills of Parthenius.
The Epistulae Austrasiacae is made up of forty-eight letters, the earliest of which is a verse epistle of the 460s, and the latest is to be dated to c. 590.
It is thought to have been put together shortly thereafter, perhaps at the Austrasian, that is the east Frankish, court, hence the title by which the collection is known.
A number of the letters relate to diplomatic missions between Austrasia and Byzantium, but the collection cannot have had a purely political purpose.
Some letters might have been regarded even in the late sixth century as being historically important; the first two, which are among the earliest in the collection, are letters from Remigius, bishop of Rheims, to Clovis, the first Christian king of the Franks.
But several of the Epistulae Austrasiacae have no such importance, being expressions of friendship, like the amicitia letters of Sidonius and his followers, sent from one member of the court to another.
The compilation, therefore, might be seen as a collection of model letters, appropriate to all sorts of circumstances, formal and informal.
If this is the case, it is testimony to the continuing importance of a literary tradition within the Frankish court in the late sixth century.
Moreover, since letters had a considerable social function in creating and maintaining bonds of friendship, which could be exploited for political ends, the continuity of this literary tradition may also imply the continuity of patterns of political influence.
That the exchange of letters continued to be significant into the seventh century is clear from the collection of Desiderius of Cahors.
Desiderius was an aristocrat from Aquitaine, where he seems to have been educated.
He joined the court of Chlothar II after 614, and there he formed a number of close friendships.
However, when one brother who was governor of Marseilles died, he was sent to replace him, and he was later elected bishop of Cahors in place of another brother, who had been killed.
As bishop, Desiderius had occasion to write about numerous specific issues, but he also took time to maintain the friendships he had made at court.
In so doing he was continuing a tradition which looked back to Sidonius, and to the social traditions of the late Roman aristocracy.
The greatest collection of letters to have survived from post-Roman Gaul, however, is made up of the poems of Venantius Fortunatus, many of which are verse epistles.
Fortunatus was not a Gallo-Roman, but an Italian.
Having  been cured of an eye infection through the agency of St Martin, in 565 he decided to visit the saint's shrine at Tours.
His journey took him through Austrasia, where he was hospitably received by members of the aristocracy.
In return he composed short poems of thanks.
Throughout his career he continued to write occasional pieces for friends and patrons, among them Leontius bishop of Bordeaux, the husband of one of Sidonius's descendants.
He also composed more formal poems, including an epithalamium on the marriage of king Sigibert and the Visigothic princess Brunhild as well as panegyrics and poems for the courts of Charibert and Chilperic I. These public poems provide what is perhaps the best evidence for the ideology of the Merovingian court in the second half of the sixth century.
After Fortunatus left the Austrasian kingdom he travelled to Tours and ultimately to Poitiers, where he became bishop in the last years of his life.
Once he reached Poitiers his literary output became increasingly religious, and included a number of prose saints' Lives.
During his early days in Poitiers a substantial number of his poems were written for Radegund, sometime wife of the Merovingian king Chlothar I, and founder and inmate of the abbey of the Holy Cross in Poitiers.
For her he composed his most important devotional works, including several hymns and a poem in praise of virginity.
Comparison between this last work, with its highly charged and colourful imagery, and Avitus of Vienne's work on chastity, which approaches the same subject through an examination of his own family, reveals a vast difference in the imagination of the two writers, and does suggest that despite the continuities, there had been a sharp change of taste in the first half of the sixth century.
On the one hand chastity is understood as an aspect of the piety of a senatorial family, while on the other it becomes the centre of a vision of the kingdom of heaven and its saintly inhabitants.
Although Fortunatus was an Italian, and although there is nothing comparable to his books of poetry in the sixth-century west, in many respects his writings can be placed in the same tradition as those of Sidonius and Avitus.
While the latter left no verse epistles, Sidonius did, as did other writers whose works are preserved in the Epistulae Austrasiacae.
As for the content of the verse epistles of Fortunatus, like that of many fifth- and sixth-century letters, it is often concerned simply with expressions of friendship, here called dulcedo rather than amicitia, and thanks.
In addition, Fortunatus's panegyrics are a revival, if not a continuation, of the form in which Sidonius had excelled.
His career is further proof of the esteem in which the sixth-century aristocracy and the courts of the Merovingian kings continued to hold literary skill.
Gregory of Tours and the decline of culture
It is against this background that the writings of Fortunatus's friend, Gregory of Tours, need to be considered.
All too often Gregory's greatest work, the Ten Books of Histories, which are unquestionably the most substantial and important single source for the history of sixth-century Gaul, are considered in isolation.
Despite their significance, it is necessary to place them within their historical and literary context, in order to appreciate the complexity of Gregory's achievement, and so as to avoid being hoodwinked into taking his work at face value.
Gregory was born in 538 or 539.
His family as he depicts it was one of the greatest senatorial families in Gaul.
It was certainly of considerable importance in the sixth-century Gallic Church.
Among his close relatives, Gregory numbered bishops of Lyons, Clermont and Langres, and he claimed that all except for five bishops of Tours were related to him.
Moreover, the family was also said to have included Vettius Epagathus, one of the Lyons martyrs of 177.
Gregory's father died when he was still a boy, and he was brought up first by his great-uncle, Nicetius, then a priest in Chalon-sur- Saône, but later bishop of Lyons, and afterwards by Avitus, archdeacon of Clermont, where his uncle Gallus was bishop.
Avitus was later to become bishop of the same see.
Gallus died in 551, and by 552 Gregory was a deacon in Lyons, where Nicetius was then bishop.
Subsequently he seems to have served the martyrial church of St Julian at Brioude, in the Auvergne.
In 573, however, he was elected bishop of Tours.
He died in 594 or perhaps a year later.
Gregory records that he wrote ten books of histories, seven of miracles and one of the Life of the Fathers, together with a commentary on the Psalter, and a work on the offices of the Church, each in one book.
He also mentions a preface to the Masses of Sidonius.
All of these survive, except for the commentary on the Psalter and the preface.
The seven books of miracles are made up of one on the Glory of the Martyrs, another on the passion and miracles of St Julian of Brioude, four on the miracles of St Martin, and one on the Glory of the Confessors.
In addition an account of the miracles of St Andrew and a version of the Passion of the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus have been attributed to Gregory.
The composition of these works stretched over a considerable period of time.
The Histories were begun in the mid-570s and not completed until shortly before Gregory's death; the four books on the miracles of St Martin were started slightly earlier and the last of them was still  being extended in 593.
The works on Julian, the Glory of the Martyrs and of the confessors seem to belong largely to the 580s, as does the legend of the Seven Sleepers.
The Life of the Fathers was not completed until 592 at the earliest.
In other words, throughout the period of his episcopate Gregory was compiling and writing his Histories and his hagiographical works.
Gregory came from the same aristocratic milieu as Sidonius and his followers.
Much of his youth was spent in Clermont, a city where the latter had been bishop, and his mentor there was Avitus, whose name indicates that he came from the same family as Sidonius's father-in-law.
Some of his early ecclesiastical career was spent in Lyons, which was Sidonius's own home town.
Since Gregory belonged to the senatorial aristocracy, it might have been assumed that he would accept its literary traditions.
His great-grandfather, Gregory of Langres, had been a correspondent of Avitus of Vienne, and the bishop of Tours himself wrote a preface to the Masses of Sidonius.
Nevertheless, Gregory's surviving writings do not belong to the rhetorical traditions which had been so fashionable in Late Roman and Merovingian Gaul.
Indeed, at first sight he appears to deny that they existed in his own day.
Gregory prefaced his great work, the Decem Libri Historiarum, with the following statement: The cultivation of liberal letters is declining or rather dying in the cities of Gaul, since some things that are good and some that are wicked are taking place, and the savagery of the barbarians is on the loose; the anger of the kings is sharp; the churches are under threat from the heretics, and are protected by the catholics; the faith of Christ burns in some and is cold in others; those same churches are enriched by the devout and empoverished by the perfidious; nor can any grammarian skillful in the art of dialectic be found to depict this in prose or verse.
Many groan frequently, saying, "Woe to our days, because the zeal for letters has died among us, nor is it to be found in those people who can set present events down in writing" .
Knowing that these and similar things are being said, in order to commemorate past deeds, so that they may come to the notice of future generations, I have not been able to hide the struggles of the wicked or the lives of those who have lived righteously, even in much uncultivated speech.
And I have been particularly inspired by this: I was impressed that many of us say that "Few understand a philosophical rhetor, and many understand rustic speech" .
In many ways this seems to contradict what is known of the culture of the senatorial aristocracy and the Merovingian court in the sixth century.
Yet, on the one hand this contradiction has been hidden by privileging Gregory's comments and neglecting the importance of the Epistulae Austrasiacae and the writings of Venantius Fortunatus; on the other, it has been explained by the apparent lack of educational opportunities available to Gregory in the households of Nicetius and Avitus.
In answer to this second argument it can be said that the education available to Desiderius of Cahors in the following century is not likely to have been any better, and yet he did write in the manner of earlier letter-writers.
Gregory's account needs to be read carefully.
At first sight it is rather a confused juxtaposition of two themes; literary decline and political crisis.
The literary decline in question, however, is not a general one; it relates to a lack of grammarians, in other words to the absence of great schools.
That is not to say that there was no literary skill around.
Indeed, Gregory almost admitted as much at the end of the Histories when he asked his successors in the bishopric of Tours to preserve his works intact, allowing no alteration to them, except their versification.
This may seem a curious exception, but it is as well to remember that Gregory would have known of the versification of Sulpicius Severus's Life of St Martin by Paulinus of Périgueux, and that he counted among his friends the poet Venantius Fortunatus, himself the author of a poetic work on the miracles of St Martin.
Besides, Gregory's preface is in itself something of a rhetorical display, leading to a defence of his use of rustic speech.
Nor is the use of rustic speech necessarily the product of a decline in literacy.
Gregory might have made a deliberate choice.
The standard of the bishop of Tours's Latin used to be seen as ruling out this possibility.
Recently, however, scholars have become aware that there are considerable difficulties in assessing Gregory's linguistic skills.
In part this change of attitude has been caused by an awareness that the earliest manuscript of the Histories, which contains only an abridged version of the first six books, does not reflect Gregory's own intentions.
It is, therefore, dangerous to take the poor quality of the Latin in that manuscript as an indication of what Gregory wrote.
His own grammar and spelling may have been rather more classical than is often supposed.
Arguments about language, in any case, need to be separated from arguments about style, particularly in a period of fast linguistic change, such as the Merovingian Age.
Gregory knew he was writing in a rustic style, and he thought that this had certain advantages in terms of its accessibility to the intended audience.
Caesarius of Arles seems to have held a similar opinion.
Like Caesarius, Gregory was, nevertheless, able to employ rhetorical devices when he wanted to, as in the prefaces to the Histories.
Also to be detached from the question of grammar is that of narrative skill.
That Gregory was a masterful storyteller has long been recognized.
That there is more to his writing than an ability to recount individual anecdotes is increasingly being acknowledged.
The bishop of Tours was capable of ordering his narrative for particular effect.
He used juxtaposition to emphasize his moral interpretation of events, and also to imply political comments, when it would have been dangerous to speak openly.
The dislocation between the culture of Sidonius and that of Gregory of Tours is not, therefore, as extreme as a reading of the preface to the Decem Libri Historiarum might imply.
Despite the absence of great schools of rhetoric, something of the literary culture of Sidonius had survived in the continuing tradition of letter-writing.
Although Gregory himself left no works within this tradition, he was able to employ tricks of style when it suited him.
In one respect, however, Gregory does appear to have broken new ground.
By deciding to write history he embarked on a task which other Gallo-Romans had avoided, it seems, for over a century.
Admittedly two Gallic chronicles survive from the fifth century, and the Chronicle of Gregory's own contemporary Marius of Avenches is a text of utmost importance with regard to the territories once ruled by the Burgundian kings.
Nevertheless chronicles, with their short annalistic entries, are scarcely to be compared with a work of history on the scale of Gregory's Ten Books.
Closer to such history in terms of the narrative skill required is hagiography.
In the century and a half prior to Gregory numerous saints' Lives had been written, most notably those concerned with the Lérinian saints, Honoratus, Hilary of Arles and Caesarius, as well as those devoted to Germanus of Auxerre, the Jura Fathers, and Genovefa, the virgin saint of Paris.
But no Gallic history survives from this period, and Sidonius had explicitly refused to write one, when asked to provide an account of Attila's invasion of 451.
For the end of the fourth and early fifth centuries Gregory was able to use the Spanish historian Orosius, and the works of two otherwise unknown authors, Sulpicius Alexander and Renatus Profuturus Frigeridus, but thereafter he had  no historian to follow.
Apparently, within Gaul the writing of history had no appeal from the early fifth century until Gregory determined to write an account which would put his own times on record and set them in perspective.
It is not clear what induced Gregory to resort to the writing of history.
His mother did encourage him in other of his writings, and certainly there is a good deal of family tradition in the ten books, which might reflect her influence, but she is not mentioned in the preface to the Decem Libri Historiarum.
Nor is there anything to suggest that Gregory was attempting to create a new genre of national historiography, although his History is often, misleadingly, described as a history of the Franks.
He himself emphasized his concern to record the good and bad that was being done in his own day, especially in so far as it concerned the Church, and he noted among the principal actors, kings, catholics and heretics.
His concerns are moral and religious, and in certain respects, therefore, although they appear to be out of line with the literary culture of Sidonius and his sixth-century followers, they do look back to the moral response which met the first wave of the barbarian invasions.
Gregory's moral and religious concerns were unquestionably a significant factor in leading him to write history.
Arguably they are more apparent in the early books of Histories than in the later ones, where his commentary on events was constrained by political circumstances.
In dealing with the difficult topics of his own day he resorted to silence and ambiguity.
For the late fifth and early sixth centuries, however, he was less constrained.
His moral reading of events was given free rein.
As a result, although he is our major narrative source for the period, he is not a reliable guide to the opening decades of the Merovingian kingdom.
The Establishment of Merovingian Power: the Franks before 537
The Franks were the last of the invaders of Gaul, although ultimately they were the most successful.
Already under Clovis (481–511) they could boast a leader of considerable stature.
Then in 534 they overthrew the kingdom of the Burgundians, and two years later they were ceded the majority of the territory held by the Goths in Provence.
Despite their importance, the emergence of the Franks as a power to be reckoned with is remarkably obscure.
Clovis's father, Childeric I, is the first member of the Merovingian dynasty to be well attested in the sources, but even he remains a shadowy figure.
Before him most of the evidence for the royal dynasty is legendary.
And although the Frankish nation was reasonably well known to the Roman emperors in the fourth century, its origins are equally hidden in myth.
Nevertheless the myths and legends associated with the Franks may hold some clues to their early history: certainly these legends were important to the developing political ideologies of the Merovingian kingdom.
They deserve examination before any investigation of the more obviously historical evidence which survives for the reigns of Childeric and Clovis.
The Trojan legend of the Franks
Writing in the mid-seventh century, probably in Burgundy, the chronicler known as Fredegar recorded the tradition that Priam was the first king of the Franks.
Friga succeeded him.
The people then split up, some remaining in Macedonia, others following Friga to the Danube and the Ocean.
There a further division took place.
Some stayed and, ruled by Torcoth, they became known as Turks, while others followed Francio to the Rhine, where they  became known as Franks.
Thereafter, under the leadership of military leaders, duces, they remained undefeated.
Another version of this Trojan origin legend was written down in 727 by the author of the Liber Historiae Francorum.
According to him or her, after the fall of Troy Priam and Antenor led twelve thousand men to the river Tanais, and then to the Maeotic swamps.
From there they moved to Pannonia, where they built a city called Sicambria.
Meanwhile the emperor Valentinian offered remission of tribute for ten years to any people who could drive the Alans out of the Maeotic swamps.
This the Trojans did, and as a result they were called Franci, which the author thought was the Attic for "fierce" .
When the ten years were over the Romans tried to reimpose tribute on the Franks, but the latter killed the tax collectors.
As a result Valentinian sent troops against them, but they fought back.
In the battle Priam was killed.
The Franks left Sicambria, and moved to the Rhine.
There Sunno, Antenor's son, died, and on the recommendation of Priam's son, Marchomir, the Franks elected Faramund as their rex crinitus, or long-haired king.
These tales are obviously no more than legend, but they contain within them some interesting elements.
Common to both are Trojan and migration traditions.
The Trojan story is first recorded in Fredegar, and it seems to have had some vogue in seventh- and eighth-century Francia, where other Trojan legends were preserved.
Its origins can only be guessed at.
Of relevance may be the tradition recorded by Ammianus Marcellinus, that the Burgundians were brothers of the Romans.
Although he does not say so explicitly, this could mean that they were thought of as Trojans.
The claim is biologically nonsensical, but it seems to have had political significance since it is first recorded in the context of a diplomatic initiative of the emperor Valentinian I, intended to secure Burgundian support against Macrianus, king of the Alamans.
Interestingly Macrianus was later to die at the hands of the Franks.
Perhaps the Franks and the Burgundians both gained the epithet "Trojan" at this time.
It may not be chance that the Liber Historiae Francorum names the emperor who called the followers of Priam Franks as Valentinian.
With the evidence of Ammianus in mind, it is likely that the Franks, like the Burgundians, received the epithet "Trojan" within the context of imperial diplomacy.
This would not have been the only occasion on which the notion of brotherhood was used to imply a special relationship with Rome; the people of Autun, for instance, regarded themselves as being brothers of the Romans, as did the men of the Auvergne.
Subsequently what had  been no more than a name implying a certain diplomatic affiliation between the Franks and Valentinian must have been interpreted as providing a genuine indication of the origins of the Franks.
The idea will have been elaborated through contact with what was still known of the Trojan legend.
Ultimately the story, originating partly in imperial politics and partly in a literary vogue, was recorded in one version by Fredegar and in another by the author of the Liber Historiae Francorum.
By this time, of course, the diplomatic origins of the epithet had been forgotten.
Gregory of Tours seems not to have known about the Trojan origin of the Franks, but he did know an undeveloped version of their migration legend.
He thought that the Franks came from Pannonia, and that they crossed the Rhine, and marched through Thuringia, when they set up long-haired kings in every region.
The peculiar geography involved has disturbed many, who have wanted to emend Thuringia to Tongres, an emendation already made by a scribe of one manuscript of Gregory's Histories.
To do so suggests that Gregory's narrative at this point is genuine history rather than legend, which may have some basis other than a purely factual one.
The migration from Pannonia, for instance, could have a symbolic significance, in that St Martin of Tours also came from there.
As for the fuller versions of the migration, as preserved in Fredegar's Chronicle and in the Liber Historiae Francorum, they may have been written in response to the origin legends of the Goths, which had been developed by Cassiodorus and preserved by Jordanes.
In fact there is no reason to believe that the Franks were involved in any long-distance migration: archaeology and history suggest that they originated in the lands immediately to the east of the Rhine.
The early Franks
The Franks first appear in historical sources relating to the barbarian invasions of the third century.
There they are already established in the region of the lower Rhine.
In fifth-century sources their territory is described as stretching as far east as the Elbe.
It is generally thought that they were a new people only in name, and that they were made up of tribes such as the Amsivarii, Chattuarii and Chatti, who are mentioned in earlier sources, but rarely, if at all, in later ones.
At the end of the century the Franks appear in the Latin panegyrics as a maritime people, causing trouble in the Channel.
As such, they were the precursors of the Saxons, who came to be more and more associated with attacks on the coasts of northern Gaul and Britain.
By the late fourth century, in fact, the Saxons were said to have been involved in raids  which had previously been ascribed to the Franks.
As a result, it is not always easy to distinguish between the two peoples in the context of attacks on northern Gaul.
Nevertheless, in the fourth century the Franks were also in close contact with the Romans, as allies and as recruits for the imperial forces.
Their involvement in Valentinian's wars with the Alamans was not unique.
Moreover some individual Franks did extremely well for themselves in imperial service, and one or two even gained the consulship.
Their significance in the 350s is recorded by Ammianus Marcellinus.
Two other sources provide crucial information on this stage of Frankish development.
Although the histories of Sulpicius Alexander and Renatus Profuturus Frigeridus no longer survive, Gregory of Tours had access to their works, and excerpted them.
Sulpicius Alexander recorded conflict in 389 between Arbogast, a Frank who held high military office in the empire, and two regales, or petty kings, of the Franks, Sunno and Marcomer, and he revealed that the latter was the warleader of the Amsivarii and the Chatti.
The History of Frigeridus covered events of a slightly later period.
From it Gregory learnt about the activities of the Franks in the first decades of the fifth century, including their involvement in the civil wars which followed the usurpation by Constantine III.
The long-haired kings
How the information of Frigeridus related to what followed, Gregory could not understand.
The Franks of the late fourth and early fifth centuries could not be squared with those led by the Merovingians in the late fifth and sixth.
What particularly distressed Gregory was the failure of Sulpicius Alexander, Renatus Profuturus Frigeridus and Orosius to talk about the kings of the Franks.
For the most part, Sulpicius Alexander referred to petty kings, regales, rather than kings, reges.
To make matters worse, when he did refer to a rex he failed to name him.
Since Gregory's account of the Franks in the late fifth century revolves around kings, there is a dislocation between his summary of the evidence provided by earlier Roman historians, and his account of the establishment of long-haired kings after the migration from Pannonia.
Had Gregory read Ammianus Marcellinus, who does talk of a Frankish king called Mallobaudes, he would have been less troubled by the apparent absence of kings in the sources.
Nevertheless the dislocation in his narrative may well be historically significant.
After excerpting Sulpicius Alexander and Renatus Profuturus Frigeridus, Gregory placed the emergence of the Merovingians at the conclusion of his version of the Frankish migration.
The Liber Historiae Francorum went some way towards connecting the evidence of Sulpicius Alexander with the Trojan migration legend by making the supposed father of Chlodio, Faramund, the son of Sunno, thus uniting the Trojan and Merovingian families.
Fredegar's solution to the problem is more illuminating.
Having provided the Franks with a Trojan origin, he stated that after the death of Francio they were ruled by duces, thus providing an explanation for the lack of a royal family, which so troubled Gregory, and creating space for a new dynasty of long-haired kings.
But he also provided an account of Merovech's birth, which may cast light both on the origins of the Merovingians and also on some of the peculiarities of the account provided by the bishop of Tours.
According to Fredegar, Merovech was conceived when Chlodio's wife went swimming, and encountered a Quinotaur.
Although it is not explicitly stated that this sea-monster was the father of eponymous founder of the Merovingian dynasty, that is clearly the impression which Fredegar intended to give.
The royal dynasty, thus, was thought to have had a supernatural origin.
Gregory may well have known of these claims, and have thought of them as pagan.
Whereas Fredegar relates the tale of the encounter with the Quinotaur, in the corresponding section of his Histories the bishop of Tours has an outburst against idolatry.
The origin legend of the Merovingians as recorded by Fredegar is important not only for its suggestion that the family claimed to be descended from a supernatural ancestor, but also for the implications it has for the rise of the dynasty.
In his panegyric on Majorian, Sidonius Apollinaris records the defeat of Chlodio, who was supposed to be the father of Merovech, at the vicus Helena in Artois.
This episode is thought to have taken place around 448.
As Chlodio's son, Merovech must therefore be a figure of the second half of the fifth century.
This suggests that the emergence of the Merovingian dynasty should be dated to the same period.
Faramund, who is later said to have been Chlodio's father, is not attested in any early source.
The dislocation apparent in Gregory's account of the early history of the Franks may be a direct reflection of the fact that the Merovingians were not a significant dynasty before the mid-fifth century.
Their origins were separate and later than those of their people.
It also may be that Gregory's references to Thuringia have more relevance to the Merovingian family than to the Franks.
According to the bishop of Tours, the Franks created long-haired kings in Thuringia, that is the territory  around modern Weimar.
He also wrote that Chlodio, the first member of the dynasty about whose existence we can be certain, originally ruled in Dispargum, which he placed in Thuringia.
Again historians have questioned the geography, preferring to place Dispargum in modern Belgium, but given that Merovech's son, Childeric, had close associations with Thuringia, where he sought asylum, and found a wife, it is possible that the Merovingian family did originate in the east of Frankish territory.
Taking the early references to the Franks together with their origin legends, it seems that we are dealing with a confederacy of peoples long settled in the region of the lower Rhine, and in the river valleys to the east, as far as the Elbe and the Main.
In the third and fourth centuries these peoples were responsible for riverine and maritime raids against the north-eastern provinces of Gaul and Germany.
At the same time, there were elements within the confederacy which became increasingly associated with the Roman Empire.
The fifth century, however, saw a change among the Franks, when the Merovingian family came to dominance.
This family seems to have ascribed to itself a peculiar supernatural origin, which probably had pagan overtones.
It is quite unlike the Trojan origin which may already have been attributed to the Franks as a result of imperial diplomacy, and suggests that the Merovingian dynasty did not come to the fore as a result of its connections with Rome.
It is possible that it came from the east of the Frankish confederacy, rather than the Rhineland.
Childeric I
Gregory learnt from his Roman sources that Chlodio captured Cambrai, and occupied territory as far as the Somme.
Of Merovech he records nothing other than his supposed descent from Chlodio and that he was the father of Childeric.
For the latter, however, he was able to draw on a set of annals which seems to have been written in Angers, to judge from the use of the Latin verb venire (to come) with reference to that city.
Gregory records a battle fought by Childeric at Orléans, and the arrival of Odovacer and the Saxons at Angers.
This was followed by plague and the death of Majorian's sometime general, Aegidius, who left a son called Syagrius.
After Aegidius's death, Odovacer took hostages from Angers.
Meanwhile the Goths drove the Britons from Bourges, but the comes (count or more precisely companion) Paul, who led a force of Romans and Franks, attacked the Goths and took their booty.
Odovacer then reached Angers, where he was followed a day later by Childeric.
Comes Paul was killed and Childeric took the city.
The annals also recorded a war between the Romans and the Saxons.
The Franks  took advantage of this by seizing some islands which the Saxons had held.
Then Odovacer and Childeric made a treaty, and turned against the Alamans who had invaded Italy.
These incidents scarcely add up to a coherent narrative, and the chronology is uncertain.
If the Britons who were defeated by the Goths were the followers of Riothamus, they provide a date of 469.
The Angers annals then cast a little, albeit crucial, light on events in the Loire valley in the reign of Anthemius, but it is not clear whose side Childeric was operating on.
Indeed he appears as a somewhat independent figure.
As for Odovacer, he has sometimes been identified with the warleader who was to be responsible for the deposition of the last emperor, Romulus Augustulus, in 476.
Yet there is nothing to support or to disprove the identification.
In so far as the general picture is intelligible, it appears that we are dealing with a group of warlords in the north, some of whom could claim to be upholding Roman jurisdiction.
As regards the armies of these leaders, they were heterogeneous warbands rather than ethnic groups.
Some Franks were prepared to fight under the Roman Paul, just as Childeric's men had once followed Aegidius according to a rather more legendary story which Gregory of Tours knew, but which Fredegar related at greater length.
In Fredegar's narrative Childeric was exiled from the Franks for his sexual profligacy, but he arranged with his faithful follower, Wiomad, that he would return when the latter had sent him half a coin which they had divided between them.
Wiomad cunningly stirred the Franks up against their new ruler, the Roman Aegidius, and then equally cunningly tricked the emperor Maurice into giving Childeric a vast treasure for his return to Francia.
Re-established in power, Childeric was approached by the wife of his one-time host, Bisinus, king of the Thuringians.
She had followed him because of his prowess and became his queen.
On their wedding night she sent him to look outside and he saw, as a symbol of their future descendants, lions, unicorns and leopards; bears and wolves; and finally dogs.
As it stands in Fredegar, the story is part of a complex literary construction which includes parallel tales of friendship and marriage relating to the Ostrogothic king Theodoric and to the emperor Justinian, as well as to Childeric.
As for the vision of the animals, which is absent from Gregory's version of events, it has become crucial to modern interpretations of Merovingian history as a tale of steady degeneration.
Nevertheless, in its emphases on Aegidius and on the Thuringians, the story of Childeric's exile does seem to be drawing on real events.
The death of Aegidius was recorded within the account of the Loire wars in the Angers chronicle, and his son Syagrius later appears as the first of the opponents and victims of Childeric's son Clovis.
Although there is no independent evidence for the behaviour of Basina, the name Basena is known  from a silver ladle, dating perhaps to the sixth century, found at Weimar.
As recorded by Fredegar, the Byzantine link, with the emperor Maurice, is chronologically impossible, but the presence of vast quantities of Byzantine coin in Childeric's grave goes some way to supporting the idea that he did have support from the eastern Empire.
Childeric's grave at Tournai, discovered originally in 1653, is perhaps the richest royal burial known from the early medieval period; the quantity of goods found was astonishing.
Fortunately, they were well published soon after their discovery; unfortunately, most of them were stolen from the Cabinet des Medailles in Paris in the nineteenth century.
They included weapons, jewellery, and objects which may have had some symbolic significance, whether religious or royal.
Most notable among the latter were numerous gold bees or cicadas, which appear once to have adorned a cloak, a small bull's head, also made of gold, and a signet-ring, which identified the occupant of the tomb.
What the finds show most certainly are the wealth, resources and contacts of the dead king.
Most individual objects from the grave can be paralleled on a lesser scale by finds from other Frankish burials of the period.
The garnet-work on the sword, however, may indicate Gothic influence, although the use of garnets was soon to become something of a speciality of the Franks.
The finds also indicate the importance of Roman tradition.
Childeric's brooch was in the style of that of a high-standing imperial official.
And the Byzantine coins imply some connection with Constantinople.
The burial itself is neither entirely barbarian, nor entirely Roman.
It is not possible to say whether the apparently symbolic objects had any sacral meaning, although the story of Merovech's birth provides some reason to think that the authority of the Merovingian kings in this period may have been bolstered by pagan tradition.
The recent discoveries of horse burials around the site of the original find of 1653, and probably to be associated with it, have, however, provided further indications of paganism.
But the same discoveries have drawn attention to the proximity of the grave to a Roman cemetry, beside a Roman road, on the outskirts of the city.
This mixture of Roman and barbarian in terms of the burial and of the grave goods needs to be seen in the contexts of Childeric's career as recorded by Gregory, following the annals of Angers.
Childeric's tomb is the archaeological counterpart to the delicate problem of the relationship of his authority with that of Aegidius, and later with that of Paul.
For Childeric's authority at the end of his life there is one further piece of information, a letter of bishop Remigius of Rheims to the king's son, Clovis, preserved in the Epistulae Austrasiacae.
In the letter the bishop congratulates Clovis on taking over his father's position in Belgica Secunda, the province which included the cities of Rheims, Soissons, Châlons-sur-Marne, Noyon, Arras, Cambrai, Tournai, Senlis, Beauvais, Amiens, Thérouanne, Boulogne and Laon.
In addition, he insists that he should listen to clerical advice, even though the new ruler was as yet a pagan, as his father had been.
The date of the letter is disputed.
Some have assigned it to 481, the probable date of Childeric's death, others to 486, when Clovis is said to have defeated Aegidius's son, Syagrius, and taken over the city of Soissons which he ruled.
Since Soissons was part of Belgica Secunda it is argued that Clovis could not have been in a position to claim his father's authority over that province until Syagrius and his kingdom had been destroyed.
It is scarcely possible to make a choice between the two dates.
One relevant factor concerns the extent of Syagrius's power.
It has been assumed that this was considerable.
If this were the case, then one of two points must follow; either Childeric himself never ruled over the whole of Belgica Secunda, or Syagrius established his kingdom after Childeric's death.
On the other hand, there is no reason for thinking that Syagrius's power ever extended beyond Soissons.
Whatever date one ascribes to the letter, Remigius conceived of Childeric's power in terms of Roman provincial rule, and he also thought that the clergy had a right to advise, even though the ruler might be barbarian and pagan.
Childeric must have been subjected to many of the influences which were to impinge on his son.
Clovis
With Clovis, Frankish history appears to come of age.
Gregory of Tours could at last write a coherent narrative of a barbarian ruler and provide him with a chronology.
Gregory's account runs as follows: first Clovis defeated Syagrius; he then married Chlothild, the daughter of a Burgundian king.
She attempted to convert her husband to catholic Christianity, but failed.
During a battle against the Alamans, however, he vowed to become Christian if he was victorious; as a result of his victory he was baptized by bishop Remigius of Rheims.
Next he allied with Godegisel against the Burgundian king Gundobad, but the latter survived through the cunning of his minister Aridius.
Then Clovis attacked the Visigoths because they were heretics.
On his return he received consular office from the eastern emperor; he subsequently chose Paris as his capital; his last years were spent eliminating rival Frankish leaders.
Clovis's reign, Gregory claims, lasted thirty years; with a little difficulty we can compute the dates of his accession as 481, the defeat of Syagrius as 486, the victory over the Alamans as 496 and the king's  death as 511.
From independent sources we can add dates for the Burgundian war (500), and for the Visigothic campaign (507).
All in all Clovis's reign seems to be straightforward.
There is, however, some conflict between detail provided by Gregory in his Histories and that to be found in his other works; moreover earlier evidence is at odds both with specific points in the Histories, and also with their general interpretation, which sees Clovis's reign as the manifestation of divine support granted to the king after his conversion.
Thus, Gregory's hagiography reveals that the exile of Quintianus of Rodez, which is important for the interpretation of Clovis's anti-arian policies, is placed a decade early in the Histories.
So too, perhaps, is the king's victory over the Alamans, and by extension his conversion.
Gregory's account of Clovis seems to be more concerned to create the image of a catholic king against whom his successors could be assessed, than with any desire to provide an accurate account of the reign.
In order to understand Clovis within the context of the late fifth and early sixth centuries it is necessary to emphasize the contemporary evidence, and to treat Gregory, as far as possible, as a secondary source.
For Clovis's accession, Remigius's letter provides the only evidence outside Gregory.
Little is known about the period from 481 until the end of the century, but during this period there were a number of significant marriages uniting the ruling dynasties of barbarian Europe.
For the most part, these marriages served to strengthen the position of Theodoric the Great, the Ostrogothic ruler of Italy, but since Clovis was drawn into this web of matrimonial alliances, it is as well to note their relevance to his career.
Theodoric himself married Audofleda, the sister of Clovis, and there were further marriages between his family, the Amals, and the ruling dynasties of the Visigoths, the Thuringians, the Herules and the Burgundians — that of the Burgundian prince Sigismund being of particular importance for developments in the 520s.
Clovis's own marriage to the Burgundian princess, Chlothild, as portrayed by Gregory, is not on a par with the rest.
Whereas Theodoric envisaged marriage alliances as a means of coordinating the policies of the western kingdoms, the bishop of Tours implies that Clovis's choice of a bride was calculated to cause unease.
Chlothild was the daughter of Gundobad's brother, Chilperic II.
According to Gregory, Gundobad murdered Chilperic, and exiled Chlothild; Clovis, however, learnt about the girl, and asked to marry her; Gundobad was afraid to refuse.
Fredegar elaborated on the story, providing interesting detail about Geneva being her place of exile.
In so doing he may have had access to local traditions.
If Gundobad was responsible for the death of Chilperic, then Chlothild was not likely to encourage good relations between the Franks and the Burgundians.
This point is picked up by both Gregory and Fredegar, who describe the later Frankish invasion of Burgundy in 523 as the prosecution of Chlothild's bloodfeud against her uncle's family.
There are, however, problems with this interpretation.
If Chlothild waited from the 490s until 523 the feud cannot have been uppermost in her mind.
Moreover, Avitus of Vienne in a letter to Gundobad describes him as weeping over the deaths of his brothers.
It may be that Chilperic's death came to be seen in a new light after the Burgundian wars of the 520s and 530s.
There is also a curious parallel between the manner of his death, supposedly by drowning in a well, and the similar disposal of Sigismund's body after his defeat and capture in 524.
It seems that Gregory's account of the murder of Chilperic and the subsequent bloodfeud reflected later assumptions, rather than historical reality.
The marriage of Chlothild, therefore, may not have had the ominous implications which the bishop of Tours attributed to it.
Even Gregory did not associate Clovis's campaign against Gundobad with Chlothild's desire for vengeance.
He describes it as being initiated by the Burgundian king's brother, Godegisel, who made secret overtures to Clovis, persuaded him to invade Burgundy, and then joined him on the battlefield.
Gundobad fled to Avignon, where he may have received Visigothic support.
There he came to terms with Clovis and became tributary to him.
Then, with the Frankish king out of the way, he besieged and killed his brother in the city of Vienne.
Although no clear account of this episode dates from the early sixth century, Gregory's evidence is confirmed by the chronicle of his own contemporary, Marius of Avenches.
The latter, who was writing in Burgundy, is an important source of information for the kingdom of the Burgundians.
He dated the war to 500.
If Chlothild's influence on relations between Franks and Burgundians is hard to assess, so too is her role in her husband's conversion.
Gregory sees her as the prime mover in this, while allowing for the importance of divine intervention in Clovis's victory against the Alamans.
On the other hand, a letter, written by Avitus of Vienne, on the occasion of the king's baptism, ascribes no role either to the queen or to the outcome of a battle, but sees  Clovis's decision to become a catholic as the personal choice of an intelligent monarch.
This silence over Chlothild and the Alaman victory need not imply that they played no part in Clovis's conversion, but it is as well to consider what Avitus did choose to emphasize.
First, he comments on the king's astuteness in seeing through the arguments of the heretics, though he implies that for some while Clovis had been persuaded by them.
Second, he congratulates the king on breaking with the traditions of his ancestors.
Finally, after conjuring up an image of the royal baptism, he exhorts the king to further the cause of catholicism, while praising his recent action of freeing an unnamed captive people.
Avitus's letter deals only briefly with Clovis's paganism, and it does so in terms of the king's abandonment of ancestral religion.
The problem of a convert's attitude to his forebears was a considerable one.
It was recognized in the Carolingian period by the author of the Life of Wulfram of Sens, who thought that the Frisian leader Radbod preferred to be with his ancestors in hell rather than alone in heaven.
For a Merovingian, whose dynasty originated with a sea-monster, rejection of previous beliefs must have been particularly hard.
In Clovis's case the sharpness of the break seems to have been remarkable.
It can be gauged by a comparison between Childeric's burial at Tournai, and his son's interment in the Church of the Holy Apostles in Paris.
Further, Childeric's grave was apparently forgotten about; the horse burials which surrounded it were already cut into in the sixth century by secondary inhumations.
Clovis and his descendants did not protect the tombs of their pagan ancestor.
There is more to be learnt about the king's conversion from the bishop of Vienne.
Although his letter does not deny that Chlothild had a part to play in Clovis's conversion, nor that the king decided to accept baptism during a battle against the Alamans, in some respects the information it contains is at odds with Gregory's account and, therefore, with the traditional interpretation of events.
This sees Clovis as converting directly from paganism to catholicism, without ever being influenced by the arian heresy.
In so doing Clovis is thought to have been unique among the kings of the continental successor states.
Further, his total avoidance of arianism is held to have made him more acceptable to the catholic Gallo-Romans, than were the other kings of his generation, and to have helped ensure that the Franks were more successful than either the Burgundians or the Visigoths.
Avitus's letter to Clovis suggests that this interpretation is unacceptable, since he implies that there was a genuine possibility that Clovis would opt for arianism.
Moreover the title of one of the bishop of Vienne's sermons, now unfortunately lost, reveals that Clovis's sister Lenteild had accepted arianism.
Audofleda, another sister, was probably converted to the heresy at the court of her husband Theodoric.
Clovis and the Franks might easily have become arian.
In assessing the significance of Clovis's conversion to catholicism it is worth noting the lack of a firm association between the Burgundians and heresy.
This is apparent from Chlothild's own beliefs.
Here was a princess who was catholic, although she belonged to a family which is usually thought of as arian.
Nor was she alone; her sister was apparently catholic, and so was Gundobad's wife, queen Caretena.
In addition there is the letter of Sidonius, a generation earlier, recording the good works of Chilperic I and his wife, and the high regard in which they were held by bishop Patiens.
In fact, evidence from the early and mid-fifth century consistently portrays the Burgundians as being catholic.
It is only in Gundobad's reign that there is clear evidence for an arian Church among the Burgundians, but Chlothild and her sister show that there were catholics in the royal family even then.
Indeed it is hard to identify any individual Burgundian as being arian, except for Gundobad, who seriously considered converting to catholicism, and Sigismund, who did convert and was remembered as a martyr.
It seems, therefore, that the Burgundians should be seen as a largely catholic people, but that for a brief period under Gundobad they had an arian Church.
Since Gundobad may have been out of step with the majority of his people and his family, his own beliefs should perhaps be connected with those of his uncle, the arian Ricimer.
Evidence for the Burgundians and for the Franks suggests that neither group can be neatly categorized as either arian or catholic.
The final section of Avitus's letter to Clovis, as it survives, exhorts the king to be active in the work of evangelization, and refers to the recent liberation of a captive people.
Identification of this group opens up the problem of the date of the king's baptism, and by extension the chronology as well as the interpretation of the second half of his reign.
Gregory linked Clovis's conversion with his victory over the Alamans.
Traditionally this battle was dated to 496.
Nevertheless the Belgian scholar van der Vyver pointed out that a panegyric addressed by Ennodius of Pavia to Theodoric the Great in 508 refers to a recent influx of Alamans into Ostrogothic territory, and he suggested that this should be linked to Clovis's victory, which he placed in 506.
The argument, although thought-provoking, was not watertight; panegyrics are not noted for their chronological reliability — and besides there could have been more than one battle against the Alamans.
Gregory himself seems to refer to at least two: in addition to that in which he thought Clovis had been converted, he mentions a battle at Tolbiac or Zülpich where  Sigibert, king of the Ripuarian Franks, was wounded.
Although it is often assumed that these were one and the same battle, there is no evidence that Clovis fought at Zülpich, and it is possible that they were separate events.
In fact conflict between Franks and Alamans was probably endemic from at least the fourth century until Clovis's reign.
Thereafter Gregory has nothing more to say about the Alamans.
The migration mentioned by Ennodius probably reflects the collapse of the Alamanic kingdom, and the beginning of Frankish annexation of their territory.
Although Ennodius's panegyric cannot be used as absolute proof that Gregory's chronology for Clovis's conversion is wrong, it does suggest that there was conflict between the Franks and the Alamans shortly before 508.
Probably this conflict should be placed before the Visigothic war of 507.
According to Gregory, Clovis attacked Alaric because of his dislike of arianism, whose evils he illustrates with a partial, and misplaced account of the exile of Quintianus from his diocese of Rodez.
As he marched south Clovis was careful not to alienate the catholic Church or its saints.
He encountered the Visigoths at the campus Vogladensis, usually identified as Vouillé, but more probably Voulon, near Poitiers.
There he defeated and killed Alaric II.
Then he moved to Bordeaux for the winter, before returning to Orléans and Paris.
His eldest son, Theuderic, marched south to Albi, Rodez and then to Clermont.
For Gregory this was a catholic crusade, and he was able to depict it as such by omitting to tell us that after "Vouillé" the Burgundians, who were still arian in his eyes, joined in the harassment of the Goths.
Evidence for Alaric II's reign does not fit easily with the picture of Visigothic arianism presented by Gregory.
There is nothing to suggest outright conflict between arians and catholics in the kingdom of Toulouse, except in the years of expansion under Euric.
Although some catholic bishops are known to have been exiled during the reign of Alaric II, where there is any detailed evidence of the circumstances, factors other than religious conflict appear to have been important.
Thus Caesarius of Arles was accused by one of his own clergy of committing treason with the Burgundians at a time when they were ruled by the arian Gundobad.
Later, he was again accused of treason; this time by the people of Arles and the Jews.
On neither occasion was the original accusation made by the arian Goths.
Although Gregory states in his Histories that Quintianus of Rodez was suspected of treason by the Visigoths, in his Life of the bishop he reveals that the local catholics were opposed to him, because he had moved the bones of a favourite saint.
He also implies that the exile should be dated to the reign of Clovis's successor, Theuderic I. 
Other evidence for Alaric II's reign suggests that he was concerned to establish good relations with the catholic Gallo-Romans in the years immediately before "Vouillé" .
He was responsible for the compilation of a Roman law-book, the Breviary.
He also supported a catholic Church council presided over by Caesarius of Arles at Agde in 506, and he approved the holding of another council in the following year, although it did not meet because of the king's defeat and death at the hands of Clovis.
The evidence from the Visigothic kingdom, therefore, does not support Gregory's image of hostility between the arians and catholics in Aquitaine.
Catholicism is unlikely to have been the key to Clovis's success.
Moreover, sources contemporary with the war of 507 allow a different interpretation from that offered by Gregory.
Avitus of Vienne associated the campaign with unspecified matters of finance.
Cassiodorus, Theodoric's spokesman, thought the causes of the conflict were minor, and tried, unsuccessfully, to prevent war breaking out by drawing attention to the ties of marriage which united the kings.
Since Gundobad and Theodoric were both arian, Avitus and Cassiodorus would have been ill-placed to describe Clovis's war as a crusade.
Nevertheless, the economic factors mentioned by Avitus may have been significant.
The "Vouillé" campaign was not the first Frankish invasion of Visigothic Aquitaine.
There is a reference among the additions to the chronicle of Prosper preserved in a Copenhagen manuscript to a Frankish attack on Bordeaux in 498.
It is possible that one of these earlier attacks had ended with a promise by Alaric II to pay tribute.
Gregory states that a financial settlement ended the Burgundian war.
There was undoubtedly a mercenary side to the campaigns of this period.
Nevertheless, there are indications that Gregory had good reason to think that the war had a religious aspect.
In his account of the manoeuvres preceding the battle of "Vouillé" Gregory describes the appearance of miraculous signs, indicating divine approval for the Franks.
For at least one of these anecdotes he had a written source; he was not the first to see the confrontation between Clovis and Alaric in religious terms.
In addition he records Clovis's concern for the property of the catholic Church, again citing earlier hagiographical texts in support of his case.
For this last point, there is better evidence from 507.
The first official document to survive from a Merovingian king is a letter addressed by Clovis to his bishops, explaining that en route for "Vouillé" he had issued an edict protecting Church property.
Clearly Clovis was currying favour with the catholic clergy at the start of the Visigothic war; that is not to say that the war was a crusade, nor is  it to say that the king had already been baptized.
Avitus places Clovis's baptism in the aftermath of the liberation of a "captive people" ; the only group which can easily be described in these terms are the Gallo-Romans of Aquitaine.
It is difficult to understand Avitus's comment as anything other than a hyperbolic reference to the defeat of the Visigoths, and the destruction of Gothic power.
A reasonable interpretation of the religious history of Clovis's reign could thus run as follows: from the moment of his father's death, Clovis had to deal with the catholic hierarchy; nevertheless he remained a pagan, even after his marriage to a catholic wife.
Drawn into the complex political world of the 490s he showed an interest in the arianism of his fellow monarchs, as well as in the catholicism of Chlothild, and some members of his court were actually baptized as arians; he himself, although he may have already been converted to Christianity, did not commit himself firmly either to catholicism or arianism, although he certainly showed an interest in the views of the heretics.
His final decision was possibly taken at the time of the war with Alaric, when he may have thought that there was propaganda value to be gained by standing as the defender of the catholic Church; he was subsequently baptised, probably in 508.
In 511 Clovis summoned a council of bishops to Orléans, largely to deal with ecclesiastical matters in newly conquered Aquitaine.
Whether he was a good master for the Church, however, is a moot point; there is correspondence of Remigius of Rheims dating from after Clovis's death, and again preserved in the Epistolae Austrasiacae which suggests that the king made some poor appointments, and that the bishop acquiesced in them, to the disgust of other members of the clergy.
Even more questionable is the significance of the king's conversion for his people.
Some Franks had already been converted.
Others will have followed their master to the font, but one need not believe the figure of three thousand given by Gregory.
The majority of the Franks are unlikely to have been affected as yet by Christianity.
The "Vouillé" campaign and the following year mark the high-point of Clovis's reign.
In 508 Theuderic continued his father's onslaught on the Gothic south, in tandem with the Burgundians.
In the same year Clovis received some recognition from the emperor Anastasius.
Gregory's claim that he was hailed as consul and Augustus at Tours must be a misunderstanding, although an honorary consulship is not out of the question.
The implications of the recognition, on the other hand, are clear from references  in eastern sources and from Cassiodorus.
The year 508 marked the nadir of relations between the Byzantine empire and the Ostrogothic king Theodoric the Great, and war broke out.
Hitherto Theodoric had been regarded by the emperor as the senior figure in the barbarian west: now Clovis was to supplant him.
This state of affairs was not to go unchallenged.
After Alaric's death, Theodoric took it upon himself to defend the Visigoths, and to punish their attackers.
Clovis was fortunate not to face the full brunt of the Ostrogothic counterattack; the Burgundians, who did, suffered for their involvement in the campaign of 508, and lost a substantial strip of land in the south of the kingdom.
The Ostrogothic presence in Provence, however, meant that the annexation of Aquitaine by Clovis's son Theuderic was not to continue, at least for the time being; the following years saw the resumption of Gothic power in Rodez, if not beyond.
Perhaps because he was blocked in the south, Clovis now turned his attention to the north.
According to Gregory, at the end of his life he destroyed the kingdom of Cologne under Sigibert the Lame, then he turned against various other kings of the Franks, Chararic and Ragnachar, whose base was in Cambrai, along with the latter's brothers, Ricchar and Rignomer, who was killed in Le Mans.
In addition he tried to discover any other royal figures, in order to eliminate potential rivals.
The chronology of these stories is surprising; Clovis ought to have eradicated Frankish opposition earlier in his reign.
Nevertheless there are incidental details in Gregory's account which might be thought to suggest that some, if not all, of these atrocities are rightly placed; for instance Gregory states that Clovis had Chararic tonsured, which, if true, implies that the Merovingian himself had already been converted.
If Gregory's ordering of events here is right, and there are no means of testing this part of his account, then the last years of Clovis's reign were concerned with the internal power politics of the Franks, whereas much of his earlier activity had taken place on an international stage.
Whatever the chronology, when Clovis died in 511 the Frankish kingdom was certainly the most powerful kingdom in Gaul, and he was apparently the favoured western ally of the Byzantine emperor Anastasius.
That is not to say that his power and influence was actually greater than that of the Ostrogothic king Theodoric, nor that it was inevitable that the Franks would permanently eclipse the Burgundians in Gaul.
There was still much to play for.
Nevertheless Clovis had transformed the Franks from being an essentially northern people to one which was influential in the wider politics of Gaul and the Mediterranean.
His reign was crucial, but not decisive in the development of Frankish power.
Theuderic, the Danes and the Thuringians
When Clovis died he divided his kingdom into four.
His eldest son Theuderic (511–33) ruled from Rheims, and the sons who had been born to Chlothild, Chlodomer (511–24), Childebert I (511–58) and Chlothar I (511–61), ruled from Orléans, Paris and Soissons respectively.
This division set something of a precedent.
Clovis's own action, however, does not appear to have been traditional.
The Byzantine historian, Priscus, records a disputed succession among the Franks before Attila's invasion of Gaul.
Although Gregory refers to Clovis's relative Ragnachar as rex, he does not call Ragnachar's brothers, Ricchar and Rignomer, kings.
It is clear, therefore, that the Frankish kingdom was not automatically divided between all the sons of the previous ruler.
Clovis's decision that his kingdom should be so divided most probably reflects the precise political situation at the end of his reign.
Chlothild must have been determined to see the succession of her sons.
They were, however, still minors.
Theuderic, who was Clovis's son by an earlier liaison, had already distinguished himself as a military leader: he could not be passed over.
The division may have been the only way that Chlothild was able to ensure that part of Clovis's realm passed to her offspring.
Whatever the cause, the solution was to have major consequences in terms of the later political history of the Merovingians.
For the decade after Clovis's death we hear little about his sons.
Only Theuderic, in the eastern kingdom of Rheims, attracted Gregory's attention, first when he sent his own son Theudebert to deal with a Danish invasion led by Chlochilaich, the Hygelac of Old English poetry, and second when he became involved in the internal politics of the Thuringian royal family.
Gregory of Tours places the original creation of the long-haired kings in Thuringia.
And it was there that Childeric fled.
Gregory has nothing to say about the Thuringians in Clovis's reign.
But he does record that Clovis's son Theuderic was approached by Hermanfrid, king of the Thuringians, who was intent on destroying his brother and fellow ruler, Baderic.
According to the bishop of Tours, Hermanfred offered Theuderic half the Thuringian kingdom for his help.
After Baderic's destruction, however, he did not keep his agreement.
Subsequently, probably in 531, Theuderic enlisted the support of his half-brother, Chlothar, in an invasion of Thuringia.
Hermanfred was killed, his niece Radegund was taken prisonner by Chlothar, and the Thuringian kingdom was annexed.
In Gregory's narrative the Thuringians appear as dupes for the more sophisticated and warlike Franks.
This may well underestimate their  significance.
The Ostrogothic king Theodoric cultivated contacts with them, drawing them into his web of marriage alliances, and trying to use them as a check on Clovis in 507.
They were included within the diplomacy of the successor states, even though they were outside the geographical bounds of the one-time Roman Empire.
They may even have converted to Christianity.
Radegund is extensively commemorated as an abbess and a saint in the writings of Venantius Fortunatus and her second biographer Baudonivia.
Nowhere is it suggested that she had to convert from paganism.
The end of the Burgundian kingdom and the Auvergne campaign
The defeats of Chlochilaich and Baderic are the only episodes involving the Franks which are recorded by Gregory for the decade after Clovis's death.
They obscure a hiatus in the expansion of Merovingian power.
During this period the Ostrogoths maintained a strong presence in Provence, and re-established Gothic authority in parts of southern Aquitaine.
They would continue to be a significant force in Gaul until the Byzantine threat led them to relinquish their holdings in Provence in 537.
Yet it was the Burgundians, if anyone, who were the most prestigious people in Gaul in the second decade of the sixth century.
Clovis's death must have come as a relief to Gundobad.
There could be no doubt that the Burgundian was the leading ruler in Gaul between 511 and 516, and he may well have been the barbarian king most favoured by the court of Constantinople.
At the end of his life he appears to have held the prestigious title of magister militum, an office he had probably held after Ricimer's death in 472.
When he died in 516 his son Sigismund succeeded him, and negotiated with Byzantium for his father's title.
In Italy, Theodoric was worried by the Burgundian dealings with the emperor, and tried to cut communications.
The Franks may also have been uneasy.
A year after his elevation to the throne Sigismund gave proof of his statesmanship when at his Easter court he issued his law-book, the Liber Constitutionum, better, though less correctly, known as the Lex Gundobada.
But it is the ecclesiastical aspects of Sigismund's reign which are best recorded, by Avitus, Gregory, two Church councils, and the Passio of the king himself.
Gundobad had contemplated conversion to catholicism, and Sigismund was already a catholic by 515, when he founded one of the most prestigious of  early medieval monasteries, that of St Maurice at Agaune.
It was distinguished by its peculiar liturgical arrangement, the laus perennis or perpetual chant.
For this the monks were organized into groups to ensure that praise was offered unceasingly to God.
It was to be an arrangement which was thought particularly appropriate to royal monasteries.
A year after the foundation of Agaune Sigismund had become king, and in 517, the year in which the Liber Constitutionum was issued, a great council of the bishops of the kingdom was held at Epaon.
It dealt largely with matters of church discipline, and with the problem of dismantling the arian Church in Burgundy.
The apparent concord of Sigismund's opening years did not last long; within a short period of time the episcopate threatened to suspend the king from communion, because of his support for a royal official in a case of incest.
To protect themselves they also determined to withdraw to a monastery.
Sigismund was forced to accept the bishops' judgement.
Second, and more important, in 522, stirred up by his second wife, if we may believe Gregory, he had his son by a previous marriage, Sigistrix, strangled.
He subsequently decided to do penance for the deed, and set off to his foundation at Agaune.
In 523, Chlodomer attacked the Burgundian kingdom.
Gregory associates the attack with Chlothild's bloodfeud, but more likely it was an opportunist move prompted by the crisis following the murder of Sigistrix.
The campaign was swift; Sigismund was handed over to Chlodomer and murdered, together with his wife and children; their corpses were thrown down a well.
Subsequently his body was taken back to Agaune, where it became the object of a cult, the first royal saint-cult of the Middle Ages.
Chlodomer returned to Burgundy in 524, but was defeated and killed at Vézeronce by Sigismund's brother, Godomar.
The latter took over the kingship and established himself in power, until he was overthrown by Chlodomer's brothers, Childebert and Chlothar, ten years later.
Thus far the events are reasonably certain, and in any case Gregory's narrative is backed up by entries in the chronicle of Marius of Avenches.
Nevertheless there are problems with the evidence not only for the fall of Burgundy, but also for the related history of the Auvergne.
In Gregory's account, Chlodomer, before setting off to Vézeronce, asked his half-brother, Theuderic, to accompany him, and the latter agreed; but when Childebert and Chlothar asked him to join them at the time of their later campaign  against the Burgundian kingdom, he refused.
Instead, because his followers were anxious for a fight, he led them against the Auvergne, where there had recently been a conspiracy against him, which he wished to punish.
The crucial difficulty revolves around the dating of the Auvergne campaign.
Gregory makes this contemporary with the destruction of the Burgundian kingdom in 534, but this is chronologically impossible, since Quintianus, who was bishop of Clermont at the time of the attack, died in c. 524, and Theuderic seems to have died in 533.
If he led his followers against the Auvergne while one of his stepbrothers fought against the Burgundians, Theuderic must have done so in 523 or 524.
Why then did Gregory specifically associate him with Chlodomer's invasion of 524?
The answer may lie in a speech put into the mouth of Sigismund's wife by Gregory.
In order to incite her husband against her stepson, Sigistrix, she claimed that the prince intended to kill his father, to take over Burgundy and subsequently Italy.
This last ambition may not be as absurd as it looks; Sigistrix was, after all, the grandson of Theodoric.
The Ostrogothic king may well have reacted to his grandson's murder; he certainly sent an army to occupy territory between the Drôme and the Durance.
The forces of Theuderic which Gregory thought were present at Vézeronce may have been those of Theodoric, angered by the murder of his grandson.
There is a further indication that this is the right solution; one of the few archaeological finds to have come from the battlefield at Vézeronce is a fine helmet, which has been thought to be of Ostrogothic workmanship.
Gregory seems to have confused the chronology of events in the 520s and 530s, just as he had muddied that of the two previous decades.
The history of Burgundy and the Auvergne in the later period can, however, be reconstructed with some confidence.
In 522 Sigismund killed Sigistrix.
The following year Chlodomer invaded Burgundy and captured and killed Sigismund.
In 524 he attacked Godomar, in alliance with the Ostrogoths, but he was killed at Vézeronce.
As a result his own kingdom was divided among his brothers.
Theuderic, meanwhile, mounted a punitive raid against the Auvergne — ostentatiously avoiding the Burgundian campaign.
His behaviour at this point can be readily explained by the fact that he was Sigismund's son-in-law.
After Vézeronce Godomar took power in Burgundy, which he held until his overthrow in 534.
The crucial lessons to be learnt from this go beyond a reconstruction of events.
Despite the fact that he was born in the Auvergne in 539, Gregory was still unable to provide an accurate account of what took place in Clermont in the 520s and 530s; moreover he was thoroughly confused by the whole career of Quintianus, even though the latter's successor as bishop was  Gregory's uncle and mentor, Gallus.
At the same time, although he was mistaken about the chronology, his account of Theuderic's expedition was extremely vivid.
And he returned to the event again and again in his works.
That he had good cause is suggested by the fact that the raid is mentioned in the legal formulae of the Auvergne as being a time of great destruction.
The punitive expedition of a Merovingian monarch was not quickly forgotten.
Frankish Kings could be as brutal as Euric had been in the days of Visigothic expansion.
With the conquest of Burgundy, the Frankish take-over of Gaul was almost complete; three years later the Ostrogoths, under enormous pressure from the Byzantine invading forces in Italy, handed over Provence to ensure peace with the Franks.
The Merovingian kingdom was firmly established.
It included most of modern France, with the exception of the old Roman province of Septimania, lying between the Rhône delta and the Pyrenees, which remained subject to the Visigoths until the eighth century, and Brittany, over which the Franks exercised influence rather than direct rule.
To the east the Merovingians controlled the French- and German-speaking areas of Switzerland, as well as Belgium, Luxembourg and the Rhineland, at least as far north as Utrecht.
The coastal areas of Frisia were effectively independent in the late seventh and early eighth centuries, but previously they may well have been under Frankish control.
Between the accession of Clovis in 481 and and the acquisition of Provence in 537 the Merovingians had established one of the most powerful of the successor states to the Roman Empire.
In time it was to become the greatest of all.
Kings and Kingdoms: The Structure of the Realm in the Sixth Century
With the conquest of Burgundy in 534 and the cession of Provence two years later, the main geographical outlines of the Merovingian kingdom were drawn.
Inevitably there would be variation along the frontiers, and, more important, Frankish control over neighbouring peoples, including the Thuringians, was not constant; the hegemony exercised by the Merovingians to the east of the Rhine was an integral part of their empire.
Nevertheless, the base of their power lay within the territory which they had acquired by the late 530's.
The vast block of land over which the Merovingians ruled was essentially treated as two different units; on the one hand there was the north and the east, that is the territories which had been controlled by the Franks before the "Vouillé" campaign, together with the Burgundian kingdom; on the other there was Provence and the lands captured from the Visigoths.
The first of these areas in the sixth century was usually divided up into a number of geographically coherent kingdoms.
Aquitaine and Provence, once they came into the hands of the Franks, were also divided, but with less concern for geography, and the units were subordinated to the kingdoms of the north.
The divisions of the kingdom
The history of the divisions of the kingdom, or Teilungen as they are often known to modern scholars, is a complex one, and it is one that has to be reconstructed from narrative sources which are not concerned to describe those kingdoms, but which provide the relevant information only in passing.
As a result our picture of the divisions, and of the resulting kingdoms, or Teilreiche, is not complete, and even the outline that we have was not properly understood until the middle of the twentieth century.
When Clovis died his kingdom was divided equally between his four surviving sons.
To a large extent we have to infer the nature of this earliest division from what we can learn of later arrangements; in particular we are told by Gregory of Tours that in 561 Clovis's grandsons took over the kingdoms of the previous generation; thus, Charibert I (561–7) received the portion of Childebert I (511–58), based on Paris; Guntram (561–92) that of Chlodomer (511–24), with its centre at Orléans; Chilperic I (561–84) was given the kingdom of Soissons, once held by Chlothar I (511–61); while Sigibert I (561–75) inherited the realm of Theuderic I (511–34) and his descendants, Theudebert I (534–47) and Theudebald (547–55), and established himself at Rheims.
In addition to working back from subsequent arrangements, we can use Gregory's narrative to establish the spheres of activity of the various kings.
Theuderic I, for instance, was faced with a Danish invasion in the Rhineland.
The majority of Gregory's information on him, however, concerns his territory in Aquitaine and centres on his attack on Clermont and the Auvergne.
It may be significant that Clermont, which was one of the Aquitanian cities consigned to the east Frankish kingdom of Theuderic and his successors, was also one of the cities which he had invested in 507, in the aftermath of "Vouillé" .
The way in which Aquitaine was divided up and alloted to the northern kingdoms may owe much to the nature of the Frankish conquest of the area in the first three decades of the sixth century; but that is a topic on which we have scarcely any information.
The other evidence provided by Gregory on the Teilreiche in this period is concerned largely with modifications to the division of 511, and not with the original arrangements.
Thus, after Chlodomer's death at Vézeronce, his sons were brought up by their grandmother, Chlothild, who clearly expected them to inherit their father's kingdom.
Their uncles, Childebert I and Chlothar I, had other ideas and resolved to divide Chlodomer's kingdom between them.
Chlothild was presented with the choice of either having her grandchildren tonsured or killed; she chose the latter solution, although one child, Chlodovald, escaped to become a monk and, in time, to be revered as St Cloud.
According to Gregory, Chlodomer's kingdom was divided equally between Childebert and Chlothar, but in so far as this division can be reconstructed it appears not to have been confined to the two brothers; there are grounds for thinking that Theuderic also may have profited from the murders.
On Theuderic's death in 533 Childebert and Chlothar united once again to exclude a nephew from his inheritance.
This time, however, the opposition was made of sterner stuff.
Theudebert I was already an active  figure in the last years of his father's reign, and he had the support of a military following, his leudes, with whose help he made good his claim to the throne.
When he died in 547 there was, apparently, no opposition to the succession of his son, Theudebald, although his subjects took advantage of his death to lynch the hated minister Parthenius.
Eight years later Theudebald died without an heir, and on this occasion Chlothar was, it seems, able to take over the eastern kingdom without opposition.
The same circumstances were repeated in 558, when Childebert died.
For the last three years of his life Chlothar was thus sole king of the Merovingian kingdom; when he died in 561 the process of division could start again from scratch.
According to Gregory the division of 561 was in many respects a return to that of 511; Charibert I received Paris, Guntram Orléans, Sigibert I Rheims and Chilperic I Soissons.
There were, however, significant differences between the two divisions: for a start, in 511 the Franks did not control Burgundy, and what lands they held in Aquitaine can hardly have seemed secure with Clovis dead and the Ostrogothic king Theodoric intent on restoring the power of the Visigoths.
For the south-east and in Burgundy, the arrangements of 511 could not have provided the sons of Chlothar with any precedent.
Those of 561 were not, in any case, to last long.
After a reign of only six years Charibert died.
As a result, his kingdom, with the exception of Paris, which was treated as neutral ground, was divided among his brothers, not that the division was universally respected.
Indeed many of the disagreements of the following years seem to be associated with cities which had once been held by Charibert, and this was to hold true even after the murder of Sigibert, since lands which he had acquired in 567 became bones of contention between his son, Childebert II, and Guntram.
Neither the murder of Sigibert in 575, nor that of Chilperic nine years later was to alter the political map of the Merovingian kingdoms in the way that the death of Charibert had done, since they each left a single male heir.
Certainly in both cases the child was a minor, and there were problems in ensuring their succession to their fathers' territories, but there was no need for a new division of the kingdom.
The parallels, such as they are, between 511 and 561, together with the arrangements made to cope with the death of Charibert, lend a spurious uniformity to the divisions of the Merovingian kingdom, but one which is, at first sight, supported by the events of 595.
Guntram had died three years earlier and, according to the seventh-century chronicler Fredegar, Sigibert's son, Childebert II (575–96) took over his kingdom, thus uniting what had been the kingdom of Orléans, but which came to be known as the kingdom  of Burgundy, with that of Rheims, or Austrasia.
Chilperic's son, Chlothar II (584–629), was excluded from this arrangement, which had been agreed at the Treaty of Andelot in 587.
Three years after Guntram's death, however, Childebert himself died, leaving two sons, Theudebert II (596–612) and Theuderic II (596–613), of whom the former had already in 589 been given a sub-kingdom of the cities of Soissons and Meaux, at the request of some of the leading citizens — development pregnant with implications for the future.
Now in 596 Theudebert received Austrasia, and Theuderic Burgundy, apparently cementing the divisions created by Charibert's death in 567.
The political developments of the next eighteen years ensured that this was not so.
The first significant change to the political map of the Merovingian kingdom occurred with the campaign of Theudebert II and Theuderic II against Chlothar II in the year 600, as a result of which the latter was left only with the territories of Beauvais, Amiens and Rouen.
The alliance of the sons of Childebert II, however, was short-lived.
In 611 Theuderic took the field against his brother, and promised to restore the duchy of the Dentelin to Chlothar, in return for his neutrality.
A year later he overthrew Theudebert, and killed him and his sons, but after uniting Burgundy and Austrasia he died of dysentery.
Although he left four sons, his grandmother, Brunhild, decided to elevate only one of them, Sigibert II (613), to the throne.
Nevertheless this attempt to ensure the succession of at least one of her descendants failed; the aristocracy deserted to Chlothar II, and the old queen and her great-grandchildren, with the exception of one child, Merovech, were killed.
In 613 the kingdom was reunited, as it had been under the previous Chlothar in 558.
Merovingian succession
Although the division of the Merovingian kingdom is often held to have been been traditional, this was clearly not the case in 511.
And although the arrangements made at Clovis's death certainly set a precedent, it did not ensure the succession of all Merovingian males, despite Gregory of Tours's famous dictum that "all boys born of kings are called king's sons" .
Childebert I and Chlothar I ensured that Chlodomer's sons did not succeed  their father, and they tried hard to exclude Theudebert I from the throne.
Towards the second half of the sixth century Fredegund was determined that her husband Chilperic's sons by other women should not be in a position to succeed, and assisted in their fates.
One of them, Merovech, attempted to outwit his stepmother by marrying Sigibert's widow, Brunhild.
Not surprisingly princes were concerned to build up a position of strength during their fathers' lifetimes.
This probably accounts for the events of the closing years of the reign of Clovis's longest surviving son, Chlothar I. After Theudebald's death in 555, Chlothar sent his own son Chramn to Clermont, where he terrorized the bishop, Cautinus, and removed the comes, Firminus.
The prince then moved to Poitiers and allied with his uncle Childebert against his father.
The conflict between Chramn and Chlothar dragged on from 556 to 560, when the prince was finally defeated, captured and burned.
Exactly a year later Chlothar himself died of fever at Compiègne.
He was buried at the church of St Medard in Soissons.
Chramn's actions are best interpreted as those of a prince determined to have some share in the Merovingian kingdom: effectively he was creating a new kingdom in his father's lifetime.
Even at the time of Chlothar's death the issue of the succession seems to have been undecided.
Venantius Fortunatus reveals that Chilperic was his father's favourite.
Chlothar may have intended that he alone should succeed.
Gregory's account of what actually happened is laconic in the extreme.
We are told that Chilperic seized his father's treasure and gained a following through bribery.
He then went to Paris and occupied the throne of his uncle Charibert.
His three half-brothers united against him and subsequently the kingdom was divided equally.
The division finally arrived at in 561 was, then, a compromise made after Chilperic's bid for the throne of Paris.
A further factor needs to be taken into consideration.
Chlothar, like many of the early Merovingian monarchs, was uxorious: he had at least sixth wives.
Three of his surviving sons — or at least of those whom he acknowledged as his — were the children of Ingund; the fourth, Chilperic, was the child of Ingund's sister, Aregund.
It is possible that Chilperic's actions immediately after his father's death were intended to ensure that he was not excluded from the succession by his half-brothers.
Arguably unlike Chlothild in 511 and certainly unlike Fredegund, Aregund may have played no part in ensuring her son's succession.
She is not known to have been involved in any way.
Nevertheless the serial monogamy of kings is likely to have had its implications for the rivalries between their heirs.
Chilperic was not the only son of Chlothar to be affected by his mother's position: in considering Chramn's bid for power it is important to remember that his mother was neither Ingund nor Aregund, but Chunsina.
Certainly the rivalries within the Merovingian family ensured that there could never been a simple pattern of succession 
The government of the Teilreiche
The evidence for the divisions of the Merovingian kingdom is slight.
The political narrative of the sixth century, however, makes it clear that they were not the result of automatic recourse to a pattern established in 511.
The evidence for the working of government is equally slight, but there are recurrent features which allow some insight into the organization of the kingdoms.
Time and again we are told that a kingdom was divided equally.
This is recorded as being the case in 511, as in 524 and 561.
What constituted equality is open to question; certainly it is unlikely that there was a strict division according to acreage.
This in any case would seem to be ruled out by references to some kings holding certain civitates, or cities with their surrounding territories, jointly.
More likely the intention was to give brothers portions which provided equal incomes.
This was almost certainly the decisive factor in the division of Aquitaine.
The basis for assessment, therefore, would have been administrative records such as tax registers, providing evidence of the value to the monarch of individual civitates, which had been the basic units of government in the later Roman Empire.
When a city and its territory was divided between two kings we should understand that it was their revenues that were at stake, although certain cities also had a strategic importance, which may also have been a matter of concern.
The civitas was central to the division of the Merovingian kingdoms because, as in the Roman period, it was the basis of much of the administrative system.
Its administrative importance is certainly attested for the sixth century, and it probably continued, although evidence is almost non-existent for the later period.
Indeed, to be strictly accurate, the evidence is far from complete for the early Merovingian age, and, for that matter, even for the fifth century.
We do not, for instance, know much about the administration of a civitas.
From collections of legal formulae we know something about the local archives of a city, in which wills and other actions were registered, and we find various officials, the defensor, curator, magister militum and other members of the local curia being called upon to open the archives for the registration of new grants, but we have Formularies only from  a small number of civitates, and their contents are not often datable, except to the period before the ninth century, when most of them were written down.
It is not clear that there was uniformity across the whole of the Merovingian kingdom in such matters.
The senior official in the civitas was usually the comes (pl. comites), sometimes unhelpfully translated as "count" ; to be precise the word means "companion" .
On the whole the Merovingian comites have been seen as similar to the late Roman comites civitatis, and there is certainly a case for thinking that both could carry out the same duties, which included the hearing of law-suits and the enforcement of justice, and could involve military leadership as well.
The comes probably had as his subordinate another officer whose post was also of late Roman origin, the centenarius.
Information relating to centenarii, however, is scarce.
Further, it is only for the kingdom of the Burgundians that there is evidence for anything like an all-embracing comital structure, and while most, if not all, Merovingian civitates must have had their comites, or in the north, their graphiones, in all probability local administration could vary according to regional tradition and to the will of an individual king, whose main concern was to ensure the loyalty of and to realize the revenues from his civitates.
Similar flexibility should also be envisaged when dealing with officials of rank superior to that of the comes.
At times we hear of men with charge over more than one civitas; thus Nicetius, who had actually been removed from comital office in the Auvergne, resorted to bribery and became dux of the Auvergne, the Rutenois and Uzès.
There is even a list of offices which claims that a dux was in charge of twelve civitates, but although this text has been seen as a Merovingian document, it is almost certainly a school-book, originating perhaps in the British Isles.
In fact while we find duces in charge of groups of civitates, they also appear as leaders of royal armies, without any clear geographical base, and they were to be found engaged in a wide variety of other activites, including diplomatic missions.
Much eludes us about the government of the Merovingian civitates, but some aspects of their role within the administration of the kingdom are reasonably clear.
The levying of taxes in particular seems to have been based on the civitas.
Our most instructive anecdote for this is Gregory's account of the new taxes instituted by Chilperic in 579.
Five gallons of wine was to be levied on every half acre of land, and there was to be an additional tax on manpower.
The levels were so heavy that people left Chilperic's kingdom in order to avoid the taxes.
In addition the arrival of the referendiary Mark at Limoges to collect the taxes provoked a riot.
How much was new about these demands is not clear; Gregory liked to portray tax as unwarranted and unjust.
In origin, however, the taxation system of the Merovingians was undoubtedly based on that of the later Roman empire; at Lyons an exemption supposedly granted by the Byzantine emperor Leo (457–74) was still in force in Gregory's day.
It was exemptions that interested Gregory, and this means that our knowledge of Merovingian taxation is decidedly one-sided.
Exemptions marked the generosity of the monarch, as with Theudebert's concessions to the churches of the Auvergne.
Wicked monarchs challenged tax-free status, as happened on more than one occasion to the church of Tours.
Chlothar I even made the heinous suggestion that the churches of his kingdom should hand over one-third of their revenues to the crown.
Gregory records such plans in order to show how they were prevented, whether by a bishop, as in the case of Chlothar's request, or by God, as happened to Chilperic's tax demands.
The disease visited on his sons prompted his wife, Fredegund, to burn the new tax registers.
This bias of Gregory makes it very difficult to assess the regularity of tax collection, but on one occasion the bishop of Tours does allow some insight into what appears to be the norm.
Because the tax registers of Poitiers were out of date, heavy burdens were falling on those unable to pay, including widows and orphans.
This prompted the bishop, Maroveus, to ask that the city be reassessed, with the result that the poor were granted relief, and only fair taxes were levied.
Childebert's tax inspectors then tried to institute the same reforms in Tours, but Gregory claimed that the city was exempt, and related the history of exemption since the time of Chlothar I. However, if reorganization had not threatened Tours, it is doubtful whether we would have heard of the perfectly sensible arrangements at Poitiers, which suggest  not only that taxation was normal in the Merovingian kingdom, but also that it could be organized efficiently, and so far as one can see, fairly.
Nevertheless taxation does not seem to have fallen on the whole population.
While the Romans are described as being tributary, it seems that the lands which had originally been granted to free-born Franks had been exempt from tax, and that the Franks subsequently assumed that any lands which they came to hold were similarly exempt.
This at least is the neatest way of explaining some of the conflicts described in Gregory's Histories between free Franks and administrators who insisted that they were liable to taxation: Parthenius they lynched, and Audo they deprived of his property.
The tax collectors were fighting an uphill struggle: during the seventh century "truly free men" came to have immunity from paying dues to the royal fisc.
Gregory claimed that Tours was free not only from taxation, but also from certain military obligations.
In 578 Chilperic ordered the men of the Touraine, Poitou, the Bessin, Maine and Anjou to march against Brittany, but as Gregory explains, the poor and the men of the cathedral and of St Martin's did not go because they were exempt from public service.
This claim illuminates one of the recurrent features of the military history of the period; the frequent presence of the men of one civitas or another on campaign, above all during the civil wars which bedevilled the second half of the sixth century, when rivalry between cities seems to have exacerbated problems.
Apparently the kings could rely not only on taxation from the civitates, but also on local armed forces.
Presumably such militias date back to the last years of the Roman period, although there is no evidence for them in the fifth century.
Nor was such military service the only obligation on which the sixth-century Merovingians could rely: they could expect the provision of hospitality, which could be an extremely costly business, as when Chilperic I's daughter, Rigunth, set out to meet her intended husband in Spain — her retinue devastated the country it passed through.
How many of these obligations could still be demanded in the seventh century, we do not know, although there are references to tax concessions granted to Tours by Dagobert I (623/9—39), to the city of Bourges by Clovis II (634–57), and to families exposing children in order to avoid public exactions in the Life of his queen, Balthild.
Certain types of taxation also continued: the seventh century boasts plenty of evidence for tolls of various kinds, which will be considered in chapter 12.
Royal resources
A king depended on the administrative structure of the civitas for tax revenue and for some of the manpower required for his armies.
But he had additional sources of wealth and troops.
Although the evidence for military organization in the Merovingian period is as poor as that for any other aspect of the administrative history of the period, it is possible, once again, to put together some picture from the narratives provided by Gregory of Tours and others.
There are references in the sources to laeti, who were probably descended from barbarian soldiers settled within the empire.
More important were the leudes of a king.
These were military followers apparently of considerable social status and influence, though probably to be distinguished from the greatest magnates of the realm, many of whom had military followings of their own, and might be expected to fight for the king both inside and outside his kingdom.
Theudebert I was reliant on his leudes to survive the threat from his uncles on his accession, and Chilperic I created an equivalent following through bribery in order to make his bid for the throne in 561.
The value placed on these men is most clearly stated in the Treaty of Andelot, where Guntram and Childebert II settled the question of the succession and dealt with various matters which had arisen during the early years of the latter's reign.
Among these was the question of those leudes who had once followed either Guntram or Sigibert I, the father of Childebert, but had transferred their loyalty elsewhere; they were to be made to return to their original allegiance from the places where they were known to have settled.
Neither king was to accept a member of the other's leudes in future.
A bond between a ruler and a military follower was clearly considered as binding, and there is some indication, in the assumption that Sigibert's leudes should follow Childebert, that the bond was hereditary.
At the same time the actions of Theudebert and Chilperic, as well as those of the disloyal followers covered by the Treaty of Andelot, show that kings were expected to offer incentives, and we may well believe that the distribution of land and wealth was the major factor in ensuring that a king had a loyal following.
In terms of land, the early Merovingian kings were probably well endowed with estates and palaces, many of them perhaps originally part of the imperial fisc.
These estates would have been run by appropriate staffs of officials, including comites of the palace, various agents, refendaries, notaries and so forth, although, once again , it is doubtful whether there was a genuinely regular pattern to the duties of this band of administrators; much clearly  depended on who was attendant on the king at any one time.
About the lands themselves we are badly informed; the evidence is, as usual, provided in passing.
In narrative and hagiographic sources we sometimes learn of the king's presence at one or other of his estates, and in charters and other legal documents we see him making grants or judgements from some palace or royal villa.
The problem which arises from this is that we are never given any inkling of the totality of a king's estates, and there is a particular difficulty in trying to construct a picture of crown land by listing all references to it from the whole Merovingian period; if kings rewarded their followers by conferring estates on them, even though the grant might not be hereditary, the pool of land must have changed constantly.
Kings also endowed churches and, increasingly, monasteries.
Meanwhile they replenished their land-holdings by conquest and by the confiscation of the estates of those who had fallen out of favour: rebels and criminals.
Because of this fluidity in royal land-holding a list of all the known royal estates from the whole Merovingian period would be misleading; it would not allow for the pattern of acquisition and alienation.
At the same time the poverty of our sources on this issue means that we cannot come anywhere near making an informed guess at the extent of the estates of any one king.
What is almost certain is that royal land-holdings were vast, and they were probably particularly impressive in the north.
To the wealth they received from their estates and taxation, successful Merovingians could also add plunder and tribute from neighbouring peoples.
Following the devastation of Thuringia by Chlothar I in 556 the Saxons paid an annual tribute of 500 cows.
Dagobert I (623/9—39) was probably richer than most Merovingian monarchs, not least because he helped Sisenand seize the Visigothic throne.
As payment for this help Sisenand promised a gold dish, weighing five hundred pounds, which had been given by Aëtius to king Thorismund in the fifth century.
The Goths, however, objected to this national treasure being handed over, and redeemed it for 200,000 solidi.
In addition diplomacy could be a source of treasure.
In 581 a Frankish legation sent by Chilperic I returned from Constantinople with numerous gifts.
Unfortunately they were shipwrecked and lost much of what they had been given.
Among the objects salvaged were gold dishes, weighing a pound each, with the image of the emperor on them.
Chilperic also showed Gregory a gold salver covered with gems, weighing fifty pounds.
This Chilperic himself had commissioned to enhance the glory of the Franks.
Descriptions of gold and silver objects commissioned by Merovingian kings and donated to churches are not infrequent in hagiography from the seventh century and later.
They testify to the fact that a colossal amount of wealth passed through royal hands, and it is therefore not surprising that control of the royal treasury was a significant factor in Merovingian politics.
Oddly  enough this is not to say that kings always had easy access to wealth: much to the disgust of monks of St Denis, Clovis II (634–57) removed silver from the apse of their church, to provide alms during a famine.
There is, in fact, a paradox about the wealth of the Merovingians.
Their resources were considerable; not only did they have vast incomes from taxation and from their own estates, but also they could expect considerable quantities of tribute from the subject peoples east of the Rhine and elsewhere.
Nevertheless Chilperic I complained that his treasury was always empty because of the church, while one retainer of a Merovingian prince attributed this penury to St Martial and St Martin, that is to the churches of Limoges and Tours.
Gregory regarded these claims as being marks of particular wickedness, and he saw the Merovingians as being, for the most part, rapacious.
In fact these two opinions are not incompatible: a Merovingian may have had a large income, but he also had vast financial commitments; he had to reward his faithful retainers; he had to endow the shrines of the saints, to ensure their support, and that of the clergy who served them; he would also have to demonstrate his piety in almsgiving.
In addition, gifts would be required in any negotiations with foreign powers, especially if they culminated in a marriage alliance.
Nor was there any question of hoarding treasure for a rainy day: a king's status was related to his generosity and to the display of wealth; hence Chilperic's salver made to the glory of the Franks; hence also the fact that on the death of the magnate Rauching, who cannot have had an income comparable to that of a king, more treasure was found in his coffers than was held in the royal treasury.
Royal Ideology
Gregory was not greatly impressed by most of the sons and grandsons of Clovis, but there were exceptions.
He admired Theudebert I, despite his injustices and adulteries.
He was particularly impressed by his treatment of Verdun: although bishop Desideratus had been exiled by Theudebert, he asked the king for financial aid to help restore his city.
Not only was a loan of 7,000 gold coins made, but the repayment was subsequently remitted.
Gregory's picture of Theudebert as a great monarch can be supplemented by other sources.
His qualities as a Christian king are extolled in a letter addressed to him by a certain Aurelian, who was once identified with the bishop of Arles of that name.
More extraordinary is another letter preserved  in the Epistulae Austrasiacae, in which Theudebert describes to Justinian the extent of his hegemony, which, he said, stretched from Visigothic Spain to Thuringia, and from the North Sea to the Danube and Pannonia.
The claims sound far-fetched, but they show the extent of Theudebert's ambition.
Essentially he was establishing himself as a figure of imperial stature, as his gold coinage reveals.
He appears to have worried the Byzantines, who thought that he was planning an attack on Constantinople.
Theudebert was certainly thought of as a great and powerful king.
War was clearly central to Theudebert's status, both at home and abroad.
At the same time his status seems to have caused him to be associated with campaigns which took place after his death: the invasion of Italy by Buccelin, which rightly belongs in the reign of Theudebald, was assigned by Gregory to that of his father.
Most of the great Merovingians proved themselves in battle.
Even Gregory admired the successes of the Merovingian kings over their neighbours, as did Venantius Fortunatus.
Great victories could become legendary: Chlothar II's defeat of the Saxons in the early seventh century is known to have been commemorated in the songs of washerwomen.
There are two other aspects to Theudebert's greatness as a monarch: Christian and Roman.
These same elements form the basis of the royal virtues described in the panegyrical works of Venantius Fortunatus.
For him Childebert I could be compared with the Old Testament monarch, Melchisedek — and doubtless, having come from Ravenna, Fortunatus's image of Melchisedek would have been similar to that which was set up in San Vitale, where the patriarch provided an analogue to the emperor Justinian.
Other of the portraits in Fortunatus's poems are more classical; Chilperic is described in terms of his military prowess, his justice and his culture, but Sigibert, especially in the epithalamium celebrating his marriage to Brunhild, is depicted in terms derived almost entirely derived from the Roman past.
These traditions also have their echoes in Gregory of Tours, but with more than a note of hostility.
Chilperic is compared with Nero and Herod.
The Christian and imperial past provided a language of criticism as well as one of praise.
It should, nevertheless, not be dismissed as mere rhetoric.
Chilperic's wish to appear as a cultivated monarch is not in question; he wrote poetry, however badly, and he showed some interest in such issues as the alphabet, to which he wished to add four letters, and in theology, where he came close to heresy, when he decided to abolish the distinctions between the persons of the Trinity.
In addition he was to be found building amphitheatres in Soissons and Paris to provide shows for the citizens.
Gregory may have laughed at Chilperic's attempts at apeing the culture of the Roman past, and despised him for them, but circuses were integral to the political culture of the later Roman Empire, and its Byzantine successor: the hippodrome was central to the court ritual of Constantinople.
Nor was Chilperic the only Merovingian monarch to involve himself in such building projects.
Doubtless they represent a thorough-going attempt to adopt the sort of Roman style envisaged by Fortunatus, and they presumably drew an admiring response from some of the more backward-looking members of the Gallo-Roman aristocracy.
The romanizing aspect of Merovingian ideology seems not to have impressed Gregory.
His own ideals were ecclesiastical rather then Roman.
There was a tradition of royal charity in the Merovingian kingdom, apparent in the Church councils and in the one surviving edict of Childebert I. Of Childebert, however, Gregory had little to say.
Among Merovingian monarchs it was Guntram who provided Gregory with his model of Christian kingship.
He was pious, and Gregory even recounts a miracle worked by a thread taken from his cloak.
There is, however, another side to Gregory's portrait, from which the king emerges as a suspicious and not totally effectual ruler.
One Sunday he begged the congregation of a Paris church not to assassinate him.
There is also reference to reprimands and complaints addressed by him to his subordinates; on one occasion we are told that the generals on an unsuccessful campaign justified their failure by explaining that although his piety was noted, he was not feared and this meant that his agents commanded no respect.
Even Gregory recognized his weaknesses: however much of a royal virtue it might be, piety alone was not enough.
It is not  likely to be a coincidence that Guntram's reign was marked by disagreements with his fellow rulers, and also by treason.
If anything it is the emperor Tiberius II who is Gregory's paragon.
The bishop of Tours relates that when the emperor saw a flagstone engraved with a cross he ordered it to be raised.
Below it was a second and then a third such stone.
Beneath the third was a vast treasure which the emperor then used for charitable purposes.
Oddly enough a similar tale was told of Guntram by the eighth-century Lombard historian Paul the Deacon.
Once when Guntram was out hunting he paused for a rest, and while he was sleeping a dragon climbed out of his mouth, crossed a neighbouring stream, vanished, returned and climbed back.
On being told about this Guntram followed the dragon's route and discovered some treasure, which he originally determined to send to Jerusalem, but then decided to use for a ciborium for the church of St Marcel at Chalon.
The pious act would have delighted Gregory.
But there are other aspects of the story which are just as appropriate to Merovingian royal ideology.
The point that the king was out hunting is not insignificant: hunting was an appropriate pastime for kings, and Guntram is known from Gregory to have been a keen huntsman.
Nor is the dragon entirely inappropriate in a story relating to a king supposedly descended from a sea-monster.
Despite Gregory's account, the Merovingians can be seen as a dynasty which cultivated a complex political ideology during the sixth century.
To a large extent that ideology looked to the Roman past.
So also did the governmental structures of the Merovingian kingdom.
As a result the rule of Clovis's descendants was by no means unsophisticated: it could also be oppressive.
This is particularly clear from Gregory's account of the convoy created to escort Chilperic's daughter Rigunth to Spain in 584.
Families of serfs were forced by Chilperic to accompany the princess; some hanged themselves to avoid going; people of good birth were also expected to make the journey, and then to stay in Spain; as a result they made their wills, reckoning themselves to be as good as dead.
The image may be exaggerated, but it is certainly an indication of royal demands.
At the same time, although there were considerable powers on which a king and his administrators could draw, not every monarch could actually mobilize his resources.
Gregory liked Guntram because of his benefactions to the Church and his regard for churchmen, although he does not hide his weaknesses.
Chilperic he disliked, in part because of his attitude towards the Church and clergy, despite some remarkable acts of generosity to individual shrines.
Yet it is likely that Chilperic was the more impressive monarch and  inspired the greater respect.
Power was not handed to the Merovingians on a plate, but a firmly established king, once he had control of his resources, could be very powerful indeed.
The limits of Ecclesiastical Power: Episcopal Jurisdiction and Politics
Alongside the complex structures of secular power there were other types of authority, associated with the Church.
Not that Church and State were easily separable in the Merovingian period; on the contrary, the authority of the Church, and particularly that of the bishops, was connected with the power of the king, especially in the urban centres of the Frankish kingdom.
Nevertheless it requires separate assessment, not least because it drew on certain areas of experience not directly dominated by the monarch.
Diocesan organization
The structure of the Merovingian Church was taken over directly from its Gallo-Roman predecessor.
It was based on dioceses which for much of the kingdom were the ecclesiastical counterparts of the civitates, with which they were coterminous.
In the north and east, however, where the barbarian invasions had caused most disruption, dioceses had to be re-created, with the result that their extent reflected the connections and interests of the clergy involved in their re-creation, rather than the geography of the Roman civitas.
Thus, unlike that of Clermont, for instance, the Merovingian diocese of Mainz did not correspond exactly to any earlier Roman administrative district.
Like Gallo-Roman civitates, dioceses were organized into provinces, and their bishops were subordinate to a metropolitan.
Theoretically there was a further hierarchy within the metropolitan sees.
What this was was much debated, particularly by the metropolitan bishops of Arles and Vienne.
In practice the authority of an individual metropolitan was influenced by political factors, such as the favour in which he was held at court.
A king could forbid a bishop to attend a council called by his metropolitan, as  happened when Sigibert III (632—c. 656) prevented Desiderius of Cahors from going to Bourges at some date between 647 and 653.
The Christian community
After the baptism of Clovis the kingdom of the Franks was theoretically a Christian state; that is not to say that all its members were Christian — indeed it would be a long time before the Christianization of the Merovingian kingdom was complete.
What was important was the fact that after 508 the catholic Church defined the Christian community which constituted the regnum Francorum.
In many respects this was a return to the position of the very last years of the fourth century; the establishment of arian kingdoms on Gallic soil had removed from the catholic bishops sole authority over the definition of the Christian community, and it was only the conversion of Clovis and the expansion of the Frankish kingdom which gave the ecclesiastical hierarchy the authority once more to define the Christian life for all the members of the State.
In the Merovingian period, as earlier, the formal moments of an individual's life were marked by rites de passage laid down by the Church.
Full entry into Christian society was determined by baptism, a ceremony which took place theoretically only on Easter day.
Having entered this Christian society the individual had to conform to its beliefs and to demonstrate conformity by attendance at Church, especially at the main feasts of the ecclesiastical year.
At Christmas, Easter and Pentecost private chapels were not to be used for services; their priests had to attend the bishop in his cathedral city, where the leading citizens had also to be present.
In addition to regulating the chief feasts and rituals of the year, the Church canons prohibited Sunday work, in accordance with the Ten Commandments, and these canons were backed up by the dissemination of miracle stories concerning the fates of those who did work on Sundays.
There are tales of hands withering, of buildings being burned, and of children conceived on Sunday being born deformed.
It is not difficult to depict the early medieval Church as a power-house of psychological oppression.
While baptism marked one rite de passage, death and burial marked another, and again the Church tried to set out appropriate actions.
Curiously, however, marriage was not seen as requiring an ecclesiastical ceremony before  the twelfth century.
Nevertheless the theological implications of marriage were not neglected.
Although there is nothing in the early Merovingian period to compare with the concern shown by the eighth-century Anglo-Saxons as to what constituted the prohibited degrees of marriage, there was considerable worry about uncanonical sexual relations.
There was also great concern about the practice of concubinage, although here our major evidence has to be drawn from tales of confrontation between holy men and members of the Merovingian royal family.
Nicetius of Trier threatened to excommunicate Theudebert I for adultery, and he frequently excommunicated Chlothar I. He heads a long line of saints who dared to challenge the Merovingians on their sexual profligacy.
Germanus of Paris excommunicated Charibert for marrying Marcovefa, a nun who was also the sister of the king's previous wife, Merofled, from whom he had as yet not separated.
In the next century Desiderius, bishop of Vienne, and the monk Columbanus would castigate Theuderic II for begetting bastards.
The question of prohibited degrees, within which marriage could not take place, also appears in the late seventh century, when bishop Leodegar of Autun is said to have attacked the marriage of Childeric II to his cousin Bilichild.
When kings were at loggerheads with their clergy, which was not their usual relationship, morality constituted the most dramatic battleground.
Bishops and saint cults
In addition to regulating the lives of the Christian subjects of the Merovingian kings — and also to circumscribing the activities of the Jews, the one recognized religious minority in the kingdom — the bishops at least tried to monopolize the local centres and objects of devotion, which might have presented a focus of religious power outside their control.
One object which did escape episcopal control was the relic of the True Cross, secured by the ex-queen Radegund, for her nunnery of the Holy Cross at Poitiers.
The bishop, Maroveus, refused to install the relic, and by doing so placed the nunnery in a difficult position with regard to the canons.
Maroveus was probably uncooperative because he did not like the challenge presented to his own status by Radegund's foundation and its relics.
His own cathedral could  not boast anything to compare with a fragment of the True Cross.
The bishop later absented himself from Radegund's funeral, and Gregory of Tours had to officiate.
Great monasteries could achieve very considerable spiritual authority.
To some extent, the Merovingian Church in the sixth century tried to obviate the problem presented by the religious influence of monastic communities with a stream of ecclesiastical legislation placing abbots under the supervision of the bishops.
This was to be the start of a long debate which would be continued in the seventh century with the growth of concessions of immunity from episcopal intervention to particular monastic foundations.
Of more immediate importance, as far as the majority of the population was concerned, was the determination of the bishops to control non-monastic sites associated with the cult of the saints.
Here it is important to realize that there was no formal process of canonization.
The creation of a saint-cult depended essentially on two factors: the first was the existence of a congregation willing to recognize that a particular place, usually a tomb, was invested with special power; the second was the official recognition of the site by the Church authorities, that is the local bishop.
The significance of either of these factors varied from site to site; at times cults appear largely to have been promoted by the Church hierarchy, or by a small group with a precise, often family, interest in the new saint — this seems to be the norm for the development of the cults of the aristocratic saints of the seventh century.
Instances where the motive force for the recognition of a cult site comes from the congregation are rare, but are particularly instructive for an understanding of the concern of the Church to control places of supposedly numinous power.
The devotion of the people of Dijon to an obscure tomb in one of the cemetries outside the town was frowned on by the local bishop, Gregory of Langres, who regarded it as an act of pagan superstition.
He may well have been right.
Nevertheless on failing to extirpate this superstition, Gregory "learned" in a vision that the tomb was that of the martyr Benignus, and he incorporated the site in a new church.
Some years later, we are told, travellers brought back from Italy an account of the saint's life, about which nothing had been known previously.
The Life itself looks remarkably like a version of the Passion of the Byzantine "megalomartyr" Menignos, relocated in Dijon, and the whole Benignus dossier is probably best interpreted as the response of a bishop to a non-Christian cult which he had not been able to stamp out.
It is also worth noting, however, that Gregory's family was closely associated with Dijon, and that he may well have relished the prospect of a major cult  close to his family estates.
What is undeniable is the determination of the bishop to bring the cult of Benignus under the auspices of the Church, if it was going to exist at all.
In episcopal hands a cult was a powerful weapon, even against the king.
This is apparent in the threat issued by Gregory of Tours warning Childebert II not to tax Tours, and in numerous other stories concerning the power of St Martin to defend his shrine.
When Ruccolen was sent by Chilperic to drive Guntram Boso from St Martin's he fell sick and died; when Claudius assassinated Eberulf in the atrium, or forecourt, of the church, he himself was killed in the process.
Such cautionary tales lost nothing in the telling, and they served to elevate the power of the shrines of the saints, and also to protect and strengthen the right of asylum claimed for churches in Roman Law and in the Church canons.
Episcopal jurisdiction
A bishop's status was not only connected to his role in defining Christian society and to his monopolization of holy places and objects, but also based on legally conferred rights and obligations dating from the late Roman period.
Many of these were connected ultimately with traditions of pastoral care which already existed in the Early Church.
Concern for the poor, and the distribution of alms, responsibility for widows and orphans, and also the visitation of those in prison, all of which came to be recognized as being within the purview of the Church in legal texts, derived from the New Testament.
The importance of these functions was enhanced by the barbarian invasions of the fifth century.
Many bishops emerged as the saviours of their cities as they arranged for famine relief and secured the ransom of prisoners during the years of crisis.
The great saint bishops of fifth-century Gaul were provided with an unequalled opportunity for the exercise of pastoral care, which they seized with open arms.
At the same time, in some towns at least, bishops came to take over the duties of such late Roman officers as the defensores, who had been expected to defend the weak.
How formal this take-over was is an open question; to a large extent the evidence derives from the funerary inscriptions of fifth- and sixth-century bishops, where the epithet defensor civitatis might refer to the dead man's achievements rather than his office.
The extension of a bishop's power continued in other ways.
Many bishops of the Late Roman period had earlier in their careers been notable civil servants; best-known is Ambrose of Milan, but Germanus of Auxerre provides a fine example from Gaul, so too does Gregory of Langres, whose episcopate  extended into the sixth century.
As one-time administrators these men were well-placed to run the temporal aspects of their sees.
They were also admirably equipped to act as judges in those cases which fell under their purview, although these were concerned largely with disputes involving churchmen.
Bishops were involved in other law suits, but more often than not this was as unofficial peacemakers, following the gospel injunction, rather than as official justices.
Constantine the Great, it is true, gave the bishops a more substantial role in the administration of justice, but this was reduced during the fourth and fifth centuries.
Nevertheless, many bishops continued to possess legal expertise, and it is not surprising that they made use of their knowledge.
So too did their Merovingian successors.
The sixth-century bishop of Le Mans, Badegisel, who had been maior of the palace, did so in his own interests, seizing the property of others, including that of his relatives.
All bishops had to be skilled administrators.
Something of the range of skills required can be seen in the career of the seventh-century bishop, Desiderius of Cahors.
Desiderius was well-educated in the law and became treasurer to Chlothar II; he succeeded one brother, Syagrius, as governor of Marseilles, and subsequently he was elected bishop of Cahors in place of his other brother, Rusticus, who had been murdered.
The Life of Desiderius reveals a bishop who was a great benefactor of his city.
Not only did he build and restore churches and monasteries, but also he repaired the city walls; he corresponded with Caesarius of Clermont about laying underground water-pipes, and he was responsible for severing road-communications with the south to prevent the spread of plague.
Although the evidence for Desiderius's activity as bishop is unequalled, it is possible to make some comparison with other Merovingian bishops; Nicetius of Dax had been comes before he became bishop; Sidonius of Mainz and Felix of Nantes embarked on significant building programmes.
To such details may be added the evidence of an episcopal coinage which appears in the late sixth century.
Taken together these points have been thought to indicate a steady take-over of secular functions by the Merovingian episcopate, and thus to presage the emergence of a group of effectively  independent episcopal states by the early eighth century, of which that of Savaric of Auxerre is the best documented.
This is, of course, to oversimplify the history of episcopal power in the Merovingian period; it involves the avoidance of problems presented by some of the evidence.
Much of what has been deduced about the institutionalized authority held by bishops in the late fifth and early sixth century, over and above their canonical jurisdiction, depends on episcopal epitaphs: it is not easy to distinguish fact from topos in such documents.
The recurrent descriptions of bishops restoring their cities may be inspired more by notions of the ideal bishop than the reality of an individual's activities.
The episcopal coinage from the end of the century presents equal, but different, problems of interpretation.
That coins were minted in the names of bishops and churches is clear, but it is not certain that they mark an encroachment into a royal preserve.
The one written reference to ecclesiastical coinage suggests that it should be interpreted in a very particular way.
In a curious visionary text of the seventh century, Barontus, a monk of St Cyran, is told by St Peter not to hide his possessions, but instead to give away twelve solidi, each one weighed and signed by a priest, for the good of his soul.
From this one might interpret ecclesiastical coinage as money originally minted for pious purposes, for alms and perhaps for tithe, which then moved into general circulation in a society in which many different types of coinage were accepted.
In order to understand the workings of ecclesiastical power, it is necessary to consider it in context, or rather in two contexts; the relations of a bishop with the king and with the leading figures of the diocese.
The evidence relating to these issues is not great, and it is unevenly distributed geographically.
Further, the evidence for the late Merovingian period is not comparable to that for the sixth century.
Gregory of Tours, in particular, provides evidence of unequalled richness; on the one hand he provides us with some of the most compelling images of the power of the Merovingian Church, on the other he allows us to see behind those images, and to look at the nuts and bolts supporting them.
Episcopal elections
One of the most surprising facts about Gregory's references to the sixth-century Church is his lack of concern to hide its canonical failings.
Once or twice he seems to imply criticism of the manner in which a bishop was appointed, most notably in his account of the appointment of the layman Desiderius to the bishopric of Eauze, despite a promise that the post would go to a cleric, but for the most part he is prepared to record events with  apparent impartiality.
A sizeable proportion of the episcopal appointments recorded by Gregory are quite clearly uncanonical.
Indeed, despite the demands of the councils of Orléans (533, 538, 549), Clermont (535), Paris (561/2, 614), Clichy (626/7) and Chalon-sur-Saône (647/53) kings can be seen to have exercised considerable influence in the appointment of bishops until at least the late seventh century.
Even in the secular legislation of Chlothar II a king had the right only of veto.
Many bishops owed their position to the king.
Some of these were admittedly men with a local following, but others, like Baudinus at Tours, Flavius at Chalon, Badegisel at Le Mans, Licerius at Arles and Charimer at Verdun were royal servants with no known connection with their sees.
That this was a problem of significance is suggested by the request of bishop Dalmatius of Rodez, that his successor should not be a stranger to the diocese.
According to Venantius Fortunatus, Gregory himself was appointed by Sigibert and Brunhild.
Although Gregory insisted that he was related to thirteen of his predecessors in the see, his family was most obviously connected with Burgundy and the Auvergne, and a local priest, Riculf, saw him as an outsider.
There were cases in which bishops were appointed in opposition to the will of a ruler, as when Dynamius, the patrician of Provence, appointed Marcellus as bishop of Uzès, despite royal support for Jovinus.
This, however, must have been a rare occurrence; most bishops will have received royal approval as canonically required.
The sixth-century episcopate cannot, therefore, be seen as a body independent of royal patronage: in so far as the seventh-century evidence allows any assessment to be made, there was no dramatic change.
Chlothar II (584–629) compelled Amandus to become bishop; Balthild appointed Leodegar to Autun; Theuderic III (673, 675—90/1) and Pippin II made Lantbert bishop of Lyons.
Although the lack of any source comparable to Gregory means that no satisfactory comparison can be made between the sixth and seventh centuries, it is, nevertheless, clear that central secular authority could still play a part in the appointment of bishops in the later Merovingian period.
Royal involvement in episcopal appointments suggests that the kings and their bishops were likely to work together rather than in opposition.
Although Gregory came into conflict with Chilperic over the immunities of Tours, the original concessions must indicate that in certain circumstances kings were happy to make grants to their bishops.
Despite occasional conflicts between bishops and comites, and the apparent restriction of comital power in some towns, secular power and ecclesiastical authority should not be seen as being in conflict.
Here the seventh-century evidence is actually more suggestive than that for the sixth.
Desiderius of Cahors was extremely active in what might be seen as secular aspects of city administration.
Given the bishop's close contact with the court of Dagobert I, it is inconceivable that these activities were a usurpation of secular authority.
Indeed it is more than likely that Desiderius was encouraged in his actions by the royal court.
Further, since he is only one of a significant group of bishops who came from court in the early seventh century, if there was any general transfer of secular authority to bishops in this period, and the evidence is far from clear on this, the likelihood is that it was condoned by the king.
In many repects the bishops of the Merovingian kingdom were like secular magnates, and for the most part they were drawn from the same class.
Just as a king needed the support of his magnates, so too he needed the support of his bishops.
And just as most magnates needed royal patronage, in terms of land and office, so too did the leading clergy of the kingdom.
Not surprisingly, effective kings worked well with their bishops, even when their morality was the subject of open criticism: weak kings are likely to have had very much less influence on their clergy, unless like Guntram they could command some ecclesiastical respect because of their piety.
Bishops and local society: the Auvergne
The relations between a bishop and his diocese could be rather more complicated, being affected by a wide variety of factors.
First, there was the problem of the bishop's origins; if he were a complete outsider appointed by the king, his position within the community would be very different from that of a man with local connections.
For both, however, there could be substantial difficulties.
Although in some dioceses individual families came close to obtaining a monopoly over the episcopate, in others there was considerable rivalry which came to a head at the time of episcopal elections.
The rival factions involved were sometimes family groups whose hostility was longstanding, but there could also be a local clerical faction: archdeacons tended to have high hopes of gaining the episcopate and could mobilize a body of support.
All this could be complicated by the involvement of royal officials who might choose to aid one or other party.
The manner of a  bishop's election could itself affect the whole of his ensuing episcopate, if factions became too firmly entrenched; peace did not always follow the elevation of the successful candidate.
The evidence for the relations between a bishop and his diocese is unevenly distributed.
Some saints' Lives shed specific light on individual episcopates, but Gregory of Tours provides unrivalled information in his references to the diocese of the Auvergne.
Although there are dangers in concentrating on a single see, the information provided by Gregory does allow a study of episcopal elections over the best part of a century.
Gregory was closely involved with several of the protagonists.
Not surprisingly his narratives are sometimes unquestionably biased.
But if, as a result, his account may misrepresent the behaviour of his heroes and villains, it does provide a contemporary and informed view of the process of election and of the exercise of episcopal power.
More generally, the Auvergne might reasonably be seen as representative of many Merovingian dioceses; Clermont was not a royal capital, nor was it a cult centre of major importance.
At the same time it was not a minor, backwoods, civitas.
Gregory's account becomes exceptional in the second decade of the sixth century with the election of Quintianus, who had fled from his see at Rodez because of the Visigoths.
Although he was apparently elected by the people of the Auvergne, he was approached by Alchima and Placidina, the mother and wife of Apollinaris, who asked him to step down in favour of their candidate.
He agreed to do so, and Apollinaris, the son of a previous bishop, the great Sidonius Apollinaris, was sent off to king Theuderic as the candidate for the office, and was appointed.
Apollinaris survived for only a few months, and on his death Theuderic had Quintianus installed as bishop, apparently on the grounds that the saint had been driven from Rodez because of his loyalty to the Frankish king.
Quintianus died in the mid-520s and he was succeeded by Gallus, Gregory of Tours's uncle.
The manner of his election was dubious in the extreme; Gallus had spent much time at the court of Theuderic, but at the time of Quintianus's death he was in Clermont; while the citizens were trying to decide on a new candidate the Holy Spirit descended on Gallus, according to his relative Gregory, and on the advice of his uncle Inpetratus he set off and presented himself to Theuderic, who authorized his consecration.
Gallus himself died in 551, and at his death the local clergy put forward the name of the priest Cato; the bishops officiating at the burial of Gallus offered to consecrate Cato there and then, and to square the appointment with the king, who was only a minor, subsequently.
Cato, however, wanted all to be canonical and refused their offer.
He was, nevertheless, elected to the see of the Auvergne, and he took over the administration of the diocese.
During this period of time he made the mistake of threatening the archdeacon, Cautinus, who fled to the court of king Theudebald, announced the death of Gallus, and was himself consecrated bishop on the king's orders.
When Cato's supporters arrived at court they found that they had been pre-empted.
Cautinus's episcopate lasted until the plague of 571, and then, once again, a less than canonical election took place.
The followers of Eufrasius resorted to simony, backed by the financial support of the Jews, but the clergy put forward the name of Avitus.
Firminus, comes of the Auvergne, tried to prevent his name going forward, but Avitus reached the court of king Sigibert, and was consecrated in Metz, although according to the canons the ceremony should have taken place in Clermont.
Gregory claims that it was the king who insisted that the consecration should be held at Metz, out of affection for the candidate, but this may be a euphemism for saying that consecration in Clermont was too dangerous.
Although the election of Avitus is the last Auvergnat election covered by Gregory, two saints' Lives allow us to take up the story again a century later.
The account of the martyrdom of bishop Praeiectus, the Passio Praeiecti, and the Life of Bonitus both present complicated narratives, which doubtless conceal specific political and religious biases, but they also provide contemporary accounts of ecclesiastical appointments in a late seventh-century diocese.
The Passio records a peculiar set of appointments in the 660s.
Before the death of Felix five leading churchmen of the civitas arranged that the archdeacon Garivald should become the next bishop, since such a succession was the norm.
Praeiectus, however, although he was one of the five, began to have second thoughts, because of a vision which his mother had had, forecasting a great ecclesiastical career.
He told the citizens of Clermont, and they advised him to buy the office.
He refused, but Garivald, who was not unreasonably put out, resorted to simony, and became bishop for forty days.
On his death the people of Clermont elected the comes Genesius, but he turned down the office, because, as a layman, he regarded the appointment as uncanonical.
As a result Praeiectus was finally elected.
The Life of Bonitus continues our information.
This saint began his career in the court of Sigibert III (632—c. 656), and ultimately became prefect of Provence.
His brother, Avitus, meanwhile was bishop of the Auvergne.
When Avitus died in c. 690 he appointed Bonitus as his successor, and Pippin II, the maior and effective ruler of Austrasia and its dependencies in Aquitaine, agreed.
Bonitus, nevertheless, came to the conclusion that his appointment was uncanonical, and recommended the elevation of Nordobert in his place.
The narratives of the Passio Praeiecti and of the Vita Boniti both have  their peculiarities, and it is possible that the appointment of Praeiectus and the retirement of Bonitus were less creditable than their hagiographers claim.
Nevertheless they do illustrate the complexities of local ecclesiastical politics.
The Clermont elections, if that is the right word, provide a startling insight into the appointment of bishops in a civitas, which, if it can scarcely be called an insignificant see, was certainly not one in the forefront of royal policy.
The patterns of appointment were rarely canonical, yet of the bishops considered, five — Quintianus, Gallus, Avitus, Praeiectus and Bonitus — were regarded as saints.
Of these only one, Bonitus, who had been appointed while still a layman, is said to have had scruples about his elevation, although he can be compared with the comes Genesius, who turned down the see prior to the election of Praeiectus.
Once installed, a bishop could still have difficulties establishing his power.
Again the best evidence is provided by Gregory of Tours.
Quintianus, for instance, was at odds with numerous groups in the diocese.
He was opposed by at least one cleric, Proculus, who took over the administration of the diocese, and scarcely allowed the bishop enough to eat.
Interestingly Gregory also records similar clerical opposition to Sidonius, during his episcopate, fifty years earlier.
Proculus met a suitably bloody end, killed at the altar of the church of Vollore, during Theuderic's raid on the Auvergne.
In addition Quintianus faced hostility from a local official, Lytigius, and from Hortensius.
The latter was cursed by Quintianus and as a result, so Gregory tells us, none of his descendants became a bishop.
Gregory recalled this curse in the context of Avitus's election in 571, when Hortensius's descendant, Eufrasius, was the leading challenger.
Another man who may have caused difficulties for Quintianus was Arcadius, whose actions prompted Theuderic's raid on the Auvergne.
He was the son of Quintianus's predecessor, Apollinaris, and grandson of Sidonius.
It is unlikely that he had kept his hands out of ecclesiastical politics in a diocese which could easily have become his family's see.
Gregory has little to say about problems faced by his uncle and mentor, Gallus.
With Cautinus, however, we see the full impact of a disputed appointment on the subsequent episcopate.
Not surprisingly Cato, having been deprived of the see to which he had been elected, was bitter about Cautinus's consecration.
He and a group of clerical supporters refused to accept the outcome of events, despite the fact that Cautinus was at first conciliatory — he may even have been responsible for the proposal that Cato should be given the see of Tours.
Cato's obdurate hostility and determination to take over the Auvergnat diocese, however, led to a hardening of lines, and Cautinus began to persecute Cato and his followers.
Subsequently matters were further complicated by the presence of Chramn, the son of Chlothar I, in Clermont.
As a prince keen to make his mark on the political stage of Merovingian Gaul, Chramn was a dangerous figure.
It was important for him to build up a body of allies to ensure his succession on his father's death, but he overreached himself, was regarded as a rebel and was killed, after being defeated in battle by Chlothar.
While in Clermont he emerged as the focus for those who were dissatisfied with the status quo— just as Childebert I had earlier appeared as an ally for Arcadius.
Among his supporters was Cato, who hoped to receive the diocese of the Auvergne from him when Chlothar was dead.
Not surprisingly Cautinus was terrified of Chramn, and on one occasion he abandoned the annual pilgrimage from Clermont to Brioude, because he thought that the prince's men were pursuing him.
Gregory's depiction of Cato and Cautinus is nuanced.
Cato appears as arrogant in his determination to fulfil the canons, despite the offer to consecrate him made by the bishops who attended Gallus's funeral; his subsequent refusal of the see of Tours does nothing to enhance his reputation.
Yet the final image of him working with plague victims transforms him into a heroic character.
Cautinus is very different.
He should probably be seen as a cleric of some piety; in Gregory's miracle stories he is associated with the cult of Stremonius at Issoire.
In the Histories, however, he is sly, drunken and spineless, even lifting a sentence of excommunication on a man suspected of matricide.
He is also cruel and rapacious when not faced with opposition: he has the priest Anastasius buried alive to extort a charter from him.
In addition he is a great client of Jewish merchants.
The Jews provide us with the single most illuminating incident of the episcopate of Avitus.
Eufrasius, Avitus's rival for the see of the Auvergne, tried to secure the episcopate with the help of Jewish money.
It is perhaps not surprising that when a Christian mob destroyed the synagogue in Clermont, in the aftermath of an outrage committed on a Jewish convert to Christianity, Avitus did nothing to protect the Jews, but used the incident to force them either to be baptized or to leave the city.
The eradication of Judaism in the Auvergne attracted the interest not only of Gregory, but also of Venantius Fortunatus, who saw in the event the emergence of a unified Christian community.
Unlike his predecessor, Avitus was a powerful bishop who managed to harness the local forces which Cautinus had signally failed to dominate.
The Auvergnat evidence, thus, shows us bishops in context, some managing to dominate their diocese, others at odds with their clergy, or hampered by secular figures, most clearly by the outsider Chramn.
Although  relations between the bishops and the resident aristocracy are harder to piece together, the fortunes of one or two families are clear enough; in the pages of Gregory the descendants of Quintianus's opponent, Hortensius, appear consistently as failures; so too does the ill-fated family of the comes Firminus.
After the death of Gallus, however, the family of Gregory itself ceases to be visible in the Auvergne.
More complex is the question of the influence of the family of Avitus, one-time emperor and father-in-law of Sidonius.
The latter's son was Quintianus's predecessor, and his grandson, Arcadius, the cause of Theuderic's attack on the Auvergne.
Gregory's account suggests that the family's influence in Clermont subsequently came to an end, but the poems of Venantius Fortunatus show that the dynasty was still powerful elsewhere: Arcadius's son Leontius became bishop of Bordeaux.
There are also hints in later sources that it regained its influence in the Auvergne; there is the name Avitus, held both by the opponent of the Clermont Jews, and also, in the seventh century, by the brother and predecessor of bishop Bonitus.
If the sixth-century Avitus was related to Sidonius it is interesting that Gregory should imply that the family faded out after Arcadius's plot; Avitus was, after all, a friend of Gregory.
The problem of the survival of the Aviti is a useful reminder of how little we know about the political structure of even our best evidenced sixth-century diocese; but from the evidence which we do have it is clear that the exercise of episcopal power in the Auvergne was no simple matter.
Theodore of Marseilles
In one respect the local political structure in Clermont was relatively simple: although Theuderic mounted a raid on the Auvergne, and although Chramn took up residence in the district, for the most part the civitas was not of great interest to the Merovingian kings.
Difficulties facing bishops could escalate when central and local politics overlapped.
One city where royal interests and local divisions often combined was Marseilles.
This city was naturally of great strategic importance: much of the communication between Francia and the eastern Mediterranean seems to have passed through it in the sixth century.
It is, therefore, not surprising that it should be a cause of dispute between kings.
In fact, in the early Merovingian period it seems to have been held by the rulers of the eastern kingdom, but after Sigibert I's murder in 575 half of it was handed over to Guntram, presumably to cement an alliance between the young Childebert II and his uncle.
When Childebert felt more secure, however, having made his peace with his other uncle Chilperic, he demanded the return of half the civitas.
This state of affairs provides the background for the misfortunes which were to confront bishop Theodore in the 580's.
The first reference to Theodore in Gregory's Histories concerns an unexplained alliance of the clergy of Marseilles and Dynamius, the patricius, or governor, of Provence, against the bishop in 581.
Theodore and the ex-governor, Jovinus, were arrested by Dynamius while travelling to the court of Childebert.
The clergy of Marseilles were overjoyed and acted as if the bishop was already dead: they took an inventory of the church plate, as was required by the canons on the death of a bishop.
The charges made against Theodore, however, did not stick.
He returned, apparently, with Gundulf, Childebert's dux.
Dynamius tried to lock them out of the city, but he was tricked by Gundulf.
Although the clergy were opposed to Theodore, it appears that the bishop did have supporters in the city because the bells were rung when he and Gundulf returned.
Nevertheless Dynamius accused Theodore of plotting against Guntram, had him arrested and sent to the king for trial; again the accusations did not stand up to scrutiny.
Not surprisingly relations between Guntram and Childebert deteriorated.
The next difficulties confronting Theodore stemmed directly from Marseilles's position as a point of entry into the Frankish kingdom from the Byzantine empire, for it was there that Gundovald, supposedly a son of Chlothar I, landed in 582, to make a bid for the throne.
As bishop, Theodore welcomed him, only to be arrested by the dux Guntram Boso, and sent to king Guntram on a charge of treason.
Once again he was found to be innocent, but he was still kept under arrest.
When or why he was reinstated in Marseilles is not known, but Guntram continued to harass him; claiming in 585 that he was one of those responsible for the murder of Chilperic, apparently one of the wildest of many such accusations made by the king.
Further, although Marseilles was under the rule of Childebert by this time, the latter's governor Rathar, arrested Theodore and sent him to Guntram.
He was probably one of a number of bishops whom Guntram intended to exile, but he was reinstated after the king fell ill.
According to Gregory, all were delighted with this turn of events.
There is a great deal that is unclear in this tale of episcopal misfortunes.
Although Marseilles is known to have been shared between two kings for much of this time, details of the division are hard to establish.
They might explain the behaviour of the various secular officials.
Certainly, the complex set up in the city meant that the bishop, appointed in the time of Sigibert, was only too easily suspected of treason by Guntram — and the arrival of Gundovald clearly did not help matters.
The conflict between Guntram and Childebert, moreover, allowed the clergy to oppose their bishop, while, at least from Gregory's account, it seems as though the laity supported him.
Theodore does not emerge from this as a powerful man, indeed he is very  much everybody else's pawn.
At the same time he is depicted as a saint by the bishop of Tours, who may well have thought of him as a fellow victim of Merovingian politics.
Theodore's career reveals that even a good bishop could be powerless in a city where there were too many other interests.
Gregory and Tours
Marseilles was perhaps not a particularly easy city for a bishop to manage.
There was no major saint-cult which could be relied on to bolster episcopal power.
Exactly how much could be gained from the support of a saintly patron can best be seen by turning to the position of Gregory at Tours, in particular to the events leading up to his trial, for purportedly slandering queen Fredegund, at Berny-Rivière.
Gregory and others saw in certain happenings which took place at this time the workings of divine providence: on one occasion the boat carrying one of his opponents sank; on another a supporter was miraculously freed from prison; and throughout his trial the princess Rigunth fasted on his behalf.
Despite his account of these miraculous events, the problems facing Gregory were immediate and considerable.
Gregory's chief opponent in Tours in the late 570's was the comes Leudast.
Gregory says he was the son of a slave and that he came to prominence in the household of king Charibert, whence he was promoted to being comes of Tours.
After Charibert's death Leudast made the mistake of wishing to see Tours transferred to the kingdom of Chilperic.
In the event it fell to Sigibert, and as a result Leudast lost his office.
Only after Sigibert's murder in 575 did Chilperic gain permanent control of the city, whereupon Leudast regained his old office.
Among his friends Leudast numbered a priest and subdeacon, both confusingly called Riculf.
Between them these men accused Gregory of slandering Chilperic's queen, Fredegund, and Leudast arrested two of Gregory's supporters, the archdeacon Plato and his friend Gallienus.
The accusations against Gregory were further supported by the dux Berulf and the comes Eunomius, who said that the bishop was intent on handing Tours over to Guntram.
As a result Gregory was summoned to Berny-Rivière and tried.
He was acquitted, apparently because he had support within the royal household, and because the bishops united to reject the evidence of an inferior against one of themselves.
There was also, or so Gregory claims, a vociferous group outside the court, which had made known their belief in his innocence.
The whole affair had, however, been tense.
Subsequently the subdeacon Riculf was tortured and revealed what lay behind the attack on Gregory.
According to Gregory the slanders against  Fredegund were intended to drive her from the court, thus facilitating the elevation of her stepson, Clovis, to the throne.
The new king was then to appoint as bishop his old friend, the priest Riculf, whose namesake was to become archdeacon: Leudast was to become a dux.
It may be significant that Clovis was murdered at about this time, apparently at Fredegund's instigation.
It is possible that Riculf's confession should be seen in the context of the aftermath of the murder, and that its accuracy should be regarded with some suspicion.
Nevertheless, it is clear that Gregory himself was opposed by members of his clergy.
It was during this crisis that Gregory was criticized as not being a local: even a bishop who belonged to the episcopal dynasty of Tours could be portrayed by his own clergy as an outsider.
The episode should make us wary of placing too much emphasis on such notions as clerical dynasties.
In this whole scandal one figure is largely absent: St Martin.
Gregory himself did not doubt the efficacy of the saint, but clearly Leudast and his supporters were less than impressed by the bishop's special relationship with his supernatural patron.
For every miracle in which a saint punished someone flouting his authority, there was someone to do the flouting.
In certain respects a major saint-cult was a liability: it usually meant the existence of a refuge to which political outcasts might flee.
Any asylum seeker brought with him the possibility of retribution against the shrine and its local town or city from his enemies, as Gregory discovered on a number of occasions.
Among the refugees who caused trouble for for the bishops of Tours were Austrapius, Merovech, Eberulf, Chariulf and Childeric the Saxon.
Moreover, although a great cult may have brought in more than enough wealth to compensate for the damage caused by those fleeing from the king's anger, that wealth could still attract the attention of would-be thieves.
A major shrine was not an unequivocal blessing to its guardians.
Episcopal power was not cut and dried, although the canons, the saints' Lives and the epitaphs of bishops would like us to think that it was.
The image presented by these sources is one of consensus, in which all was ultimately rightly ordered by divine forces.
This vision is the creation of propaganda.
The propaganda may have had some success; it was, nevertheless, necessary.
Precisely because a bishop's hold on his diocese could be precarious, he needed to manipulate all the resources at his disposal; contacts at court, family connections, the canons and the cult of the saints.
When Eligius became bishop of Noyon in 641 he set out to find the bones of the martyr Quentin.
Maurinus, cantor in the royal palace, had effectively challenged Eligius to do so, by searching himself, although he died in the attempt.
The new bishop's credibility could and did gain much from the discovery.
He needed to mobilize all his resources in order to control his diocese, much as kings had to do in order to rule their kingdoms.
Stability in Disunity: The Civil Wars of the Sixth Century
Civil war was the spectre which haunted much of sixth-century Gaul, or so it seemed to Gregory of Tours as he wrote the preface to the fifth book of his Histories.
In certain respects this preface is misleading.
Book Five of the Histories covers the period from the murder of Sigibert in 575 until Gregory's own trial at Berny-Rivière in 580.
These five years were a particularly disruptive time for the city of Tours, not least because of the presence of Chilperic's son Merovech, who sought asylum in St Martin's in 577.
Book Seven enhances the impression of a century of civil war, but again allowance must be made for the fact that this one book covers scarcely more than twelve months of 584/5, and that it is concerned largely with the attempt by the "pretender" Gundovald to establish his claim to the Frankish throne.
The crisis surrounding Gundovald casts a disproportionate shadow across Gregory's Histories.
Indeed, it is difficult to estimate the scale of any civil war from Gregory's account.
Civil wars were not the only destructive forces in the Merovingian kingdoms.
Urban politics could be extremely disruptive; Book Five of the Histories deals not only with Merovech, but also with Leudast, and his plots against Gregory.
Nor was conflict within Merovingian society the sole cause of destruction: the passage of an army heading for campaigns outside the Frankish kingdom could be devastating, as the Septimanian expedition of 585 revealed.
Just as bad was the passage of the retinue of Rigunth, as she set out to marry the Visigothic prince Reccared in 584.
Gregory saw in the vandalism caused during this episode the fulfilment of a prophecy of Joel: "that which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten" .
Family politics 511–613
Despite the devastation which could be caused in peace-time, Gregory saw civil wars as being the single most important cause of disruption.
They deserve close consideration.
Clovis's campaigns and ruses against other Frankish rulers should perhaps be seen as power struggles within a small kin-group, and therefore as precursors of the civil wars that were to follow, but we know nothing about the connections between the petty kings of the years prior to 511.
From the 520's onwards, however, the Merovingians were regularly at each other 's throats; Theuderic I attempted to murder his half-brother Chlothar I; Chlothar and Childebert I did kill the sons of Chlodomer; Childebert and Theuderic's son Theudebert I almost fought against Chlothar, but a storm miraculously prevented a battle taking place.
In the 550's Chlothar himself was faced with the rebellion of his own son Chramn.
After Chlothar's death in 561 a new set of conflicts arose, largely associated with the rivalry between Chlothar's sons, Charibert I, Guntram, Sigibert I and Chilperic I, over the division of their father's kingdom.
In 562 Chilperic took advantage of Sigibert's preoccupation with a campaign against the Avars east of the Rhine to seize some of his brother's cities.
After defeating the Avars, Sigibert returned and took Chilperic's capital, Soissons, before restoring the status quo.
Matters were made worse when Chilperic had his wife Galswinth murdered: she was the sister of Sigibert's wife, Brunhild, and not surprisingly Chilperic's half-brothers ganged up on him.
In 566 it was Sigibert's turn to be the aggressor, when he sent an army against Arles, which was held by Guntram.
Sigibert and Guntram came to blows again in 573, and the crisis was exacerbated by Chilperic's attacking Sigibert's lands south of the Loire.
Sigibert retaliated by calling in his allies from across the Rhine.
Chilperic and Guntram united against him, but Sigibert forced Guntram to abandon the alliances on two occasions.
Finally in 575 Sigibert was at the point of eliminating Chilperic, but he was murdered, probably by agents of Fredegund.
It is possible that the wars of 573 to 575 marked the worst period of civil war in sixth-century Francia.
Nevertheless it was the political complexities which followed which most attracted Gregory.
In the aftermath of Sigibert's murder the survival of his son Childebert II was uncertain: Chilperic took advantage of the difficulties facing the young  king to seize some of his cities.
Childebert survived in the first instance because of the loyalty of his father's followers, and later because of the intervention of his uncle Guntram.
Meanwhile Chilperic himself was faced with a challenge from Merovech, his son by Audovera.
The prince was intent on establishing himself as king, and he appears to have chosen the period following Sigibert's death deliberately to make his bid for recognition.
One measure he took to bolster his position was to marry Sigibert's widow, Brunhild.
He was right to feel insecure.
Fredegund was determined that only her children should succeed Chilperic, and to this end she eliminated his sons by other women.
To survive, Merovech had to oppose his father, but his bid for power failed and he asked his servant to kill him.
One result of Fredegund's actions, which also involved the murder of prince Clovis, was that by 581 Chilperic had no living son.
Her three eldest sons had all died of disease, and the fourth had not yet been born.
Meanwhile relations between Childebert and Guntram had soured over the latter's treatment of lands once held by Sigibert.
The way was therefore open for a rapprochement between Childebert and Chilperic, who now adopted the former as his heir.
The original alliance between Guntram and his nephew thus came to an end.
The following three years saw a complex set of political manoeuvres, centred largely on the control of various cities of Aquitaine.
Ultimately Childebert and Guntram patched up their quarrel, and Chilperic moved on to the defensive, only to be murdered at Chelles in 584.
Chilperic left Fredegund's infant son, Chlothar II, as his heir.
His survival depended on the support of the Neustrian aristocracy, and, once again on Guntram, now childless, playing the part of a kindly uncle, although he was suspicious about the child's parentage.
Meanwhile Gundovald, a supposed son of Chlothar, who had been excluded from the succession in 561, took advantage of the situation to revive his claim to the crown, which he had already asserted with Byzantine support in 582.
For the best part of a year he presented Guntram with a very serious challenge.
His death in 585 marks the end of the major military conflicts covered by Gregory of Tours, but there was still much disagreement between Childebert and his uncle, over  land, over the participants in the Gundovald affair, over relations with Spain, and over the recognition of Chilperic's son, Chlothar II.
Mutual irritation is apparent up until the end of Gregory's narrative, in 591.
Guntram died in 592, and Childebert II took over his kingdom.
The latter, however, died four years later: of his sons, Theudebert II inherited Austrasia, and Theuderic II Burgundy.
The two brothers were at times united in their hostility to Chilperic's son Chlothar II, and at one moment they reduced the latter's kingdom to territory between the Seine, the Oise and the sea.
Theudebert and Theuderic, however, were soon to fall out, largely, according to Fredegar, at the instigation of their grandmother Brunhild.
Whereas Gregory had tended to see the malign influence of Fredegund as the origin of many of the problems of his own day, for Fredegar Brunhild was the evil genius of the period from 575 to 613.
The old queen stirred up Theuderic against his brother, whom she called the son of a gardener, and Theuderic defeated and killed Theudebert in 612.
He then turned on Chlothar, but his own death, from dysentery, and the subsequent elimination of his family in 613, led to the reunification of the Frankish kingdom and brought to a close one period of Merovingian civil war.
The causes of war
Within the history of these early civil wars there are certain recurrent features which are worthy of emphasis.
First, there is the chronological association between the death, or reported death, of a king and political crisis.
Childebert I's invasion of the Auvergne, prompted by Arcadius, followed inaccurate reports that Theuderic I had died; Childebert was also to attack Rheims because he was told, again incorrectly, of Chlothar's death.
The conflict between Chilperic and his half-brothers began on the death of their father Chlothar I. More interestingly, Merovech's bid for power followed his uncle's murder; similarly Gundovald, who had been more or less ignored when he first returned to Gaul in 582, became a plausible candidate for the throne when Chilperic was killed.
All candidates for the throne had to be recognized as Merovingians.
Most of them were unquestioned members of the royal family.
But there were exceptions: Gregory of Tours denied the claims of one would-be king called Munderic, who was crushed by Theuderic I. Chlothar I refused to acknowledge that Gundovald was his son, but there were others who thought that he was.
They may well have been in the right: the tendency of some Merovingians to take and discard wives at will, that is to practise serial monogamy, meant that there was no clearly defined family tree.
Nor was the behaviour of all Merovingian queens above suspicion.
The parentage of two kings was called into question; Fredegund gathered three bishops and three hundred leading laymen to swear that Chlothar II was the son of Chilperic when Guntram suggested that he was illegitimate; Brunhild, however, was prepared to say that her grandson Theudebert was the son of a gardener.
Even a prince whose parentage was known could not be certain of succeeding his father, especially if his mother had been discarded from the royal bed.
As we have seen serial monogamy could put the claims of unquestionably legitimate princes at risk.
None of Chilperic's sons by women other than Fredegund gained the throne, but they were all legitimate claimants, and two of them, Merovech and Clovis, made a bid for power in opposition to the will of their stepmother.
Nor was this a peculiarly Frankish problem: similar conflict had already been seen in the hostility between Sigistrix and Sigismund's second wife, in the kingdom of the Burgundians.
Not every Merovingian queen was as forceful as Fredegund, and the sons of various queens or concubines did inherit at the same time.
Nevertheless, Merovingian kings with the same mother were more likely to cooperate than sons of different mothers.
Theuderic I seems to have kept himself apart from the other sons of Clovis, though this could, in part, be explained by his greater age.
Among those sons of Chlothar to survive and inherit from their father, Chilperic appears as an outsider: he was the son of Aregund, while Charibert, Guntram and Sigibert were the sons of Ingund.
It is possible that the earlier opposition of Chramn to his father, Chlothar, and to his brothers was linked to the fact that he alone was the son of Chunsina.
The problems faced by princes go a long way to explaining their activities during the lifetimes of their fathers, especially their hostility to their stepmothers.
The history of the royal succession shows time and again that a  prince had to prove himself in order to be sure of inheriting a kingdom, and the process of building up a following and prestige was likely to cause some conflict.
For an established monarch the major conflicts with other rulers were almost inevitably concerned with land, and more particularly with the question of the divisions of the kingdom.
This largely accounts for the hostilities following the death of Chlothar I in 561.
Problems were doubtless aggravated by Charibert's death six years later, which necessitated a redivision of his lands among his surviving brothers.
The murder of Sigibert I left his son's territories open to the military onslaughts of Chilperic and to the rather more devious guardianship undertaken by Guntram.
Concentration on the issue of the divisions of the kingdom, however, runs the risk of presenting the Merovingian civil wars in too exclusively royal a fashion.
by no means all the conflict within the Frankish kingdom stemmed from the centre.
There were certainly occasions when an over-zealous army drove a king to war.
Theuderic's Auvergne campaign of 524 was in part forced on him, according to Gregory of Tours, when he refused to attack Burgundy: his soldiers wanted a war of some sort and he had to provide one.
Sigibert's eastern troops were furious when he patched up a peace with Chilperic.
On the whole, although there is an exception in 583, when Childebert II's army refused to obey the policies of bishop Egidius of Rheims, the military followers of the Merovingians liked to fight: a battle brought hope of booty.
Similarly the militias of the civitates seem to have relished the opportunity to plunder neighbouring districts; in the wake of Chilperic's murder there was a particularly savage conflict between the men of Orléans and Blois on the one hand and the men of Châteaudun and Chartres, just to the north, on the other.
The Gundovald affair
The involvement of the aristocracy in the civil wars and the disruptions of the Merovingian period is complex.
Inevitably the interests of individual magnates varied.
How royal conflicts could engage these various interests is best seen through a detailed investigation of one particular crisis.
The most informative is undoubtedly that caused by Gundovald's claim to the throne, since Gregory of Tours not only allocates a considerable amount of space to the rebellion itself, but also provides evidence in the ensuing books of the Histories which  illuminates the nature of the"pretender's' following.
Further, the way in which Gregory presents his account of Gundovald's rebellion and the subsequent related events is in itself revealing.
Gundovald claimed to be a son of Chlothar I. Chlothar denied the claim, but his brother Childebert I at first accepted it, as also did Chlothar's son Charibert I. Despite this support, Gundovald was rejected by Sigibert, another of Chlothar's sons, so he went to Italy, where he was received by the Byzantine general, Narses, and from there to Constantinople.
Following the approaches of a member of the Frankish aristocracy, however, he returned to Gaul in 582/3, and was met by Theodore, bishop of Marseilles.
His arrival was inopportune, and he soon withdrew to a Mediterranean island.
In 584, however, he was to be found with Mummolus in Avignon, where they were joined by Desiderius, dux of the recently murdered Chilperic.
Together Mummolus and Desiderius elevated Gundovald to the kingship at Brives-la-Gaillarde.
As king, Gundovald proceeded to take oaths of loyalty from those civitates which had been held by Chilperic, as well as those still subject to Guntram.
During the course of 585 Gundovald's luck began to run out.
He was deserted by Desiderius and retreated to St Bertrand de Comminges, where he was eventually deserted by his other leading followers; finally he was tricked into handing himself over to Guntram's generals and was killed.
Gundovald's bid for the throne was based on his claim to Merovingian blood.
Whether his claim was genuine or not is an open question.
Given the complexities of Merovingian family politics, Chlothar's denial of paternity is not conclusive: he may have had good reason to disassociate himself from Gundovald's mother.
Equally, Sigibert and Guntram may have been opposed to Gundovald because he threatened their own positions.
On the other hand, Childebert may have backed Gundovald in order to inconvenience his brother Chlothar.
Charibert's support, however, is less easily explained away.
Yet more thought-provoking is a speech which Gregory puts into Gundovald's mouth shortly before his death.
There Gundovald claims to have the support of Radegund and Ingitrude.
The former was one of the women most admired by Gregory, and as a sometime wife of Chlothar she may have been well informed about his children.
At the very least Gundovald's claim was plausible.
His bid for the throne was in the first instance an aspect of Merovingian family politics.
What made the bid viable were two related factors: treasure and aristocratic support.
When Gundovald first arrived in Gaul he apparently had an considerable quantity of treasure with him, which must suggest that he initially had the backing of the Byzantine emperor, whose concerns about the Lombards in Italy may well have stretched to a desire to see a close ally established in Francia.
Childebert's dux Guntram Boso is said to have captured an immense amount of gold and silver when Gundovald fled from Avignon.
Two years later, however, Gundovald was wealthy enough to bribe the leading citizens of Angoulême.
Subsequently the remnants of Rigunth's treasure, for which Waddo had been responsible, and which Desiderius had secured, fell into his hands.
Even when he was cornered at St Bertrand de Comminges Gundovald had quantities of gold and silver.
With regard to Gundovald's aristocratic support, Gregory's account is less straightforward.
When he first refers to the approach made to Gundovald in Constantinople he does not reveal the identity of the man involved.
Later he says that Guntram accused Guntram Boso of inviting Gundovald to return to Gaul.
Gundovald himself is said to have talked of conversations with Boso in Constantinople.
When Gundovald first arrived, however, Boso arrested bishop Theodore of Marseilles for receiving him and he stole Gundovald's treasure.
Theodore claimed that he was acting on the instructions of Childebert's magnates.
Gregory's failure to make any clear statement about the author of the original invitation asking Gundovald to return to Gaul seems to be deliberate.
The support which Gundovald received once in Gaul is easier to analyse.
Theodore seems not to have acted of his own volition; his welcome to Gundovald can be discounted.
Gundovald's first major supporter was Mummolus: Gregory records Guntram Boso's accusation that Mummolus received Gundovald hospitably.
The charge brought the two commanders to blows.
This might suggest that it was a calumny on Boso's part, but Gregory himself states directly that Mummolus received Gundovald.
Later Gundovald and Mummolus were joined by dux Desiderius, Bladast, Waddo and bishop Sagittarius of Gap.
In Bordeaux, Gundovald was supported by the bishop, Bertram.
These men can be divided into two groups; half had  followed Guntram, the other half, Chilperic.
The followers of Guntram were Mummolus, Sagittarius and Bertram.
The latter was related to the king.
His support may have been determined by the presence of Gundovald's army in his cathedral city.
Mummolus and Sagittarius, however, had both fallen out with Guntram: Sagittarius had been deposed from his bishopric as a result of adultery and murder.
For their point of view, if Gundovald could be established in the kingship, he would be a new patron.
Similar pressures weighed on Desiderius, Waddo and Bladast, but for rather different reasons.
They joined Gundovald after Chilperic's murder in 584.
Probably all three of them were away from court at the time of the murder: Waddo was certainly in the retinue of Chilperic's daughter Rigunth, who was en route for Spain, where she was to have been married.
From Waddo's point of view the king's death was a disaster; too far from court to be involved in safeguarding Chilperic's heir, which was arranged by Fredegund, he was liable to be excluded from the ruling group in the early years of Chlothar II.
In Aquitaine, however, he, Desiderius and perhaps Bladast were well placed to transfer their allegiance to Gundovald, which is what they did.
The significance of Chilperic's murder for Gundovald's cause can be seen in the curious chronology of the whole affair.
Since Childebert I is said to have acknowledged Gundovald's claim to Merovingian blood, the issue must have been raised before 558, perhaps long before.
Gundovald probably left Francia in or shortly after 561.
He was certainly in Italy before Narses died in 574, and he subsequently spent a long time in Constantinople.
He returned to Gaul in 582/3, but received little support.
It was not until 584 that his bid for the throne made serious headway, and then only after the murder of Chilperic had left certain of his followers without a patron.
Gundovald and the opposition to Childebert II
Although Gundovald received open support from men who had fallen out with Guntram, or who had been left without a patron at Chilperic's death, Theodore of Marseilles claimed that he had been ordered to receive Gundovald by Childebert's magnates.
It is possible that Childebert and his mother, Brunhild, had some sympathy for Gundovald, who was careful not to lay claim to Childebert's territory; indeed he took oaths on Childebert's behalf.
Further, Guntram feared that Brunhild would contact the "pretender" , and he actually wrote to Gundovald in her name, in order to  trick him into disbanding his troops.
After Gundovald's death Brunhild does seem to have been in communication with his sons.
Guntram even accused her of wanting to marry one of them; a suggestion which Gregory found preposterous.
She did, nevertheless, offer Waddo protection after he had left Gundovald.
Despite these hints, it is more likely that those magnates of Childebert who encouraged Gundovald in 582 were men who had strong reservations about the king and his mother.
This is suggested in two ways.
In Gundovald's description of his conversations with Guntram Boso, as set out by Gregory of Tours, Boso is reported to have said that Chilperic was dead (which was not the case at the time), that Guntram was childless, and that Childebert had no support.
Even though Gundovald can never have said some of the things which Gregory attributes to him, the bishop of Tours must have had some reason for putting the words into his mouth.
Effectively Gregory indicates that a section of the aristocracy were dissatisfied with all three Merovingian kings, including Childebert in 582.
There may be a further indication of this dissatisfaction in Gregory's account of the interrogation in 585 of two of Gundovald's envoys, who revealed to Guntram under torture that all the nobility of Childebert's kingdom had offered Gundovald the crown.
Further, with regard to the malcontents, there seem to be a number of connections between those men who had supported Gundovald, and the authors of a plot against Childebert which was uncovered in 587.
Two years after Gundovald's death, it was discovered that the dux Rauching was plotting with the followers of Chlothar II to assassinate Childebert; he was then to take control of Theudebert, the king's elder son, and of Champagne; two other men, Ursio and Berthefred, were to seize Theuderic and the rest of Childebert's kingdom; Brunhild was to be ousted from power.
Guntram passed this information on to Childebert; Rauching was killed, as were Ursio and Berthefred.
In 590 it further became apparent that bishop Egidius of Rheims had been involved in Rauching's plot, and he was deposed from his see.
Although no direct connection can be shown between the revolt of Gundovald and the conspiracy of 587, there are reasons for thinking that the two affairs may have been related.
There is the consistent, but unexplained, emphasis placed by Gregory on support given to Gundovald by Childebert's followers.
And there is Gregory's account of Guntram warning Childebert over the behaviour of Egidius, which is placed immediately before his  description of the last days of Gundovald.
Gregory often uses juxtaposition deliberately.
Egidius certainly operated in association with Guntram Boso.
The two of them were implicated in the hounding to death of Chilperic's son Merovech in 577.
Since on that occasion they were working with the approval of Fredegund they are likely to have been opposed to Brunhild.
Egidius was certainly hostile to the dux Lupus, who was Brunhild's favourite.
His connection with Boso may suggest that he was one of the magnates of Childebert who was involved in bringing Gundovald to Gaul.
Was it merely a coincidence that the fall of Boso took place at the same time as the discovery of the Rauching plot, in which Egidius was involved?
There are, however, significant differences between the political affiliations of 585 and 587.
Gundovald was not only, as it seems, supported by members of the Austrasian aristocracy, but also publicly upholding Childebert's authority in Aquitaine, while challenging that of Guntram and of Chlothar.
By contrast, in 587 Rauching was in alliance with Chlothar's followers and hostile to Childebert: Guntram was to be kept neutral.
This switch by an important faction of Austrasian magnates may be related to developments at court.
Shortly before Gundovald's death Guntram had recognized Childebert as reaching his majority: he was therefore fit to rule on his own.
Throughout Childebert's minority the power structure at the Austrasian court may well have favoured the likes of Boso, Rauching and Egidius.
By 587, however, Brunhild seems to have become the most influential figure at Childebert's court, even though Guntram, when recognizing his nephew's coming of age, had advised him not to visit his mother.
From Rauching's point of view, under Brunhild's influence, Childebert was no longer a satisfactory master; he was, therefore, to be removed and his sons elevated to the kingship in his place, in the hope that they would be more amenable.
Despite this difference, the plot of 587 does help illuminate the crisis of two years before.
It sheds some light on those members of the Austrasian aristocracy whose loyalty was questionable.
Further, if Rauching and Egidius were involved in inviting Gundovald to Gaul, the fact that their influence was unaffected by his defeat may explain why Gregory fails to name those members of Childebert's court who were responsible for the invitation.
At this point in time the bishop of Tours was apparently too scared to state the truth openly.
Kings and magnates
If the preceding analysis is correct, then Gundovald's support can be seen to depend on three different groups: there were members of Childebert's court, seemingly anxious to keep their options open until the king was recognized as being of an age to rule; there were men who had been followers of Guntram, but whose positions had been compromised; and finally there were military leaders who had been in the service of Chilperic, but who had been too far from court at the time of his murder to ensure their survival under Chlothar II, whose own succession could scarcely be taken for granted.
Thus, the Gundovald affair highlights the dangers posed by magnates caught in three different situations: by those who were unsure of their position at court, those who had already fallen from royal favour, and those whose royal patron had been killed.
Despite Gregory's constant emphasis on the involvement of Childebert's men in Gundovald's cause, it seems from the chronological coincidence of Chilperic's murder and the elevation of the "pretender" to the kingship, that it was the support of this third group, that is of Desiderius and Waddo, which suddenly made rebellion viable.
Essentially those who felt themselves to be excluded from power decided to support a perfectly plausible claimant to the throne who had been waiting on the sidelines for such a following to materialize.
The Gundovald crisis can thus be seen as a classic illustration of the difficulties raised at the time of the transfer of power from one monarch to another: the dispossessed and those who thought that their status was in question set about making contact with a new lord.
Looked at from this point of view Gundovald's revolt illustrates perfectly a major aspect of sixth- and indeed seventh-century politics, that is the tendency for those lacking royal support, either because of accidents of death or because they were in opposition to a particular monarch, to search out the favour of another king.
There were plenty of rebels opposed to individual Merovingians, but the family's right to rule was not questioned.
As a plausible candidate for the throne Gundovald could attract to himself those whose careers were under threat.
There is a long history of members of the aristocracy seeking an alternative Merovingian lord; effectively it begins with Arcadius calling Childebert into the Auvergne.
It was not only the aristocracy who could hope for promotion from a change of regime: for instance Riculf hoped that the see of Tours would be granted to him by Chilperic's son, Clovis, as a result of the Leudast affair and Gregory's anticipated deposition.
After Gundovald's uprising the same search for a new Merovingian lord can be seen in Rauching's plot.
The problem of the transfer of loyalty by members of the aristocracy from one Merovingian to another attracted the attention of Guntram and Childebert shortly after Rauching's death, when they met at Andelot.
The treaty which they drew up dealt specifically with those leudes who had transferred from one king to the other.
In the seventh century the decision of the aristocracy of Austrasia to abandon Brunhild and her great-grandson, and to transfer their loyalty to Chlothar II, is one of the few examples of a successful rebellion against a member of the Merovingian dynasty.
It succeeded because Sigibert II was extremely young, while Chlothar II was well established.
Later in the century political factions still depended on association with particular claimants to the throne.
The crises surrounding Ebroin, Pippin II, Charles Martel, and even Pippin III and Carloman were all concerned in part with loyalty to or control of individual members of the royal family.
The search for an acceptable Merovingian lord affected local as well as court politics.
It is not known why Arcadius was opposed to Theuderic's regime, but Riculf quite clearly hoped that changes at the centre would improve his prospects in his own civitas.
Equally Leudast's position in Tours was closely connected with changing royal control of the city.
Numerous conflicts within the kingdom were thus centred upon the royal court.
Thus the civil wars, so decried by Gregory, actually held the kingdom together, because the struggles between members of the Merovingian family provided a focus around which other conflicts could cluster.
The Merovingian civil wars, at least in the sixth century, were centripetal, rather than centrifugal.
Politics in Aquitaine
The position of Aquitaine needs to be considered in this light.
In certain crucial respects Aquitaine was different from the northern heartlands of the Merovingians.
Kings themselves rarely travelled south of the Loire.
Their favoured residences and, therefore, their itineraries were centred in the north.
Royal business in Aquitaine was conducted largely through agents.
Sometimes princes acted on their fathers' behalf.
On occasion, however, a prince might oppose his father.
In so doing he could still ensure loyalty to the Merovingian dynasty, even if not to the individual king.
Chramn used his position in Aquitaine to set himself up in opposition to his father, Chlothar I, who sent his half-brothers to destroy him.
Aquitaine was also the setting for Gundovald's bid for the throne.
It was at Brives-la-Gaillarde that he was elevated to the kingship, and it was from the cities of Aquitaine that he received the oaths of loyalty, which most kings must have taken by proxy.
The south-west was far enough from the established centres of power for those who felt excluded from the throne to use it as a launching pad for rebellion.
Nevertheless it was not opposed to the Merovingian dynasty.
Certainly there were Gallo-Romans of an independent turn of mind in the south.
The patrician Dynamius provides perhaps the best illustration of this.
He was the scion of a noble and highly educated family, and correspondent of Gregory the Great.
In 581, as governor of Provence, he backed the aristocrat Marcellus, to become bishop of Uzès, in opposition to Guntram's nominee, Jovinus, the then ex-governor.
And in the same year he tried to prevent Guntram's general, Gundulf, from entering Marseilles.
But he was prepared to act as Guntram's agent in his dealings with bishop Theodore of Marseilles.
This, however, was precisely the time that Guntram and Childebert were in dispute over Marseilles.
Dynamius was making the most of the opportunities provided by the conflict to strengthen his own position.
When the two kings had resolved their differences, Dynamius sided firmly with Childebert.
He is best seen, therefore, as a southern aristocrat who exploited the rifts within the Merovingian family for his own ends, but he never rejected Merovingian rule, and his son Evantius was even killed while on a diplomatic mission from Childebert II to the Byzantine court.
The relationship between centre and periphery in the Merovingian kingdom was thus extremely complex, because the connections between the two regions were exploited both by the Gallo-Roman aristocracy and by the northern rulers for their own ends up until the eighth century.
There was, therefore, a balance between court and country, and the civil wars helped to maintain this balance, by providing a central focus for local conflict.
Certainly the civil wars were destructive.
Moreover luck sometimes prevented the family conflicts of the Merovingians from getting out of hand: accident of survival meant that the kingdom was united in 558, when Chlothar I was left as the only surviving son of Clovis, and was able to unite the regnum Francorum for the first time in forty-seven years.
Nevertheless the Merovingian civil wars did not pose a threat to the survival of the kingdom.
Indeed, in a sense, they were a unifying part of the structure of the Frankish state in the sixth century and for much of the seventh.
Laws and Law-Codes: Merovingian Legislation
The preface to Book Five of Gregory's Histories suggests that civil war was one of the great threats to the legacy of Clovis.
In fact civil wars may not have endangered the Merovingian state to the extent that Gregory implies.
In a sense they were integral to the structure of Frankish politics, serving to strengthen the bond between the Merovingian family and the aristocracy.
At the same time Gregory's emphasis on the civil wars tends to divert attention from the very real achievements made by the Merovingians in keeping the peace.
One of the chief functions of an early medieval king was the enforcement of justice.
Einhard's criticism that the late Merovingians travelled around in ox-carts ignored the fact that in so doing they were copying late Roman provincial governors, who used this means of transport to ensure that they were accessible to petitioners.
Many of the petitions would have been concerned with justice.
Fortunately a considerable quantity of Merovingian legal material survives to offset the negative images left by Gregory and Einhard.
Some of it belongs to the years directly after 591, when Gregory's narrative comes to an end, and has the additional significance of casting some light on the later years of the reign of Childebert II (575–96), which are otherwise poorly represented in the sources.
At the same time, the reign of Childebert itself provides a clear point of access to the history of Merovingian law, which all too easily can be swamped in the problems of origins, chronology and manuscript transmission.
Childebert II
The first nine years of Childebert II's reign are dominated by the problems of the young king's survival, sometimes with the help of Guntram, sometimes with the help of Chilperic, and always with the involvement of his  aristocracy.
After the death of Chilperic and the revolt of Gundovald in 584, Guntram recognized his nephew as being fit to rule in his own name, but even this did not ensure consistently good relations between the two kings, not least because of differences of opinion over control of certain cities, and because of the ramifications of the Gundovald affair.
In order to solve the first of these differences the two kings signed the Treaty of Andelot in 587, but Guntram remained suspicious of his nephew.
In particular he found opportunity to complain about Childebert's policies towards the Visigoths, with whom he cultivated more cordial relations than his uncle felt was proper.
Despite Guntram's qualms, Childebert had extensive dealings with foreign powers: the Visigoths, the Lombards and the Byzantines.
In these dealings, which are represented both in Gregory's Histories and in the Epistulae Austrasiacae, as well as the later narrative of Paul the Deacon, Childebert appears as a formidable figure.
Childebert had yet to reach the height of his power in 591, when Gregory's narrative ends.
Fredegar records the death of Guntram, apparently in 592, and Childebert's succession to the kingdom of Burgundy, thus uniting it to the east Frankish realm, and establishing a political axis which was to last until 613.
For 594 Fredegar notes a war between the Franks and the Bretons, and under the following year he mentions a victory over the Warni, who are probably to be equated with the Thuringians.
In the early 590s Childebert was clearly a successful monarch.
Writing in the eighth century the Lombard historian Paul the Deacon provides some additional information relating to the involvement of Childebert in the elevation of Tassilo as "king" of the Bavarians, confirming his influence outside Francia itself.
Finally, he states that Childebert and his wife were poisoned.
From Fredegar's chronicle it is possible to date the king's death to 596, but Paul is the only author to record unequivocally that Childebert was murdered.
Childebert's reign over the combined kingdoms of Sigibert and Guntram was short, and it is very poorly recorded.
Nevertheless, three edicts of Childebert survive, the first issued at Andernach in 594, the second at Maastricht in 595, and the third at Cologne in 596.
Each was issued on  1 March, presumably at an annual gathering, after consultation with the king's magnates, his obtimates.
In order to bring the edicts to the notice of all they were combined into a single law, referred to as the Decretio Childeberti.
As such they are included as an addendum in some manuscripts of the earliest Frankish law-book, known as the Pactus Legis Salicae.
Since Childebert was also one of the two kings involved in the Treaty of Andelot, his reign is a significant one in the history of royal legislation.
Merovingian legislation
In his edition of the Capitularies of the Frankish kings Alfred Boretius included nine pieces of legislation issued by the Merovingians.
They form a heterogeneous collection of one letter, two precepts, three edicts, a decree and two "pacts" .
Three of these texts, the Pactus pro tenore pacis, the Edictum Chilperici and the Decretio Childeberti, are preserved in manuscripts of the Pactus Legis Salicae.
Three more, the letter of Clovis addressed to his bishops, Guntram's edict of 585 and Chlothar II's decree of 614, are associated with ecclesiastical legislation.
The text of the Treaty of Andelot is included in the Histories of Gregory of Tours.
Separately preserved and more difficult to date than these are the precepts of Childebert I and Chlothar II.
The first is preserved only in one manuscript, and the second in two.
The context in which these last two laws were first issued is unknown; indeed the identification of which Childebert and which Chlothar was responsible for these laws depends on attribution by modern editors.
The variety of contexts in which the laws are preserved and the chance survival of the precepts of Childebert I and Chlothar II show that the great law-books of the Merovingian kingdom, the Pactus Legis Salicae and the Lex Ribvaria, were only one part of the legal output of the period, and they suggest that the Merovingian kings legislated often.
Indicative of the lowest level of Merovingian legislation is the first book of the Formulary compiled by Marculf around the year 700.
It is largely a compendium of model royal commands and charters, with some appropriate responses.
As such it is indicative of the daily involvement of the king in legal matters.
More significantly, the fact that the edicts of Guntram in 585 and of Chlothar in 614 were issued in the aftermath of Church councils raises the possibility that other royal legislation was attached to such councils, but that it  has not been preserved.
The canons themselves provide an indication of royal involvement in ecclesiastical legislation.
Certainly kings were responsible for summoning councils.
That of Orléans in 533 was held by royal order, ex praeceptione gloriosissimorum regum.
Theudebert I authorized the meeting of the Council of Clermont in 535: the council started with prayers for the king, and it addressed a petition to him.
The Council of Orléans in 549 was summoned by Childebert I, and it confirmed the creation in Lyons of a xenodochium, or hostel, which the king and his queen Ultrogotha had founded.
In 551/2 Childebert called a council in Paris to judge bishop Saffaracus.
Among the kings of the next generation Charibert I authorized a council in Tours in 567.
Guntram's bishops dealt with a disagreement between their king and his brother Sigibert in 573, and Guntram himself summoned two councils to Mâcon between 581 and 585, and another to Valence in the same period.
In 614 Chlothar held a council at Paris, and one at Clichy in 626/7.
His grandson, Clovis II, summoned his bishops to Chalon-sur-Saône between 647 and 653, and Clovis's son Childeric II ordered the holding of councils at St-Pierre-de-Granon (Bordeaux) and St-Jean-de-Losne between 673 and 675.
For all of these the canons survive, recording royal involvement or approval.
To this ecclesiastical evidence can be added information in the narrative sources.
Gregory records conciliar involvement in judicial matters on a number of occasions.
The cases of the troublesome bishops Salonius of Embrun and Sagittarius of Gap were dealt with on Guntram's orders at the Church councils of Lyons (567/73) and Chalon-sur-Saône (579).
Praetextatus of Rouen was tried at Paris in 577, and Gregory himself at a gathering of bishops at the royal palace of Berny-Rivière in 580: both these last trials were held under the aegis of Chilperic I. A year later the flight of Mummolus was discussed at Lyons.
Bishops met under royal command at  Poitiers in 589 and 590 to suppress the rebellion of the nuns of the Holy Cross monastery against their abbess.
The same year Egidius of Rheims was tried in council at Metz.
Fredegar reveals that Theuderic II and Brunhild used the Council of Chalon in 602/3 to depose Desiderius of Vienne.
The mixture of narrative and conciliar evidence is important, for Gregory and Fredegar sometimes refer to matters not included in the theological record.
Thus, in Gregory's Histories the Council of Mâcon in 585 was expected to deal with a quarrel between bishops Bertram of Bordeaux and Palladius of Saintes, and it did deal with the theology of a certain unnamed bishop who thought that the word homo in the Bible did not apply to women.
Fredegar, however, seems to have remembered this same council as being concerned with the foundation of the royal monastery of St Marcel at Chalon.
None of these matters appears in the canons which deal at length with a host of theological and ecclesiastical issues.
This should alert us to the fact that the canons are incomplete records, and that they could even overlook matters of royal concern, like Guntram's foundation of the monastery of St Marcel.
Nevertheless the evidence which we have is enough to show that the situation in Merovingian Francia may not have been so very different from Visigothic Spain, where kings are well known to have been closely involved in the major ecclesiastical councils of the kingdom.
The range of legislation covered by the Merovingian capitularies is also impressive.
Clovis's letter, which was sent in the aftermath of the battle of "Vouillé" , describes how he had decreed that no one was to harm the Church, those who had entered the religious life, those living with them, or slaves of the Church.
Anyone belonging to these categories who had been taken captive was to be freed.
Further, the power of the bishops to protect others was confirmed.
The fragmentary precept of Childebert I is likewise concerned with religious matters, with the destruction of idols, and sacriligeous behaviour, including drunkenness, scurrility and singing at Easter and Christmas.
The edict of Guntram issued at Péronne, and appended to the canons of the Council of Mâcon of 585, continues royal involvement in ecclesiastical legislation, with an attack on Sunday work, and by backing the force of the canons with secular sanctions.
Also responding directly to the ecclesiastical council held in Paris in 614, Chlothar II's edict dealt with episcopal elections, clerical patronage, and the limits of the power of secular  judges over clerics, inheritance, freedom, the legal rights of Jews against Christians, and the punishment of nuns who married.
Further, it addressed other secular matters relating specifically to the political situation following the fall of Brunhild.
Secular legislation is more exclusively to the fore in the remaining Merovingian capitularies.
The Pactus pro tenore pacis concerned itself largely with issues relating to theft; the crime itself and the tracking of the criminal by local officials called centenarii, even across the boundaries between the Merovingian kingdoms; it also dealt with trial by ordeal, punishment, and the right of sanctuary.
The edict of Chilperic I tackled a larger selection of issues, including inheritance, dowry and robbery, but above all it legislated on the whole process of bringing a slave to trial by ordeal; when he was to be handed over to trial, and what delays might be allowed before the king's legal officer, the graphio, and the local law-men, the rachinburgi, took action.
The edict in fact provides the fullest surviving account of the process of law outside the courts of the king or his agents.
The Decretio Childeberti from 594–6 is more wide-ranging still.
At Andernach Childebert legislated on inheritance and incest, at Maastricht on ownership, rape, murder, the subversion of justice in court, and the death-penalty, and at Cologne he turned to the questions of the execution of thieves, the pursuit of criminals, and Sunday work.
The Praeceptio of Chlothar II similarly dealt with secular and religious legal matters.
Childebert's legislation is remarkable not only for its range, but also for its clear dependence on Roman Law.
In dealing with the question of possession it adopted the same time-limits as did the Sentences of Paul, as well as the thirty-year rule of late Roman Law.
In addition it followed Roman Law on rape.
These influences might partly be attributed to the official who authenticated the Cologne decree, Asclipiodus.
He is usually identified with the vir illustris and referendarius Asclepiodatus, who delivered Guntram's instructions relating to the foundations of the queen and her daughters at Chalon-sur-Saône and Autun to the synod of Valence in 585.
He is also  thought to be the same as the Asclepiodatus who was patricius of Provence, and was the recipient of letters from Gregory the Great in 599 and 601.
With less reason he has been equated with the one-time dux Asclipius, who led Guntram's men against Chilperic's guards in Paris in 582.
Asclepiodatus can, therefore, be seen as beginning his career in the service of Guntram, for whom he acted as referendary, transferring to Childebert in 593, and then becoming patricius of Provence under Childebert's sons.
The identification of Guntram's referendary Asclepiodatus with Asclipiodus, the authenticator of the Decretio Childeberti, has obvious attractions.
He could, for instance, have drawn many of the Roman elements in the Decretio from a Roman legal handbook compiled in the kingdom of the Burgundians, the Lex Romana Burgundionum.
Guntram had, after all, been king of Burgundy.
Nevertheless it would be dangerous to assign laws to Asclepiodatus simply on the basis of his probable knowledge: the praeceptio of Chlothar II also shows signs of influence from Roman and Burgundian Law.
It is unlikely to have been the work of Asclepiodatus, who can scarcely have worked for Chlothar before 613, given his association with Childebert II, and is equally unlikely to have been active after that date.
The legislation of Guntram, Childebert II and Chlothar II is indicative not of the work of one man, but of the style and practice of Merovingian law-giving in the late sixth and early seventh centuries.
This casts doubt on the suggestion that Asclepiodatus was also responsible for the shorter prologue of Lex Salica.
The attribution, made on stylistic grounds alone, must be treated with caution.
The evidence seems to point to a legal style which a number of royal servants were competent to use.
Lex Salica
The authorship of the shorter prologue to Lex Salica is a minor problem by comparison with the other conundra presented by the hornet's nest of Salic Law.
The earliest written version of Lex Salica seems to have been made up of sixty-five titles.
To these titles various laws were added during the Merovingian period, and indeed later.
Under the Carolingians new recensions of the code were made.
To differentiate it from the Carolingian revisions  the Merovingian text has come to be called the Pactus Legis Salicae.
The manuscript tradition seems to imply that the first sixty-five titles had no prologue, or at least there is none that survives.
As a result the Pactus is not clearly ascribed to any king or legislator.
This lack of ascription was subsequently remedied by the shorter prologue, which survives in a limited number of manuscripts of the Pactus: apparently known to the author of the Liber Historiae Francorum, the shorter prologue seems to date from the late seventh or early eighth century.
It was incorporated into the longer Carolingian prologue.
The shorter prologue of Lex Salica states that With God's help it pleased the Franks and their nobility and they agreed that they ought to prohibit all escalations of quarrels for the preservation of enthusiasm for peace among themselves; and because they excelled other neighbouring peoples by force of arms, so they should excel them in legal authority, with the result that criminal cases might be concluded in a manner appropriate to the type of complaint.
Therefore four men, chosen out of many among them, stood out: Their names were Wisogast, Arogast, Salegast and Widogast.
They came from the villae of Bothem, Salehem and Widohem, beyond the Rhine.
Coming together in three legal assemblies, and discussing the origins of all cases carefully, they made judgement on each case as follows.
Nothing else is known of these four lawmen, not even the period in which they are supposed to have lived.
They may well be legendary.
What is particularly interesting, however, is the fact that the shorter prologue ascribes the Pactus Legis Salicae to the Franks, their nobility and these four individuals, and not to a king.
Whoever wrote the prologue saw the compilation of a law-code, rightly or wrongly, not in the context of earlier Roman legislation, which culminated in the Theodosian Code, but in that of the pronouncement of law by the law-men of small communities.
In this respect the first Merovingian code was at least perceived by men of the seventh century as being different from its Visigothic and Burgundian counterparts.
Effectively the shorter prologue to Lex Salica raises the question of the extent to which the law was royal and the extent to which it was customary.
This problem may be related to a further question; that is the relationship between the code and Salic law in general.
The Pactus Legis Salicae in fact did not contain all Salic law.
There are general references within the Pactus to Lex Salica, which may not refer to any individual title.
Moreover, when the Pactus pro tenore pacis cites Salic law in detail, it is not an exact citation of any law contained within the sixty-five title text of the Pactus Legis Salicae.
Further, on one occasion the Pactus Legis Salicae deals with those rachinburgi, or local law-men, who were unable to state the law in response to the demand, "Tell us the Salic Law" : Dicite nobis legem Salicam.
This suggests that there was unwritten law supposedly known by the rachinburgi, which was not contained in the Pactus Legis Salicae.
That there is some discrepancy within the whole tradition of Salic Law is, therefore, not surprising.
Much of the law in the Pactus Legis Salicae probably did equate with that known by the rachinburgi, even if there was variation in detail.
Nevertheless some of the law in the Pactus is likely to have had a royal origin.
Those laws which deal with the king's authority could have originated in edicts; the same could be true of laws concerned with Romans.
Equally, the complex legislation relating to slaves taken overseas, which involves registration of claims in foreign courts, is unlikely to have been traditional.
In origin such legislation is likely to have been similar to the Pactus pro tenore pacis, the edict of Chilperic I and the Decretio Childeberti, which were later attached to the Pactus Legis Salicae.
The inclusion of royal law within a law-code which is otherwise not directly ascribed to a king is more obviously apparent in another Merovingian law-book, associated with the east Frankish kingdom, the Lex Ribvaria, where the verb iubere, "to order" , is occasionally used.
This is particularly true of the legislation concerning church freedmen, which includes a complex mixture of Roman and Frankish law.
Royal command is also apparent in the final clauses of the text, which warn officials against taking bribes, on pain of death, and against exacting fines too early in the legal process.
To some extent, therefore, the Pactus Legis Salicae and the Lex Ribvaria resemble the Liber Constitutionum of the Burgundians issued by Sigismund in 517, for without question this last text includes a number of royal edicts.
In the Frankish codes such laws are included alongside other, plausibly customary, legislation.
Moreover, just as there are general references to Salic law in the Pactus Legis Salicae, so too there are broad allusions to Ripuarian law in the Lex Ribvaria, suggesting once again that there was more to the law than what is contained in the code.
Like the Pactus Legis Salicae, the Lex Ribvaria is not directly attributed to any king, but it bears the marks of royal involvement.
A royal attribution for the Pactus Legis Salicae is first made in the so-called "epilogue" , which also provides a history for the early compilation of the text.
This epilogue is included in still fewer manuscripts than the shorter prologue.
In one manuscript the text runs as follows:
The first king of the Franks established titles 1 to 62 [for 65?], and he set them out for judgement.
After a little while he and his magnates added titles 63 [for 66?]to 78.
Then indeed, after a long time, Childebert considered what ought to be added, and he instituted from 78 to 83, which he is known to have imposed worthily, and so he transmitted these writings to his brother Chlothar.
Afterwards, when he [Chlothar]had gladly received these titles from his older brother [Childebert], he considered in his own kingdom what ought to be added there, and what further should be included, and he ordered clauses 84 to 63 [for 93?]to be fixed.
And afterwards he sent the laws to his brother.
And thus it was agreed between them that all this compilation should stand as it had done.
It can scarcely be claimed that this provides a much more authoritative or even revealing account of the composition of the Pactus than does the shorter prologue, but it is nevertheless worthy of some consideration.
Oddly enough, the author of the epilogue does not seem to have known the name of the king who first ordered the compilation.
He is merely "the first king of the Franks" .
Usually, it is assumed that Clovis must be the monarch in question, but if so the failure to name him is peculiar: his reputation might have been expected to add lustre to the code.
Either Merovech or Childeric would have had a better claim to being "the first king" of the Franks.
In all probability, the author did not know who was responsible for the original compilation: he merely assumed that legislation was an appropriate activity for the founder of a kingdom.
For a modern historian to associate the Pactus with any individual among the early Merovingian kings on the basis of the epilogue is thus unwarranted.
There is nothing in the epilogue to justify the attribution of the Pactus Legis Salicae to Clovis, or to any other other early Merovingian king.
Nevertheless the epilogue to the Pactus does provide a terminus ante quem for the compilation of the code.
It talks in some detail about the additions made to the Pactus subsequent to those which "the first king" had himself added.
These additions it attributes to Childebert and to Chlothar.
The epilogue claims that Childebert added six clauses and Chlothar ten.
From this it is clear that the the additions which the author of the epilogue had in mind are what constitute the Pactus pro tenore pacis of Childebert and Chlothar.
The clauses of the Pactus pro tenore pacis are divided between the two monarchs; if the prologue to the Pactus is counted as a separate clause, then Childebert is responsible for six and Chlothar ten.
Further, the clauses of the Pactus pro tenore pacis appear as numbers 78 to 83 and 84 to 93 in some manuscripts of the Pactus legis Salicae, coinciding with the numbers which were perhaps intended by the author of the epilogue for the clauses issued by Childebert and  Chlothar.
The additions mentioned can be nothing more than the Pactus pro tenore pacis itself.
By assigning these additions to two brothers, the epilogue identifies the authors of the Pactus pro tenore pacis as Childebert I and Chlothar I. That it was correct in so doing is shown by the reference to brotherly love (germanitatis caritas) in the Pactus pro tenore pacis itself, and by Chilperic I's citation of the legislation of his father and uncle.
If Childebert and Chlothar were indeed adding to the first sixty-five, or even the first seventy-eight, clauses of Lex Salica, then the first Merovingian code can be dated before 511.
Certainly there are some odd discrepancies between the opening sixty-five clauses of the Pactus Legis Salicae and the legislation of Childebert and Chlothar, which should give cause for thought.
In dealing with the matter of bringing a slave to the ordeal Childebert sets out the time-scale of the case, and states that his deadlines are as required in Lex Salica.
In fact, Childebert sets out two periods of twenty days, but the appropriate clause in the first sixty-five titles of the Pactus apparently talks of two periods of seven days.
Perhaps this was a deliberate revision of earlier procedure.
Despite such contradictions the unanimity of the manuscripts in the preservation of the first sixty-five titles makes it clear that these did constitute a code, and it seems probable that other surviving legislation postdates this compilation, and was, at times, intended to complement it.
On balance, therefore, it is likely that the sixty-five title text of the Pactus Legis Salicae was compiled before 511.
Working from this hypothesis, it is possible to make one further deduction about the date of the original code.
Clause 47 distinguishes the region between the Loire and the Charbonnière, the forest which came to divide the east and west Frankish kingdoms, from that beyond those two boundaries.
During Clovis's reign these boundaries can have been significant only before the expansion of the Franks into Aquitaine as a result of "Vouillé" and before Clovis destroyed the kingdoms of such rival kings as Sigibert the Lame.
In other words it must belong to the period before 507.
This means that the Pactus Legis Salicae antedates the Liber Constitutionum of the Burgundians by at least a decade.
It probably also means that it was issued while Clovis was still a pagan.
It is, therefore, not surprising that there are possible references to pagan practice within the code, most notably to sacrificial cattle.
Nor is it surprising that there is nothing that can be firmly attributed to Christian influence within the first sixty-five titles.
Clovis's own edict on Church land, widows and orphans, issued in 507, is not included.
A legal code in Latin, among whose clauses are to be found royal edicts, can have been compiled only with the help of Roman lawyers.
A parallel for this could well be found in the work of Sidonius's friend Syagrius, a "Solon" active among the Burgundians by 470.
The Burgundians, however, were  already Christian at the time of Syagrius's involvement in their legislation.
The non-Christian, even pagan, nature of some of the clauses of the Pactus Legis Salicae, may make Roman involvement seem less likely.
Here a useful parallel may be found not in law, but in Remigius's admonition addressed to Clovis at the start of his reign: although the king was still pagan he was advised to listen to his bishops.
Christian Romans were willing to collaborate with pagan Franks.
In short, we may guess that the original recension of Lex Salica, a work which included traditional legal custom as well as royal edicts, was compiled for Clovis, perhaps by Frankish lawmen, but certainly with the help of Roman lawyers.