

3 The sterling bond market
by Richard Harrington
Sterling bonds have been traded in London for centuries; they have been issued by commercial undertakings, by foreign governments and their agencies and above all by the British government.
The origins of an organised market in the debt of the government can be traced to the end of the seventeenth century and during the following hundred years the growth of the Stock Exchange itself was closely bound up with the growth of government debt.
The market in UK government bonds was a very large one by international standards up until recent times.
This was due both to periods of heavy issues of stock, usually in connection with war finance, and to the fact that the UK, unlike many other countries, experienced neither political revolutions accompanied by debt repudiation nor bouts of hyper-inflation which destroyed the real value of fixed-interest securities.
The Napoleonic Wars brought about a large increase in the government debt and, in the twentieth century, so did the First World War and the Second World War.
By 1946, the total of marketable government stock comfortably exceeded annual national income while the total national debt (including non-marketable debt and short-term instruments) was well in excess of twice annual national income.
But in more recent times, the real value of outstanding government stock has been declining.
Creeping inflation during the 1950s and 1960s and periods of rapid inflation in the 1970s and 1980s reduced real values while the Conservative administration of the 1980s at first reduced the government's borrowing requirement and then, during three years, ran a fiscal surplus and repaid debt.
Meanwhile a number of governments abroad were running large and sustained budget deficits, the financing of which was steadily expanding the size of other markets in government debt.
In the USA, the financing of unusually high federal government deficits (averaging over $150 billion throughout the 1980s) has produced a government bond market of a size equivalent to more than £1,000 billion or more than eight times the size of the UK government bond market.
And in Japan, Italy, Germany and France large regular government deficits were leading to a steadily growing volume of outstanding government securities.
In 1991, British government finances again moved into deficit and the projections are that the deficit will grow but notwithstanding this the market in UK government bonds will remain, by international standards, a medium-sized one for the foreseeable future.
But if in recent years the market in British government bonds has declined in size, the market for other sterling bonds has grown.
The exchange controls which had been strictly enforced for over forty years were removed in 1979 and this enabled both sovereign and corporate borrowers from abroad to issue sterling-denominated bonds in London.
And as nominal rates of interest declined from the high levels of the 1970s and early 1980s, there was also an increasing number of British companies seeking bond finance.
Sterling bonds, other than those of the UK government, may be issued in one of two distinct ways.
The traditional way involves a public offer for sale with a published prospectus and listing on the London Stock Exchange; distribution tends to be mainly to investors resident in the United Kingdom.
The alternative way is by means of an issue of sterling eurobonds where no prospectus is issued and where the bonds are distributed through banks and security dealers to an international investor clientele; sterling eurobonds may be listed on the London Stock Exchange but need not be.
Issuing bonds in the form of eurobonds has a number of advantages (discussed below) and this method of issue has now become the dominant one.
In what follows, we look first at the market in British government securities and then consider the market for other sterling bonds.
3.1 UK government securities
3.1.1 The size of the market
Table 3.1 shows the number and value of UK government bonds (gilt-edged) outstanding at end September 1991.
Over 100 stocks were listed with a total nominal value of just under £125 billion and a market value slightly in excess of this.
At the same date, the market value of all company securities listed on the International Stock Exchange of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland was almost £1,970 billion.
At end December 1990, the size of the international bond market was estimated by the Bank for International Settlements to be $1,472.5 billion (£763.15 billion).
Table 3.1 UK government bonds outstanding 30 September, 1991  The nominal value of government stock outstanding changes continually due to a number of factors of which the most important are redemptions and conversions of existing stocks, the issue of new stock, and the annual inflation-adjustment to the nominal value of index-linked stock.
Over time, the dominant influence on the nominal size of the government bond market will be the public authorities' need to borrow and the means by which this need is met.
In Britain, borrowing needs of all public authorities are largely centralised and expressed as a public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR).
Apart from the years 1988-90 when the PSBR was negative  (i.e. a public-sector financial surplus), this borrowing requirement has been met by sales of marketable debt (principally bonds) and of non-marketable debt (principally savings certificates and deposits with the national savings bank).
Although, in the early 1980s, the government made a successful attempt to make non-marketable debt more attractive, it is sales of marketable debt which remain the dominant means of funding the PSBR.
This is reflected in the fact that at end-March 1991, government bonds outstanding constituted nearly 70 per cent of the total national debt in market holdings.
Table 3.2 shows the amounts of net sales of UK government bonds in the years 1981–1991.
The three years in which the public sector was in surplus and repaying outstanding debt may be seen as exceptional; the normal pattern is for the government to be a net seller of debt.
Table 3.2 Net official sales of UK government bonds 1981–1991  As can be seen from Table 3.1, just over one-tenth of the nominal value of outstanding government bonds is now in the form of index-linked stocks.
The value of these stocks is uprated each year in line with changes in the retail price index.
For other stocks (conventional stocks), the nominal value is fixed in terms of pounds sterling and hence all such stocks decline in real value due to price inflation.
During the 1980s, inflation in Britain measured by the retail price index averaged around 6 per cent per annum; a rate sufficient to halve the real value of a fixed sum of money in twelve years.
Conventional stocks and index-linked stocks are discussed further in sections 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 below.
Table 3.3 provides figures for turnover in British government securities for the years 1985–1991.
Prior to the reform of the market in October 1986 (see below) all transactions were on behalf of customers but subsequently there has been much trading between market makers as well as transactions with customers as the table shows.
Table 3.3 Turnover in British government securities 1985–1991  Since the reform, the number of bargains per day has averaged nearly 3,300 with the average size of bargain reaching nearly £1½m in 1990.
From a longer-term perspective, it can be said that the number of transactions per day has shown no tendency to increase since the mid-1970s; there was a surge in total number of transactions during 1987 and 1988 due to a large number of deals between the newly established market makers but both transactions on behalf of customers and intra-market business has fallen back since then.
On the other hand, the average value per transaction has risen steeply since the early 1980s; this reflects both the increasing size of transactions with customers and the fact that modern intra-market business is typically conducted through deals of high value (over £4m on average in 1991).
3.1.2 Conventional bonds
The majority of government bonds, those described in Table 3.2 as "conventional" , are of fixed nominal value and pay a fixed amount (the coupon) each year, usually in two instalments.
Most have a fixed maturity date and are redeemable at par, i.e. £100 is payable for each £100 nominal value of stock.
For example, Treasury 9¾ per cent stock 2002, issued in January 1992, pays annual interest at the rate of £9.75 per £100 nominal value of stock in equal instalments on 27 February and 27 August each year until the redemption date of 27 August 2002.
Government bonds will not usually be issued at par; each £100 nominal value of stock will usually be sold for less than £100.
Table 3.4 gives details of government bond issues during the last three months of 1991 and shows that, of the five issues, three were made at prices below par and two at prices above par.
Once issued, bonds will, of course, be subject to continual price fluctuations as a result of changing market demand and only by chance will market price be equal to par value.
This means that the effective return or yield will differ from the coupon.
Two yields can be defined.
The running yield is given by dividing the coupon by current market price and then multiplying the result by 100 in order to express it as a percentage.
For example, the Treasury 9¾ per cent stock 2002 instanced above  stood at a price of £103 (£103.09375) at the close of business on Friday 28 February, 1992 when the running yield could be derived as follows:
But holders of Treasury 9¾ per cent stock 2002, if they held the stock until redemption in August 2002, would only receive back £100 for each £100 nominal amount of stock; i.e. they would lose capital value of £3.09375 on each £100 nominal amount of stock.
When this loss is allowed for and expressed in terms of an annual (negative) return over the holding period, it is possible to derive a redemption yield comprised of both running yield minus annualised capital loss.
In the case of Treasury 9¾ per cent stock 2002 the redemption yield, at end-February 1992, was 9.27%.
For most purposes comparison of bonds is in terms of gross redemption yields as these best reflect the expected return on an investment in terms both of coupon payments and capital gain or loss.
But the composition of the total expected return is important for tax purposes: coupon payments are taxed as income; capital gains are not subject to taxation, capital losses cannot be offset against other taxable income.
For many of the larger investors in gilt-edged stock, their investments are tax-free (approved pension funds, life assurance companies in respect of their pension business, registered friendly societies) so this distinction is irrelevant; but for others subject to tax (banks, building societies, many personal investors) it is obviously of importance.
Tax-paying investors will, other things being equal, prefer bonds which have a low coupon but which are expected to show a capital appreciation.
To cater for different demands, the Bank of England issues bonds with widely differing coupons.
In general, low-coupon bonds will have a lower gross redemption yield because they will be attractive to tax-paying investors concerned to maximize their net redemption yield after payment of taxes.
During the late 1970s, the Bank of England issued three variable-rate stocks with interest payable half-yearly at an annual average ½%; above the daily average rate of discount on 91-day Treasury bills over a previous six-month period.
These stocks were attractive to banks and discount houses but did not meet with strong demand elsewhere and no more were issued subsequently.
None are presently outstanding.
As with coupons, there are different preferences among investors regarding term to maturity.
Pension funds and life assurance companies tend to prefer medium- term and long-term bonds while banks and building societies tend to prefer short-term bonds.
The Bank of England is happy to respond to market demand and issues stocks across a wide range of maturities.
As can be seen from Table 3.1, there are nine government stocks outstanding which have no final maturity; they are irredeemable bonds.
These are a historical survival and no new irredeemable stocks have been issued for many years.
The oldest in existence — 2 ½%; consols — dates from 1750.
Having been issued in another era, all of these stocks have low coupon rates (from 2 ½%; to 4%) and hence their market value in a time of high nominal interest rates tends to be low.
In total they accounted for less than 1% of the market value of government bonds outstanding at end-September, 1991.
3.1.3 Index-linked bonds
Since 1981, the Bank of England has issued a number of index-linked bonds where both capital sum and interest payments are increased in line with changes in the retail price index (RPI).
The principle is straightforward.
Suppose a bond issued on 1 January, 1990 paying £2 per annum; if during the year 1990 inflation as measured by the RPI were 5%, then on 1 January, 1991 each nominal £100 of the bond as issued would be worth £105 and the interest to be paid thereon in 1991 would be £2.10.
If inflation continued at the rate of 5% per annum, then by 1 January, 1992 each £100 original nominal value of the bond would be worth £110.25 and the interest due thereon in that year would be £2.205.
In practice things are a little more complicated.
The indexing is done with respect to a lagged value of the RPI and both the increase in capital value (the uplift) and the increase in interest payments depend on the rate of change of the price index to a period eight months earlier.
Thus for a bond issued on 1 January, 1990, the base for indexing would be given by the level of the RPI in April, 1989; the uplift for capital value in January of each subsequent year would depend on the change in the RPI to April of the preceding year and all sums paid in interest would depend on the level of the RPI eight months before the payment date.
This lagged indexing means that throughout the trading during any six-month period, the precise money value of the next interest payment is known.
It also means that the real value of the redemption payment will vary according to the rate of inflation during the last eight months' life of a bond and so calculations of real yields to redemption can only be made on the basis of assumed rates of inflation.
For this purpose it is now common to assume an inflation rate of 5%.
The retail price index was rebased in January 1987.
The old index (January 1974 = 0) then stood at 394.5 and the new index was launched as usual with base 100.
For all index-linked stocks issued prior to January, 1987, it is necessary therefore to adjust downward their base for indexing by the multiplicative factor of 100/394.5.
All index-linked stock issued to date have carried low coupons (2% or 2 ½%).; ked Maturities vary but they tend to be longer than those for conventional stocks; only three of the 13 stocks outstanding at end-September, 1991 had maturity dates before the end of the century and several still had terms to maturity in excess of 20 years.
The money price of index-linked bonds varies due to the influence of two separate forces.
Firstly there is the regular uplift in line with the (eight months prior) changes in the RPI.
But then, in addition, prices move up and down due to changes in demand.
Calculated gross redemption yields (real) on index-linked bonds vary just as do yields (in nominal terms) on conventional bonds.
As an example, consider 2% index-linked Treasury 2013 first issued on 21 February 1985.
The base for indexing is derived from the RPI of June 1984 and is (after adjustment to allow for the rebased RPI) 89.2.
In September 1991, the Bank of England issued the latest of a number of additional amounts (tranchettes) of this stock.
Had the issue been at par (i.e. had the real return on outstanding amounts of this stock been exactly 2 ½%),; it would have been issued at a price determined by the RPI eight months earlier in January 1991.
Then the index stood at 130.2 so the uplifted value of a nominal £100 of 2% index-linked Treasury 1996 would have been equal to: But in September 1991 interest rates on index-linked stock were well above 2 ½%,; so the Bank of England issued the new tranchette at a price of £110.625 to give an estimated real gross yield to maturity of 4.22%.
3.1.4 The organization of the market since October 1986
The market in government securities was drastically reformed in October 1986 at the same time as the general — Big Bang — reforms of security trading in Britain discussed in Chapter 2 above.
Prior to the reform, dealing in government securities had taken place on the floor of the London Stock Exchange between brokers (acting on behalf of clients in an agency capacity) and jobbers (acting on their own behalf as principals).
Trading was organised on the same lines as for other securities; but, after a number of preparatory changes introduced during the preceding months, the trading system was completely restructured on Monday, 27 October 1986.
The most significant of the changes was the ending of single capacity with its sharp demarcation between the function of broker and that of jobber and the creation of a number of gilt-edged market makers (GEMMs) able to act in the dual capacity of broker and dealer.
The GEMMs hold stocks of government securities and deal on their own account both among themselves and with final customers or their agents.
There were other important changes.
A new type of intermediary, the inter-dealer broker (IDB), was created to facilitate intra-market dealings in conditions of anonymity.
A new settlement system came into being with the creation jointly by the Bank of England and the London Stock Exchange of the Central Gilts Office.
The Bank of England extended formal and explicit supervision to all traders and brokers in the government bond market.
Dealing in government bonds, along with dealing in other securities, moved off the floor of the London Stock Market sooner than anticipated and became a wholly screen-based activity.
In principle, any security dealer that is a member of the Stock Exchange can trade in government securities; but the market is subject to the powerful influence of the Bank of England and the latter has chosen to offer a package of rights and responsibilities to those whom it recognises as market makers in government securities, i.e. the GEMMs.
In practice, they are the only important regular market makers and as such collectively constitute the trading core of the market.
The basic obligation of GEMMs is "to make on demand and in any trading conditions, continuous and effective two-way prices at which they stand committed to deal in appropriate size…thereby providing continuous liquidity for the investing public" .
That is to say, GEMMs provide a quote-driven market at all times and regardless of market conditions.
They are required by the Bank of England to deal in all outstanding gilt-edged stocks including index-linked stocks and may, if they so choose, deal in other sterling fixed-interest securities; in certain sterling money-market instruments; and in derivatives of these securities and instruments, e.g. futures and options on gilts.
They may not deal in equity shares nor in securities convertible into equity shares.
Recently, the Bank has agreed to GEMMs being allowed to deal in ECU-denominated liabilities of the British government.
GEMMs are required by the Bank of England to be separately established as companies or partnerships in the United Kingdom with their own dedicated sterling capital.
Substantial shareholders are required to give assurances that they accept ultimate responsibility for the liabilities of the GEMM in question.
The Bank  discusses regularly with each GEMM about the size of transactions in which it is committed to deal and about the risk exposure that it can accept.
There is no single requirement for capital but permissible risk exposure is governed for each GEMM by the amount of capital that it has.
At the inception of the new market arrangements in October 1986, there were 27 GEMMs with an aggregate capital of £595 million.
By end-December 1991, the combined effect of a small number of new entrants and a larger number of withdrawals had reduced the total number of firms to 18 and aggregate capital was down to £432 million.
Although new firms continue to enter the market, most commentators expect the total number of GEMMs to decline further.
However there does not appear to be large over-capacity in the government bond market to the extent believed to exist in the equity market.
Although GEMMs in the aggregate made substantial losses during the years 1987–89, the market as a whole became profitable in 1990 and remained so in 1991.
In the latter year, the amount of capital committed to the market rose for the first time since the start of the new trading arrangements in October 1986.
The Bank of England keeps the capital position of all GEMMs under observation and also monitors their fulfilment of their trading obligations.
As part of this on-going process of supervision, each GEMM is required to furnish details of its market position to the Bank at the close of business each day.
In return for accepting these obligations — obligations which, it should be recalled, are additional to the normal requirements as to conduct and to financial reporting imposed on all members of the London Stock Exchange — gilt-edged market makers have the right to certain privileges.
These consist of:(i) a direct dealing relationship with the Bank of England;(ii) borrowing facilities at the Bank;(iii) access to IDBs;(iv) facilities for borrowing and lending stock; and (v) the right to submit bids slightly later than others at auctions of new government stock.
The dealing relationship with the Bank enables GEMMs to bid for stock that the Bank holds, to offer stock to the Bank for sale and to propose switches between different stocks.
The Bank of England is, of course, free to respond as it chooses to any such bids or offers but, as well as being concerned to finance the government's borrowing needs on the best possible terms, the Bank has a publicly-expressed interest in the liquidity of the gilt-edged market.
In view of this, it is prepared, on occasions, to buy particular stocks for which there is little demand otherwise; for instance, the Bank was a net purchaser of index-linked stocks during certain periods in 1990 when demand for these stocks was low.
Access to the inter-dealer brokers in gilts (to be distinguished from the different IDBs that act in a similar capacity in the equity market) is restricted to GEMMs.
Intra-market business is large and, as is shown by Table 3.3, has in recent years been averaging over £2 billion per business day.
It is an important part of the market as at present constituted that market makers be able to deal freely with each other so that each can eliminate undesired surpluses or shortages of stock arising from past or prospective business with clients.
But there will frequently be considerable advantages in being able to deal anonymously.
If, for example, a GEMM has acquired an unusually large amount of a particular stock and is known to be keen to sell, other market makers may cut dealing prices; conversely, if a GEMM is known to want to buy large amounts of stock, other market makers may raise prices.
By dealing through brokers who have access to market-wide information and who are continually matching buying and selling offers, GEMMs can adjust their positions in the knowledge that prices will only move in response to generalised market shortages or surpluses of stock and not in anticipation of any particular deals of their own.
The ability to borrow and lend stock is an important facility and enables market makers more easily to take long positions (large holdings) and short positions (low or negative holdings) of stocks.
Borrowing and lending stock is officially regulated as there are both prudential and tax considerations: GEMMs are approved lenders and approved borrowers.
Other approved lenders include many of the large institutional investors.
Borrowing and lending of stock is facilitated by eight (at end 1991) Stock Exchange Money Brokers (SEMBs) who, as well as acting as brokers in the actual loan of stock, make loans to GEMMs to finance long positions and stand ready to borrow from them any surplus funds arising out of short positions.
Stock Exchange money brokers finance themselves additionally by short-term borrowing from banks but, in the event that funds are not forthcoming on normal market terms, they like the GEMMs have individual borrowing rights at the Bank of England.
Settlement of transactions in government securities is now carried out largely through the Central Gilts Office.
This is discussed further below.
3.1.5 New issues
All new issues as well as all redemptions of government stock are carried out on behalf of the government by the Bank of England.
Gross new issues of gilt-edged stock are made in order to finance (i) new borrowing needs of the government;(ii) the redemption of maturing government stock; and (iii) net payments in sterling made by the Bank of England to acquire foreign currency.
During the period from late-1988 to early-1991, when the government had a budget surplus, there were no new issues of stock and, at times, the Bank was an active net buyer of outstanding stock.
New issues of stock are now made in three distinct ways.
Firstly, there is the traditional method of the offer for sale by tender where the Bank of England offers a large amount (usually not less than £1 billion) of newly created stock for sale at or above a specific minimum price.
Bids to purchase stock have to be submitted by 10 a.m. on an appointed day and the Bank then decides how many of the bids to accept.
If the offer is under-subscribed, all valid bids will be accepted; if the offer is over-subscribed, it will be the highest bids that are accepted.
In each case, all bids are accepted at a common price, either the tender price or the minimum bid price accepted.
When an offer is under-subscribed, the unsold stock is taken on to the books of the Bank of England and used as a tap stock for sale to the market over time as and when demand develops or can be created.
Secondly, new stocks are issued by auction.
This method is relatively new in Britain and was first used in May 1987.
As with sales by tender, the Bank offers a large amount (not less than £1 billion) of newly created stock for sale and invites bids to be submitted before 10 a.m. on the appointed day.
But here there is no minimum price specified and stock is sold to the highest bidders and sold at the price that each has bid.
To date, all seven offers of stock for sale by auction have been oversubscribed and, on each occasion, all stock on offer has been sold.
After each auction, the Bank publishes details of the average yield on accepted bids and the yields on the highest and lowest accepted bids.
Three auctions were held between May 1987 and January 1988 and four were held during 1991.
In the earlier series of auctions, there were large differences (in terms of yield) between minimum and maximum accepted bids but market operators appear to have learned by experience and, with the four auctions of 1991, the difference was never more than three basis points.
Individual small bids (up to £100,000) may be submitted on a non-competitive basis and the bidder receives stock at the mean accepted price.
Such bids are regularly submitted but only account for a very small amount of stock allotted.
Large investors may bid directly but many choose to acquire stock directly from GEMMs by buying on a "when issued" basis in the period between the announcement of an auction and the date of the auction.
At all four auctions in 1991, the GEMMs built up substantial short positions prior to the auction through "when issued" trading.
The Bank of England reserves the right to decline to accept bids that it judges to be out of line with market conditions even if this should mean that it does not sell all stock on offer.
But the Bank has always indicated that it would only take such a step in exceptional circumstances and continues to stress its awareness of the need to avoid actions which could be seen as capricious if it is to retain the confidence of market makers and investors in gilt-edged stock.
The third method of issue involves the Bank of England taking stock on to its own books and then selling this as a tap stock over a period of time in day-to-day dealings with GEMMs.
This method is very flexible and can be used equally to make large new issues of stock or to sell comparatively small extra tranchettes of an existing stock.
Table 3.4 provides details of new issues of government stock between 1 October and 31 December 1991.
Prior to this period, the Bank had been funding actively and, during the preceding six months, had made issues of stock by all three methods amounting to £8.5 billion and including both conventional stocks and index-linked stocks.
The pattern, which continued into the last quarter of 1991, was one of large periodic issues by tender or by auction and frequent and usually small issues of tranchettes of tap stock.
During October 1991, the bond market was subdued and the Bank of England sold only modest amounts of previously issued tap stocks but also received payments in respect of a stock sold earlier by auction but with payment by instalments.
During November, the Bank took advantage of rising bond prices to sell what was left of its tap stocks and to announce the auction of £1.5 billion of 9% conversion 2011.
The auction was successful with bids received amounting to 2.28 times the amount of stock on offer and the following day the Bank announced the issue of three new tranchettes of tap stock.
Gilt-edged prices continued to rise strongly, all three tranchettes were quickly sold out and, shortly afterwards, the Bank announced the issue of a much larger tap stock: £1 billion of 8 ½%; Treasury 2007.
As the government's manager of the marketable national debt, the Bank of England plays a predominant role in the gilt-edged market.
It is usually in the position of seeking to sell new debt in the short term but it is also concerned to promote efficient trading mechanisms and to sustain the demand for government debt in the long term.
It is primarily such long-term considerations which have led the Bank to adopt a particular approach to the issuing and selling of new government securities.
Both holders of government stock and dealers in it know that prices fluctuate and that capital losses can be expected as well as capital gains.
They also know that fluctuations in bond prices (the obverse of changes in interest rates) are frequently the result of monetary policy conducted by the Bank of England.
The operations of  the latter in the money markets are frequently designed to move short-term rates of interest up or down; and movements in short-term rates usually affect medium- and long-term rates, albeit not necessarily in a one-to-one manner.
So the Bank of England is in the situation that it usually wishes to sell government securities; it invariably wishes to sustain long-run demand for such securities but it periodically has to take action which inflicts losses on the holders of such securities.
Faced with this ambiguity, the Bank has sought to make a clear distinction between its money-market operations (for purposes of monetary policy) and its bond-market operations (for purposes of meeting the government's borrowing requirement).
In the bond market, the Bank does not actively try to sell at a time when prices are falling; indeed its spokesmen have often asserted that it cannot sell in such conditions, that the views of investors in the short-term are predominantly extrapolative and that few will wish to buy stock when the price is falling.
This is a view which goes back a long way, at least as far as the time of the Radcliffe Report in 1960.
The strategy of the Bank of England is to bring forward auctions and offers for sale by tender at times when it thinks market demand will be strong and not at times when prices are falling.
Further, from the time of an announcement of an auction until 28 days after it has been held, the Bank observes a fallow period during which it does not sell stock of a similar type to that being auctioned so as not to be seen to be depressing the price.
With tap stocks, the Bank seeks to sell to the market when bond prices are rising and does not actively try to sell when prices are falling.
Ideally, the Bank would like to sell all tap stock at or above the published issue price — minimum tender price or certified price at which it acquired the stock — but this is not always possible; inevitably there are occasions when the Bank is holding unsold stock and when rates of interest rise and bond prices fall.
In such circumstances, if the Bank wishes to sell the stock it is holding over a reasonable time period, it will often be unable to avoid reducing its price.
But the Bank is keen to avoid suggestions that — in its bond-dealing — it leads prices down or in any way operates to impose losses on existing holders of government bonds: at times of falling prices, it follows the market and does not lead it.
3.1.6 Redemptions
With a stock of government bonds outstanding of over £120 billion and an average maturity of around 10 years, it follows that stock falling due for redemption will average about £12 billion per annum.
The Bank of England has, for many years, sought to make this a continuous operation and it seeks to buy stock approaching maturity rather than waiting for legal redemption dates.
The Bank stands ready to buy from market makers, and at a price of its own choosing, any stock with three months or less to maturity; it is also usually prepared to quote a price for stocks with between three and twelve months to maturity.
In this way the Bank avoids the potential disruption to the money markets due to its having to make large payments to private-sector bond-holders all at once.
3.1.7 Secondary trading
Secondary trading in the government bond market is dominated by the gilt-edged market makers (GEMMs) of which at the time of writing there are eighteen.
As explained above, each is committed to making, within normal business hours, a continuous market in all existing government stocks.
The market is an over-the-telephone market and prices are quoted on demand by telephone.
Most market makers also display prices for the most widely traded stocks on screen on SEAQ.
During the two years 1990 and 1991, business with customers averaged around 2,000 deals per day and intra-market business (between GEMMs) averaged around 600 deals per day.
The average size of transactions, it was noted above, has been rising over time and now amounts to about £1 million for transactions with customers and about £4 million for intra-market business.
This means that total market turnover per day is now of the order of £4,400 million on average.
Market liquidity depends not just on average figures of turnover but on the size of transactions that are possible.
At present, it is usually possible to undertake deals in widely traded stocks of from £5 million to £10 million on best terms, and deals can be done for £30 million or even more albeit at higher margins.
Dealing costs have declined since the restructuring of the market in 1986.
Under the old system, commission payments for transactions of £1 million in widely traded stocks would have varied between £80 and £500, depending on the maturity of the stock.
These have now largely disappeared.
In addition, the spread between buying and selling prices quoted by market makers has roughly halved.
The spread is measured in "ticks" ' with each tick equal to %; and whereas, prior to October 1986, a typical spread for short-term bonds would have been 2-4 ticks (the lower for the more liquid stocks, the higher for the less liquid) it is now 1-2 ticks.
For medium- and long-term bonds, spreads which used to be of the order of 4-8 ticks are now more likely to be 2-4 ticks.
It is worth making explicit that %; equals £312.5 for a transaction of £1 million.
It is then clear by just how much dealing costs on large transactions have fallen.
Taking into account both the virtual disappearance of explicit commissions and the shrinking of spreads, it is evident that dealing costs, for the most part, are now appreciably less than half of what they were prior to the reforms of October 1986.
Dealing takes place between GEMMs and investors in gilt-edged; between GEMMs themselves, usually but not invariably through one of the three inter-dealer brokers (IDBs); and between GEMMs and the Bank of England.
Deals with investors tend to be direct in the case of large institutional holders of government stock but will often be through agency brokers in the case of personal customers.
A number of GEMMs provide a small-business service.
Table 3.5 shows the main categories of holders of government stock as at end-March 1991.
It is apparent that the dominant holders are the insurance companies and pension funds who together accounted for around 50% of all holdings.
Foreign holders, including overseas central banks and monetary institutions, held around 12% and UK official holders, including the Bank of England, accounted for nearly 13%.
Persons and private trusts held somewhat less than 10% of the total and the combined holdings of the banking sector and the building societies were around 5.5%.
Almost all of the holdings shown as belonging to the banking sector were held by banks; discount houses have, in recent years, ceased to be significant holders of gilt-edged securities in their own names.
A number of the houses are still actively involved in the market through their ownership of GEMMs or (in one case) of a SEMB.
Table 3.5: Holders of government stock 31st March, 1991  Holdings of persons and private trusts although small compared to those of the large institutional investors remain significant.
As was noted above, the Bank of England provides special facilities for small bidders when offering stock for sale by auction and a number of GEMMs provide a retail service, i.e. they are prepared to buy and sell stock in relatively small amounts.
Dealing between GEMMs plays an important part in the maintenance of an efficient and liquid market.
For each individual GEMM, it is improbable that daily transactions with customers will leave it holding the desired amounts of all the different stocks in which it deals.
On the contrary, it is to be expected that sales to and purchases from customers will leave individual market makers holding more or less of particular stocks than they would choose.
In this situation each market maker can seek to adjust its own holdings of different stocks by trading with other market makers and can do this anonymously by dealing through the IDBs.
The IDBs, who are in constant contact with all GEMMs, will be able to match offers to buy and to sell and so localised shortages and surpluses of particular stocks will be quickly ironed out.
And if shortages or surpluses are general across the market this will be immediately apparent and indicate to GEMMs a need to adjust quoted prices.
Further room for manoeuvre is provided by GEMMs' ability to borrow stock from approved lenders, typically large insurance companies and pension funds.
This is facilitated by the Stock Exchange Money Brokers (SEMBs), described above in Section 3.2.4, and enhances the ability of GEMMs to supply large amounts of stock on demand without having always to hold large inventories of stocks or without having to offset large sales by matching purchases in intra-market business.
But also the ability to borrow stock provides a means whereby GEMMs can choose to take short positions when they think that prices will fall.
The existence of well developed facilities for borrowing and lending stock can be seen as an alternative to the "repo market" found in the USA and in a number of  other countries.
This is a market for the sale and repurchase of government bonds and serves much the same function as the lending of stock in the UK.
Such position-taking obviously involves risks and if expectations were incorrect and bond prices rise rather than fall then market makers with short positions will incur losses.
There are analogous risks with long positions; those with net holdings of stock lose when bond prices fall.
There are a number of ways of dealing with these risks when they are unwanted as opposed to being deliberately chosen in the hope of making capital gains.
Market makers can aim to run only modest positions in any group of similar stocks or they can run large but offsetting positions, i.e. being long on certain stocks and short on others such that capital gains and losses can be expected to cancel each other out.
A further means of risk management is provided by the derivative markets in futures and options in which GEMMs can broadly offset spot positions by dealing in bond futures or options.
The use of derivative markets is discussed further below.
3.1.8 The Central Gilts Office (CGO)
During the 1980s, the Bank of England and the London Stock Exchange developed jointly a computerised settlement system for transactions in gilt-edged securities.
It is managed from an office located within the Bank of England which has direct computer links to over 100 firms including all GEMMs, IDBs, SEMBs, the large banks and many of the large institutional investors in government stock.
Member firms hold stock in accounts with the CGO and same-day transfers can be made between accounts on receipt of instructions via computer terminals.
Member firms can also have nominee accounts in which stock owned by their clients can be held.
Following agreement with a number of settlement banks, payment for gilt-edged stock transferred within the CGO is guaranteed.
Use of the CGO has decreased settlement costs for members, reduced the number of paper transfers by means of stock transfer forms and eliminated the credit risk involved in delivering stock against a promise of payment.
The system, which is also used for the borrowing and lending of stock and for the pledging of stock as collateral for short-term loans, has proved popular and, by late-1991, some 70% of all outstanding gilt-edged stock was held in accounts with the CGO.
3.2 Other sterling bonds
3.2.1 Issuers and types of security
The main issuers of sterling bonds, other than the Uk government, are British companies, British local authorities, foreign public authorities, international agencies, and foreign companies.
During the nineteenth and early twentieth century foreign issues were the most important but, for many years during and after the Second World War pervasive exchange controls excluded all such issues.
Of the domestic borrowers, local authorities issued, in the years between the mid-1950s and the early 1980s, a large volume of stocks (over five years to maturity) and negotiable bonds (from one to four years to maturity); but in recent years it has been government policy to centralise most public-sector borrowing and as a result public issues by local authorities have all but ceased.
On the other hand, bond issues by  British companies which, during the 1970s, had dwindled due to high and volatile nominal rates of interest have increased markedly in recent years.
As foreign issues have also grown rapidly following the abolition in 1979 of exchange controls, it is no exaggeration to see the 1980s as a period of renaissance for the sterling bond market.
A wide variety of bonds exists.
An important distinction is between bonds which carry a fixed (coupon) rate of interest and floating-rate notes (FRNs) where the rate of interest varies in line with movements in a designated short-term rate.
Then one must distinguish between "straights" which are bonds which just earn interest until maturity and "convertibles" which are bonds which give the holder the right to convert, on specified terms, into another security, usually the equity of the issuing company.
Some bonds are secured on the assets of the issuer (known as debentures) while others are unsecured but invariably carry a negative pledge to the effect that the company in question will not subsequently issue bonds which have any greater security or degree of preference.
Bonds may be registered or they may be issued in the form of bearer securities.
Terms to maturity vary widely and so also do coupon rates.
A major difference of form exists between domestic bonds and sterling eurobonds, although the differences of substance have tended to decline in recent years.
Domestic bonds traditionally are registered securities, usually issued in the form of debentures; they are listed on the London Stock Exchange and they pay interest net of UK income tax.
Issues are managed by domestic security dealers or by merchant banks and are largely sold to investors resident in the UK.
Sterling eurobonds, which are a part of the international eurobond market described in Chapter 5 below, are normally issued as bearer securities and are usually unsecured but with a negative pledge; they are listed on an exchange but not necessarily the London Stock Exchange and they pay interest gross.
Issues are managed by large banks or security traders and sold to both domestic and overseas residents.
In recent years, more and more borrowers have chosen to make issues in the form of sterling eurobonds and the volume of domestic issues has declined.
This trend would appear to be an inevitable consequence of the internationalisation of bond trading and, in the absence of unexpected changes in regulation, is unlikely to be reversed.
More specifically, there are a number of reasons why it should have come about.
Foreign investors are better acquainted with customs and practices in the eurobond market and they are also widely believed to have strong preferences for the anonymity of bearer securities and for the receipt of interest payments without deduction of tax.
It would appear to be due to the strength of these preferences that prime borrowers have frequently been able to raise funds more cheaply by making a eurosterling rather than a domestic issue.
At times during the 1980s, yields on short-dated eurosterling bonds even fell below those on gilt-edged stocks of similar maturity.
Issues of eurobonds are limited to highly rated and usually well known borrowers so investors do not require additional security in the form of specific claims on assets provided by domestically issued debentures.
Furthermore for those borrowers who have eurobonds outstanding, it is no longer possible to issue bonds with such security in view of the negative pledge on the eurobond.
Such borrowers now include a growing number of large British companies.
And as both issues and potential issuers of traditional domestic bonds have declined, so British institutional investors have had to overcome some initial reluctance and look to eurosterling issues as a source of non-gilt fixed-interest assets.
Another important reason for the trend to eurosterling bonds has been the growth in interest-rate swaps.
As is explained in Chapter 5 below, the formalities of issue of eurobonds are somewhat less than with domestic bonds and issues can be arranged more quickly.
This allows borrowers more scope to time issues so as to take advantage of temporarily favourable patterns of interest rates such as would permit profitable swaps.
Notable among issuers of sterling eurobonds who have swapped their resultant fixed-rate obligations for floating-rate payments have been British and foreign financial institutions.
They have been able to take advantage of their good standing internationally to raise funds on fine terms which could then be converted into floating-rate liabilities suitable for financing the acquisition of floating-rate sterling assets.
Among the counterparties to these swaps have figured a number of British companies that were too small to issue bonds in their own name but were happy to acquire an equivalent fixed-interest liability in exchange for floating-rate obligations.
3.2.2 The size of the market
During the 1950s and 1960s, the debenture market was an important source of funds for domestic British companies.
Over the two decades, according to Midland Bank statistics, sums raised averaged nearly £200 million per annum.
While this single figure conceals sharp year-to-year fluctuations as well as a secular upward trend, it is noteworthy that sums raised over this period by bond finance (including convertible bonds) exceeded those raised by the issue of ordinary shares and also exceeded the sums raised for the government by the sale of gilt-edged securities.
But during the 1970s, inflation rose to levels unprecedented in peacetime and in consequence nominal interest rates rose to very high levels.
This discouraged companies from issuing fixed-rate securities to such an extent that, over the years 1973–1980, redemptions exceeded gross issues and net issues were negative.
At the same time, exchange controls continued to prevent foreign issuers from raising bond finance in London and the eurosterling market was still in its infancy.
The sterling bond market apart from gilt-edged had all but ceased to exist.
But the picture changed sharply in the 1980s.
Inflation, if still a problem, was much lower than in the previous decade and nominal rates of interest were also lower.
Issues of government stock declined and this may have contributed to the lower trend in rates of interest.
It also meant that financial institutions put less of their funds into gilt-edged stocks and, in consequence, were more ready to purchase other fixed-interest securities.
This combination of lower interest rates and a ready demand for their debt securities meant that British companies increased markedly their issues of sterling bonds.
At the same time, following the ending of exchange controls, both foreign companies and foreign public authorities were once again able to issue sterling bonds in the British market (the so-called "bulldog issues" ).
Both domestic and foreign borrowers also increased their usage of the eurosterling market.
Table 3.6 provides details of sterling bond issues, excluding those of the UK public sector, for the years 1980–1991.
It shows the remarkable rise in total issues over the period in question and also shows the rising share of eurosterling issues in total issues.
It would however be unwise to assume too easily that volumes will continue to grow rapidly.
British government finances deteriorated in the early 1990s and the prospects are for a return to large net sales of gilt-edged securities.
Some "crowding-out" of private-sector bond finance may occur.
An idea of the size of the secondary market in non-gilt sterling bonds is given by Table 3.7 which shows outstanding amounts of such bonds listed on the London Stock Exchange at end September 1991.
The main gap in Table 3.7 is that it does not show the amount of sterling eurobonds not listed on the London Stock Exchange.
However, from comparisons of Stock Exchange statistics and those compiled by the Bank for International Settlements, it can be inferred that between 70-75% of all sterling eurobonds are listed in London.
This would suggest that sterling eurobonds not listed in London would, at end September 1991, have amounted to a figure between £14 million and £19 million.
Table 3.7 Sterling bonds, other than gilt-edged, listed on the London Stock Exchange 30.9.1991  Turnover in secondary market trading has traditionally been low, both for domestically issued bonds and for eurosterling bonds.
Many issues are relatively small and liquidity is low.
As far as most outstanding bonds are concerned this is still true but the picture has become more varied.
Some large issues were made in the 1980s and turnover of eurosterling bonds has increased as has turnover of eurobonds in general.
Turnover in all sterling bonds listed on the London Stock Exchange has, in recent years, been averaging around £50 billion per annum, split more or less evenly between client business and intra-market business.
3.2.3 New issues
The methods of issuing new sterling bonds in the domestic market, whether for UK borrowers or for foreign borrowers, are broadly the same as those for new issues of equity shares.
Issuers can choose a public offer for sale, either at a fixed price or by tender or alternatively they can opt to issue bonds by means of a placing.
In recent years, virtually all domestic issues of bonds have been by means of a placing.
These methods of issue are described in detail in Chapter 2 above.
Eurobond issues are managed by international banks and security traders and are invariably in the form of a placing.
The method of issue is described in detail in Chapter 5 below.
3.2.4 Secondary trading
Prices are quoted for non-gilt bonds by market makers but, due to the small size of many fixed-interest issues, quotations are often only indicative.
Under the classification of stocks which existed prior to January 1991, fixed interest securities were virtually all classified as gamma or delta stocks.
But liquidity has increased for a number of the larger issues of recent years and certain gilt-edged market makers are now active dealers in a range of non-gilt securities.
Secondary trading in eurosterling issues follows the pattern of secondary trading in the eurobond market in general and is described in Chapter 5 below.
3.3 Financial futures and options
Financial futures and options, discussed fully in Chapter 4 below, are now used widely by market makers and investors in the sterling bond market as a means of managing risk.
The important contracts are the long gilt future (£50,000 nominal value, notional gilt with 9% coupon) and the option on this future; both traded on LIFFE.
As can be seen from Table 4.1 (p. 94), they are among the most important of the derivative contracts traded in London.
To a certain extent turnover follows that of the cash market in government securities: it rose in 1987 following the start of the new trading arrangements for gilt-edged securities and it fell in 1988 and 1989 when government accounts moved into surplus and there was a cessation of new issues.
The derivative markets are useful to both market makers and to investors.
Market makers, GEMMs notably but also dealers in sterling eurobonds, are continually buying and selling large volumes of bonds and their risk exposure is continually changing.
And at times of new issues, they will often be committed to purchasing very large amounts of stock which they can only expect to sell over a period of weeks; during which period they are exposed to the risk of capital loss if prices fall.
The use of futures and/or options offers a quick way of hedging this and other risks by creating future positions which offset those in the cash market.
The large institutional investors may also choose to hedge positions.
If they fear a fall in prices, selling a future or acquiring a put option are alternatives to selling the underlying securities.
Or alternatively if cash has been allocated for a later purchase of, say, an expected new issue of bonds and the fear is of prices rising, an investor can hedge by buying a future or by acquiring a call option.
The evidence is that institutional investors in Britain were initially wary of financial futures and options and were also concerned about the uncertain tax treatment of gains and  losses arising from dealing in such derivatives.
The 1990 Budget clarified the tax position and a recent survey of pension fund managers reported in the Financial Times appears to confirm a growing use of derivative products.
3.4 International comparisons
The Bank for International Settlements has published detailed figures on the volume of publicly issued bonds outstanding by currency of issue and covering issues denominated in twenty-one different currencies.
Table 3.8 draws on these figures to show the sizes of the largest bond markets in the world and to give an international context to the sterling bond market.
It should be borne in mind that there are always problems of definition and of classification in compiling figures such as these and also that all the figures for currencies other than the US dollar have had to be converted to dollars and hence depend upon the exchange rate used.
But even allowing for such problems and treating the figures with due caution, they do give a dramatic picture of the relative sizes of different currency segments of the world bond market.
Table 3.8 shows the complete dominance of the US dollar in all sectors of the market: government bonds, domestic private issues and eurobonds.
The value of US dollar bonds outstanding exceeds that of the combined total of bonds outstanding from the other six currency segments put together.
The sterling bond market is not only small compared to those denominated in dollars and in yen, it is also much smaller than those denominated in marks, lira and French francs.
Not only has the British government and its agencies borrowed less in recent years than other European governments, it is also the case that, until recently, the private bond market was narrow.
Sterling issues expanded dramatically in the 1980s but increasingly in the form of eurosterling bonds and Table 3.8 shows the important share that such bonds now have in the total sterling bond market.