

The Game is Begun
There are people who know that they have experienced deep within themselves a reality which gives them simple and overwhelming certainties about the real goals of human existence and which transforms their lives.
This reality is not primarily one of sense experience or of the conscious intellect, though it may suffuse and illuminate both.
This book introduces the writings of five of them who lived in fourteenth- and early fifteenth-century England.
Although all felt that they had found a means of living which enabled them to be open to this reality, they nevertheless say that it was experienced as a gift and a grace beyond anything that could be achieved by conscious effort.
Because the nature of this experience subtly eludes the normal processes of human thought and feeling and is felt to engage with a power beyond them, it is termed "mystical" and one who knows it a "mystic" .
The label is awkward as it is also used loosely of anything inspiring a sense of inexplicable awe and mystery, however vaguely, or anyone thus moved.
However, although these five writers belonged to a minority group in their society, and although they say that their experience derives from a source greater than human reason can comprehend, they are fired with a certainty that it is intimately related to the deepest needs and purposes of human being, and has about it the simple inevitability of fulfilment.
It both transcends the self-evident imperfections and problems of human existence and provides the means of so living with them that they can be transformed.
They called it God, understood it in terms of Christian theology and used the terms "meditative" , and "contemplative" rather than "mystical" to talk about their experience.
Three of the five were men: Richard Rolle, a hermit from North Yorkshire; Walter Hilton, an Augustinian canon; and an anonymous writer, probably a religious, known best for his treatise  The Cloud of Unknowing.
Two were women: one lived as a recluse at St Julian's church in Norwich and is known as Julian of Norwich; the other was an ebullient housewife from King's Lynn — Margery Kempe.
The fact that all five wrote of their understanding of "mystical" experience not in Latin but in English is a sign of their times.
There was a great yearning among lay people to understand in terms of their own vernacular this inner experience of the faith, which, through the institutional influence of the Church, formally governed the structure of their lives, although their education may not have been such as to enable them to cope with the official language of the Church or highly intellectual theological exposition.
Much has been written about the theology expressed by these writers, and the theological influences which seem relevant to it.
Such study is certainly important historically.
But speculative source-study can reveal more about the reading of the scholar than about the actual text whose possible sources are the object of the exercise and, after all, it is only to be expected that those who share a faith will also share a way of expressing it.
The study of origins and influences is no substitute for looking directly at what these texts actually say and the very particular felt understanding that they mediate.
That source-study has been so common is at least partly due to the fact that the interpretation of the writings of the mystics has, from the start, been felt to be the preserve of theologians.
In the medieval period these were seen as the custodians of an orthodoxy which was felt to be, if only potentially, challenged by self-authenticating mystical writings — a custodial role which seems to have lingered into the twentieth century.
There must, of course, always be a proper and fruitful relationship between intellectually worked out theological doctrine and the witness of individual experience.
However, in the medieval period theology was "queen of the sciences" , a discipline which subsumed all other branches of knowledge and social activity and was itself luminously informed by them.
Today it tends to be a more exclusive activity in which theologians talk straight to each other and down to the faithful.
As far as study of the mystics is concerned, this has meant that modern readers have felt inhibited about discussing these texts and have attributed to them an abstruse esoteric quality; this is ironic in view of the fact that the mystics themselves proclaim their experience to be of fundamental human importance — and essentially simple.
This book is not designed to engage with exposition of doctrine  though it will inevitably point to its importance; rather it attempts a mode of appreciation of these texts to help readers, whether or not they have prior knowledge of the subject, to respond to them as literary witnesses to a life of faith understood as a game.
Such a concept does itself have roots in theological tradition.
The playing of this "game" is enabled by the transcendent reality which is then manifested through its play.
The aims of this first chapter are: first, to provide pointers to the nature of the experience with which these writers were concerned and an approach through which the sympathetic but uninformed reader of our own time might be able to respond to it; second, to clarify those aspects of the medieval cultural context which particularly governed the mode of expression of these writers and, importantly, the expectations of their readers.
NAMING THE GAME: CONTEMPLATIVE EXPERIENCE
Mysticism in the precise sense of an ultimate spiritual reality experienced both within the structure of the human personality and as a transcendent power is not confined to Christianity but common to all religions, and mystics from differing faiths share at least elements of a common experience.
They witness to a certainty that all the diversity of living beings are a part of a transcendent unifying spiritual whole which is by definition difficult to grasp in its totality; individual dancers cannot see the pattern of the whole dance — that is perceived only from outside.
Mystics are certain that for brief periods they have been enabled to experience such perception and know themselves to be part of a meaningful whole — one with the way things ultimately are.
So Thomas Traherne in the seventeenth century saw "something infinite behind everything" and expressed his joy at the feeling of unity with creation: You never Enjoy the World aright, till the sea itself floweth in your Veins, till you are Clothed with the Heavens, and Crowned with the Stars:…
Till you can sing and Rejoyce and Delight in GOD as Misers do in Gold, and Kings in Scepters, you never Enjoy the World.
Blake, over a hundred years later, similarly perceived that true vision was: To see a World in a Grain of Sand And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand And Eternity in an hour.
These are states that a Buddhist might recognise as "enlightenment" .
Such knowledge brings a feeling of fulfilment and liberation from the immediate pressures and problems of material existence, and values derived from them, and a sense that time is the medium through which eternal realities are distilled.
From within its limits it is experienced as linear, and life is organised in accordance with this.
People aim at achievements to be completed in a time process and talk about how they order their priorities accordingly.
Mystics are overwhelmed by a consciousness that there is a dimension beyond that of time, experience of which brings such certainty of fulfilling joy, such transfiguring of the material order, that the only possible priorities for existence in time can be to find a way of life that will allow access to this dimension.
The restlessness of the striving and alienated ego is given its proper direction in a fixed longing for this joyful reality, a longing which is the ground and means of its own fulfilment.
The deep-seated feeling that man's nature is essentially structured to survive nomadically and that he needs to be on the move in some way if he is to be satisfied, is complemented by the mystics' witness that true human fulfilment is the concomitant of what is experienced as a spiritual journey to a goal beyond time that is occasionally anticipated and known in time, the element within which our curiously mixed physical and spiritual natures cohere and mature.
They convey a double sense of experience: that of a linear process; but also of an eternal state of being which informs and transcends it, and which is accessed within the structure of human nature, itself programmed with a restlessness that can be assuaged by nothing less.
It may be useful to a twentieth-century reader unfamiliar with the theology of Christian mysticism to turn to a particularly luminous account of such awareness in more immediately accessible terms.
For example, Peter Matthiessen's account of his astonishing journey on foot, with limited supplies in the face of overwhelming winter snows, from Nepal to the Crystal Mountain in Tibet where he goes fired with the hope of seeing the rare, almost mythical, snow leopard, expresses a pattern of experience that is at the heart  of the awareness of the medieval mystics with whom this book is concerned.
The beauties and rigours of the literal journey, the only means of seeing the creature now threatened with extinction through the dark destructive energies of man, are inseparable from the spiritual experience given and expressed through their means.
High among the bright snows of the Crystal Mountain, cut off from the immediate claims and responsibilities of life in time in the twentieth century, Matthiessen experiences a joy at the heart of the created order to which he belongs, a oneness with it.
He engages with a sense of Being eternally present, not driven and limited by the demands of time.
He does not see what he so much wants to, the snow leopard, though he sees the evidence of its being which is, curiously, sufficient for him, despite his disappointment.
What he does see is a crippled lama living in extreme simplicity and frugality in a mountain hermitage, whose being is irradiated with a joy which has an even keener edge because his infirmities offer him no possibility of escape.
Coming down off the mountains, Matthiessen first finds that he loses the calm and joy of the transfiguration of his perception in high places and becomes a prey to irritation and a sense of desolation and purposelessness — his past experience apparently rendered hallucinatory in the face of his present sense of failure.
But then, like the lama, he discovers his disabilities and the constraints of life to be the very conditions for experiencing the validity of transfiguration — the two are concomitant.
The whole experience of the pains and startling joys of the hazardous journey becomes for him paradigmatic of the realities of life lived fully from moment to moment, and the teaching of the lama "not the enlightened wisdom of one man but the splendid utterance of the divine in all mankind" .
The mystics with whom this book is concerned understood this sense of an ultimate reality inherent in, yet transcending, the created world, with the power to transform its pain to joy, in Christian terms.
They did not travel to Tibet to seek enlightenment in high places and in an alien culture — though one at least knew the capacity of the literal pilgrimage journey to trigger an existential experience of this power, and they all believed some kind of solitude and withdrawal from the normal conditions of social life to be an enabler of such knowledge.
All witness to experiencing the process during which such knowledge is given as a "way" , a  "journey" , and the moments of the certainty of transfiguring joy as the attainment of high places in inner experience.
For them "the splendid utterance of the divine in all mankind" had been definitively expressed over a thousand years previously in the way of life and teaching of Jesus Christ in Palestine, in his death at the hands of violently destructive men and in his restoration in life with the source of all being, God.
It is their understanding and experience of the meaning of this story of the Incarnation transmitted to them in the Bible, and in the interpretations of the Scriptures by the Church Fathers, which gives their Christian mysticism its definitive characteristics.
They saw in it a narrative paradigm which offered the possibility of meaning in their individual experience to all men.
In their lives they could both validate, renew and thus extend its significance, for it was understood as the Incarnation of meaning, of that Word which informs the partiality of all words.
The writings of these authors have a very particular literary function.
Whereas the meeting-point between reader and author in imaginative creative literature is the recognition of particular aspects of experience shaped and clarified, these authors are trying to share their understanding of the means by which all experience can be understood.
Their writings are designed as spring-boards for that action which enables the understanding which is felt experience.
They are not designed as artistic structures from which to stand back but as vital nourishment for the journey to which they point.
They perform the function of a rite of passage whereby the reader is enabled not only to glimpse imaginatively the possibility of a reality which transcends the limitations of sense and intellect but also to validate it.
For all these writers the key which gives access to this experience is understanding the essentially dynamic implications of the Incarnation.
To all of them the story pattern of Mary's assent to God's will at the Annunciation, enabling the birth of his Son who was involved with suffering, death, but also with resurrection and ascension in time, discloses a means of re-ordering (literally transforming) their own experience.
They witness to a process of realisation of the confusion, frustration, failure and partiality at the heart of even the best of human experience, let alone the worst, which makes them essentially accessible to all; but they also witness to an awakening understanding of the fact that these are the very  means of the experience of transformation.
They feel that they can engage with a dynamic power which orders the confusion into meaning and enables them to become participants in creating a pattern that redeems the losses and chances in the contingencies of life in time — to play a game that extends the significance of the Incarnation.
The awareness of the working of this dynamic power, and awareness of the need for a disciplined way of life essential to its operation, is characteristic of the mystics.
All five of these writers engage in various ways with, and with differing emphasis on, the component parts of this story.
Some concentrate on their experience of the significance of the birth, death and resurrection of Christ as a fully revealed paradigm of human potential, others witness more immediately to an experience of the ultimate and ineffable reality which informs the story.
Margery Kempe finds the actual humanity of Christ's life and death a pattern of living which transfigures the ordinary demands of daily life with a sense of the holy — an emotional engagement with the humanity of Christ which she shares with the "affective piety" of her age.
In his English writings Richard Rolle, too, sees Christ's suffering as the pragmatic key to a form of living both as regards external circumstances and internal consciousness, which will free followers to engage with the ineffable reality of the love mediated at the Incarnation.
Walter Hilton is concerned in a much more abstract and organised way with the whole story of the Incarnation as a paradigm for understanding the self and realising its fullest potential.
For Julian of Norwich, meditation on Christ's Passion is the means to her visionary experience of the ultimately redemptive reality of love in the suffering and alienation of time.
For her there is no way to "endles knowyng" of God but by "time of passion" .
The Cloud-author would not dispute this but, whereas Julian and the others communicate their experience of the being of the transcendent God in the inner self by means of focus on the combination of literal and figurative truths revealed in the story of the Incarnation and Passion, he is so concerned with the reality of a God who cannot be "known" by intellect or sense, that he plays down these "means" .
Some commentators see the affective piety of Margery Kempe as radically distinguished from that of the Cloud-author, and indeed in danger of missing the essential spirituality of God.
It is helpful to approach the spiritual continuum which in fact unites them by way of the teaching of the thirteenth-century Franciscan Bonaventura's description of the light of God as the sun of his divinity and the moon of his humanity.
Whereas the moon can be looked at directly, although its luminosity derives from the sun, the sun itself, if gazed at, blinds man with excess of light.
It is this kind of darkness which is at the heart of the Cloud-author's work and constitutes the cloud of unknowing.
Both these lights are operative in the writings of the mystics as means by which man sees his own true nature and in doing so also a reflection of God; it is a state in which they feel themselves to be most fully alive.
One thing all the writers share is an agreement that the progress to the special knowledge in the game of faith involves a reordering and an integration of the personality which gives birth to an essential lightness of spirit within man.
This answers to a wider theological concept that the whole universe itself of which man is part is an expression of the play of God bringing creative order out of chaos.
The concept of play as an activity entered into with delight for its own sake is important for both the theology and the psychology of religion.
The Christian belief in God's being as a Trinity of Father, Son and Holy Spirit was traditionally interpreted by the Church Fathers who formulated theology, as an interplay of power, wisdom and love.
The creative power of the Father is expressed in the Son as his wisdom and, in the Holy Spirit, as the creative love which binds them.
Thomas Aquinas understood the relationship between Father and Son as that of the joy of divine wisdom playing before the face of God and contemplative life as sharing in such play.
The mystics understood the story of the Incarnation as the game of love in time, and the life of faith as engaging with, and extending it.
All agree that it involves a process of discipline and self-knowledge as a means to liberate the spirit, much as the grace and apparently effortless expressiveness of dance is, paradoxically, the fruit of rigorous physical discipline.
The whole process enacts redemption.
Living by faith in the story of the Incarnation turns out to be for these writers a totally absorbing game, the playing of which is a self-validating exercise that releases human creative energies to the full and extends the play of divine wisdom before the face of God.
In the human situation it can be played only by means of failure and suffering: these are the elements by which the triumph of joy and love seen in Christ is constantly rediscovered.
The following chapters will look at how each of these mystics understood the nature and rules of the game.
For all of them the story of the Incarnation interprets and orders all possibilities of human experience.
In their time there was a general recognition of an ultimately important spiritual dimension to life that is lacking in our own — a sense of the universe given meaning by God so that man's words interpenetrate with the Word, that whole transcendent meaning so fragmented and distorted by the Fall.
This fundamental relevance of a religious view of the universe to all aspects of experience is encapsulated in the figurative mode of reading Biblical history as the revelation of a divine purpose whereby the events of the Old Testament prefigure those of the New, and both together reveal the pattern of salvation whereby all future history may be interpreted.
This pattern was traditionally expounded as involving four kinds of reality: literal historical truth; allegorical significance in the way in which events in the Old Testament are fulfilled by those in the New and in the life of the Church; moral teaching (labelled troplogical interpretation); and fourthly, anagogical understanding relating to ultimate spiritual realities — this is particularly important for mystical works.
These four ways of understanding Scripture permeated medieval habits of reading and writing.
The sense of joy and spiritual opportunity at the heart of this interpretation of human history and the life of faith is vibrantly embodied in a fifteenth-century carol: It has been suggested that this carol is guilty of reducing the mystery of God to human terms and redemption itself to "little more than a lark" .
But such a response to the literal meaning of this carol completely misses the spiritual dimension inherent in the form of the carol and signalled by its context of affective piety.
The swinging rhythm and rather pleasantly exhibitionist rhyme- scheme, together with the reconciled paradoxical terms of the maiden-mother, angels kneeling to men, prisoners freed, small become great and foe become friend, enact rhetorically a delight that redemption is indeed a game, the playing of which reverses all the normal expectations of mortality.
The final quieter, prayerful stanza contrasts with the single line declamations of the previous verses and witnesses to the recognition that this game is not always played with ease, that the very measure of the exultation felt arises from realisation of the ultimate issues at stake.
The mystic's understanding of this joy at the heart of experience is called visionary; it is to ordinary human perception as waking is to sleeping; and this carol, in its excited evocation of the significance of redemption in words and images, answers to this understanding.
It also points to a fundamental truth that the mystics perceived in the story of the Incarnation — that the "purpose of the Word become flesh was indeed to make mystics of us all" .
INHERITED APPROACHES TO THE GAME
Mystical experience as a peculiarly human goal has a long cultural history which bears on the way these writers express themselves.
The tradition to which they belong evolved an accommodation of Christian doctrine to a body of teaching inherited from Greek philosophy about a kind of knowledge — noesis — which is neither intellectual nor sensual, but in essence experiential and manifested in the human soul.
It involves the completion of all partiality, the overcoming of all senses of alienation and it brings a fulfilment of desire for the good and the beautiful beyond the capacity of human understanding.
There is an unresolved tension between the fact that the perceptions of mystics are seen as fundamentally important to the human condition and the fact that they are given to so few.
But it is particularly ironic that this body of teaching on to which Christian mysticism was grafted was élitist in its view of those to whom such knowledge was possible.
Philosophers like Plato and Plotinus believed that the longing for this knowledge is innate in the human soul which had itself emanated, albeit to the furthest possible extent, from the source of all being to which it longs to return.
The Christian accommodation of such inherent longing for fulfilment had, however, to take account of the teaching of Nicene Orthodoxy concerning the Biblical account of creation.
It held that God is the Creator ex nihilo thus implying a divide rather than a continuum of being between man's soul and God.
In both Classical and Christian thinking mysticism represents a way back to the source of being, but in Christian thinking from the fourth century on, the gulf between Creator and created was seen as mysteriously bridged by the love of God incarnate in Jesus Christ, God's Word, the expression of himself manifest in time, which, in turn, enables human knowledge and love which are the way back.
It is this essentially dynamic experience — energy releasing energy, which gives medieval Christian mysticism its special characteristics, many of which were directly derived from the teaching of St Augustine (fifth century), the most seminal figure in the West for orthodox mystical theology.
He formulated in haunting terms the longing expressed by Platonists for the source of all beauty: "late have I loved Thee, O Beauty so ancient and so new" , but he recognised this longing as itself the working of God's  gift of love in man — in theological terms, the grace of the Holy Spirit.
For Augustine, God in giving man life quite literally inspired in him a longing for its source: Thou didst breathe fragrance upon me, and I draw in my breath and do now pant for Thee…
Thou didst touch me, and I have burned for thy peace and growth in mystical knowledge concerned a process of recognition of the nature of God's involvement with his creatures in time.
Unlike the Platonists he saw no ontological continuity between the soul and God, but a relationship of likeness based on the Biblical account of man's creation in Genesis (1:26—7) where his peculiar property was to be made in the image of God.
Augustine conceived the structure of man's inner being, his mind, to be activated by the interaction of memory and understanding through will.
This trinity of faculties constituted the image of God and enabled in him a wisdom based on the knowledge of the reality of the love of God revealed at the Incarnation.
It is in this felt understanding that the image of God in man, obscured by the disintegration of sin, is regenerated.
For Augustine, mystical experience operated in the gap between the Creator and creature, enabling man to recognise his own true nature and so come to a knowledge of God — a process possible only because of the Incarnation, the love poured out from the being of God to his creatures which revealed how He could be known.
However, just as the fourteenth-century English mystics present a variety of responses to a core of dogmatically formulated belief, the tradition they inherited developed a variety of particular views on the nature of mystical experience in relation to Christian orthodoxy.
And if Augustine's understanding of how God can indeed be known incarnationally influenced the thinking of later mystics like Walter Hilton, Richard Rolle and Julian of Norwich, another tradition, which stressed not the links between Creator and created, but the darkness of the divide, was undoubtedly formative in the experience of the Cloud-author.
He inherited a tradition of teaching which stressed the essential unknowability of God by human faculties.
A key figure in this "negative" approach is Denys, or Dionysius, the Areopagite, probably a sixth-century Syrian monk, whose theology acquired a quasi-apostolic authority in the Middle  Ages because he was confused with the Areopagite converted by St Paul (Acts 17:19—34).
He is sometimes referred to as pseudo-Dionysius or pseudo-Denys.
He does not dwell on the significance of the Incarnation, but rather on the process by which the individual can, despite partial knowledge and creatureliness, enter into a darkness where nothing is known, yet God is existentially encountered in love.
He finds an icon for his teaching in the Old Testament account (Exodus 19) of Moses' ascent of Sinai where he is separated from the people and priests by a cloud in the darkness of which he encounters God.
This image he inherited from the fourth-century teaching of Gregory of Nyssa, the most influential among those who earlier developed this negative approach to Christian mystical theology.
Whether the emphasis in mystical theology is on the interaction of those God-given human faculties which are understood as an image of his being and the means by which man may realise the love and truth manifested in the Incarnation, or on the essential unknowability of the transcendent source from whence that love and truth emanated in time, there is common ground between the two approaches in the sense of a dynamic with which man may engage.
For Augustine mystical knowledge of God is the essence of Christianity involving a lifelong process of growth in the recognition of the reality of the Incarnation, enabled through the grace of God working in man's powers of will, memory and understanding.
Although Dionysius stresses the utter inadequacy of any created being to know the nature of the one God who created everything from nothing, he also asserts that He is immanent in His creation and that man can encounter the reality of the energy of divine love at the heart of his being.
This is the truth manifest in the Incarnation, and Dionysius says that at such a moment the mystic is like St Paul who said: "I live and yet not I, but Christ lives in me" .
Both theologians find man's highest development to be his participation in the living energy of the love of a transcendent God who, both would agree, cannot be fully known in time.
At the heart of both of them is a witness to the vital relationship between the historical reality of the Incarnation and a way of living by which man may engage with the spiritual reality it manifested and thus extend it in time.
Concomitant with the mystical theology inherited by the medieval English mystics, and also governing their thought and  expression was a dialectic about the mode of living which enabled mystical experience and a vocabulary to express it.
Broadly speaking, as far as these writers are concerned, psychological understanding of the self was Augustinian in its emphasis on memory as the power of the mind which brings to consciousness that which is the object of the will — itself the indicator of the affections and disposition of the mind and intellect.
These inner faculties provide both the ability to reasonably organise one's daily survival in time and also the means by which God is known.
There was, however, considerably detailed discussion as to the nature of the interaction of those inner powers in mystical knowledge.
It was generally agreed that there was a difference between human science and the knowledge of God, in that while human knowledge was concerned with that which reason could analyse, theology was concerned with the way in which the transcendent love of God is known.
Writers from the twelfth century onwards like Bernard of Clairvaux, Thomas Gallus and Bishop Grosseteste stressed the role of the will, the affective faculty, in this knowledge which was the desired wisdom of felt understanding.
Others, like Albert the Great or Richard of St Victor emphasised more strongly the role of the intellect in that which is known.
This dialectic concerning the balance of human cognitive powers in theological understanding certainly influenced the way in which the medieval mystics expressed themselves, and it is necessary to be aware of the context of argument within which they wrote.
Nevertheless their aim was the expression of the experience of a knowledge which integrates human faculties, not a scholastic dissection of its separate parts, important though this is to the history of thought.
It is this knowledge prompted by, and answering to, divinely inspired longing that William Langland gestures towards in Piers Plowman.
Will and intellect are united in the significantly named "Will" who is also a searcher after Truth.
The allegorical figure of Holy Church sets him on an inner journey as she teaches him that the object of his being is to discover a natural inward knowledge of a love for God that is greater than any other preoccupation.
The poem, of epic proportions, illuminates the way in which Will arrives at such "kynde knowynge" which embraces both knowledge of himself and of the love of God.
TRAINING TO PLAY: INNER DISCIPLINE
Whatever discussion there was about the faculties operative in mystical knowledge, there was a consensus of agreement that it was enabled by a process of inward self-discipline with recognisable stages of progress.
The groundwork was concerned with the acquirement of self-control facilitated by the recognition of the emotional drives and mental preoccupations that would sidetrack the seeker after the love of God and impede his progress.
One vivid account of the means by which this may be achieved is set out in Ancrene Wisse, an early Middle English text written originally for particular sisters in the late twelfth century who wanted to live as recluses dedicated to God but later adopted more widely in other such communities.
It illuminates the medieval understanding of the interior life subject to impulses whose gratification may satisfy the immediate demands of the self for ease, anger, pleasure, esteem, but which also impede the freedom of the spirit to seek that ultimate good which in reality is the only means of satisfying man's inherent need for fulfilment.
The key to the repressive discipline advocated in this manual of behaviour is that it is to be the means by which man is liberated from all that thwarts his true nature, just as the dancer can only use his body expressively if he trains his muscles: "those move easiest who have learnt to dance" .
The sisters are taught to think of those impulses that impede the spirit as sins with the strength of predatory beasts ravening in the wilderness of the interior landscape of the fallen world.
The process of achievement of a state where the self is receptive to the love of God is that of a balancing act.
The author embodies his sense of this in the cumulative use of the verb leap to point towards the poise achieved above the abyss of self-destruction.
So he calls the heart a wild beast liable to impulsive leaps out of control, a situation archetypally illustrated in the story of the Fall when Eve's eyes leapt to the apple and her heart followed and so she leapt from Paradise to the pains of mortality and took all men with her.
This inner life is projected as a theatre for the right direction of energy: the soul in temptation is ready to leap into pride, indeed the devil  himself is seen as a leaper constantly alert to seize his chance to get hold of the direction of man's life.
But if man is vulnerable to impulses which send him spiralling down into darkness, that very vulnerability is the means by which he can existentially know the strength whereby it can be healed and stabilised.
The precarious nature of the human effort to balance is steadied by the strength of the love of God which itself leapt down into time to show it could be done.
So that which makes man vulnerable to the force of the leaping devil, also opens him to the effortless strength of the leaping God which is known through the experience of inadequacy.
The author sees the spiritual strength released in the sisters through their disciplined aspiration to the love of God as part of the work of that love in them; they share in the pattern of Incarnation.
If the process of learning to conquer the impulses to self-gratification seems too painful to be borne, the author reminds the sisters that ultimately a complaint will seem as misguided as that of a prisoner thrown a bag of money to buy his release who moans that the bag hit and bruised him.
The pain is the price of freedom: not just freedom in a spiritual kingdom after death, but realised in an inner freedom to love.
The process of the recognition of the self's capacity to sin but also to engage with the strength of the leaping God which enables it to make good its losses, is ritually enacted in the sacrament of penance.
The process of confession, contrition and restitution was originally instituted as a public act through which individual members of society were reconciled to each other in that social harmony signified by the kiss of peace at the Mass which was the condition for the reception of Christ at the eucharist.
For the individual seeking an inner personal relationship with that God whose Incarnation enabled the socially redemptive love celebrated at the Mass, it was an interior process mediated by the priest and one formally encouraged by the Church after the Lateran Council of 1215.
This penance was the ground for growth in the interior realisation of the love of God.
Those who wished to foster it further were encouraged in a process of meditation and prayer.
Individual writers may differ in their exposition of how these two mental activities interact but a classic exposition of the dynamics of the whole spiritual exercise involved in the contemplative process is found in the twelfth-century Scala Claustralium (The Ladder of Monks) by a  Carthusian, Guigo II.
He understands meditation and prayer as two sides of growth in the knowledge of God: meditation on the truth of what is read in Scripture informs the focus of the mind and the will in prayer.
Meditation is that process of mental digestion that gives rise to understanding which integrates the energies of mind and will in a desire for God which is prayer.
It is in this prayerful meditation that mystics say that they receive an illumination of the reality of God over and above anything they can reach by their own efforts.
Clearly the whole game has a dimension of linear extension which enables a continual process of growth in recognition.
The effort involved in the activity of penance may become less rigorous as the self achieves a habit of self-control born out of self-knowledge, although, clearly, the kind of self-awareness which is the necessary ingredient for penance must constantly be maintained.
But the growth in knowledge enabled by the activities of reading, meditation and contemplative prayer grows in time; it engages with the inexhaustible wisdom of God.
For teaching purposes, writers in the contemplative tradition followed Richard of St Victor in allegorising the process by which the soul comes to know God through the Old Testament story (Genesis 29) of Jacob's marriage to Leah and Rachel.
Jacob loved Rachel for whom he was set to work for seven years, but was then tricked into marrying the older sister, Leah, first, and working a further seven years for the greatly desired Rachel.
Leah bore him children, but Rachel was barren for a long period during which Jacob had children by her maidservant before she eventually gave birth to Joseph and then Benjamin.
Richard of St Victor used the story to schematise his understanding of how God (Jacob) works in the human will and affections (Leah) and the reason (Rachel) so that they become fruitful with the knowledge of himself.
The story provided a flow-chart to clarify the dynamic sense of man's inner drives and faculties integrated in an ordered recognition of the reality of God.
The awakened will gives rise to fear of God, sorrow for sin, hope for forgiveness and love of God (Leah's first four children).
They are understood by the ability of the imagination (Rachel's servant, Bilhah) to relate these emotions to anticipation of the joys of heaven and pains of hell, and helped by the practice of self-discipline, abstinence and patience in the desires of sensuality (Zilpah, Leah's servant).
This growth in, and ordering of, the impulses of the will brings an inner peace and joy (the fifth child of  Leah) which is accompanied by hatred of, and shame for, sin (the sixth and seventh children).
Such a state of ordered affection enables man to recognise the achievement of inner balance and reconciliation of powers in the longing for God, the necessary condition for knowledge of Him.
This recognition is the first child of Rachel and a function of reason, known by the mystics as the state of discretion.
It represents an instinctive knowledge (a "kynde knowynge" ) acquired by trial and error of how to maintain an inner balance, and reason's active initiative ends here, giving way to a new kind of knowledge of God experienced as a gift that discretion enables man to receive.
This knowledge is contemplative, and contemplation is Rachel's last child (Benjamin) before she dies.
PLAYING-FIELDS: ACTIVE AND COMTEMPLATIVE LIFE AND THE LITURGY
These two states of the inner activity of integration giving way to the gift of contemplation are related to a complex of ideas inherited by the mystics about two modes of living known as "active" and "contemplative" .
The story of Jacob's marriage to Leah and Rachel had also been used since the time of Augustine to symbolise these two ways of Christian living; the fundamental activities necessary to the well-being of society being represented by Leah, contemplative knowledge of the love that is the ground for these activities by Rachel.
Even if it is arguable for the purposes of theological discussion that the mode of being in which contemplative knowledge of God becomes a reality is superior to the demands of the active life, Augustine recognised that in the fallen world the two were indissolubly linked and complementary: for no one ought to be so leisured as to take no thought in that leisure for the interest of his neighbour, nor so active as to feel no need for the contemplation of God.
Gregory the Great made a similar point.
Active life is a condition of existence in time, translating the love of God into actions that will repair the fallen inner world of the psyche and the external world of society.
It will cease with time, whereas contemplative life may be begun in time, but it will be perfected beyond it.
In the  fourteenth century the Cloud-author makes the same point quite explicitly: The Cloud-author also provides an acute analysis of the way these terms interact in a continuum of activity both external and internal which leads finally to the possibility of the gift of contemplation.
Thus he explains that the lower part of active life consists in the works of mercy and charity in society, the higher in the activities involved in penance and meditation which are also the lower part and the groundwork for contemplative knowledge of God who is beyond the ability of man's active faculties to comprehend.
Yet although God is dark to man's understanding, the reality of his being may be reached out to through love.
This ideal of an essential continuity between active and contemplative life is often worked out in practice in terms of their opposition.
The Cloud-author points out that they cannot be pursued simultaneously.
As in a modern context it is immediately clear that students find it hard to combine study with a full-time job; so, addressing a would-be contemplative, the Cloud-author explains his view that it is impossible for man to pursue the discipline of meditation and study unless he first ceases external activity, and impossible to come to mystical knowledge of God if the mind is engaged in discursive thought.
In practice active and contemplative life get in each other 's way.
This kind of emphasis on the opposition between, rather than the complementary nature of, the active and contemplative lives was reflected in the patristic interpretation of the story of Martha and Mary (Luke 10:38—42) in which Christ excuses Mary's lack of active help in Martha's household chores because she was listening to him, on the grounds that she was concentrating on that which was most essential.
An opposition between active and contemplative life is fostered by the fact that not all people feel able to pursue the discipline of contemplative life — some are notably more suited to the necessary functions of active life.
Thus the two terms came to be used not just of modes of being with which individuals engaged but the outward life-styles they embraced.
Contemplatives often lived solitary and reclusive lives whether or not they were in religious orders.
In thinking about the terms "active" and "contemplative" in medieval devotional writing, however, it is important not to confuse their use to designate outward life-styles with their designation of modes of being which enable argument about the purposes of man's existence.
While it could be, and was, argued that the contemplative knowledge of God should inform the goals of active life for all men, it was acknowledged that in practice very few individuals could combine both states in balance.
Evidence of the difficulties experienced in trying to combine the demands of active life with those of inner quietness can be found in the request for help answered by Walter Hilton in his Mixed Life and by the courageous attempt of Margery Kempe to live out her faith.
The relationship between the two ways of being was, however, always a live issue.
If few could attain the peculiar sanctity of St Francis who united contemplative consciousness of God's love with a life of exemplary action, such integrity was seen as a desideratum.
But what might be impossible for individuals was possible within the larger body of society.
The essentially complementary nature of contemplative and active life fully expressed in the Incarnation but experienced often as a tension for individuals could be reflected more freely in the whole society of Christians understood as the body of Christ.
In this context each individual can emphasise that aspect of the two modes of being for which he has the greatest gift and both may further the understanding of the work of love.
The opposition inherent in the terms active and contemplative is a useful way of delineating issues fundamental to the structure of the human personality and therefore of Christian society.
Theologically this opposition is perceived as an accident of the Fall; essentially there is no gap between action and contemplation in the being of God.
That is part of the meaning revealed through the Incarnation and it is this spontaneous integrity of being that mystics glimpse and in so doing serve and inspire the Christian society, of which they are a part, struggling to repair the ravages of sin.
This transcending of the differences of individual gifts in a corporate wholeness in which the love of God could be manifest and known was constantly enacted in the ritual of the Mass at the centre of parish worship.
There the emphasis in late medieval times was on the transcendental unity of the whole body of Christ  embracing both the living and the dead, a unity constantly in creation through the energy of love.
The breaking of the Host, the round wafer of bread signifying the body of Christ at the end of the canon of the Mass after the consecration, pointed to the continual enactment of the Passion linking Christ's body broken by the actions of sin at the Crucifixion with the divided community; but simultaneously revealing the means by which the divisions are healed since, precisely because of its breaking, the Host is the shared bread of life.
The sacrament embodies the reality of the power of love, known through suffering and division, as a healing power.
This was emphasised by the peace — a ritual kiss of reconciliation with which the congregation were occupied while the priest made his communion.
The peace of society was thus assimilated to the sacrament; it was enacted as both the condition and the effect of the reality of Christ's presence.
This sacramental process by which the body of Christ was healed was further stressed by the execution of the statutory obligation on parishioners to receive communion at least once a year.
This generally took place at Easter preceded by confession, often in public, in which the social duty of making restitution for sin was stressed; it might be succeeded by a parish party which played out at its own level the eternal being of love celebrated in the Mass.
Indeed the power of the Church rituals in society to provide icons through which the reality they were designed to express could be felt, should not be underestimated as Margery Kempe's reaction, however extreme, bears witness.
One in particular strongly reinforced this strong sense of the essential unity of the whole body of believers, despite the accidents of time — the celebration of the feast of Corpus Christi.
It has been well argued that the great procession, headed by the Host and including the orders of the Church and social guilds, interrupted by the plays performed by the guild members reminding followers of the archetypal story of God's plan of salvation from the Creation to the Last Judgement, provided opportunity for participating in that sense of unity beyond division which is the heart of Christian belief, and which underpins the social value put on the more isolated lives of contemplatives.
Such emphasis on corporate wholeness can also be seen in the prayers recommended for the use of lay people during the Latin Mass.
After the Sanctus and before the elevation of the Host, the  reader is bidden to remember Christ's Passion and his own sin, and also to pray for all estates in the land from Pope and King to the "poure and smale" , for good harvests to sustain them and for entry into God's joy at death.
This prayerful reminder of Christ as the sustainer of men in society is concluded as the Host is elevated.
Then follow prayers for the dead by both priest, and people who have their own version, that the Mass may be "mede & medecyne" to them.
After the peace and while the priest receives the sacrament, the layman reflects on that love which is the reflection of God in society and constitutes the peace; love of God, proper love of self demonstrated in the harnessing of both spiritual and physical energies to serve God, and love of society — "alle manere of men" .
At the end of the Mass there is a touching prayer as men go out into the world linking the sacrament of the one bread which binds all men in God with the bread and ale of human meeting: In the bidding prayers where the priest directs the people to pray and tells them what to pray for, probably after the offering and the anthem, again attention is directed to all estates of society, living and dead, including religious, both monastic and secular.
Pilgrims also are remembered, that "god of his goodnes graunt them parte of our good prayers and us parte of theyr good pylgrimages" .
And certainly those treatises which deal with the spiritual and physical advantages of hearing the Mass (which ranged from not ageing during the period of the Mass to its efficacy in promoting work or journeys) stress the belief in the power of the sacrament to affect all aspects of life.
This stress on communitas [the bond of community]is one in which the potential divisions between active and contemplative life are healed, and provides the structure within which the prayer of contemplatives is a channel for the release of the love of God, not just within the self, but within society.
Those devoted to  contemplation might have lived enclosed lives, but they were open to society as advisers and counsellors.
And if the Mass enacted the social reality of the body of Christ, it also enacted the recognised pattern of personal contemplative experience, moving as it did from confession, the recognition of the condition of sin and fallen man, through the articulation of faith as revealed in Scripture and Creed, to the offering to God of the God-given fruits of human labour through which the gift of his presence is made known.
The contemplative who had a cell adjoining the church would have a window through which the altar could be seen.
Thus at the canon of the Mass he or she would be able to identify the realities of personal experience and the sacred participation in communitas with the presence of Christ.
Small wonder that the eucharist was the centre of mystical devotion for some notable female mystics like Catherine of Siena.
It is significant that one of the few occasions when the author of Ancrene Wisse hints at the contemplative experience occurs in his account of the behaviour appropriate at the Mass:(After the kiss of peace in the Mass, when the priest communicates, forget the world, be completely out of the body, and with burning love embrace your Beloved who has come down from heaven to your heart's bower, and hold Him fast until He has granted you all that you ask.)
Liturgy provides both a public focus of the structure of the contemplative life and a ritual in which the individual's experience of the reality of God's presence within the self is one with his sense of communitas in the body of Christ.
It also offers a continual rite of passage to mystical understanding and experience for those less advanced in that particular understanding of the reality of the faith.
The whole complex structure of the liturgy throughout the year orders and enacts believers' common sense of how an ultimate reality engages with the processes of time: the Mass through the celebration of a corporate sense of all life as a divine gift sustained by processes of death and resurrection; the office by a daily pattern  of worship varying throughout the year to commemorate the significance of the events of the Incarnation and link the activities of the Church in time present with the saints.
The complex pattern of prayers, hymns, readings, versicles and responses performed daily throughout the year enables a private faith to be projected in a shared experience and assume a ritualised existential quality.
The liturgy offers all Christians the opportunity to balance the discipline of habit and formal order with spontaneous renewal of that experience which the order of the liturgy is designed to clarify.
Margery Kempe witnesses to the way in which the visual icons of the Easter ceremonies activated her inner sense of the reality of the Incarnation.
Thus when she saw the priests kneel in darkness lit only by burning torches, to place the crucifix and Host in the Easter sepulchre to symbolise the darkness of the physical death and burial of Christ prior to the joy of resurrection, this ritual precipitated her inner sense of the significance of the Passion and a corresponding outpouring of love and compassion in tears as she spread her arms like her crucified Lord.
Margery's reactions may have been physically extreme, but her account highlights the peculiar potential in the liturgy to trigger existential experiences of the faith.
This sense of Christian unity in the faith enacted in liturgical structures which catered for the needs of lay individuals seeking to understand their faith was lost after the Reformation, when increasing stress was put on individual communion and a personal relationship with God.
In the late medieval period, although the sense of unity in the Church was stretched to near breaking point as the upsurge of spiritual enthusiasm from the grass roots which had been fostered by the Church's own mission for reform since the thirteenth century became viewed as a potential threat by the establishment, there was nevertheless a fruitful tension between individual and corporate senses of identity.
It fostered the personal exploration of spirituality within the framework of the Church's teaching that characterises late medieval English texts.
DEFINING THE RULES: RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION TO THE LAITY
The social dynamics which foregrounded a consciousness of individual identity have been clearly analysed: primo-genitive inheritance forcing younger sons to seek a role outside the family; the growth of a socially fluid urban society and of cathedral schools and the resultant rise of an administrative class; the climate of learning and debate about the purposes of life, ideals to be followed and choice of life-style — whether to pursue an active life of involvement with the world of affairs or the inner contemplative ideals of a personal relationship with God within the renunciation and shelter of a cloister; the stress on personal relationships between friends and lovers; all these factors contributed to raise the profile of the individual within society rather than submerge it in low relief within a predetermined authoritarian hierarchy.
Culture flourished on the tension between a perception of the unique reality of individual beings and the corporate structures to which they belonged.
Chaucer's art of ambiguity in presenting his Canterbury pilgrims balances the levels at which they are bonded by the literal and figurative goals of their journey and stereotyped by their social functions, with an awareness of an individual reality which cannot be adequately contained by either.
So the Wife of Bath and the Prioress together challenge the social norms of women's roles; the shifting surfaces of the Pardoner's blatant hypocrisy tease the reader into an uncomfortable awareness of the unfathomable nature of human motivation for the onlooker; the Nun's priest's juxtaposition of intellectual solemnity with quick-witted pragmatism and his stress on the saving grace of social charity cuts self-importance down to size.
In Piers Plowman, Will's discovery of the reality of his salvation is inextricably bound up with his exasperation at the gap between the ideals of the faith and their realisation within the social fabric of Church and State.
His journey is one of growth in patient awareness that the truth of the Gospel cannot be enforced by social legislation but only fostered in the consciousness of individuals from whose hearts alone the reality of social salvation can spring.
Langland's imaginative perception of Will's growth from experiencing this tension as destructive to a state where he sees it as the opportunity for love parallels the written witness of the mystics.
In the visual arts the more immediate appeal of the physical and emotional realities of Gothic replaced the more remote, albeit intensely moving, complexities of Romanesque and Celtic styles.
The archetypal stiff-leaf decorating the movement from summit of pillar to springing of arch, burgeons into recognisable foliage: oak, hawthorn, buttercup.
The specifically indeterminate forms that inhabit the underside of misericords — birds with human heads, dragons with foliage tails — give way to bats, cats, men — on horseback or performing somersaults under the ledge to balance it on various parts of their anatomy.
The geometrical patterning and grotesques in the margins of holy books disappear in favour of conventional realism, birds, hunting scenes, agricultural activities.
The English mystical texts in the fourteenth century are symptomatic of this whole ethos.
They were produced at a time when lay people were being targeted for instruction in ways which further fostered their consciousness as individuals with self-defining choices to be made by the programme for revitalising the mission of the Church instituted by the fourth Lateran Council in 1215.
This called for confession as a yearly obligation for all Christians and officially sanctioned the growing practice of private, as opposed to public, penance, although the social dimension of the sacrament as a healer of social division remained.
The actual implementation of reform and teaching in the Church was left to the initiative of individual bishops through the organisation of provincial synods.
The English bishops were conscientious in the provision of manuals of instruction on how to hear confession and on how to teach the laity the rudiments of the faith.
The most influential model of such instruction to be produced was that of John Pecham, Archbishop of Canterbury (1279–92).
His Lambeth Constitutions of 1281 laid down that the priest should instruct the people in the basics of the faith and preach at least four time a year in English.
Since not all of the clergy were capable of this, model sermons were produced to help them.
One collection of such gives insight into the literal way spiritual truths were inculcated.
The sermons illuminate not only the sometimes seemingly awkward literal mode of the piety of Margery Kempe, but also the Cloud-author's nervousness that his readers should not confuse physical and spiritual realities.
One sermon to urge the duty of penance and confession tells of a woman who had committed a sin which she could not bring herself to confess for shame.
 "Crist see well  she shuld haue be dampned for  synne" so he appeared to her in her sleep, wounded as in his Passion, and told her to put her hand into his side and even to feel his internal organs and heart, commenting that if he is thus open with her, why is she so ashamed to reveal to him the secrets of her heart?
When she woke she found her hand covered with blood which she could not wash off until she went to church to confess  to the priest.
There she wept for her sins and her tears washed away the blood; The form in which this sermon harnesses the pressure of fear as well as the promise of comfort, provides a recognisable cultural context for the form of Margery Kempe's initial vision of salvation and witnesses to the high esteem in which tears as a sign of spiritual grace were held in the fifteenth century.
The instructions that John Thorseby, Archbishop of York, issued for the clergy in 1357 and which were on his instructions expounded by the Benedictine monk, John Gaytrick, in a vernacular version known as the Lay Folks' Catechism, give insight into the framework of thought within which life was assimilated to, and ordered by, Christian belief — the groundwork of assumptions that mystical writers in the vernacular could take for granted.
The Lay Folks' Catechism sets out the fundamentals of the faith under six headings: fourteen points of truth; the ten commandments and the two Gospel commandments; the seven sacraments; the works of mercy; the seven virtues; the seven sins.
The very order implies understanding of the process of redemption whereby the Incarnation and Passion transform the lex talionis (the law of retaliation) of the Old Testament with the grace and love which are the means of recycling the waste products of sin.
The "fourteen points of truth" , which are the foundation for all that follows, concern teaching on both the Godhead and the manhood of Christ.
The seven points relevant to the Godhead are that he is true; that he is everlasting truth — "stedefast & sothefast" ; that Jesus is God's Son and equal with his Father; that the Holy Ghost came from both of them and is equal with them so that in God there are three aspects or powers; that this Trinity is the source of all creativity: that all believers share in the sacraments and are the Church within which lies salvation; that at judgement day all will rise up, body and  soul together, and go either to hell or heaven depending on whether they have done evil or good.
The seven which are relevant to Christ's manhood are: belief in the Incarnation and Virgin birth; that in Jesus God and man are united, begotten by God, born of Mary; belief in "Cristes passion" that after Christ was taken down from the cross dead (the deposition), he liberated those believers subject to death before he was born, a process known as the Harrowing of Hell; that though he suffered mortality, he rose from the dead through the strength of God, and made this possible for all men; that he ascended into heaven and was crowned higher than the angels; that he will come at the end of time to judge the world and this will be the end of the era of redemption: These two sets of seven points about the Godhead and Christ delineate beliefs about the nature of life subject to a process of sickness and death but also filled with the potential for healing realised definitively in the life of Christ.
Both series share a common conclusion in the belief in the inevitability of the Last Judgement for which the creativity of the Trinity works through the sacraments of the Church to ensure that man can rise with Christ to "that blis that euermore lastes" .
But that process is only possible at all because of the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ who lives the love of God triumphant in and beyond the sins of time.
Thus the rest of the catechism sets out the teaching in diagrammatic form of the way in which this pattern of love can be imitated in time.
At the heart of the prohibitions and directives of the ten commandments is a definition of the ways in which man inhibits love both in himself and his society: inhibitions which are released in the gospel commandment of love that we  The seven sacraments, traditionally linked to the wounds of Christ because it is his suffering love which gives them efficacy, are baptism, confirmation, penance, the eucharist, extreme unction, marriage and ordination.
They provide the framework by which man enters into, and sustains to the end, his spiritual life in Christian belief both personally and socially.
The sacraments of marriage and ordination refer particularly to two social roles in which Christ is known, though much medieval literature betrays a piquant questioning of the gap between sacramental ideal and social reality.
The works of mercy and the virtues together show that combination of active life and inner condition that can counteract the subversive activities of the seven sins: pride, envy, wrath, gluttony, covetousness, sloth and lechery.
The works of mercy are practically: to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, to shelter the homeless, to visit the sick, to help those in prison and to bury the dead; and spiritually: to give counsel, to reprove wickedness, to comfort the sorrowful, to pray for sinners, to be patient in misjudgement and to forgive wrong-doing.
The seven virtues put together the three theological virtues which arise from man's relationship to God as his creator, and are the condition of all Christian action — faith, hope and charity — with the four classical virtues which relate to man as a social being: justice towards others, prudence in distinguishing good from evil in the world, fortitude in all circumstances, "whethir so betides" and temperance to achieve a balanced life-style to "lyff skillwisely [with discretion]als the lawe techis" .
This dogmatic teaching about how the faith should affect  experience is fundamental to the insight of the mystics into the living reality of the being of God and thus to the substance of the game of faith which participates in this being.
Indeed the end of the Lay Folks' Catechism says no more or less, essentially, than they do:
DEMONSTRATIONS OF PLAY: PRIMERS AND LYRICS
Just as the catechism sets out the substance of the faith for the lay people, so Primers, specifically designed prayer books to enable lay people to share in the liturgical offices of the Church, incorporated it into a series of devotions that daily and poignantly remind man of the cycle of salvation.
These too enter deeply into the "play" of the mystics' faith.
The organisation of the Latin office of the Church at the Canonical Hours evolved from a complex tradition of teaching which found justification for these hours of prayer in both Old and New Testaments of the Bible; and a general pattern emerged in which they were connected with the Passion narrative.
Thus Matins at daybreak remembers the betrayal of Christ in the garden of Gethsemane; Prime is connected with the trial before Pilate and false accusation; Tierce with the crowning with thorns and condemnation to death; Sext (midday) with the Crucifixion; None (3 p.m.) with Christ's death; Evensong with the deposition; and Compline with the entombment.
In this way the worship of each day was tied fundamentally to a constant re-enactment of the memory of Christ's death.
By the fourteenth century there had developed simplified service books called Primers which were translated into English by the second half of the period.
The order of service in the Primers had developed from monastic devotions, added to the main office from the eighth century onwards, to remember the dead (the office of the dead), and to celebrate understanding of the role of the Virgin Mary in the working of the faith — the Hours of the Virgin.
These offices were  used by secular clergy and were particularly appropriate for lay use since they remained constant throughout the liturgical year and were not subject to the complex variations of the main office.
Throughout the day the Hours of the Virgin celebrate Mary as the instrument of the Incarnation and intercessor for man with God but they also incorporate into this a daily memorial of Christ's Passion in the appropriate verses of the hymn Patris Sapientia at each Canonical Hour.
Thus at Lauds at the end of Matins the verses remember how: But the daily reminder of the shocking betrayal of truth in time is counterpointed against prayers and psalms which emphasise that this very process is the means by which redemption is accomplished and the ultimate strength of love proved.
At each Hour a verse from the hymn is followed by a prayer which acknowledges this and sees the Incarnation as the means by which all men, both living and dead, can be united: The office thus daily rehearsed the historical story of the Passion of Christ and its significance in such a way that it is constantly renewed in human awareness through both the linear and cyclical experience of the passing of time.
This ritual process enacts a pattern which can be translated into inner experience in the contemplative discipline.
There, recognition of those elements in human nature which are death to the working of the creative love of God in man, provides the grounds for its quickening into new  life and knowledge of God.
This liturgical pattern was also repeated in the vernacular literature produced by the Franciscans and aimed at stimulating lay piety.
John Pecham, who gave such authoritative impetus to the Church's mission to teach the laity, was a Franciscan and his Constitutions and their effect owed much to the dynamic nature of Franciscan spirituality with its stress on the freedoms of love and poverty and the importance of knowledge of the Scriptures.
St Francis's own mystical experience centred on his understanding of, and identification with, Christ the crucified redeemer (he received the stigmata in a visionary experience at the end of his life), and at the heart of the theology of his followers was a stress on penance as a sacrament through which man can bring his nature into conformity with Christ.
The idea that a contritional experience is an ongoing activity in which every man fights and conquers those elements of his fallen nature as Christ fought evil on the Cross and that this is part of the continuing process of redemption — indeed its very condition — was at the heart of their preaching and teaching which developed the monastic piety of an earlier period for a lay audience.
The zeal for the development of spiritual life, which had flowered in Europe from the tenth to the twelfth centuries, had resulted in the reform of the Benedictine monasticism of the West and the emergence of Orders — Cluniac, Cistercian and Carthusian — committed to living apart in various communal ways which stressed above all the individual inner spiritual growth of their members.
A new emphasis on the fruit of learning being inward experience of the truth of Christ was given particularly cogent expression by such men as the Carthusian Guigo II and the Cistercian Bernard of Clairvaux.
In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries this reforming enthusiasm was channelled into the foundation of Orders more oriented towards service of the whole community — the mendicant Dominicans and Franciscans were travelling preachers and the Augustinian Canons (known as Austin Friars) were committed to lives of pastoral service.
Through these channels the contemplative ideals developed in monastic communities found a wider audience.
The Franciscans had a specially charismatic gift for transmitting their understanding of the inward nature of redemption.
It shaped the aesthetic of the lyrics and meditations concerned with the life of Christ which they wrote to convey their understanding imaginatively.
In the retelling and  interpretation of the events of the Incarnation to stimulate an emotional response, and to deepen understanding of its implications, they translated the affective piety of earlier reformed monasticism into a religious sensibility which dominated English popular piety.
The lyrics which are found in preaching manuals like the Fasisculus Morum and Speculum Christiani or are specifically written or collected by Franciscans like James Ryman, William Herebert and John Grimestone both encapsulate essentials of the Franciscan teaching in a way calculated to catch the imagination and stir the emotions, and incorporate standard interpretations of the meaning of Scripture.
A lyric like Grimestone's little fragment draws on a verse from Lamentations (1:12) which in the office for Easter was quoted as words of Christ as a reproach to sinful man.
It thus provides a vernacular equivalent for the uneducated; and, by poetically fusing the Scriptural texts with the way in which they were interpreted and with emotional understanding of such meaning, it enables a response to the significance of the Incarnation.
Its words in their own way incarnate the Word in the tradition of Augustinian and Franciscan epistemology.
Very simply it presents, through its visual image of the Crucifixion and its present-tense appeal to passers-by to think of the uniqueness of the love it manifests, a sense of the issues of the Passion as a continual process: The final two lines complete the physical image but metaphorically signify that reality at the heart of Christianity, that through the experience of suffering the strength of love is made known.
Another lyric makes even more explicit this identification of life in time with the Crucifixion as the only means by which its true value may be realised: Such lyrics embody an understanding of the process of transfiguration at the heart of the Christian faith which is realised by the mystics in experience and gestured towards in their texts.
Lyrics operate in that area between intellectual reception of dogmatic teaching and mystical intuition of the reality to which this teaching points.
They signal this for those who are not contemplatives and reflect it for those who are.
Like the liturgy, they provide a meeting point for the two and enter deeply into the means by which a visionary like Julian of Norwich conveys to others her apprehension of God alive and working in the being of man.
Consider for example the little lyric based on Augustine's Confessions VIII, 5.
This skilfully manipulates alliteration and rhyme in a humorously wry acknowledgement of the archetypally human facility for putting off that effort of intellectual and emotional energy involved in recognising and acting on the truth.
It might well have been in the mind of the Cloud-author when he appealed to his disciple as a weary wretch, sleeping in sloth, and deaf to the calling of the disturbingly dynamic love of God.
Lyrics like these enabled the possibility of grass-roots familiarity and emotional engagement with the Incarnation.
They could  operate as a focus or trigger for meditative understanding.
This was also directly addressed in one of the most popular books of the Middle Ages, the thirteenth-century Franciscan Meditationes Vitae Christi.
The first complete English translation was by the Carthusian Nicholas Love and licensed for reading by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Arundel, in 1410, but portions were translated earlier than this.
For example, the fragment by Robert Mannyng dealing with the story of the Passion known as Meditations of the Supper of Our Lord.
Although the aim of the Meditations was to stimulate an emotional response to the humanity of Christ in an act of affective piety, this was closely tied to a theological understanding that only through a loving penitential identification with His suffering could man also experience the transfiguring reality of the power of His Resurrection and life.
At the beginning of his translation, Mannyng appeals to the reader: His vivid description of the Crucifixion both stresses Christ's willingness — he climbs the ladder to mount the cross, then turns at the top, laying himself vulnerable and open as he stretches out his arms and back against it — and rams home the shock of pain as the nails are driven in.
Mannyng invites an emotional identification with the event to give rise to a spiritual act: In the full translation by Nicholas Love, the whole story of the Incarnation integrated with comment from Patristic sources (and especially from Bernard of Clairvaux) was schematised into sections for meditation through the week.
Monday's stories included that of the Annunciation, recalling both Adam's fall and Christ's redemption in such a way that sin and redemption appear as simultaneous action constantly re-enacted: Such meditation is closely connected with Julian's visionary experience of the lord and the servant in which Adam and Christ become one figure, Adam falling and Christ instantly subjected to death as sin precipitates the Incarnation in the work of mercy and love.
Friday is devoted to the Passion story organised in terms of the Canonical Hours with the detail of Christ's human suffering imaginatively elaborated in order to encourage the reader to identify with the moment.
The pattern is completed by the account of the Ascension and Pentecost as proper to Sunday.
The historical period of time between the two events is seen in terms of the internal experience of the individual Christian seeking assurance of God.
Such a one is bidden to "preye"  "seke"  "aske" and "knokke at the dore" in the certainty that "he schal come…and coumforte thy desolate soule" as the Holy Ghost came to the apostles: The book ends with a meditation on the sacrament as the focus for the experience of the transforming energy of God released in  time at the Incarnation.
The power of the sacrament is attested to not just by stories of miracles in which the devout see Christ himself present in the Host, but in terms of inward experience "wherof we haue knowynge onely by beleue with ynneforthe" [ynneforthe: inwardly]and the meditation ends with a prayer for the experience of the healing presence of Christ: Such cultivation of an inner experience of the reality of Christ's being by means of affective meditation on his life is a discipline taken for granted in the writings of all the mystics to be discussed, despite their differences in emphasis.
It can be taken for granted precisely because of the kind of literature with which lay people were already familiar and the liturgical practices which stimulated their desire for further instruction and participation in the practice of the faith.
CONTEXT OF PLAY: THE CULTURAL MOMENT
This lay demand for teaching about contemplative spirituality together with the particular emphases of individual mystics who met and also stimulated it in fourteenth-century England, both represents, and engages with, a complex web of theological and socio-historical developments.
Modern scholarship is beginning to bring to attention traditions of piety, particularly that of women, in Europe from the twelfth century onwards, which are significant for the understanding of medieval English mysticism.
The zeitgeist expressed itself in a lively concern for the Christian faith and its implications for a modus vivendi.
Among all levels of society — university teachers, those living in religious communities, women with time on their hands from the new bourgeoisie — there was a deep engagement with religious truth.
The world of learning, fired by the tension between the intellectual arguments of scholasticism and the more experiential piety of the monastic orders given a powerful voice by such men as Bernard of Clairvaux and Hugo and Richard of St Victor, was preoccupied with the relationship between the operations of reason  and faith and a growing tendency to see them as distinct rather than complementary experiences, a climate of thought favourable to mystical theology.
Moreover, the thrust of missionary zeal to preach the faith and to live out its realities (the vita apostolica [apostolic way of life]) which gave rise to the preaching and mendicant orders was of enormous importance to the development of lay piety in Europe.
Both the Augustinians and Dominicans sought to combine the qualities of actives and contemplatives in their way of life and teaching; they stressed the need for penance and man's dependence on God's grace for that illumination of understanding through faith and love that they believed was knowledge of God.
Bonaventura articulated the theology of the Franciscans, inspired by the imitation of Christ in the life of poverty and love of their founder.
The Dominicans and Franciscans had houses in England and scholars at the universities there in the thirteenth century, the Augustinians in the fourteenth century.
In Europe their mission found a receptive audience in the groups of holy women, mulieres sanctae, who came together in various ways to pursue life-styles which they thought best furthered their ideal of a Scriptural vita apostolica.
The devotional lives of women gained increasing official recognition in all sorts of ways from the eleventh to the fifteenth century.
The percentage who were considered saints for their complete rejection of worldly influence and a piety which often combined active charity with mystical prayer, increased dramatically.
Such dedication manifested itself not only among professional religious like the Dominican nuns in the Rhineland known for their mystical experience, or Franciscan tertiaries like Angela of Foligno, who was converted after her marriage and, once a widow, devoted her life to God, but among lay women in the Low Countries and Germany known as Beguines.
These chose to live a life of poverty and charity supported by their own manual labours and loosely affiliated to local religious houses, from whom they might receive spiritual guidance, and to whom they gave the proceeds of their work.
During the thirteenth century they associated together in communities submitting to an organised communal life of prayer, including the Canonical Hours, and active charity as well as their work, though they were still dependent on the guidance of priests and religious houses.
Augustinians, Dominicans, Franciscans and Cistercians all  contributed to the care of such communities which were finally organised into independent parishes.
This partial regularisation of the Beguine life-style in enclosed groups with restricted movement and in association with orthodox religious communities, was the condition of their recognition by the Church, and important as a safeguard from the suspicion that their free and irregular communities and enthusiastic piety were breeding grounds for heresy.
The women who joined such communities were sometimes married and their aim was to live out the ideals of an apostolic life within the restrictions of their local community.
They dressed with distinctive plainness and aspired to a simple integrity expressed in behavioural terms defined with the authority of Scripture.
It is easy to see from the list of qualities appropriate to the good Beguine listed in one thirteenth-century manuscript how their piety engaged with contemplative spirituality.
They are bidden to: look down; to have lofty thoughts; to pray often; to travel little; to speak in the heart; to walk in the spirit; to be watchful in sleep; to be rich in poverty, wise in foolishness and strong in weakness; to cry for joy; to have a burning love, pure thoughts and an ordered way of life.
The lives of some of these mulieres sanctae were certainly known in England.
One fourteenth-century manuscript contains information about four: those of Catherine of Siena, the fourteenth-century Italian girl who became a Dominican tertiary and whose teaching based on mystical certainty of the reality of her union with Christ, with whom she experienced a spiritual visionary marriage, was given official Dominican patronage; and three thirteenth-century Belgian mystics: Christina called Mirabilis from St Truden; Elizabeth of Spalbeck, a Belgian recluse patronised by the Cistercians; and the prototypical Beguine, Mary of Oignies, championed by Jacques de Vitry, the Bishop of Acres and later a Cardinal Legate at the court of Gregory IX who protected her and wrote her biography.
Mary's exceptional piety as a child, extending to the scorning of pretty clothes, caused her parents to wonder "what-maner womman schalle oure doghter be?" 
In fact she became a woman devoted to prayer "soo , while she  with hir handes and spanne, she hadde a sauter set byfore hir and swetly seyde salmes  ere to oure lorde" [spanne: spun; sauter: psalter; salmes: psalms], and practised severe self-mortification.
The severity of her discipline  — she lived three years on bread and water, sometimes went barefoot to church in winter and prostrated herself on the bare floor of the church during weather so cold that the wine froze in the chalice during Mass — is typical of these women.
Elizabeth of Spalbeck imitated the Passion of Christ at the Canonical Hours: at Matins, beating herself as she remembered Christ being taken with swords and staves; at Prime, walking with arms twisted behind her back like a bound thief to commemorate Christ being led from Caiaphas to Pilate and then Herod; at Sext, None and Evensong, stretching herself in a cruciform posture.
The narrator comments: The accounts of the torments to which Christina subjected herself convey a feeling of a disturbed personality although she apparently miraculously survived them.
She cast herself into heated ovens or boiling cauldrons, was immersed in the freezing waters of a mill-race in winter and hunted by a pack of dogs through thorny thickets.
Like Margery Kempe later, she had prophetic gifts.
The devotion of these women centred on the eucharist.
Catherine sometimes lived off it alone, Christine had strange out-of-body experiences during Mass while Jacques de Vitry tells how Mary of Oignies had visionary experiences at the elevation of the Host and found rest and relief for her spirit in the presence of the sacrament.
Mary was married but with her husband's cooperation dedicated her life to God.
The same was true of the enormously influential Bridget of Sweden who, despite an early marriage and eight children, lived an increasingly ascetic and religious life to which she devoted herself completely at her husband's death.
She founded a still extant Bridgettine order for whom she provided a Rule.
An English Bridgettine house was founded at Sion House in Twickenham in 1415.
The aims of St Bridget in founding her order concentrate the cultural significance of this increasingly high-profile female piety in  the Middle Ages.
Her concern that the sisters living a life of contemplative discipline should in one respect be totally unrestricted — in their access to, and possession of, books — and the fact that, evidently, the brothers of the order both encouraged and instructed them in the knowledge of theological traditions, illuminates, and is symptomatic of, the problems faced by women who wished to live out their faith and give an articulate account of their experience.
Such women suffered from a lack of formally structured education and from inhibitions about taking the authoritative initiative involved in composing written texts.
The social engineering which placed them in positions of powerlessness ensured that the only female voice readily heard was that of the shrill tones of the satirised scold — a literary stereotype.
It is no accident that in secular lyrics of the period women, apparently the cause of so much self-regarding male rhetoric,(albeit rescued by humorous and witty posturing), are conspicuous by their silence — absent from the lover's self-dramatisation and the satirist's easy jibes.
The inescapable subservience of the female is ratified even when she is not manoeuvred as an object of adoration or spite: But the effect of this fifteenth-century carol in providing a reminder that the Incarnation was realised through a woman, is to put a warning shot across the bows of those who exploit the daughters of Eve.
That Mary herself could be cultivated as an ideal of womanhood, as Virgin and Mother, without the complications of sexual politics, suited the male temper of the age.
It is interesting that it is in the work of a woman, Julian of Norwich, that Mary's female willingness to be open to receive embodies that attitude which lies at the heart of contemplative experience.
Religious experience offered a release through which women could testify to an authoritative experience in which gender was transcended.
It must surely be significant that in an age when the evidence for women as writers is so sparse, two out of the five writers here discussed are women and that both present their spirituality nourished by physical debility, coloured by gender-specific terms, and very evidently rooted in the affective piety stimulated by the visual iconography of the Incarnation; although both found these to be factors which precipitated their experience of transcendent being and for Julian, in particular, they triggered her sense of that which is ineffable.
It is true that both Julian and Margery Kempe, like their European counterparts, had to negotiate the significance of their experience through the authority of the Church; and like Catherine of Siena and Bridget of Sweden, Margery, certainly, depended on the offices of a scribe to actually write her account.
Nevertheless all found an authority in their relationship to God which enabled them to find a means of articulating it.
The cultural phenomena through which we glimpse female spirituality in the Middle Ages are undoubtedly important for feminist studies.
But as mystics these medieval women, though "taking the route [they]would be likely to take" , join with their male counterparts to point to the same inner journey into the truth of the Incarnation — a wisdom which transcends human distinctions and where"there is neither male nor female.
For you are all one in Christ Jesus"(Galatians 3:28).
It is against such a background of fervent articulate piety in Europe, always presenting the Church with the challenge of potential heresy, and occasionally erupting into mass movements like the hysterically fervent white-robed flagellants who lashed themselves in hysterical penitential preparation for the Second Coming, that the English situation in the fourteenth century has to be seen.
Although there is evidence for a great growth in lay piety in England there was no equivalent to the free association of mulieres  sanctae on the Continent.
It is clear, however, that there were manifestations of ways of life shaped by an understanding of the faith that leavened society with spiritual awareness.
The evidence of wills and bishops' registers points to the prevalence of recluses in society from the twelfth century onwards: men and women who led solitary contemplative lives of prayer, often in cells attached to churches and chapels but who were also available to counsel those who sought help.
Some were in religious orders and acted as confessors, others were lay people.
All were required to get official sanction for their enclosure and to provide evidence of the means by which they were to be physically provided for.
It is clear from the evidence of wills from all social classes up to the sovereign himself that society valued the spiritual input of those whose dying to worldly values (at their enclosure the burial service was read over them) was not regarded with jokey discomfort as disturbingly eccentric, but valued as contributing a unique gift to a total social welfare.
Besides anchorites who were physically enclosed, there were also those who led eremitical lives of greater physical mobility, preaching and teaching, sometimes performing labouring tasks like road-mending or keeping care of bridges, sometimes living more haphazardly off the charity of others.
Such a figure was the perfect model for the everyman figure seeking the meaning of salvation for both individual and society that Langland depicted in the weary, wet-shod Will, so vibrantly aware of the gap between the final metaphysical realities of heaven and hell and the immediate beguiling preoccupations of the field full of folk, for whom hot pies seemed more sustaining than the bread of life.
Other outlets for lay piety which may have channelled that desire for corporate activity embodied in the European Beguinages were the lay fraternities of contemplative communities and the city guilds which provided both temporary contemplative retreats for those in active life, and active expressions of social concern which embodied the love of God.
All this would have fostered among lay people awareness of a spiritual dimension to life.
The strong sense of community between living and dead expressed in the frequent injunction in wills to pray for the soul of the deceased and to endow a priest for this specific purpose witnesses to a feeling for a purpose in existence beyond that of material well-being.
This feeling was also released in the cult  of the saints — both those long dead and those whose lives of special piety inspired a demand for their canonisation.
Thus John, Prior of the Augustinian House at Bridlington, was known as a holy man and canonised in 1401.
The saintly Vicar of Keyingham, Philip of Beverley, who did much for local clergy, was venerated as a saint.
Miracles were reported at his tomb as they were at the burial place of Richard Scrope, Archbishop of York, who was beheaded in 1405 and whose popularity as a saintly defender of Church freedoms against the usurpation of secular authority rivalled that of Thomas of Canterbury.
An office was written to celebrate his memory, as also for the engaging north-country hermit, Richard Rolle, although neither was ever officially canonised.
Such emotionally fervent piety was also provided with a catalyst in the devotional use of images.
At best, this focused that subtle blend of doctrine and awareness of its living reality defended by Walter Hilton and Reginald Pecock, at worst it encouraged the superstitious substitute for the work of faith which was labelled idolatry by the Lollards, those enthusiasts for the study of Scripture who tended to confuse its letter with its spirit.
They were themselves a witness to the success of the ecclesiastical promotion of lay education in the faith although, in their case, it stimulated a sectarianism which exploded in the first quarter of the fifteenth century as a threat to both the doctrinal and social establishment of authority.
The potential for subversiveness in the realisation of the equality of all men in the sight of God, and the possibility of each man reading the word of God directly for himself, sadly, proved too explosive a threat to be ignored and the Lollards were subject to persecution.
Nevertheless their Bible was widely circulated not only among the middle classes but among the nobility.
There is evidence of a religious enthusiasm more acceptable to the establishment among the nobility, some of whom appear to have either anticipated or eagerly embraced the official establishment of new liturgical feasts in devotional offices in their private chapels.
A rite for the Mass of the Holy Name, confirmed officially in 1489 is found in a fourteenth-century missal belonging to William Beauchamp, Lord Bergavenny.
And there is evidence for the prompt celebration of the Feasts of the Transfiguration and the Visitation, officially instituted in 1457 and 1475 respectively, in an unusual series of screen paintings in a small Devon church connected with the Chudleigh family.
This upsurge in lay piety in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries also fostered particular reading habits.
Again, the evidence of wills indicates increased lay interest in the literature of the contemplative life.
Henry Lord Scrope of Masham had texts of Richard Rolle and a copy of St Bridget's Revelations in his library.
The widow of Sir Brian Stapleton left a collection of books which included Rolle's psalter.
An inventory of the books of a Bridlington widow, Elizabeth Sewerby, included the Meditations of the Passion ascribed to Bonaventura, Rolle's meditations on the Passion, the Revelations of St Bridget of Sweden and an English copy of the life of St Catherine of Siena.
At a time when the middle class, having acquired literacy for reasons of commercial pragmatism during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, started to develop a more imaginative personal taste in reading, they also showed signs of being involved with vernacular piety.
In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, wills show that books such as primers, saints' lives (Legenda Aurea), Boethius' Consolation of Philosophy and psalters belonged to such people as tailors, grocers, vintners and mercers.
This desire to accommodate the life of the spirit in everyday activities is finely illustrated by the Latin instructions in a fifteenth-century manuscript as to how a devout layman should regulate his daily life, from his rising with all swiftness and signing himself with the cross, to his final return to bed when he must go to sleep in the uncertainty, salutary from a penitential, if not somnific, point of view, as to whether he will survive until the morrow.
As well as his ordinary business, the person addressed is expected to say Matins of the office of the Virgin and intersperse the day with prayers.
Light is cast on the customs of contemporary devotion by the instruction not "climb up to the cross" to kiss Christ's feet in tears of penitence but to do it in his heart.
This presumably refers to devotional access to the rood-loft (by newel stair or ladder).
He is also instructed to look at the books provided in the church for such as him when he hears Mass.
His whole household is permeated by a religious rule.
The children must have found the silence or edifying talk at table somewhat tedious, as also the prohibitions on all dancing, dicing and wrestling.
The injunction to make a small cross on the table from five breadcrumbs as a sign of devotion links him with a custom known to have been practised in monastic life, linking the daily  bread of physical survival with the bread of life broken at the Passion.
This sensibility for integrating aspects of contemplative with active life is also manifest in the Livre de Seyntz Medecines written by Henry Duke of Lancaster; in it he writes about his own sense of that mortal sin for which Christ the healer supplies remedies, having beaten death in that tournament where he "turned our sorrow into joy and overcame death with death" .
It is clear, then, that there was among laymen and women an interest in leading what Walter Hilton calls a "mixed life" , combining prayer and meditation with active duties.
To cater for this audience manuscript compilations of devotional works were produced as working anthologies with a practical purpose.
Certainly the early printers saw the commercial viability of producing texts for this market although the writings of the English mystics were not well represented.
Wynkyn de Worde printed Hilton's Scale at the command of Lady Margaret Beaufort and carefully arranged selections from the Book of Margery Kempe known as A shorte treatyse of contemplacyon.
He also printed the Middle English adaptation of the dialogue of St Catherine of Siena made for the Bridgettine sisters at Syon Abbey and known as The Orcherd of Syon.
The cultural context of the mystics who wrote in English in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries witnesses to an appetite for spiritual literature which they both formed and addressed.
Their writings engage with a spectrum of the cultural and theological traditions of medieval Europe.
More abstractly the particularities of circumstance which attended both Julian's and Margery's report of their experiences illuminate the position of women and the roles open to them within the heirarchy of spiritual authority in the late medieval period.
Clearly the subtle substructure of theological argument in the negative tradition which underlies the experiential theology of the Cloud-author distinguishes him from Julian of Norwich whose vibrant sense of the reality of the being of God at work in human nature was born out of her visionary meditative experience focused on Christ's Passion.
Her religious sensibility is much nearer to that of the affective Franciscan devotion just as his is to the Dominican tradition of speculative thought.
The enthusiasm of both Margery Kempe and Richard Rolle for adopting a life-style which would itself openly express a response to God's love as revealed in the Incarnation and their desire to teach  others of this, betrays a deeply felt response to Franciscan teaching; while Walter Hilton's beautifully structured account of the progress to essential human fulfilment as inward discovery of the reality of Christ incarnate dying to sin but rising in love, one in heart and mind with God, places Walter Hilton squarely in the tradition of the theology of the Augustinian friars.
Interesting though it is to be aware of the way in which these various theological traditions bear fruit in the mystics' accounts of their experience, it is important to remember that they cannot fully account for this experience.
They provide the writers with a language by which they can recognise and communicate their sense of an ineffable being with the dynamic power to transform their lives, and the purpose of their writing is to release that dynamic in the lives of others.
The knowledge they seek is experiential, and they lived in the expectation of a final reality which must inevitably be in itself a judgement on the existential awareness of it at a human level.
All depend in varying degrees on the analytical activities of conscious thought, but all would say with Thomas à Kempis: I had sooner feel compunction than know its definition.
At the last judgement we shall not be asked how many books we have read but how we have lived.
It is to this existential challenge that the writers here discussed addressed themselves, all in their own ways meeting it by demonstrating how to go on the game of faith!
Richard Rolle: The Form of Living
It is no accident that we know more about the lives of Richard Rolle and Margery Kempe than about the other three writers with whom this book is concerned.
Biographical details are not relevant to what the Cloud-author and Walter Hilton have to say, and about Julian we know only those circumstances which immediately impinge on her visionary experience.
The thrust of their work points away from the particularities of individuality to engage in different ways with the significance of the Incarnation which for them provides the ultimate pattern of meaning for all men.
It may also be important that the two most impersonal writers of these three, Walter Hilton and the Cloud-author, were both almost certainly professional religious and thus already established in a tradition of self-effacement.
The details of Julian's life are not known, but it is highly unlikely that she was professed at the time of her visionary experience — if at all.
It is interesting that although she does begin her account with biographical experience, her concern is with its theological import for all.
Richard Rolle and Margery Kempe found their own routes, not without difficulty, to mystical understanding.
Neither of them was in religious orders and, whether or not either of them aspired to sainthood, both clearly felt that sharing their "confessions" was an important social act.
For Margery they are the substance of her book — for Rolle they enter into some of his writing and illuminate his teaching.
With both Rolle and Margery Kempe more is known precisely because both were articulate about adopting a life-style which answered to their spiritual needs.
Margery followed her own adaptation of the tradition of the mulieres sanctae and Rolle was a hermit; each exhibited extraordinary qualities within his or her role.
Such was Rolle's charisma during his life that his grave at Hampole Priory in South Yorkshire just west of Doncaster, became a centre of pilgrimage where miracles were recorded.
The deaf, dumb, insane and dead were all said to be restored at his tomb.
Sometimes it appears that the mere act of measuring them in order to manufacture a candle of corresponding dimensions to burn at the tomb was sufficient to effect the cure.
For instance, it is recorded that one woman, Joan of Sprotborough, fell into a millpool and in spite of not being rescued for an hour was then revived by prayer and by being "measured for a candle" .
Towards the end of the fourteenth century an Office for St Richard Hermit was written for the Priory in the hope of his canonisation.
It recorded the main events of his life, and modern scholarship has in the main verified it from independent documentary sources as well as from Rolle's own writings.
The picture that emerges is of a man both maddening and engaging in his inner spiritual drive, and in his search for a way of living appropriate to its demands.
He had the freedom of spirit to cut through convention and authority if he felt it to be an impediment to his calling.
Such courageous integrity can look like arrogance since it apparently rejected the means to an understanding of the faith acquired by the tested traditions of academic and spiritual disciplines or social mores.
Yet his writings witness to an inner toughness and honesty which complement his sensitivity and spiritual receptiveness, and balance his obvious volatility.
They compel respect for his "venture" life-style risked to win the realities of his faith and also, on occasions, make vividly accessible the mental furniture of his faith.
He is more poet than academic, or professional religious, and it is precisely because of his wilful integrity and gift for language that he is able to share a sense of the actual process — frequently frustrating — of the practice of spiritual discipline which for all the mystics is the weapon in the battle against the forces of darkness that self-evidently threaten to destroy human fulfilment.
The discipline is the only means by which these forces are consumed and thus destroyed.
In a consumer society, where wealth is synonymous with money and thus both the currency and final desideratum in a process of endless consumption, people are in danger of knowing the "price of everything and the value of nothing" .
The mystics, however, joyfully recognise a congruity between price and value.
The discipline which all of them write about with varying levels of emphasis and directness is the only means in every sphere of human  activity by which the desideratum of love is liberated and all pain finally destroyed.
In his Latin work Incendium Amoris (The Fire of Love) Rolle talks of it as kindling for the "fire which consumes everything which is dark" (Prologue.4), an element which he recognises as the final reality.
There is, however, a touching gap between the grandeur of the issues he recognises and the comical or exasperating hit and miss practical manner in which he engaged with them.
The Office tells us that he was born at Thornton Dale near Pickering in North Yorkshire.
Such external evidence as there is points to his being the son of a fairly poor rural family who were tenants on the estate of the manor of Thornton Dale which, in 1335, was described as having: a chief messuage worth in garden produce and herbage 13s 4d, arable lands and meadows, a watermill, a fulling mill, a common oven.
They managed to send Richard to school and at some time he attracted the notice of the lawyer-priest Thomas de Nevill, later Archdeacon of Durham, who gave him a grant to study at Oxford when he was about thirteen or fourteen years old.
The first three years of his Oxford course of studies would have included grammar, logic and rhetoric (the trivium), after which the student had to attend formal sessions of dispute and argument before becoming a Bachelor of Arts and going on to the second part of the course, music, astronomy, geometry and arithmetic.
There is no evidence that Rolle received his Bachelor's degree, and his frequent scathing remarks on the uselessness of scholarly argument as a means to the knowledge of God indicate that the intellectual training offered at Oxford would have been uncongenial to him.
In The Fire of Love he writes: Nowadays too many are consumed with a desire for knowledge rather than for love, so that they scarcely know what love is or what is its delight.
Yet all their study should have been directed to this end, so that they might be consumed with the love of God as well.
Shame on them!
An old woman can be more expert in the love of God — and less worldly too — than your theologian with his useless studying.
He does it for vanity, to get a reputation, to obtain stipends and official positions.
Such a fellow ought to be entitled not "Doctor" but "Fool" .
Certainly he did not stay the full course which was seven years for the qualification of a Master's degree, the necessary precondition for further study of law, theology and medicine.
He left when he was eighteen, presumably with the cry so often heard from those who look for instant wisdom in courses designed primarily to foster skills by which such discrimination may be attained: "the course cannot give me what I am looking for" .
The Office remarks that "he desired rather to be imbued more fully and deeply with the theological doctrines of Holy Scripture than with the study of physical and secular science" which looks as if he left after the trivium.
It continues: in his nineteenth year…considering the uncertain term of human life, and the fearful end especially before the fleshly and the worldly, he took thought, by the inspiration of God, providently concerning himself (remembering his end), lest he should be taken in the snares of sin.
The Office, of course, was in the business of sanctification, but this account of Rolle's early passionate concern for a life-style which reflected his urgent sense of priorities is heard again later in his Fire of Love: As adolescence dawned in my unhappy youth, present too was the grace of my Maker.
It was he who curbed my youthful lust and transformed it into a longing for spiritual embrace.
He lifted and transferred my soul from the depths up to the heights, so that I ardently longed for the pleasures of heaven more than I had ever delighted in physical embrace or worldly corruption…
Yet I was still living amongst those who flourished in the world, and it was their food I used to eat.
And I used to listen to that kind of flattery which all too often can drag the most doughty warriors from their heights down to hell itself.
But when I rejected everything of this sort to set myself to one purpose, my soul was absorbed with love for my Maker.
I longed for the sweet delights of eternity, and I gave my soul over to love Christ with every ounce of my power…
From then on I continually sought quiet, and that although I went from one place to another.
By the age of nineteen he was back at home, which was probably, by this time, in Yafforth about twenty-five miles from Thornton Dale, the way of development through the competitive channels of establishment institutions behind him, and his face turned  towards the alternative life-style of the recluse which he embarked on with a comically home-spun rite of passage.
Since it is clear that the vocation of hermit was officially recognised in the fourteenth century, the account of Richard's pursuit of his calling points to parental opposition and possibly a reluctance on Richard's part to commit himself to any officially supervised licensing.
Certainly the Office states that he became a hermit "without his father's knowledge and against his will…because he loved God more than his father in the flesh" .
It looks as if he decided on a do-it-yourself habit modelled on those of Augustinian hermits who wore a basic white garment and scapulary which for outside wear were covered with a black cowl and hood tied round with a black leather thong.
The Office tells us that he arranged for his sister to meet him in a nearby wood and to bring with her two of her over-dresses, one white and one grey, and his father's rainhood.
As soon as he got his hands on them he cut the sleeves off the grey dress and adapted those of the white one, then stripped off, and donned first the white dress and then the grey one as a sort of sleeveless cowl of a suitably penitential colour and finally the hood and "thus, as far as was then possible to him, he contrived a confused likeness to a hermit" .
As the implications of the purposes of this scarecrow figure dawned on her, his sister screamed out that he was crazy, and perhaps even threw herself at him to prevent his plan.
The legend says that he "drove her away from him menacingly" and took to his heels in flight from any possible prevention of his purposes by friends and family.
The next episode reported in the Office has the same eccentric opportunist quality.
Whether by design or accident, Richard went to "a certain church…where the wife of a certain worthy esquire…named John de Dalton, was accustomed to pray" .
John Dalton was the younger son of a Lancashire family who feathered his nest by dubious means while carrying out the office of agent for the Earl of Lancaster as constable of Pickering Castle, a position he lost in 1322 as a result of the unsuccessful rebellion of the earl who was subsequently executed.
Dalton was, however, granted his own estates again which included land at Pickering and further east near Snainton, first at Foulbridge and then at Kirkby Misperton.
There is no certainty as to which church and manor house the account in the Office refers to, but it is highly probable that they were at Pickering.
If this is correct Rolle was putting  some distance between himself and his father but returning to territory known in childhood.
In the church Richard fell to prayer with such absorption that Lady Dalton forbore to disturb him when she entered, but her son recognised him as a former Oxford student.
The interest he attracted was greatly increased when, with the consent of the priest-in-charge, Richard preached at Mass with such charism that the congregation were moved to tears.
He was subsequently invited home to dinner by the Daltons.
His behaviour at the visit seems to suggest that he was a disturbing presence, since he did not turn up in the Great Hall as expected, but disappeared into a derelict and disused part of the house from whence he had to be fetched.
At dinner he was utterly silent and tried to leave as soon as he had eaten sufficient but before the table was cleared.
John Dalton eventually elicited the truth of his identity from him and offered him sanctuary as a hermit in his own home (perhaps Richard had been reconnoitring in his disappearance before dinner) and at his own expense.
John Dalton's action seems to have been very near in time to the crisis in his own life when he was temporarily imprisoned for his support of the Earl of Lancaster.
The acceptance of Dalton as his patron by the uncompromisingly idealistic Richard seems odd, though he may not have realised the character of the man at this stage.
Certainly both the account in the Office of his later career and the remarks he let drop in his own writings point to a friction in his situation which ultimately led him to leave the Daltons to seek a quiet place elsewhere.
In The Fire of Love he lashes out at those who have spent "their youthful energy in getting hold of others' property by hook or by crook" for their own worldly security and who use their authority aggressively (30.139–40).
His own situation as a tame hermit to be shown off to guests by the lady of the house can hardly have suited him.
The account in the Office of one such episode makes pious capital from the situation: and a remarkable incident is recounted.
We are told that the hermit was once sitting alone in his cell after dinner when there came to him the lady of the house…and many persons with her, and found him writing rapidly.
They begged him to desist, in order to give them some words of edification, and for two consecutive hours he proceeded to give them excellent exhortations, while at the same time never ceasing his writing — and all the while what he was writing was not the same as what he was speaking.
One wonders whether Richard's failure to look up from his work (perhaps copying a manuscript) betokened exasperation at the interruption.
He may have left the Daltons at the time of their troubles.
The reconstruction of the possible sequence of events in his life which can be inferred from the Office and personal remarks in his writings, is at best a complicated matter of academic conjecture which is of no direct help to the reader in engaging with his English works.
The Office hints defensively at a period of nomadic existence which was censured by critics as unstable.
Certainly there are references in his works to his "wandering like Cain" and also to disagreements with monks whom he criticises for their worldliness and describes as jealous of his own popularity and envious of his mystical experience.
It has even been mistakenly argued that at some point during the 1320s he fled to Paris and studied for a while at the Sorbonne.
What is certain is that Rolle's own inner drive was to be a solitary contemplative and to use his experience in the service of others.
The Office tells us that he eventually settled in the area known as the county of Richmond.
It also gives the information that Rolle was "accustomed to show himself very familiar to recluses, and to those who needed spiritual consolation" and it must have been during this period of his life that he met his disciple Margaret de Kirkeby.
She was a nun at Hampole Priory before adopting the life of a recluse at East Layton near Richmond in 1348 when Rolle wrote for her a treatise known as The Form of Living which was designed as both programme for, and illumination of, the solitary life-style that she had adopted.
Indeed it may even be argued that many more of Rolle's English texts were written specifically for her.
There was clearly a close friendship between them, and the Office gives a moving account of his efficacy in curing her of some kind of fit: He came and found her mute, but when he had seated himself at her window and they had eaten together, it chanced that at the end of the dinner the recluse wished to sleep, and oppressed by slumber her head drooped towards the window where God's saint, Richard, was reclining, and as she was leaning a litle on that same Richard, suddenly, with a vehement onslaught, such a grave vexation took her in her sleep that she seemed to wish to break the window of her house, and in that strong vexation she awoke, her speech was restored, and with great  devotion she broke out into the words "Gloria tibi Domine" , and the blessed Richard completed the verse which she had begun.
There are difficulties about the dating of this episode.
The Office continues with a description of a relapse of Margaret's illness from which she was cured when Rolle promised her that she should never again suffer from it as long as he was alive.
After several years, therefore, when the illness recurred, Margaret sent after Richard only to learn that he had died at the hour she was afflicted.
Although the Office describes her as a recluse at the time of her cure, there is a discrepancy here between the date at which she was enclosed (1348) and the fact that several years elapsed between the cure and the relapse of her illness when Rolle died, since many manuscripts attest to Rolle's death in 1348.
Perhaps her cure took place while she was still at Hampole and the Office refers to her as a recluse because that is what she later became, or perhaps she had become an anchoress while still at Hampole.
Rolle died at the height of the plague, but his reputation as a loved spiritual counsellor survived him — probably furthered by his disciple William Stopes who seems to have been a young religious and acted as Rolle's literary executor after his death.
There is doubt as to whether he is that "William" for whom Rolle wrote, at the end of his life, the Latin treatise, Emendatio Vitae, translated into English in the sixteenth century.
Whatever the uncertainties of the precise dates, events and social connections in Rolle's life it is clear from external and internal evidence that he felt increasingly compelled towards a solitary life because it facilitated contemplative inner life which was for him the reality to be cultivated above all other.
To those who urged the perennial claims of the virtues of community living and quoted Ecclesiastes 4:10 "Woe to him who is alone when he falls; for he has not another to help him up" , Rolle answered: they do not define "alone" as being "without God" but understand it to mean "without company" .
While he condemned as pride the solitary life-style which arises from self-reliance rather than faith in God (14.87) he countered his opponents with another Scriptural quotation from Osee (Hosea) 2:14 interpreted as referring to the relationship between God and  the soul: "I will lead her into solitude, and I will speak to her heart" (13.83).
His whole life was a search for quietness in which the voice of God could be heard (see 15.92).
While he recognised that the essence of this quietness is an inner condition, saying of those who know it: many of their number, although they live physically among people, are mentally remote from them; they never falter in their heavenly longing, because in spirit they are far removed from a sinful way of life,
yet for him such remoteness had to be physical as well as spiritual.
Perhaps his own impatient temperament made this especially essential in his case: I myself fled to the wilderness when it proved no longer possible to live harmoniously with men, who, admittedly, were a frequent obstacle to my inner joy.
Because I did not do the kind of things they did, they attributed waywardness and bad temper to me.
Certainly he believed that his inner feeling of being most alive, most engaged with real issues, in his contemplative experience, was a gift from God and that his whole integrity depended on his furthering a life-style which he believed enabled him to receive the gift, however strong the opposition he encountered: Above all else I have always longed to sit and concentrate on Christ, and him alone…
But those who argued with me did not share this opinion, and tried to make me conform to their pattern.
But I could not possibly desert the grace of Christ and accept the views of foolish men who were completely ignorant of all that was going on within me.
I put up with all their talk, and I did what I had to do according to the state in which the Lord had placed me.
What he had to do was to "live apart from men, as far as the needs of the body allow…continually upheld by him whom I love" (31.142).
CONTEMPLATIVE EXPERIENCE
In The Fire of Love Rolle gives a vivid account of his spiritual life as a progress from intellectual knowledge of the faith to "kynde knowynge" — a progress to which all the mystics witness.
Rolle  can only talk about it in figurative terms.
First comes the inner experience of a spiritual reality described as a door opening to reveal not only the face of the Beloved but a way of love by which he can be reached (15.92).
Then Rolle describes two further stages in which his experience is illuminated as the truths of God on which he meditates are felt inwardly.
First he feels what he calls heat which seems to be associated with creativity: "an unusually pleasant heat…from none of his creatures but from the Creator himself" .
This leads to a sense of eternal harmony "and I knew the infusion and understanding of heavenly spiritual sounds, sounds which pertain to the song of eternal praise and to the sweetness of unheard melody" (15.93).
In his account of the final stage, it is as if the unheard melody of which he had some intimation suddenly becomes audible and transposes all his experience into its terms: In my prayer I was reaching out to heaven with heartfelt longing when I became aware, in a way I cannot explain, of a symphony of song, and in myself I sensed a corresponding harmony at once wholly delectable and heavenly, which persisted in my mind.
Then and there my thinking itself turned into melodious song, and my meditation became a poem, and my very prayers and psalms took up the same sound.
The effect of this inner sweetness was that I began to sing what previously I had spoken; only I sang inwardly, and that for my Creator.
The extent to which the senses actually play a role in Rolle's spiritual experience has been argued.
Certainly later writers warn against mistaking unusual sense phenomena for genuine spiritual enlightenment.
What does seem to be the case is that Rolle had an experience of what he understood as divine reality which transfigured his ordinary perception and that he could only express this in terms of the way men respond to the arts of music and literature.
His meditation became a poem, his thinking became a song.
Poems order experience and share it; understanding them and writing them involves an act of creativity, and in both activities there is a kind of joy involved when the order of words, or insight into the effect of that order, corresponds with the way things are.
Bonaventura saw human craftsmanship (which included poetry) as an image of the creativity of God revealed in the Incarnation — "for the Son of God is the"  "art of the Father"  "" — and known in the  contemplative union of the soul with God.
The work of the craftsman is to realise an inner idea in a way that is beautiful, useful and enduring, and as his work is the object of his satisfaction and delight ( "if it were in his power to produce an effect which would know and love him, this he would assuredly do" ), so man is created for God who alone satisfies his nature.
The idea points to a kind of dynamic joy of understanding between creator and creation; that it is not constantly felt is due to sin.
Rolle seems to witness to an experience where the barrier to the direct experience of that joy is lifted; the Word that informs all words, the harmony behind all music, becomes real to him;"my meditation became a poem…
I began to sing what previously I had spoken"(15.93).
It is small wonder that he sought quiet and freedom from external pressure to follow his inner vision.
His search for a style of living which would enable him to cultivate his contemplative gifts led him to equate, perhaps sometimes confuse, an interior state with the external mode of achieving it.
Certainly he seems to define active life in terms of outward works and to see it as inferior to the inward experience of contemplation: Some people are doubtful as to which life is the more meritorious and excellent, the contemplative or the active.
To many of them the active life seems more deserving because of the amount of good works and preaching it performs.
But this is the mistake of ignorance, because they do not know what the contemplative life stands for.
True there are many actives who are better than some contemplatives.
But the best contemplatives are superior to the best actives.
So we say therefore that the contemplative life, taken in itself, is sweeter, nobler, worthier, and more meritorious in respect of its fundamental principle, which is delight in uncreated good; in other words it is because this is the life which loves God more ardently.
Therefore, the contemplative life, if it is properly lived, issues in a greater love of God, and demands more grace, than the active life…
Actives to be sure, serve God with their toil and outward activity, but they spend little time in inner quiet.
And the result is that they can only rarely and briefly know spiritual delight.
On the other hand contemplatives are almost always enjoying the embrace of their Beloved.
For Rolle, because God looks on the heart and not the outward appearance, and judges the will not the deed, it seems self-evident that the contemplative life, seeking to be one with God's love, must be preferred, because actives are too distracted by what they do.
But if he sometimes tends to distinguish active from contemplative life in terms of life-style, he is also aware of the strenuousness of contemplative life and stresses that solitude alone will not yield the fruits of contemplative life.
In The Fire of Love he pinpoints the experience witnessed to by all mystics of a strenuous inner effort which although it is the precondition of contemplative experience cannot actually produce it.
As the Cloud-author might say, contemplative understanding comes from nowhere and is experienced as a gift: We must not be surprised if a man does not attain the heights of contemplation or experience its sweetness at the beginning of his Christian life.
It is quite simple: to acquire contemplation means much time and hard work, and it is not given to anyone any time anyhow, even though its possession brings unspeakable joy.
It is not within man's power to achieve it, and however great his efforts they will be inadequate.
But God is generous, and it is granted to those who truly love him, and who have sought Christ beyond what men consider possible.
THE FORM OF LIVING
The events of Rolle's life as given in The Fire of Love and the Office illustrate his growing discoveries in his game of faith.
Rolle was a prolific writer in Latin about his mystical theology.
His English texts which almost certainly belong to the last ten years of his life relate to his role as a spiritual counsellor, and they are consistent with what we know of him — their strength lying not in systematic exposition but in his skill with language to illuminate the goals of spiritual life and so awake his readers to their reality.
It is as if they might be responses to requests to "write up" exchanged conversation and counsel — some are lyrics and short prose poems on the nature of contemplative life.
This chapter will introduce Rolle's qualities as an English writer about mystical experience by concentrating chiefly on two kinds of text.
The first, The Form of Living, is a treatise which Rolle wrote for Margaret de Kirkeby to explain the shape of contemplative life to which it is an excellently manageable introduction.
It is characteristic of Rolle's mystical theology, and it  is the most extended and systematic of the English treatises, combining imaginative use of language and a relatively well-controlled intellectual structure to effect a psychological understanding of the desire for, and experiences of, the life of faith, and a taste of its nature.
The second kind of text — meditation on the Passion — is illuminated by the wider perspective of The Form of Living.
Rolle's Meditations embody at a literary level his appreciation of the shaping energies of the form of the inner life.
Through a high level of devotional art they enact stages of the contemplative game — indeed provide means of play.
Rolle uses the phrase "form of lyvyng" twice in the text of that name.
He signs off: "Loo, Margarete, I have schortly sayde  forme of lyvyng, and how  may come til perfeccion" (12.119.76-7), using the phrase to denote a pattern of life.
Earlier he ends chapter three with a hint of humour saying that many people are not what they seem despite the appearances and begs her to try her utmost not to be worse than she appears, concluding: Here the word "form" is ambiguous referring to his writing as well as to a life-style.
The literary work is to define the mould which is to be instrumental in shaping the life's work.
The use of "form" meaning an instrument for shaping in crafts, like a template or a cobbler's last, was normal in the 1340s, the more modern usage of the word as "prescribed course" , "formative principle" , not being found until later.
The register of "form" as "template" seems to catch exactly the potentially creative status of the text whose full form will only be realised when it is enacted.
Moreover, it follows in its own terms a design which is fundamental to medieval Christian culture, underlying the liturgy of the Mass and informing the architecture of church buildings.
The Mass offers the sacrifice of the Passion through which man becomes part of the kingdom of God and the redeeming action of Christ.
The church interior was dominated by the rood-screen and rood with the visual images of the dying Christ flanked by the sorrowing and faithful Mary and  John.
Passing beneath it from the lay part of the church, the nave, to the chancel, where the priest celebrated, figuratively marked the rite of passage from earth to heaven.
In an age when lay people did not participate in the celebration of the Latin Mass the mystics writing in the vernacular interpreted their own experience of the reality expressed in both ritual and architecture, that it is only by means of suffering that redemptive love is proved and inherits the kingdom.
The Form of Living illuminates the stages of the way of life which Rolle believed would enable these beliefs enacted in building and ritual to become psychological realities.
It seems clearly to be divided into two parts.
Each concentrates on the means and ends, preparation for, and fulfilment of, spiritual life, the first part dealing with the self-regulation necessary to release the desire for God from all impediment; the second dealing more directly with contemplative experience.
But while it is true that such a division is discernible, it is also true that the goal is in sight from the start.
In the first chapter Rolle juxtaposes the issues of life and death in terms of everlasting and perishable goods, and says strikingly: thus identifying the Incarnation with the fulfilment of human identity.
In one of the meditations on the Passion to be examined in the last part of the chapter Rolle vividly explores the nature of such a loss.
This treatise, however, is designed to clarify the process by which man turns from death to life and finds "all  he has" , Jesus.
Rolle has to try to meet the linguistic challenge which faces any mystical writer: to define and point towards the nature of an experience which is in essence ineffable.
Characteristically he uses the imagery of song to point to the highest kind of contemplative experience of God: The Form unfolds a process of definition which comes full circle back to its beginning so that that can be understood in a new way: the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we started And know the place for the first time.
The value of the writing is that it provides points of reference for the voyager within.
The first three chapters of The Form address themselves chiefly to the solitary religious, pointing the contrast between the reality of inward holiness and the outward appearances — "habett of halyness" (3.94.39)— a term which seems to cover not just the clothing but the outward practices of piety, fasting and abstinence.
Rolle stresses the need to acquire discretion in these observances so that they do not become ends in themselves and counter-productive to their true purpose — to release the practitioner to a freedom to love.
Rolle stresses at the beginning the joy which is the obverse of the discipline: But although it is characteristic of Rolle's writing to stress the joy of the contemplative, it would be a mistake to suppose that he ever suggests that the passage to it is easy: At the very start he warns against the specific danger attendant on solitary life — hallucination; a point to remember when considering the arguments of those who tend to be distrustful of Rolle's  theology.
There is a delightful passage where he addresses himself to the role of dreams and faces out the difficulty inherent in medieval lore which others like Chaucer resolve through ambiguity: namely, that in a situation where some dreams were held to reveal truth and others to be the products of a disordered digestive system, it is difficult to distinguish true from false.
Rolle warns against taking any of it seriously: He ends the address to the solitary with his playful warning on the necessity of distinguishing between inner holiness and outward habit having previously established that: The phrase, characteristic of Rolle, "byrnes in  luf of Jhesu Criste" combines man's love for God with God's for man in a fire which sets man alight.
This is the "fire which consumes everything that is dark" (Fire of Love, prologue, p.47); at this stage of the treatise it is a metaphor whose full implications have not been developed, but it is the goal of this form of living.
Chapters 1–6: lighting the fire of love
The kindling that ignites the desire for knowledge of God into leaping flames rising "ay upwarde, als fire, sekand  heghest place in heven" (4.95.1) is inner discipline.
Rolle suggests that this is begun in thought of the four last things: death, for "we lyve bot in a poynt" in "uncertente of owre endyng" ; judgement, when we account for our use of time "and ilk tyme  we thynk not on God, we may cownt it als  we have tynt" (4.95.19–22, 38–9); heaven, the joy which is "mare  any may tell" ; and hell, where also is burning in fire (4.96.46–7, 54).
The perspectives Rolle brings into focus stress the urgency of the situation.
He presses it home, "I wyll  be ay clymbande tyll Jhesu-warde" (5.96.1).
The end of the first half of The Form is concerned with clarifying the ordering of inner life — laying the fire — through an analysis of the human capacity for sin.
Its positive side is that it implies man's ability to recognise his aptitude for self-pollution, and thus trigger the dynamic power which first clears the mess through the sacrament of penance (repentance, confession, satisfaction) and then works through self-discipline to keep the channels running clear in thought, word and deed.
This involves working mentally and physically to keep distractions at bay, guarding the tongue to speak little and to the point, taking especial care not to misrepresent others, living as if death might come tomorrow and balancing the needs of the body with the longings of the spirit in discretion.
Rolle is emphatic that "ryghtwysnes" is not in the discipline itself, but it is the fruit of it, a state of inner freedom untouched by the constraints of outward circumstances: He recognises that the will to effect such inner effort has to be awakened — drawn — that it is the response to goodness in men and in Christ, and to the joy of heaven, which starts to work man's salvation.
So far Rolle has been concerned to delineate strategies to prevent man losing all his creative potential, a stage roughly corresponding to that which other mystics label the purgative stage; now he tries to bring into focus what is saved.
This involves finding a language for the goal of contemplative life — "I vate wele  desyres to here some special poynt of  luf of Jhesu Criste, and of contemplatyf lyfe" [vate wele: know well; here: hear](6.102–3.214–2)— to bridge the gap between doctrine and reality.
In the first part of The Form, language is used to denote action and inner states that are immediately recognisable so that, for instance , cleanness of mouth is defined as not talking for the sake of it and telling no lies (c.5).
Now words become means to mediate a visionary experience of love and enlarge understanding.
They point beyond themselves to the possibility of an all-encompassing reality to which they are a vital witness because they are constituent parts, words signifying the Word.
The prose in this section starts to function like poetry, ordering images and rhythmical cadences to convey an intimation  of the way that Rolle believed that things are.
In its own terms it is sacramental.
Chapter seven, the hinge by which The Form opens to this level of significance, directly addresses itself to the essence of the contemplative life — certainty of being, through which all experience is transfigured to joy.
Rolle expresses it metaphorically as speech becomes song.
In Emendatio Vitae he acknowledges the variety of modes of expressing this kind of insight: He continues with a memorable expression of the joy in the play of faith "myrth in mynde had gostely for  lufar euerlastynge, with grete voys oowt brekand" (12.127.16–28).
Chapter 7: the song of love
In chapter seven of The Form, leading his disciple on from the initial perspective of striving to order her inner life as if she should die tomorrow — a challenge which sets the adrenalin running and wonderfully sharpens awareness — he potently reminds her in terms of his own cultural coinage that the world is indeed "charged with the grandeur of God" by instructing her to see all her physical experience in terms of the sacrifice also offered at the Mass: By means of keeping in remembrance this little incantatory prayer at meals and indeed at all times not otherwise taken up with prayer or speech ( "and thynk it noght anely whils  etes, bot bath before and after, ay bot when  prayes or spekes" , 7.104.39–40) the disciple will maintain a constant perception of all aspects of sustaining life as a divine gift mysteriously available in time only through the processes of death and resurrection.
It is no accident that it was recommended for use in the fifteenth-century Lay Folks Mass Book at the elevation of the Host.
All the devotions recommended for the laity during the Mass reinforce a sense of this pattern.
The prayers recommended before the consecration are for the spiritual welfare of all estates and conditions of men in terms of a literal and spiritual harvest which not only ensures their survival in this world but also in the next.
Such prayers are then easily assimilated to the offering of the Mass, a ritual which keeps alive the paradigmatic reality of the Incarnation.
So the priest addresses God Wherefore also we thy servants, O Lord, and also thy holy people, in memory as well of the blessed passion of the same Christ, thy Son, our Lord, as of his resurrection from the dead, and also of his glorious ascension into the heavens do offer unto thy excellent majesty, of thine own gifts albeit given unto us, a pure, a holy, an undefiled sacrifice, the holy bread of eternal life, and the cup of everlasting salvation.
As he continues with the prayer that those who receive the sacrament may "be fulfilled with all hevenly benediction and grace through Jesus Christ" , so Rolle in The Form of Living now turns to a description of the interior awareness of this fulfilment.
Like all mystics Rolle understands the essence of contemplative life to be a progress and he borrows terminology from Richard of St Victor when he describes this progress as three degrees of love "insuperable"  "inseparable" and "singular" .
Chapter 8: the three degrees of love
For Rolle the first stage, "insuperable" involves a love of God which nothing can shake: He uses the same degrees translated as "vnouercomyn"  "indepartyd" and "singuler" (11.123–4.26,32,5) in Emendatio Vitae and it illuminates his thinking in The Form.
He says of the first degree that it happens when no other desire can divert love from God and "all labyr is lyght to a lufar" , signalling a vivid apprehension of the joy at the heart of the work of redemption.
The second stage "inseparabel" represents a state of being constantly centred on a consciousness of Jesus.
The heart "cryes with his lufe to be haldyn" [haldyn: held fast].
The third degree involves a sense of complete comfort in Jesus "all multyn in fyre of lufe" (11. 123.30,35; 125.34-5).
In The Form he comments that in the first two degrees it is possible to say "I languysch for lufe" or "Me langes in lufe" (106.53–4) but in the third degree all is comfort and joy.
Speech becomes song: "sange of lovyng and of lufe es commen" (105.45), longing is satisfied and the lover becomes part of the fire of love.
In The Form the prose style shows Rolle at his best embodying his sense of "the expanding of love beyond desire" : The first sentence uses the inexpressibility topos — the rhetorical trick for gesturing towards the ineffable.
It is followed by a sentence of seven verbal phrases dependent on one main verb "is" which builds up a sense of being actively extended "lufand — thynkand — desirand — anedande — syngand — byrnand" yet also paradoxically "restand" .
The incantatory run of present participles with their weak-syllable endings gives way to the strong definitive statement which has gathered resonance of meaning both within the text and from other of Rolle's writings: "sange of lovynge and of lufe es cummen" .
Its rhythm is hauntingly evocative of the Canticle of Canticles (Song of Songs)(2:11): "For winter is now past, the rain is over and gone.
The flowers have appeared in our land, the time of pruning is come".
It is then developed in seven statements to a climactic definition of the nature of the fire of love; they are brought to a triumphant conclusion by juxtaposing a negative statement with its positive form to indicate ways in which the third degree of singular love fulfils and transcends the longing of the earlier stages: The phrase from The Song of Songs (5:2) which heralds the arrival of the beloved, here conveys a sense of a transformed newly awakened consciousness where longing and the unquiet ego are quenched.
It has been suggested that because Rolle does not make use of Richard of St Victor's fourth stage, insatiabilis the love that can never be satisfied because of the inexhaustible nature of God, he did not in fact enter so profound a mystical experience as others.
This argument, however, is countered by drawing attention to the passage in Emendatio Vitae (c.11) describing singular love: which shows that he conceived of an unlimited and thus, literally, unfulfilled desire for God.
This sense is not contradicted by anything in The Form.
Rolle also refers to three degrees of love in two earlier treatises known as Ego Dormio and The Commandment both written for a nun in the early stages of religious life (possibly Margaret Kirkeby).
The Commandment anticipates The Form but is less comprehensive in its analysis, whereas in Ego Dormio although he does not borrow Victorine terminology for his analysis, he nevertheless outlines a growth in religious experience similar to that in The Form but starting at an earlier stage in religious life.
The first degree of love in Ego Dormio shown by an unshakeable adherence to the teaching of the Church and necessary to every man "will be safe" (63.91) seems to be taken for granted by the time of the later text.
But the second degree expressed outwardly in giving up the world with a heart wholly centred on Christ, seems to correspond in some ways to both the insuperable and inseparable stages of The Form and like them gives way to a third stage when the contemplative sees into heaven and is filled with the joy Rolle expresses as song: "prayers turnes intil joyful sange, and  thoghtes to melody" (69.284–5).
Rolle says that the first two stages defined in Ego Dormio are possible for actives as well as contemplatives, though he does comment that during the second stage his pupil will want to be alone "to thynk on Criste, and to be in mykel praying" (65–66.158–9).
At the end of chapter eight of The Form Rolle comments that in the "fyrst degre er many, in  degree er ful faa, bot in  thyrde degre unnethes er any" [faa: few; unnethes: scarcely](107.83–5) confirming this view.
It is one that is echoed by the Cloud-author.
In The Form the first two degrees of love seem to correspond to the stages in the contemplative's life that Rolle has addressed in chapters one to six.
In chapter four the "turnyng til Jhesu" from all worldly things (94.2) is like the "insuperabel" love, while the second degree, "inseperabel" relates to the injunction to remember that all time is lost which is not God-centred and to contemplate the joy of those who are stable in this love until death (95.38f.).
The element of active effort in the discipline of the inner life in the first part of The Form seems linked to the sense of the first two degrees.
The third  degree is not felt to be acquired by effort but given by grace, "God gyfes it til wham he wil, bot noght withouten grete grace comand before" (8.106.75–6).
Nevertheless Rolle concludes this chapter with a song which acts as a kind of rite of passage — an enabler for the reception of this gift.
Its rhetorical structures enact a felt understanding of an interior spiritual state which illuminates the reader's imagination.
Chapters 8–10: poetic teaching
In this cantus amoris Rolle creates a literary experience of the longing to have Jesus illuminated by the intellectual understanding of what this means.
To achieve this he creates a sense of the gap between the speaker and God by contrasting verbs of action which embody a sense of the dynamic power of the love of God to the speaker's trapped stillness, and then resolves these apparent opposites as he perceives his stillness to be the very condition of the inner movement he desires.
He is both "still and still moving" .
In the first six lines he asks when that love which is incarnated in Jesus will "com to comforth me"  "bryng me owt of care"  "gyf me " , and sets these verbs of power potentially activated on his behalf with his own sense of motionless deprivation: "I stand in still mowrnyng" .
The quickening presence of the love he longs for seems conspicuous by its absence, a feeling emphasised by the strong-stressed, medially-stopped half-line.
But the second half of the lyric moves on from this: the completion of the line looks back to what has gone before in its rhyme, but syntactically and alliteratively it moves forward to convey the perception of that very still mourning symptomatic of the inner spiritual movement of Christ's coming.
With perhaps a pun on mourning he continues: "of all lufelyst of lare/Es lufe langyng, it drawes me til my day" .
Thus he expresses the realisation that in the still mourning is a moving power and the lyric ends with another juxtaposition, this time of two positive certainties, of the reality of the vision longed for, and of the recognition that the power to realise it is love which on man's part essentially expresses its dynamic nature by means of patience, "the faith and the love and the hope are all in the waiting" .
The lyric unites feeling and understanding in that wisdom which is the goal of affective piety.
Anyone who comes to Rolle's lyrics looking for the subtle music of variety of stress within a regular syllabic pattern will be brought up short by an unpredictability of both syllabic and stress systems which lurch uneasily from one banal sing-song pattern to another.
But Rolle's great strength as a lyric writer is in his ability to approximate the rhythms and emphases of the speaking voice to incantation.
It is positively helpful if his poems are written out as prose (as they actually often are in the case of those lyrics embedded in prose treatises as opposed to independent lyrics) because they are then naturally read for the speaking voice and not with any expectation of the regularity roused by the sight of poetic form.
The result is a lyrical prose particularly effective when it serves to embody a singing climax at strategic points — a not unsurprising tactical manoeuvre on the part of a writer trying to intimate the reality of a mystical experience which he expresses as transposing everyday speech to song.
This poetic teaching which enacts a surrogate experience of the operation of grace is extended in Rolle's recommendation of a form of prayer which, though obviously popular in the Middle Ages, he yet made peculiarly his own, devotion to the name of Jesus.
It was a form of devotion found not only among the learned but in prayers designed for the laity, as for instance, in another prayer recommended for lay folk at the elevation of the Host: or in the prayer, a fragment of which was carved on a church bench in Oxfordshire: Jesu for thy holy name And for thy bitter passion, Save us fro synne and shame And endles dampnacion.
In chapter nine Rolle writes a prose-poem about the efficacy of a prayer in which the Holy Name is a focus for all that he understands about the process of redemption.
The name of "Jhesu" concentrates an understanding of the energy of love which continually works to this end and used in prayer becomes a kind of brief mnemonic for this whole area of understanding and longing.
It concentrates the will to God who transcends all particularity and it acts like the kind of short prayer that the Cloud-author recommends: "take  bot a litil worde of o silable; for so it is betir  of two, for euer  schorter it is, the betir it  spirite…is worde schal be  ridest on pees or on werre" .
In chapter nine of The Form Rolle uses this Jesus prayer to recapitulate the whole progress in love he has so far described — it becomes as it were the tool which shapes and conveys his understanding of redemption: The prose is orchestrated to a climax.
The series of short paratactical main clauses with two (occasionally three) strong stresses answers the opening conditional clause, "if  thynk Jhesu contynuly" .
They first describe the work of love as a double edged activity with positive and negative effect — purging sin and kindling the heart, clearing the soul and removing anger and sloth, wounding in love and fulfilling with charity, chasing off the devil and extinguishing fear — and then level out to the strongly stressed affirmation which defines the positive potential of the negative statement in chapter one "he  hase noght Jhesu Criste, he tynes all  he has, and all  he es, and all  he myght gete" (85.19–21) for he that has "Jhesu" grows through prayer to the fulfilment of human potential: heaven is open to him and he is made a "contemplatif man" .
The chapter ends with a succinct statement about the divine  energy which works through discipline to the freedom to love and is manifested in the relationship between the Old and New Covenants: "for fulnes of  law es charite; in  hynges all" .
This leads naturally to the splendid definitions of love in chapter ten as Rolle anticipates the disciple bringing him down to earth with a question: "You talk a great deal about love but what is it?
Where is it?
How do I best practise it and know that I am loving God?"
The systematic answers reveal that love is essentially in the inner heart of man not in works, which are merely a sign of love, though it is true that "luf wil noght be ydel: it es wirkand som gude evermare" (111.96–7).
By re-examining the three degrees in ways which are closer to those of Emendatio Vitae Rolle now expands understanding of the implications of his earlier definitions in chapter eight of The Form.
He answers that first God should be loved with the humility and strength which makes all labour light so that no shame or anguish can destabilise the delight (111–12.99–137).
Secondly, he should be loved wisely and that involves complete detachment from earthly values (112–13.138–70).
Thirdly he should be loved devoutly (113.171f.) and sweetly and that is when the soul feels overcome with joy, burning in the heat of the Holy Ghost — a Noah's ark of security in the love of God that nothing can destroy: On the question of how the lover can recognise whether he is loving, Rolle warns that apart from the overwhelming assurance which accompanies the gift of the experience of singular love, man cannot live by certainty, but faith, since that is the nature of the game; but he does suggest a do-it-yourself questionnaire which is really designed to reveal to the user where his heart is fixed.
So he is doing well if he genuinely feels no lusting after earthly things but such a burning love of God that it is the only thing he wants to talk about, the only activity he wishes to pursue; and if anything which furthers it, however apparently difficult, is easily done, and any hardship suffered gladly with genuinely indestructible inner joy.
Answering the question as to the state in which this love can best  be practised, Rolle points to an inner quietness which seems for him to be achievable only in literal solitude and constrained stability: "er Goddes trone, dwelles still in a stede, and er noght abowte rennand" [trone: throne; a stede: one place](10.116.258–9).
For himself, he finds that the sitting posture most effectively releases his contemplative energy.
But the high point of the chapter is the definition of love which precedes these questions of where and how it may be pursued.
It is another example of Rolle's singing prose as he moves through a series of figures which accumulate a delighted perception of love as the Word which informs all meaning.
The initial image of fire and light clarifying the sight/understanding and consuming the whole being is left behind in a series of more abstract metaphors which relate to its dynamic quality drawing men to its source.
The style is emotive but the intellectual understanding informing it has an astringent clarity which is very moving.
It points to truth which has become wisdom born of experience: This is Rolle's version of 1 Corinthians 13:2: And if I should have prophecy and should know all mysteries, and all knowledge, and if I should have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.
But he is more immediate in his evocation of the reality of a power that activates the potential efficacy in all areas of human endeavour and experience and runs counter to death.
He creates a sense of a primal energy suffusing man as the sun does the air and fire a coal (10.110.56–72) and in his writing he tries to bridge the gap between intellectual acknowledgement of such a truth and experience of its reality.
In only one manuscript is the form of living related to the wider but familiar theological framework of the gift virtues.
These were developed from qualities defined by Isaiah (c.11) in his prophecy traditionally associated with the Incarnation, and interpreted by the Church Fathers as gifts of the Holy Spirit.
The inclusion of them at this point in the text, defines the whole process of the experience of love, "insuperable"  "inseparable" and "singular" as the activity of the Holy Spirit in man.
The section exists elsewhere in separate form but it has a propriety at this point, stressing that the dynamic shaping inherent in the process Rolle describes is a property of God and a divine gift; and it leads into the final summarising chapter focused on active and contemplative life.
In traditional manner Rolle treats the gifts of the Holy Spirit listed as Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Might, Knowledge Piety and Fear of the Lord in Isaiah 11 in the inverted hierarchical order Counsel, Understanding, Wisdom to relate them to the process of withdrawal from the world and achievement of that inner discretion which is the ground of contemplation; he then deals with strength, piety, knowledge and the fear of the Lord itemised as forces which stimulate man to self-knowledge and help the soul to endure against sin, all aspects of a more active spirituality.
Chapter 11: the gift virtues and the form of living
In the final chapter Rolle looks at active and contemplative life both as inner states and outward practices.
Active life, keeping the commandments and loving one's neighbour as oneself, is compatible with, indeed may express, the first degree of love, while contemplative life grows from this to the more inward experience of all three degrees of love.
Here Rolle recognises the two stages in mystical experience, one actively willed the other a transcendent gift, to which all those engaged with spiritual life witness.
These stages relate to the spiritual exercises which embrace reading of scripture (lectio), meditation (meditatio), prayer and contemplation although those who use this terminology do not always do so in a precisely similar denotative way.
Thus, for instance, in the twelfth century the Carthusian Guigo II said that"reading seeks for the sweetness of a blessed life, meditation perceives it, prayer asks for it, contemplation tastes it.
Reading, as it were, puts food whole into the mouth, meditation chews it and breaks it up, prayer extracts its flavor, contemplation is the sweetness itself which gladdens and refreshes."
Here meditation is closely connected to what is read in terms of its retention in the memory as the grounds for prayer.
However, with the growth in emphasis on the importance of what is called "affective devotion" — that is, experienced, rather than intellectual, knowledge of the faith — meditation came to refer to an exercise not necessarily based directly on Scripture but designed to stir the will by an intense appeal to the emotions through meditations on the manhood of Christ.
As the definition of meditation developed in scope, so prayer came to denote not just intellectually formulated structures but a desire for God which sometimes rises to a direct consciousness of his presence.
This has been described as "the affection of a man that clingeth to God, a homely and pious speaking, a standing of the enlightened soul unto enjoying for so long as may be" .
Thus prayer became seen not as formulated exercise, which may or may not concentrate the mind, but as a state of consciousness.
Chapter 12: reading, meditation and prayer
This development is particularly important in the study of those who wrote in the vernacular for laymen who were cut off from the richness of recollected prayer in the practice of the liturgy and in search of modes by which they could realise the substance of their faith.
In chapter twelve of The Form Rolle says that the "lower part" of contemplative life, or first stage, is concerned with meditation, prayer and hymns.
This seems to coincide with the experience of love he calls "inseparabel" when: and the solitary is urged to prayer as a focus for the love: The second stage he labels contemplation which is "a wonderful joy of Goddes luf, whilk joy es lovyng of God, may noght be talde" (118.46–7).
And he describes the moment when the second stage is entered as seeing (with all its connotations of understanding) into heaven "for contemplacion es a syght, and  se intil heven with  gastly egh" (119.68–9).
This signals clearly that the dynamic of singular love is operative when everyday reality is transfigured from speech to song and the contemplative feels the ordinary demands of the self stilled as he awakes to the wider reality: "may  say: "  "I slepe and my hert wakes"  "" (8.106.51–2).
For Rolle it seems that this "sight" can arise from both meditation and prayer, two conditions which look alike in his writing.
In The Form he says that the lower part of the contemplative life is: This is consistent with his account of his own quickened consciousness in The Fire of Love when he says that prior to his feeling of calor he was sitting in a chapel "delighting in the sweetness of prayer and meditation" and in his experience of canor "my thinking itself turned into melodious song, and my meditation became a poem, and my very prayers and psalms took up the same sound" (15.93).
In Emendatio Vitae he deals with prayer, meditation and reading in that order, but in the actual chapter on contemplation he spells out a sequence which agrees with what he tells us of his own experience and which does not contradict his account in The Form.
It is clear from this that for Rolle prayer was the most important exercise by which the reality of faith is realised, which is why he deals with it first after the section on the necessity for patience in adversity: Prayer is the means by which the transforming dynamic of the love of God is accessed in the innermost marrow ( "inhirliest mergh" ) of our hearts (7.118.28) and labour becomes light (11.123.30).
It is fundamental to all stages of spiritual life.
But he does acknowledge, even while giving prayer priority, that "meditacion helpis" (7.119.5).
His sense of the delicate interrelation between reading, meditation and prayer is set out at the beginning of the chapter on contemplation: Here meditation has a mediating function: a process in which insight is received like a gift, much as the process of analysing a poem mysteriously yields a new integrated perception of its whole meaning which transcends the conscious process of study.
For Rolle this kind of understanding is assimilated to the consciousness of God in prayer.
The angels that descended in meditation ascend in prayer, and so meditation is the very "halsynge of rachell" (12.127.10), that is contemplative experience, which Rolle points towards in affective anagogical terms as the "ioyfull songe of godis lufe" (12.127.25).
But for him, as for all the mystics, such joy is not realised without suffering.
The pattern revealed in the story of the Incarnation of constraint, death and resurrection is fundamental to the Christian mystical perception of being human.
Salvation lies only in working with the system of redemptive choices.
In chapter six of Emendatio Vitae he says that man must either be burnt in this life with the fire  of God's love and of tribulation (the last being a means to proving the strength of the first) or, after this life, bitterly in hell — a perception that Eliot transposes into a modern idiom in Little Gidding: We only live, only suspire Consumed by either fire or fire.
For Rolle meditation was clearly a means of activating the inner work of love and freeing the self.
In Ego Dormio he explains to the Sister that as she grows in her love of Christ, she will find nothing matters to her but this love and the sin of man which disfigures it, and that all this is focused by thinking on the Passion of Christ: Although in The Form he makes it clear to Margaret that it is difficult to be too prescriptive about meditation, since God will put the kind of thoughts into her heart that are right for her, he does say in Emendatio Vitae that beginners in spiritual life may find the words of others helpful (8.120.31–2) and on occasions he himself wrote meditations on the Passion which embody his understanding of the catalysis they are designed to help.
The rest of this chapter is concerned with Rolle's ability to find literary means of engaging in various ways with the Passion story so that he can point to the transforming experience of truth, "kynde knowynge" , which is the aim of the meditative exercise.
His deliberately composed meditations exemplify his particularly characteristic gifts as a mystical writer in English — to project the elusive processes of the inner experiences of the human condition as live issues.
Study of these meditations therefore also illuminates aspects of the inner journey which all the medieval mystics take for granted.
For all of them the Passion focuses the terrifyingly destructive forces in human nature and signals the one way by which they are to be rendered ultimately ineffective — a way not isolated in history, but constantly repeated by means of the game of faith.
It is a hard game to engage with but meditations on the Passion are designed to enable play.
In Emendatio Vitae Rolle explains: His own meditations focus on the paradoxical response of "Ioy and mournyng" in various ways appropriate to differing stages of inner development.
The lyrical meditation proper to the second degree of love that he includes in Ego Dormio projects a lightness of spirit as it embodies rhetorically a sense of the joyful reality behind the story which is the goal of the contemplative.
The two most powerful prose meditations attributed to Rolle, on the other hand, enact a painful penitential sense of the gap between the sour sterility which is a concomitant of what St Paul calls "the body of this death" (Romans 7:24) and the joy and creativity of God, though comparison between them reveals different levels of engagement with the same theme.
THE PROSE MEDITATIONS ON THE PASSION
The question of authorship
The shorter and most effective from a literary standpoint survives in only one manuscript where it is attributed to Rolle.
It is closely related to a longer version extant in four manuscripts three of which assign it to him.
There is, however, a third prose meditation attributed to Rolle.
It exists in incomplete form in a manuscript at Longleat House which contains an anthology of Rolle's English writings all, there, recorded as dedicated to Margaret de Kirkeby, and it also exists in an extended form where it is entitled De passione secundum Ricardum.
It is far less powerful than the other two.
In them the meditator projects a dramatisation of his own reaction to the Passion as a present reality.
In this, an authoritarian voice addresses the would-be meditator in a series of injunctions to remember the various events in the Passion story and to pray for mercy.
The moving immediacy of the situation is  diluted and exchanged for a homiletic tone.
If it is by Rolle, it would seem to be more of a series of prompts for meditation on the Passion than a fully worked out structure.
Despite the agreement on the attributions to Rolle in the manuscripts, his authorship has been questioned, partly because of the lack of certainty about the authority of scribal attributions, partly because of the absence in the texts of that sense of joy springing from an inner knowledge of the reality of redemption which generally characterises his work.
Yet the very specially acute sense of deprivation found in the shorter of the two versions to be examined here argues the recognition of the possibility of the presence of just such joy; "absence is not non-existence, and we are therefore entitled to repeat,"  "come, come, come, come: "  "" and both Rolle's meditations on the Passion are such powerful works precisely because he enacts a sense of the gap between the body of sin and the joy of God and a longing to close it through penitence and love.
It is true that knowledge of the probable origins of the meditations in a series of Anglo-Norman prayers points to the possibility that they have been freely adapted by various compilers who may or may not have included Rolle.
But it is also true that Rolle was in the habit of reworking old material with variations in different works and that the manuscript ascriptions to him suggest that there was no discomfort in seeing the Meditations as part of the Rolle canon in the late medieval period.
Certainly they are powerful examples of how meditations on the Passion were designed to work in inner experience and they illuminate aspects of the "form" of contemplative living in ways characteristic of Rolle.
Liturgical context
It is important to remember the liturgical context of these meditations for it supplies other expressed structures of meaning only latent within them but crucial to their full impact.
The meditations project an experience of alienation and deadness from which the meditator longs to be released; he knows at one level that Christ's death is the key to such release: But in this work such knowledge is not projected as that of experience, though it depends on recognition of the possibility of such experience for its validity.
Such a recognition was, of course, a commonplace of the faith.
It was formulated dogmatically in the catechism and daily celebrated in the memorial of the Passion inherent in the Canonical Hours.
It was also embodied in the Hours of the Virgin that daily reminded the devout laity as well as religious, of an archetypal pattern of suffering through which the nature of redemption was manifested and which established the means by which it would be experienced.
The pattern of these Hours entered deeply in various ways into the structure of deliberately composed meditations on the Passion and enabled them to imply a greater meaning than they explicitly formulate.
The series of vernacular meditations based on the Franciscan Meditationes Vitae Christi are quite specifically organised in terms of the Canonical Hours as is the series in the thirteenth-century Mirror of St Edmund of Abingdon which was translated from the Latin in the fourteenth century and almost certainly known to Rolle.
It throws light on the role of meditation in the "form" of contemplative living.
The Mirror, a work of Victorine piety, is designed to reveal both the state of fallen human nature and what could be if all its potential was fulfilled.
The text opens with the words of St Paul to the Ephesians (4:1) videte vocacionem vestram; the copy in the manuscript belonging to the Yorkshire man, Robert Thornton, renders this vividly as "seese  callynge" [seese: take possession of].
The calling is to holiness which inheres in knowing the truth and loving goodness ( "knowynge of , and Loue of godnesse" ) and comes only with self-knowledge and contemplation of God.
The text sets out guidelines for coming to a true sense of priorities in the self, not unlike those in Rolle's Form, and then examines three ways in which man can contemplate God: in nature (which shows us our place in creation), in Scripture (which teaches the faith) and on "God self" .
This "may beo in two Maners:, in his Monhede, and  -Innen in his  Godhede" .
The contemplation of the manhood is organised as a series of meditations on the Passion attached to the Canonical Hours in the same order of events as in the Primer but in a more extended form.
Juxtaposed to each detail from the Passion sequence is another about the life of Christ which sets the Passion in the context of the  scheme of salvation.
For example, the betrayal remembered at Matins is juxtaposed with the Nativity; the Crucifixion at Sext with the Annunciation; the death of "makere of lyf, for  loue" and the withdrawal of sunlight at Nones with the Ascencion.
The contemplation on the Godhead is an explanation of the Trinity as God, the original creative power, who enjoys the goodness of company in the Son whose wisdom is bound to himself by the love which is the Holy Ghost.
And, says the writer, "selue may eueri man sen in himself" for he has within him the image of the Trinity: a creative power which enables him to know, and to love what he knows.
The passage concludes: "in  is manere  schalt knowen  god.
Such manere of knowyng is foundement of Contemplacion"[foundement: foundation].
He then describes the inner movements of contemplative experience in which man is raised above the limits of his nature to a sense of the ultimate reality of God.
In the progress of the Mirror the meditations (which this text also calls contemplation) on the Passion are one part of the process by which man sees God in himself since it activates the trinitarian structure of the soul and is the means by which the Incarnation is realised and man becomes holy.
The process of recollecting the events of the Passion is the catalyst for two kinds of knowledge: knowledge of sin which awakens sorrow, and knowledge of love which awakens joy.
This is the knowledge which redeems man and is the basis for the contemplative experience of God as the final transforming reality in which joy and sorrow are perceived as harmony not discord.
It is in the context of such liturgical and meditative patterning of the Passion narrative that the two most powerful meditations attributed to Rolle should be studied in order to understand their full potential for helping that transformation of consciousness which is at the heart of mystical experience.
The long and the short prose meditations on the Passion
Both the long and short meditations are presented as prayers in which Rolle counterpoints awareness of the suffering caused by sin in the events of the Passion with a growth in horrified consciousness of the death blows of sin in the self, for which the only remedy is that love manifested in the death of Christ working in man: what Julian will call "the werkyng of mercy" , which lasts as long as sin pursues man, and of grace which works our "dredful  faylyng" into solace and our "shamefull"  "falling" to resurrection.
Rolle's meditations enact the meaning of such grace.
In them he isolates the main events of the Passion story for attention in particular ways in the sequence in which they appear in the Hours, except that he begins with the agony in the garden not included there.
In this respect his practice contrasts interestingly with that of the Mirror of St Edmund where this is remembered at Compline along with the entombment thus suggesting a constant cycle of enactment of the Passion.
As one day closes, the agony in the garden reminds man of the whole round of suffering starting again thus prompting that continual sorrow which activates the sacrament of penance, the start of the redemptive process.
The suffering involved in facing the enormity of man's potential for sin is the only cure for the greater suffering.
The same effect is achieved in the continual cycle of meditations on the Passion in the liturgical Hours of the Cross; they remind man not just of death conquered by death once in the historical events of the Passion, but of a continual process to last until the end of time.
But if Rolle's positioning of the agony in the garden has a simpler impact than that in the Mirror, his meditations nevertheless achieve a similar overall effect through his prayerful response to the series of emphasised moments in the Passion narrative.
But despite their close similarity there is a marked difference in emphasis and tone between the two versions.
The longer one opens with a series of petitions in which the meditator prays for grace to serve God with his whole being.
These culminate in the prayer that was also used at each Canonical Hour of the Cross and that brings to mind the glory, joy and life which was man's birthright, forfeited at the Fall but renewed by Incarnation.
In the meditation it is given in Latin, the Middle English version from the Primer is: This tone of penitent confidence in the grace made available through Christ dominates the longer meditation which sustains a  formal devotional element that constantly acts as a buffer between the meditator and the subject of his meditation.
In the shorter version there are no preliminary prayers recorded and the formal prayer structure which introduces the opening events of the Passion story (as in the long version) is early abandoned in the account of the crucifixion itself in favour of an uninterrupted meditation on Christ's Passion with which the observer is closely identified at many levels.
The nature of this particular kind of identification and of the differences between the two versions can be illustrated even in the formally constructed prayerful episodes.
Each opens with thanks addressed to Jesus for the particular incident of the Passion under consideration and closes with a prayer which first applies this incident to aspects of the meditator's own life and then modulates into a set pattern indicated by the Latin directives Pater Noster, Et ne nos, Adoramus, Aue [Our Father, And [lead]us not, we praise, Hail].
The seventh prayer in the long version concerns the suffering before Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate and Herod, but more especially the moment when Christ looks at Peter after he has denied him (Luke 22:55—62): The short version, typically, focuses more sharply, concentrating only on the episode with Peter so that there is an identification made between him and the meditator and, by implication, all men who by their natures inevitably betray Christ: The Longleat version of this subject shows by comparison how much less effective than either of the others it is.
The meditator is simply bidden to remember Peter although the identification with him is implicit in the way the incident is juxtaposed to the injunctions to pray: Although the formal prayer structure in the long version operates more rigidly and systematically, it is punctuated by lengthy emotive meditations.
Thus the account of the scourging opens out into a series of extravagant similes to meditate on Christ's wounded body.
It is likened to a heaven full of stars, yet better than such because his wounds are efficacious by day as well as by night, and not only cannot be obscured by clouds but positively drive away clouds of sin; a net full of holes in which the meditator prays to be drawn to the bank of death; a dovecote full of holes of refuge and a honeycomb full of cells of sweet honey; a book written in red ink — matter for the meditator's attention at "matyns, pryme, houris, euesong & complin" ; a meadow full of healing and delightful flowers and herbs (96–7).
Here the similes seem to enact a devotional extravaganza which conveys a remarkable feeling of that very elation and joy the absence of which has been remarked upon.
The passage brings sharply to attention the powerful and complex ways in which elements of the Passion story may provoke a meditative response.
There is a kind of confidence, typified in the prayer to Christ the source of sweet honey-cells of devotion, which is at odds with the stark mood provoked by a revulsion from sin in the whole piece and which is very different from the whole thrust of the short version: The profound realisation of Jesus as a source of grace at the heart of this passage in the long version colours the meditator's longing for it in the other expanded meditations that open out of this sequence of prayers.
When he remembers Christ condemned to carry his cross out of Jerusalem to the place of execution, he prays for compassion to identify with the sufferings of Mary, and when Christ is nailed to the cross the meditator's awareness of the deadly processes of sin in himself appropriately obtrudes into the meditation.
The tone is distinctly altered from that in the earlier passage on the grace in Christ but it is not unaffected by it: and the formal Latin prayer which concludes the section is followed by one for grace to feel the love of God, addressed to 
Hereafter, although each meditation on the process of Christ's death is ended by Latin prayers, the opening is only once a formal expression of thanks (significantly when Rolle remembers Christ's cry that he feels forsaken); the other moments are initiated by cries of prayer or remembrance.
The cadences of intense sadness and horror serve to intensify the feeling of devotional longing for a love which will somehow heal this dying process yet is integrally linked with, and expressed through it: The very repetition of the invocation "swete Ihesu" which does not appear in the short version gives a feeling of relief.
In this long version the final moment brought to consciousness is the death of Christ when light drains from the cosmos itself and Mary and John are left in sorrow at the foot of the Cross.
So, at the point when the meditator ends in prayer that he may always keep this passion in mind, he presents to himself an image which might easily coincide with that on a rood-screen, or painted panel.
This might thus serve to bridge the transition between prayer and other forms of activity and also embody a perpetual icon for that prayer and for penitence: The shorter version engages with the Passion story much more starkly to project a powerful realisation of the horror of being cut off from all that Christ is — in the words of The Form of Living "he  hase noght Jhesu Criste, he tynes all  he has, and all  he es, and all  he myght gete" (1.85.19–21).
It starts off with the prayer-framed sequence of events up to the point in the narrative when Christ is crowned with thorns and condemned to death, but in a more compressed form.
At this point the short version abandons the formal prayer frames and opens out into uninterrupted prose in which meditation on the enormity of what is happening to him "schop the sonne & al  is , of al  gode in " [schop: created;: anything](p.85) carries the narrative to the point where Christ leaves Jerusalem; then the meditation on the sorrow of Mary modulates into the account of the death of Christ, the major stages of which are marked by cries of remembrance but unpunctuated by any suggestions for Latin prayer.
The cadence of the prose in the short version often emphasises meaning with a more telling precision than in the long version.
When Christ, beaten and weak, is made to carry the cross, the long version presents it as one element in a series which together compose a "ruful " 
Whereas the short version makes a flat statement: where the strong stresses of sense are counterpointed with the underlying metrically rhythmical dactyls, and the half rhyme on "stark" and "harde" brings the whole description to a brutal head.
Similarly a few lines further on, in the description of the journey to Golgotha, the long version has "goost, swete Ihesu out of Ierusalem toward " (p.99), where the interjection of "swete Ihesu" interrupts the action of the scene and lends the whole description a devotional tone.
The short version moves from polysyllabic words to the final monosyllabic "deth" and creates a tone of inexorable finality: In both versions Christ is imagined as suffering in all his human senses through the cruel process of crucifixion"so was  but, unlike the long version, the short version pins this down precisely in a process of blow-by-blow equivalents between sin and sufferings.
For example: The understood realities of redemptive love and a feeling of separation from them break into the narrative sequence of both versions.
In the short text the account of the Crucifixion and the meditator's awareness of his own sin come to a climax in an outpouring of lyrical prose which has been printed as verse though it seems more effective if the surge of the rhymes and the alliterative cadences rise within the very structure of the prose like great waves to break in the bitter realisation that it is the meditator's sin which both nails Christ to the cross and blocks the free expression of love in himself: All the internal rhyme, play on words () and alliteration, which intensify the sense of the meditator's awareness of both the creative power of God "king of " and the impotence of all his own functions, are lost in the long version which omits much of the intense self-disgust present in the short: The emphasis on Christ as the source of life and creativity is similarly highlighted in the short version in the skilful use made of rhyme, cadence and monosyllabic, strong-stressed ends of sentences to graphically convey the moment when he dies and the created cosmos fails: These effects are lost in the prosaic longer version: In both versions the meditator contemplates the appalling inversion of the created order with its lord suffering greater deprivation than the foxes and birds as he hangs "in  eyre" (88. cf.101) with nowhere to lay his head — a reference to Matthew 8:20 traditionally used to emphasise the poverty of God embraced at the Incarnation.
Both bring into play the Easter office and order for the Mass on Good Friday where Christ is given words of reproach based on texts from Lamentations, Jeremias and Micheas (Micah) to stress the contrast between God's goodness to his people under the old covenant and their crucifixion of his Son.
But whereas the long version refers only to the words in Lamentations 1:12 (O all ye that pass by the way, attend, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow), the short version incorporates all the references to focus more sharply on the organic relationship between man and Christ whose natural growth is blasted by sin: And only in the short version does the meditator acknowledge this by identifying himself with the penitent thief pleading for pardon to be extended to him, and confessing his failure to acknowledge Christ as the true source of his integrity: In both versions the meditator admits that the very ability to recognise the life-giving power in Christ is a sign that he in fact has the love of God even if he does not feel it: And in both, as the meditator sees his betrayal and sense of deprivation borne by Christ in His words: "My god, my dere god, why hastow al forsakyn me…(89. cf.102) he imagines himself lying down among the bones of dead men on mount Calvary, taking the foot of the Cross in his arms, the stench of death in his  nostrils.
It is a powerful icon: Christ and man identified in accepting the consequences of sin, but differentiated by the sign of the unfailing creativity of the love of God — life-blood.
Both versions thus make play with the paradox of life and health through suffering and death, but the short version makes a much more pointed and concentrated use of the theme.
Right at the very beginning, in the prayer which arises from the memory of Christ's anguish in the garden of Gethsemane when the narrator remembers "swattest blod for angwysche" , the shorter version identifies this sweat with that which marks the healing and turning point of human fever conflating it with the sweat of human anguish struggling against evil.
In this way Christ's suffering from sin at the Passion, and man's penance, are seen as part of one sacramental healing process: Such perception is foregrounded again at the point when the meditator devotionally embraces the cross.
Like Eliot's sharply witty version of this paradox: The wounded surgeon plies the steel That questions the distempered part; Beneath the bleeding hands we feel The sharp compassion of the healer's art Resolving the enigma of the fever chart, the meditator in the short text exclaims: But the force of this metaphor of healing is lost, together with the lyrical cadences of alliteration, in the long version: This existentially known contrast between the body of death through which is encountered the possibility of life is at the heart of Christian mysticism itself experienced in playing the game of faith which renews the truth of the Incarnation.
A few years later than the time Rolle was writing, Langland made verbal play with the paradox to point to the transcending truth that Will perceives.
The figure of Mercy points to the nature of the redemptive process: Later still, Julian of Norwich, whose mystical experience arose out of meditation on the Passion, defined her sense of a dynamic power of divine love working to process the effects of sin as the work of Christ: "and there is in him bleding and praying for us to the Father — and is and shall be as long as it nedith" .
The purpose of both versions of Rolle's Meditations on the Passion is the same: to stimulate that penance and love which can bridge the gap between man and God — a gap that Julian was to express in her realisation that in her longing for God "nothyng letted me but synne, and so I beheld generally in us al" .
But whereas the long version sustains a note of quiet confidence in the efficacy of penitential meditation on the Passion to enable this, the short version uses literary resources to embody a horrifying sense of what it means to be trapped in the body of this death (sin) contrasted to the life in love to be embraced in Christ where death has no actual dominion.
The contrast in emphasis in meditative engagement with the same theme between the two pieces is taken further in their endings.
The long version leaves the sinner in sustained penitential mood with Mary at the foot of the Cross —( "still mowrning" ).
But the short version points to a promise of progress in experience beyond the stage of penitent sorrow.
It moves to the description of the deposition at "os it were tyme of euynsonge" (p.91) and entombment, ending quietly with the event recorded in Matthew's Gospel (27:66) "was  set of armede  day" .
(p.91) This final sentence is evocative of all that is not stated about the sequel to the Passion.
The sorrow and guarded watchfulness in the darkness of the external events of the story is counterpart for the inner penitential awareness of the meditator, but at the heart of the darkness there is certainty of light in the Resurrection of the "thrydde day" .
This is the faith which underlies the bleakest expressions of the meditator's sense of evil.
The most negative moment of withdrawal contains all the potential for new growth.
The Primer expresses it: and in contemplative understanding the historical resurrection of love is experienced as an inner reality more powerful than the block of sin (guarded tomb) that separates man from Christ.
It is to such renewed life and joy that the meditation on the Passion in Ego Dormio points.
MEDITATION ON THE PASSION IN EGO DORMIO
It has been said that the Meditations on the Passion are proper to beginners in spiritual life.
It is certainly true that they enact an awareness of the efficacy of penance which is at the very foundation of Christian spirituality; but it also true that part of their potency depends on an understanding of the joy of "brennyng in loue ouur al thynge" when: The meditation on the Passion in Ego Dormio, on the other hand, engages directly with the experience of receiving such a gift.
Its chanting quality sounds a note of buoyancy and music in the evocation of the enormity of the Crucifixion.
This runs freely at the end of the lyric composition as finally the speaker explicitly asserts his capacity to sing for love.
Athough the text is sometimes represented in stanzas, it does not appear as verse in all the manuscripts.
In fact it makes its point more powerfully if it is seen as prose but heard or read as poetry since the meditation then enacts for the reader that speech-become-song meditation-become-poem that Rolle talks of in The Fire of Love.
It thus points to the way in which meditation is the very "halsynge of Rachel" .
Furthermore, the stanzas obscure the fact that the use of rhyme shapes significant units of sense, since the rhyme scheme then cuts across the stanza forms.
This becomes clearer by looking at the first two stanzas.
Here the rhyming unit begun by grette brings to mind both interior and exterior pain: Christ's solitary agony in the garden and the pain of scourging.
It nevertheless addresses the sufferer as king, thus defining the relationship between meditator and Christ and establishing the twin poles of thought — sovereignty and suffering.
The second rhyme on dying emphasises the deforming physical violence which precedes the final judgement to death, and provides the stark reminder that this action kills joy: "alas! my joy and my swetyng es demed to hyng" .
The third rhyme on fete isolates the image of the five wounds and modulates into an extended description of this on a new rhyme.
This fourth unit, edited as the third stanza, is, in fact, borrowed from a current Middle English verse paraphrase of lines in a Latin meditation and provides some justification for printing out the whole piece in stanza form.
The  description of the five wounds prepares for the fifth unit, which fuses memory of the outrage of the historical Passion story with its sacramental meaning, as the bread of heaven is, in effect, rubbished on the Cross.
The sixth unit rams home the enormity of such an act, but the sacramental references have already introduced the joy latent in the horror.
Then, just at the moment when the full sacrilege of what happened is described, there is a change of tone as Rolle initiates the seventh rhyme scheme chiming with ryng, and refocuses the actions of hideous brutality as the means by which the voluntary ring-dance of love is patterned.
The leader has shown the way and the dancers respond: This "comyng" , works at several levels: that of the reality of the sacraments, the promise of the Second Coming, and the anticipation of a longed-for coming in mystical experience.
All three are part of one pattern, defined by Christ, but experienced within the penitential life of the meditator: no resurrection without death, no joy without sorrow, no feeling of the presence of love without sometimes consciousness of its absence, and all three comings relate to an overcoming of sin.
So the rest of the meditation turns on overcoming of separation from God through the fire of love.
The tenth rhyming unit on thoght and  brings together the Passion that started the meditation and the inner desire of the speaker, through the image of the wound of love which will impel the soul to God.
Stressed monosyllables enforce the recognition of Jesus as the goal of longing : "I have soght" .
The last seven lines on three rhymes break the pattern of units of sense on single rhymes as the meditator signals by means of the present tense: "lufe chawnges my chere" , the possibility of transformation to a state where he can hear the melody to which love dances, and he ends with a statement of faith, "be my lufyng, I lufe may syng" .
This meditation works by recalling the isolated moments of the Passion story familiar in other meditations and in the liturgy — the agony in the garden, the scourging, the crowning with thorns, the Crucifixion  itself — but using the resources of rhetoric to embody a sense of the joyful reality behind the story which such meditation is designed to enable.
It enacts in its form a faith that the experience of broken suffering in time is in reality the choreography and notation for the dance and music of love and Rolle advises his disciple that meditation on this reality will draw up her heart "so  hert mai loke intil heven" (69.261–2).
Rolle's gifts as a writer enable him to convey the flavour of a variety of levels of religious awareness and all his English writings are worth exploring with this in mind.
In The Form of Living he charts the sacramental understanding at the heart of the Mass, as a whole way of life and perceived growth in consciousness; his Meditations on the Passion engage with different stages of such growth and, indeed, are designed to act as catalysts for its progress.
All are devotional art work to signify the nature of the contemplative journey for those starting out.
Walter Hilton: The Heritage of Health
Richard Rolle's at times flamboyant attempt to arrive at a form of living which would express his compulsive and impulsive drive towards personal realisation of the love of God, brought the circumstances of his life into prominence.
In contrast we know little of the life of Walter Hilton.
Manuscript sources state that he was an Augustinian canon at Thurgarton in Nottinghamshire and some also state that he died there on 23 or 24 March, 1395–96.
His major work, however, which became known as The Scale of Perfection was extremely popular in his own time.
A large number of manuscript copies survive, some owned by lay people like John Kilham, a London merchant, and it was printed in 1494 at the command of Lady Margaret Tudor the mother of Henry Vll.
Whereas Rolle's poetic understanding of spiritual life embodied in his English works makes them like flares sent up to illuminate dark ground, each a light but each separate, Hilton's Scale brings into the daylight a carefully worked out map of spiritual life with each of the major stages interconnected.
There is some evidence that he received formal academic training at Cambridge.
He is called Magister in the manuscripts, a title reserved for doctors of theology.
In addition to this, one manuscript describes him as "comensour of decrees and Chanoun of Thurgurtoun" , another as decretorum inceptoris and it has been argued that this implies a training in Canon Law.
Certainly the careful structuring and methodical scrupulosity of his vernacular works on the development of spiritual life betoken an academic training.
His involvement with the practicalities of such development seems to have been at the level of experience as well as theory.
Harley MS 2397 calls him "maister Watir hiltone hermyte" .
Sometime about 1382 he wrote an epistle (De Imagine Peccati) to his friend Adam Horsley, a priest, who was an official of the  Exchequer, encouraging him in his intention to become an enclosed religious.
In this epistle he indicates that he himself, at the time of writing, is a solitary attracted by the disciplined life of service in a religious order, but does not feel any burning conviction that that is his calling: I confess, alas, that I do not feel that burning spiritual desire for entry into religion, inspired by that divine grace, as it ought to be felt by those who from zealous devotion and pure desire of the mind plan to enter religion…
Indeed I own myself unworthy and I long to be the servant of even the least religious in the Church of God and I hope by God's grace to be made a sharer with them…
If, on the other hand, God should have ordained for me thus, miserable and wretched as I am, and should have called me by His grace to sit solitary and serve him in that manner, as he deigns to grant to me, shall I not persevere in that calling?
There is no means of knowing how near to the regularised life of Thurgarton he was at this date.
There is no certainty either as to where he wrote his main English works: the treatise known as Mixed Life, giving advice to the upmarket man of affairs who also wished to create opportunities to cultivate his inner spiritual life (one manuscript describes it as "a luitel Boc  was writen to a worldli lord to teche him hou he schulde haue him in his state in ordeynd loue to god and to his euencristene" ), and the two books of The Scale of Perfection.
It is generally supposed that it was at Thurgarton.
Certainly both books are attributed to Walter Hilton Canonicus de Thurgarton, though the mood he expresses in Scale 1, which is addressed to a female recluse, seems similar to that he expressed while he was still a solitary and suffering the kind of feelings of purposelessness he expresses in the De Imagine Peccati.
In Scale 1 he protests that he speaks of more than he has directly experienced: In the second book which complements the material in the first, there is an often remarked upon change of tone: the reservation and distancing of Scale 1 is absent from the imagistic structures which embody his thought and insight in Scale 2.
Certainly the ethos of an Augustinian priory with its stress on the expression of an inner religious faith in the active life of the community would have been sympathetic to the characteristic concern Hilton displays in his writing not just for professional religious but for all those, whether in active or enclosed life, who feel that their religious faith holds the secret of a dimension of fulfilment to which they desire access.
He recognises that there are many levels at which people engage with religion.
For many it will involve no more than a ritualised acknowledgement, mediated by the Church, of a realm of ultimate value which, if it does in fact inform their existence, they know only through blind obedience to the Church's teaching: They have: Those for whom Hilton is writing, however, are those who are driven either intellectually (Scale 1, c.4) or emotionally (Scale 1, c.5) towards integrating an inner life of moral values and spiritual sensitivity with Christian teaching.
Hilton's mystical theology is not conveyed with the passionate poetry that characterises Rolle's writing, it is not attended by the rigours of the Cloud-author's sense of that transcendent God who cannot be known in any recognisable sense of the word, the visionary experience of Julian of Norwich, or the endearingly unbalanced enthusiasm of Margery Kempe.
His work is, however, central to an understanding of Christian mysticism and the spiritual  sensibility which informed the surge of lay devotion in the late medieval period.
His great literary achievement is to have found images and structures to convey theologically understood experience and to articulate with luminous clarity an understanding of how the Incarnation reveals a pattern in which all modes of human fulfilment are subsumed.
Hilton sees this as a "form" (in Rolle's sense of the word) which provides the means of integrating and ordering human experience.
In all his work he addresses not just those who are enclosed as religious solitaries with special time for attention to their inner development — though he admits that this life-style is most conducive to it — but all those who are predisposed to pursue an inner life.
MIXED LIFE: KINDLING FOR LOVE
It is not clear whether the date of composition of The Epistle of Mixed Life precedes or follows Scale 1 with which it has close affinities.
Certainly its thinking is complemented by a knowledge of the longer text which may be the reason for its appearing after both books of the Scale in the early printed editions.
It does, however, provide a useful introductory focus on Hilton's breadth of appeal, and also on his understanding of the terms "active" and "contemplative" as they appear in the more sophisticated books of The Scale.
It is also a cultural document of prime importance for understanding the sensibilities of the lay audience for whom the mystical writers in the vernacular were providing texts.
Obviously popular, it survives complete (or nearly so) in sixteen manuscripts many of which divide the text into chapters although they do not all agree as to how.
Six of these manuscripts include passages absent from the other ten at the beginning and the end of the text.
They relate to what is coming and what has gone respectively.
Whatever disagreement there is about the internal divisions of the texts in the manuscripts, the whole treatise has a shape.
It first sets in a social and theological context the desire of the unknown nobleman to devote himself to God without the distractions that arise from involvement with secular responsibilities.
It then argues that this very desire for God is God immanent in man's being and shows how it may, in his particular case, come to inform all sides of his life which are reconciled as they are turned into fuel to feed the fire of love — itself lit in his desire for God.
The implication at the  beginning of the text is that the lord feels his worldly duty and his love for God to be pulling against each other and unbalancing him: The state to which Hilton hopes to point him is one of discretion in which self-knowledge and the love of God are the means of integrating what seem like opposites in equilibrium.
The text from the Canticle of Canticles 2:4 ordinavit in me caritatem (he set in order charity in me) distils imaginatively Hilton's understanding that love can only be properly expressed through a disciplined orientation of the particular gifts and powers of the self to God.
This involves responsible self-knowledge; not a striving after a spirituality which may not be appropriate to one's particular capacity, but a creative inner process.
In The Scale Hilton will talk about it in terms of remaking — reforming — those elements of the self which he calls the"' [powers]of the soul (Scale 2, 31.106v—258)— mind, reason and will — in such a way that they reflect the likeness of God in whose image they were created.
Scale 2 is structured to manifest the nature of this likeness; Mixed Life is less ambitious, but the moderate clarity of its argument is based on, and goes some way towards revealing, an understanding of the structure of personality as the means by which God is conceived in time.
Hilton addressed himself to the practical situation of his friend who felt himself torn by the demands of the active life impinging on his desire to pursue contemplation, and helps by showing that these two terms, so often used as opposites to refer to a manner of living, either as a professed religious or as a man of affairs, take their fundamental meaning from different inner conditions.
He is much clearer analytically and more comprehensive than Rolle in his discussion of this matter and realises that the terms distinguish essentially complementary modes of living.
Active life in the sense of engagement with the physical necessities and well-being of society belongs properly and sensibly to people who feel no inner compulsion towards, or understanding of, spiritual issues — as he much more trenchantly put it, they have "no sauour" of "goostli  occupacioun" (12.123–4).
Contemplative life belongs to those who not only have a keen awareness that life in the world hangs by a thread, but a sense that their own identity and reality does not inhere fundamentally in physical things.
Hilton says they turn away from involvement in the world, and, in words which more immediately evoke the liberation and peace which are the goals of the rigours of contemplative life, he says that they: That is, they rid themselves from involvement with any possessions not strictly needed for physical survival and escape from the demands and goals of social success to a different kind of service.
But immediately Hilton makes it clear that such a life-style involves an active life of its own if the peace that is sought is to be found, for it may not be had: This has been defined earlier as: Such an active component of spiritual endeavour is a concomitant of man's temporal nature.
He may be naturally drawn towards a discovery of a state which does not depend on time and space for its reality, but the medium of the imperfect world into which he is born means that: Such knowing and feeling, the mystics say, is given in response to a process — an ordering of the drives in human nature so that they can be expressed as love.
The development is one of recovery of health from sickness; Hilton sees that man's dual nature has a double inheritance: the sickness of the self that we are born to (3.19–20) and the transcendent "heritage of " (Scale 2. 46.139r. –301) that we can work towards: In The Scale Hilton developed at greater length the nature of the active and passive elements that belong to the contemplative life through which those who pursue it discover in the structure of their own experience the very being of Christ.
Here, in Mixed Life, he relates that individual experience of Christ in every man to the Christ who transcends individual limitations and is expressed by the whole body of those in whom he is born in time through their knowing and doing: It is precisely because of these "sundri wirchynges" in the lives of individuals dictated by their particular talents and circumstances that discussion of active and contemplative life tends to polarise life-styles which are then also subject to evaluation in which contemplation is more highly esteemed simply because it relates to a greater state of spiritual awareness.
In recommending what Hilton calls "medeled liyf" to his noble lord, he calls on the earlier tradition of awareness of a fundamental harmony between these two conditions — both crucial to temporal life as exemplified in the Incarnation.
So he persuades his man with a natural talent for the proper administration of worldly affairs that to neglect this because of a preoccupation with spiritual meditation could be unwise.
Indeed in view of the tradition of seeing Christ as combining both active and contemplative lives it is perhaps surprising that mixed life was not more specifically advocated as an ideal.
It is true that Franciscan spirituality put new stress on the necessity for integrating action and contemplation.
But perhaps the obvious disparity between individual talents and dispositions which clearly fit some for action more than others, the obvious tension involved between the pressures of active involvement in affairs and the inner detachment necessary for thought and contemplation, and the history of the development of Western institutional Christianity with its strong tradition of groups separated from the world in convents and monasteries, or priests distinguished from the laity by their religious calling, make it after all not so surprising that the discussions of active and contemplative life tended to stress their separation from each other rather than draw attention to a more fruitful affinity.
It is a mark of Hilton's clarity of thought and practical spirituality that he should pick up the episcopal ideal of a composite life-style and set it up as the modus vivendi for a spiritually—minded temporal lord.
In the graphic image taken from contemporary devotion of the lord who aspires to kiss Christ's mouth in spiritual devotions and in doing so neglects acts of charity and so treads on his feet, Hilton skilfully combines all the strands of thought on the roles of action and contemplation in the Christian life as the means by which the individual works out his full spiritual potential (25–6.273–88).
He immediately commands attention by grasping the nettle of the difficulty that the lord feels in combining the apparently opposing demands on his natural gifts.
It is just here, Hilton points out, that his particular opportunity to show love arises.
The point of his advice is not just to authorise "medeled liyf" which the lord is anyhow pursuing: He can cut from one kind of state to the other with joy; this is for him precisely how love is to be ordained.
To emphasise the very essential connection between the two modes of being, Hilton introduces the metaphorical interpretation of the Old Testament story of Jacob's marriage to Leah and Rachel.
Although this has the weight of patristic authority behind it, Hilton very simply outlines the bare essentials of the story and its interpretation giving it particular emphasis to highlight implications peculiarly relevant to the noble lord.
Thus instead of following the traditional linear progression of the allegory — a development towards contemplation based on Jacob's union with Rachel after his marriage to Leah — Hilton is more interested in emphasising the coexistence of the two wives: In his reference to another facet of the story, that concerning Jacob's change of name to Israel, allegorised as a man seeing God, Hilton does suggest a progression in contemplation for his pupil saying that he will become Israel, that is, fully contemplative, in the next world, certainly, and possibly even in this if his circumstances change so that he is relieved of worldly responsibility altogether.
But Hilton is chiefly concerned with exploring how it is possible for contemplation and action to be states which are mutually creative and fulfilling for the lord.
He suggests that, rightly managed with a light heart, the demands of the active service of love will positively stimulate desire for contemplative perception — a rest in the recognition of the ground of all love.
The key to healing the divisions in man's nature which produce the tension between active and contemplative life is love, only realised in playing the game of faith that this is true.
When you are interrupted in contemplative devotion, says Hilton, don't be angry and depressed but   This is the mode by which man following a mixed life realises in himself the creative love of God — the fire of love that Rolle talked of as consuming all that is dark.
The disciplines of active life in the sense of worldly help to others, or the necessity for study, are to be like "stikkes" laid on the burning coal that represents man's innate desire for God and needs to be nourished if it is to provide full light and heat (35–9.397–449).
Indeed this is the heart of Hilton's argument for the validity of mixed life for the aspiring contemplative, for he says that this very desire, the burning coal which has to be thus nourished by a positive attitude to the demands of both active and contemplative life, is in fact God himself at the very ground of our being.
In Scale 2 Hilton talks of his understanding of the dynamic nature of God's love working in man: The goal of contemplative life is to see this, a seeing which is a felt understanding of love, and Hilton accounts for the curious process by which a person grows towards this state as the interaction between the being of God — unformed love in which all men participate — and the response enabled by God to this dynamic potential at the heart of their being — love formed.
Finally the contemplative grows to recognise that in his life of love for God the being of God is extended in time: "he is  gifte for to knowen and lufen him" (Scale 2, 34.111r. –264).
And time, the medium in which Jesus is discovered as "tresour hidd in  soule" (Scale 1, 49.322b. –122), is the dimension of the Incarnation, necessitated by the Fall.
Here in Mixed Life, a text that must be seen in relation to Scale 1 and Scale 2, Hilton adumbrates the same progress in chapter fourteen: Following Augustinian theology, he locates the very essence of Christian life in the continual sustained desire for God — the only way in this life to perceive the nature of the love which joins God and man's soul.
This desire should govern every aspect of living as desire for health dominates a sick man — it is the very mainspring of action, "rote of al  wirkynge" (47.558).
The lord has to learn how best to pace himself spiritually to allow this desire to integrate all his potential.
The kind of awareness this induces is discretion.
The last eleven chapters of the treatise address themselves to the nature of the discretion appropriate to mixed life.
Hilton is aware that ultimately the lord will be best judge of what helps him most, but he suggests that every day should start with an effort to discipline his whole attention to God.
It may be that thinking of his own fragile balance between goodness and a propensity to go wrong, or thinking of the sins of others with compassion, will be salutary.
Such thoughts lead naturally to the manhood of Christ, the sharp reminder that the Incarnation provides of both the destructive nature of sin and the means by which this destruction is turned back on itself — laid waste.
Hilton stresses that a quickened sense of the inner meaning of the Incarnation cannot be forced; it is essentially experienced as a gift and those eager to know God should always try to work with the grain of their own particular natures rather than force any prescribed activity: "take esili  wolen come" (53.637).
Nevertheless he does signal some, as Julian would call them, "means" that might help.
A careful consideration of the nature of virtues, or of the lives of the saints and apostles  may help, as will meditation on the Passion and Mary, whose virtues enabled Christ to be born and make manifest the wisdom and goodness of God.
Prayer and meditation may be alternated to foster a recollected attention, but no activity, however fruitful, should be pursued to the point of extremes: Hilton thus encourages a constant awareness of an inner life to be fostered.
The area of conscious energy he is seeking to nourish is one which can engage with the means by which sorrow, lethargy, darkness and ill health are transfigured to joy, energy, light, strength and peace.
It is this sharp awareness of an inner process which will release men from the constraints of time, that makes those who make enormous emotional investment in material enterprises look incredibly foolish: Heaven is the only true object of human desire and it must be particularly and discreetly nourished in a continual process of growth.
This awareness of a process is the governing concept of The Scale of Perfection.
Despite the fact that Hilton says in chapter ten of Mixed Life that the nobleman who is like Jacob married to Rachel and Leah will only become Israel "is verri contemplatif" (33.374–5), if he is released from worldly responsibilites there is no ground for suggesting that he meant to rule out the possibility of the most profound kind of contemplative experience for the man in mixed life.
It is true that his definition of Rachel as "reste [and]goosteli swettenesse in deuocioun and contemplacion" , and "grace of deuocioun and reste in conscience" (31–2. 351–2,360–1) seems to  correspond with his thinking about the stage of spiritual development which he describes in Scale 1 chapter seven as preceding an experience where man's awareness in love of the life within him as Christ, is expressed as a "mariage made bitwix god and  soule" (8.283a. –82).
But it is also true that he describes this final state as one illumined so as "forto se by vnderstondyng  whilk is god, and also gostly thynges with a soft swete brennand loue in hym" (8.282b. –82); and in Mixed Life Rachel is also defined as "of bigynnynge  is God, and bitokene  liyf contemplatif" (30–1.342–3).
Moreover in Scale 2 he moves away from using the language of progressively numbered stages to formulate his thinking about the nature of contemplative experience.
Instead he explores a number of aspects that all inhere in a state of contemplative awareness of a reality beyond time.
Here inward stillness and peace of conscience (aspects of Rachel in Mixed Life) are incorporated into the experience of union.
In Scale 1 chapter nine Hilton says that the fullness of contemplative experience can be given to those in active life, though he adds the rider that they will not be able to make such full use of it as those living more sheltered lives as solitaries or in a contemplative order.
It is this reference to contemplative life as a state that Hilton refers to as "verrei contemplatif" in Mixed Life.
In line with his unprescriptive manner of teaching about how to develop contemplative life which is governed by his awareness of the intensely individual nature of discretionary achievement, Hilton is deliberately leaving his terms open, or using those likely to be directly applicable to actives, so that the recipient should not be constrained by definitions as he develops in his contemplative life.
The scale and tone of the little treatise on mixed life does not allow for the complex work and breadth of thinking such definitions would entail.
It is in the two books of The Scale of Perfection that Hilton develops structures to convey his understanding of the nature of contemplative life; these two books form the most sustained analysis and illumination of the subject in the writings of the five authors here studied.
SCALE 1 AND 2: FROM SICKNESS TO HEALTH
Hilton's powers of analysis have attracted studies in a historical theological context and comparisons of his account of the stages of  contemplative life with those formulated by other writers, especially St John of the Cross.
Such work is of obvious value to the understanding of Hilton's ideas and to the overall academic perspective on the documentation of contemplative experience.
The original recipients of Hilton's text, however, as is clear from the very fact that he wrote for them in the vernacular, were not interested in comparative academic study, but in particular guidance which would enable them to fully integrate their religious faith in their lives.
The approach of the historian of theological ideas may obscure the literary integrity of such a text as Hilton's Scale.
Ironically, it may, indeed, frighten the lay reader away altogether.
Yet Hilton's text is remarkable in its power to bring alive conceptually the nature and ultimate implications of the life of faith in its own terms.
As has already been observed by the Dominican, Conrad Pepler: we need not to labour the fact that Hilton is writing the same things as St John of the Cross,…
What is remarkable is that the same basic truths can be experienced and expressed in such outwardly differing modes.
If any proof were needed to insist that confessors and directors should avoid pressing their penitents into any clearly established scheme but instead should simply wait upon the Lord and watch and assist his working in the individual soul, this diversity among the great masters of the spiritual life should be sufficient.
The way is one in Christ who is the way, it is the way of love — the love of Christ, but Christ is lived in each person according to the construction of that personality and the love works through the individual's free will.
Hilton's Scale gains, perhaps, over some other later descriptions of the way in being very wide and very general so that the individual can find his own way therein without being embarrassed by a bundle of inapplicable particularities.
The "particularities" of scholarly comparison can also embarrass the lay reader of The Scale where Hilton, particularly in Scale 2, illuminates something about the inner relevance of what is meant by "Christ lived in each person according to the construction of that personality" .
Manuscript copies of The Scale survive in large numbers.
Sometimes they include both books, sometimes 1 or 2 by themselves.
Some of those which contain Book 1 only, for example the fourteenth-century Vernon and Simeon manuscripts, include it  as part of a large collection of medieval texts.
Those manuscripts with both books or only Book 2 belong to the fifteenth century.
Although in both books Hilton never loses sight of the spirituality possible for actives each book is addressed to a different audience: Scale 1 to an enclosed and apparently illiterate anchoress "redyng of holy writt may <  wel vse" (15.288a. –88); while Scale 2 seems more generally addressed to a wider and not necessarily wholly contemplative audience.
It looks as if the two books were not conceived as a single entity although they interrelate in the way that Hilton picks up and elaborates aspects of the subject of Scale 1 in Scale 2.
Clearly contemporary readers who knew both books considered them connected.
For instance, one of the manuscripts containing a copy of only Book 1, describes it as the first part of the book called "The Mirror of Contemplation by Canon Walter Hilton" (Lansdowne MS 362: Prima pars libri qui dicitur Speculum contemplacionis — Walterus hiltoun canonicus while one of the few manuscripts to contain Book 2 alone refers to it as "the secunde part of the reformyng of mannys soule drawyn of maister Watir hiltone hermyte" .
Only where the two books appear together is it called Scala Perfeccionis, The Scale of Perfection.
Although this title is not very appropriate, since Hilton never explicitly develops the metaphor, it nevertheless presents a view of the two books treating an overall development of an inner spiritual life.
Furthermore, not only does Hilton imply that he is implementing his treatment of the subject in Scale 1 at the beginning of Scale 2, there are also points in Scale 1 where he anticipates a development of his subject beyond that relevant for his immediate recipient.
On occasions when he is developing thought about contemplative prayer as an experience where man feels his faculties of reason and will to be at rest, informed by a loving knowledge of God, or about this experience both restoring what man lost at the Fall and anticipating the life to come, he acknowledges that he has outstripped the immediate needs of his particular audience: "has no  fully seen what it is, for  is  opened" (46.319a. –119).
In The Scale as a whole Hilton brings into focus a double image of human nature.
One, relating to its ability to get things wrong, is sick and frustrated: "now euere ilk man  in  wrecched lyfe is gostly seke" (Scale 1, 44.316a. –116); Hilton's view of this state is like that of Rolle's view of the body of this death in his Meditations  on the Passion.
The other image is of man cured of his sickness, delighting in the freedom of a state where knowledge and desire are fully answered in an experience of love.
The experienced reality of this image is the recognition of the nature of God in man that will grow beyond time: "for in  and in  knowynge of Iesu is fully  blis of a resonable soule and endles lif" (2.33.110v. –263).
For Hilton, the key to the means of curing the sickness which obscures and thwarts the brightness and power of the image of God lies in the Incarnation.
The intellectual and emotional clarity of his understanding, his sensitivity to language, and the potential of traditional figurative modes of writing, come together in a work of literature which conveys a sense of the Incarnation as a live issue.
The Scale of Perfection is a key text for its own period and beyond it.
Scale 1 concentrates more on the image of sickness, its diagnosis and treatment, but all the time it is informed by a vibrant sense of the health aspired to; whereas Scale 2 is concerned with the nature of the experience by which the image of sin is transfigured to a likeness of the being of God.
It is at the point in Scale 2, where Hilton starts to emphasise this, that he uses the image of the ladder to look back at what has gone before, and to point the way ahead: The rest of the book illuminates the subtle inner movements of the personality in which man engages with the power of God to come to a knowledge of his being, the "wirkyng in a soul" when   Scale 2 is more engaging as a work which marshals literary resources to illuminate Christian mystical theology.
But Hilton himself starts the book with a statement of its purpose to describe "more of an ymage  whilk I haue bifore tymes in pertie discried to " (1.63r. –193) and the image here taken for granted is the subject of Scale 1 to which some reference must be made.
SCALE 1
The text
Establishing the text for Scale 1 is a less straightforward matter than that for Scale 2 where all the manuscripts agree on the basic substance of the book.
In Scale 1 three main issues divide the manuscript versions.
The first is the passage on the cult of the Holy Name of Jesus which, where it is included, completes chapter 44 and begins "bot now : "  "If  be soth"  "" (316a. –115).
The second is the presence in some manuscripts of short expansions of the text which tend to tie in very explicitly what is being said to the Incarnation of Christ.
For example, the following passage dealing with a remedy against temptation contains in some manuscripts an expansion which is here taken from B.L.
Harley MS 6579 and marked by italics: Or further, in chapter forty-six, where Hilton is talking about the word "Iesu" as a means of focusing all the inheritance of life that the recluse desires, he says: These insertions do not add anything new, they simply expand in a particular way what has been said and they are not absolutely consistent in all the manuscripts in which they appear.
The third  element, the presence or absence of which cuts across the manuscript relationships, is a short passage influenced by the teaching of St Augustine on charity which occurs in some, but not all of the manuscripts in Scale 1, chapter seventy.
Some manuscripts of Scale 1 contain neither the passage on the Holy Name nor the insertions; some have the Holy Name passage but not the shorter additions; some have both; still others have the insertions but not the passage on the Holy Name.
The conclusion of scholars is that the passage on the Holy Name and the addition to chapter seventy is original to Hilton whereas the shorter passages were probably originated and incorporated by transcribers as glosses on the text.
The text here quoted for Scale 1 is from Cambridge University Library Add.
MS 6686 which includes the passage on the Holy Name and that in chapter seventy but not the shorter additions.
Certainly both elements bring into high relief the incarnational element in Hilton's thinking which is, in fact, central to both books.
Chapters 1–41: "work as you may" 
The opening fourteen chapters of Scale 1 provide a context of definitions for Hilton's particular address to a recluse asking advice on the contemplative life which, in the first chapter, he acknowledges to be a demanding process: Although in defining active and contemplative life Hilton makes it clear that contemplative life belongs especially  he, characteristically, makes it clear that it is not ruled out for actives.
Hilton sees three divisions in contemplative life which, broadly speaking, cover the range of modes of inner knowledge of God.
The first is that acquired solely by study and reading which is only a pale imitation of the real thing since it is not accompanied by an experience of love which answers to the intellectual knowledge (c.4).
The second concerns a love for God which is a gift and has nothing to do with learning (c.5-7); this itself has two aspects covering that which is experienced sporadically by both actives and contemplatives, and a stabler devotion given after a long process of discipline in which the contemplative feels a "grete rest of bodie and of soule" (7.282a. –81).
The third refers to a state of love in which man realises the love of God in his being and is one with Him.
This state is the goal of the contemplative life, if not here, then certainly after death.
Hilton says that the concomitant of this state is to be reformed to the image of Jesus, that is to the wisdom of God, the traditional title of the Son, and such reformation will combine both knowledge and love "cognicioun and affeccioun" (8.282b. –82).
Theologically trained readers of his time would recognise a background of scholarly debate on whether it is primarily through man's intellect or capacity to love, that the soul engages with God, and they would be able to acknowledge Hilton's synthesis of understanding and desire.
Hilton's uneducated disciple, however, is learning at this stage that the goal of the contemplative life is a remaking of the self to be like God through a loving practice, and thus knowledge, of goodness: Such contemplation is experienced as a gift which lifts the conscious effort to know and love God into an activity of delight which expresses the whole man: Although this goal is thus acknowledged from the start, the rest of the book is devoted to the means by which the contemplative can  work towards it.
Since she is illiterate, reading of the Bible is ruled out, but, in whatever activity she finds herself, she can pursue prayer and meditation in meekness, and faith in the teachings of the Church, and the same "continuel desire to God" that he advocated in Mixed Life (41.472) here stressed as an inner dynamic, where she is never idle "bot alwey liftand up  hert by desire to God and to  blisse of heuen" (22.296a. –96).
Like Rolle, Hilton sees prayer as the primary activity, recognising it as a state of consciousness which enables man to receive the gift of God; and while it does not cause it to be given, nevertheless prayer is a way in which such grace comes (c.24) He sharpens a constant awareness of two modes of activity in the inner life: that of conscious effort, and that of an effortless creative power of love and understanding which is sometimes experienced and believed by the mystics to be the work of God in man.
Scale 2 enlarges on this release of creative being in the self.
Here Hilton is more concerned with advising formal patterns of prayer which may help the recluse towards the ability to meditate, though all the time his description of the exercise of spoken prayer is informed by an excited awareness of a form that needs no words in its joyful and peaceful awareness of God.
This is the object of his pupil's desire, though at present she is like the man who  and for this reason  Such a staff is spoken prayer.
The technique in Scale 1 is to fuel the recluse's imaginative understanding of a condition where she can freely maximise her spiritual potential and, at the same time, promote the discipline which allows her to do so.
This discipline is the way through which the full meaning of the Incarnation is experienced and the creative love of God expressed through the constraints of human nature.
Thus is Christ known.
Hilton here formulates the same  perceptions that govern Rolle's understanding of the role of meditations on the Passion when he says: In fact Hilton gives no very precise rules about meditation itself because he is aware that it relates intimately to each individual's unique personality and gifts.
But he is in one sense or another occupied with it for the rest of the book as he directs the recluse in understanding her experience in terms of a pattern established by the Incarnation, and anchors his teaching to Scripture.
His understanding of the illuminative potential of meditation as a gift from God is indicated by his comparison of the meditative state to that of the disciples between the Ascension and Pentecost.
As they longed for a spiritual assurance of Christ's presence and received it in the Holy Spirit which literally inspired in them knowledge and love of God so the meditator may grow in inner spiritual knowledge (c.33, 36).
But he does not shirk the reality that the exercise is often accompanied by distracting temptation arising out of a sense of futility, doubt and weakness.
When this happens, meditation on the Passion of Christ is an obvious source of strength together with the constantly held realisation that it provides an opportunity to play the game of faith by which its reality is proved.
It can also thus be the entrée into a further development: Hilton stresses that this may not be part of the natural development of his particular correspondent.
He rather hauntingly characterises  the life of the contemplative as a God-hunt and compares those hounds who see the hare and never weary of the chase until they have their quarry with those who run simply because others in the pack do so.
Just as a hound who is not on the scent will not get his quarry, so the contemplative cannot violate the integrity of her own feeling and understanding and force her development.
This must come by the delicate interaction of her own willed effort and the creative understanding which Hilton calls grace.
All she can do is to desire God,"bot wirk as  may and crie God mercie for  (41.312a. –112).
Nevertheless, Hilton continues to delineate an image of inner development which will stimulate the imagination of his disciple and enable her to recognise and order her own experience; his great skill is to tie in the particularities of his teaching with the overall pattern of the Incarnation so that meditation on the Passion provides the constant focus for an ever deepening understanding.
Chapters 42–92: the image of sin
His starting point is with the inward consciousness, common to human nature, of the duality every person experiences — the awareness of the possibility of an inner poise and fulfilment apparent by its absence from an opposing experience of disorder and discontent.
He interprets this in terms of the story of the Fall saying that by "inward biholdyng" man can see in his nature: and fastens on the dynamic nature of the longing to recover what appears to be lost as the material to be worked with.
It is what, in Mixed Life he would call the "sparcle of  is blissid fier, is him silf" (39.450–1).
But the longing will draw its follower into hard places, so Hilton quotes Matthew 16:24: Si quis vult post me venire, abneget semetipsum, et tollat crucem suam, et sequatur me [If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me]and relates it explicitly to the anchoress's mode of religious life: This is the way she shares the work of redemption which is Christ's.
In order to bring into clear focus what it is that has been lost but can be regained through meditative discipline, Hilton advances an orthodox Augustinian analysis of the structure of personality as essentially tripartite and, thus, trinitarian.
Mind or memory is that total creative capacity for consciousness, which also contains that which is below the level of immediate recognition — man's full potential for knowledge, which is like God himself  It is the theatre of human integrity which involves the other two faculties, "resoun" and "will" .
 "Reason" , Hilton defines as the faculty by which things are understood — the process by which they are brought to conscious recognition and so can be, metaphorically, "seen" , like the wisdom of God the Father,— Christ.
 "Will" is driven by love and desire and so is like the Holy Ghost.
Hilton describes the story of man before the Fall as a time when reason was clear and bright, love directed only towards the goodness of God and man's potential fulfilled as his soul "whilk may be called a made trinite was fulfilled in mynde  and loue of  vnmade blissed trinite whilk is oure lord" (43a.314. –114).
It is this spontaneous participation in the being of God in whom is "full rest" (43.314b. –114) that was lost at the Fall.
In place of the original image of the power of God in which man was created, came a distorted travesty of it "a foule merk wrecched trinite" (43b.314. –114) in which God is not recognised and things which of their very nature cannot fully satisfy desire become its object.
This is the human nature (the heritage of sickness) with which every  man is familiar, and which is nevertheless still capable of conceiving what is lost, just as health is desired by the sick.
Although the image of the Trinity is distorted, its powers are not destroyed and this is the activity of God in the soul — the ability to understand what could be, and to desire it: But it is a question of "so near and yet so far" as Hilton adds that man is not near Christ or in him until he has actually found him.
The key to the whole process of "finding" is Christ's Incarnation.
It is the ground for the faith and effective action of all men, in whatever state of life, who desire the spiritual health that they know they lack.
This desire, Hilton says, is the "love of Iesu" which is the ground of salvation whether or not man experiences the joy and love in the kind of illuminated understanding which is the special gift of the contemplative: Hilton spends some time at this stage of the book finding imaginative ways of pointing to the goal of contemplative discipline — the finding of Jesus who is lost in man's soul as a treasure buried in a field (c.49) but who also is a joy beyond all that desiring can encompass (c.46).
These pointers serve to motivate the inner discipline — the subject which occupies the rest of the book.
Hilton stimulates a conception of the contemplative vocation as essentially dynamic — an interaction between the creative powers of God and man.
In so far as the anchoress is seeking Christ lost in the soul, she is like the disciples in the boat on the sea of Galilee lost in the  storm (Matthew 13:44) who woke the sleeping Jesus to save them from destruction: But underlying the cry of the anchoress is the constant calling of God which alone enables her cry: "oure lord  and all  whilk wilen herken to hym (50.323a. –122).
Here Hilton comes to the heart of his treatment of the inner life in Scale 1.
He asks: "what  se hym ne here hym?" [: hinders](ibid) The new "gamen" and "trauaile" of which he spoke in chapter forty is to find out.
It is small wonder that Hilton wrote a sequel to Scale 1.
Its centre lies in the recognition of what impedes the sight of love, whereas Scale 2 is occupied with facilitating recognition of the nature of God's being — love — in man.
In Scale 1 Hilton defines the obstruction to the sight and sound of Jesus as the body of sin and death from which Paul cried to be delivered (Romans 7:24—5) and which the anchoress encounters in the progress of her meditative life.
The more she tries to fix her heart on God who is beyond all man can think and desire, the more she encounters an inner darkness which has "of knowyng ne felyng of loue ne likyng" (52.324b. –124).
As Rolle uses his Meditations on the Passion as a means to recognise what is meant by the death of Christ, in terms of the life within ("it is tokenyng of my deth, and fylthe of my synne, slayn hath my sowle…
I may  the fele"(p.87)) Hilton spends thirty chapters (55–84) in defining that within man which hides his integrity and its source from him.
If you wish to stop pollution, then you must be able to identify it.
But Hilton is always careful to stress that the cleansing process to eradicate sin involves patient inner effort (the expression of the anchoress's fixed intention to God) not violent physical punishment (chapters 72–5).
It is a case of going with the grain of one's nature — the heart of which is the wisdom of God.
The analysis of sin that occupies much of the second half of the book and which, perhaps fittingly from a literary point of view, distorts the balanced analytic framework of the role and nature of contemplative life in the first half, is frozen in a definitive icon in which the body of death is  horriby manifested with a head of pride, back of covetousness (worldly things that the anchoress turns away from), a heart of envy, arms of anger, a belly of greed, genitals of lechery and feet of despairing sloth which find it difficult to stir themselves to good works (prayer and meditation for the anchoress)(85.355a—6a. –154–5).
This image is of that mortality which perverts the realisation of the image of God and travesties it.
If man is to be delivered from this, he must, like Christ, suffer a form of crucifixion.
As Hilton puts it we are born into this image of sin which "if  wilt be like to Crist" must be crucified (86.356b. –156).
The very desire to break the image will meet with the response of love which enables it to happen.
Hilton sees this destruction as a continual process, but he also recognises in it a major stage that other mystics call the "dark night of the senses" a particularly sharp period of suffering during which the will is firmly dislodged from false values and reoriented towards God.
Thereafter, he says, if the stirrings of the old image are felt they may disturb the peace but will not radically contaminate the knowledge and love of God, the image of Jesus, conceived now in contemplation as a shadow of ultimate reality.
And if the whole life of the contemplative is an extension of the Incarnation, it is at this point that Christ is quickened.
Hilton sums up the whole process as he has defined it in Book One through the two images of sin and Christ with a quotation from Galatians 4:19: Scale 1, then, maps the whole area of the contemplative life and shows it may be accessed through inner participation in the truth revealed at the Incarnation: Most of the book, however, is occupied with the effort to clarify the process by which the reformation to the likeness of Jesus in his manhood may be begun, the experience of this likeness in the reformed "" of the soul and how it leads to contemplation of the Godhead is not explored in any fullness although it is present as a stated goal.
It is to this image of the reformed soul and the nature of its experience that Hilton turns at greater length in Scale 2.
SCALE 2:
Chapters 1–17: wholeness and health
The first seventeen chapters of Scale 2 provide a context for this discussion which looks back to Scale 1.
Chapters one to six recapitulate in a more explicitly dogmatic form the implications of his treatment of the image of sin in Scale 1.
The means of all reformation is the Incarnation and Passion of Christ through which love is known both by divine revelation and experience.
Hilton says that the possibility of reformation thus open to man's free choice has two aspects: first, reformation in faith which is based on the process of recognition and destruction of the image of sin which has occupied the greater part of Scale 1; and second, reformation in feeling which involves a development possible for some who can progress further to an inner freedom and joy which such discipline enables.
At the heart of Hilton's conception of reformation in faith is a belief in the efficacy of the sacraments and the authority of the Church; at the heart of his conception of reformation in feeling is his understanding of the nature of human cognition of God.
In the first sixteen chapters he looks at reformation in faith which is open to all through the sacraments of baptism — the means of restoration from the consequences of original sin — and penance, the means of recovery from individual sin.
The crucial element for Hilton is the reorientation of the will.
In baptism this occurs through the faith of Holy Church.
In penance Hilton stresses contrition because it, rather than confession itself, signifies the reorientation of the will, although it is clear that the act of confession can also aid contrition.
This stress on will — "loke what  wil is for  in  al" (70r. –205)— is an aspect of the concern he expresses in Mixed Life for the importance of a "continuel  desire to God" and in Scale 1 (22.295b. –95) for a "hole and a stable entencoun" to please God which must underly all that the anchoress does.
The reformation in faith is of fundamental importance to all who wish to lay hold on their inheritance of health.
And in language which extends the representation in Scale 1 of man's struggles against sin in terms of the Passion, Hilton says that it is the reformation in faith which enables man to carry the image of sin rather than be carried away by it: For some this reformation in faith is sufficient in itself.
The contemplatives, however, with whom Scale 2 is chiefly concerned, go further into reformation in feeling.
Their natural capacity to achieve self-knowledge (hence the stress on recognising the image of sin in Scale 1) enables them to receive what feels like a gift of freedom from the pressures of the destructive impulses in the self, and a personal inner experience of the God.
For Hilton, as for those in the Augustinian tradition, faith is the condition of understanding, nisi credideritis non intelligetis.
At the beginning of Scale 2, Hilton puts its subject in a conceptual framework which picks up and indirectly rehearses his teaching in Scale 1.
But he stresses that the progress in contemplative experience, reformation in feeling developing from reformation in faith, is part of an organic process of growth to a peace and fulfilment the longing for which is innate in man who may mistakenly and unnaturally think it resides in material circumstances: Scale 2 is pervaded by a sense of the reality of a dimension to human experience beyond the confines of time and sin, though it is only accessed through them.
Hilton uses words like "shape" and  "image" ( "oure lord God schope man in soule to his owne ymage and liknes" )(1.63r. –193) which depend on spatial dimension for their meaning; but as he defines them they point to an integration of human sentient powers in a consciousness of transcendent love and knowledge.
There is a potency in his warning at the end of chapter fourteen that the world is dependent on time which will end, and man's most urgent and natural work, therefore, should be to find the means by which he can pass beyond it.
People should love God and "bisily seken and travailen how  be reformed to his liknes or  passed hennus" (14.77r. –216).
Reformation in feeling is the state in which man experiences something of an ultimate reality of which he will only be fully aware after death.
It is to the processes of this second reformation that Hilton now turns in chapter seventeen onwards, likening them to the gradual progress in recovery of full health after the medicine that effects the basic cure of the disease (spiritually speaking, penance).
It is in this context that Hilton uses the image which was later used as the title of the work.
Reforming in faith is the fundamental starting-point for those concerned with the heritage of health; reforming in feeling is the highest state in this life that a soul may come to, but the climb towards it is gradual.
The image of the ascent of the ladder is relevant not only to the process of spiritual development he is about to describe, but also to the careful sequential structuring of his teaching where images and arguments accumulate to point towards a greater synthetic understanding.
Hilton's use of language in Scale 2 is more creative than in Scale 1.
He finds a means of using the language of both physical experience and Scripture in an anagogical sense whereby mystical experience may be both recognised and shared by those to whom it is known, and to some extent desired, because imagined, by others less involved.
Imagination played an important, if intermediate, role in Hilton's theology.
All through The Scale Hilton hangs his thinking on the pegs of Scriptural texts interpreted as revealing figuratively the nature of spiritual reality.
We know from his other writings that he defended the use of images in understanding the faith.
He aligned himself with the traditional view that the Scriptures describe unseen things by the form of visible things so as to stimulate reason in cognitive understanding, itself a spiritual reality which is an image of full contemplative knowledge.
In the seventeenth century Herbert saw this kind of understanding as a form of prayer  which he describes not only as "God's breath in man returning to his birth" but as an illumination in terms which Rolle and Hilton would have recognised: Church bels beyond the starres heard, the soul's bloud, The land of spices; something understood.
Hilton describes imagination as serving understanding when the need arises and although he is clear that the imaginative faculty is dependent on physical experience in a way in which mystical experience of God is not, he none the less saw it as able to precipitate a more spiritual understanding.
Thus in chapter thirty he restates the threefold division of the spiritual life which he starts in Scale 1: the basic faith without any inner experience of God, a felt love of Christ and finally an experience of the spiritual reality of God.
Imagination "stirrid bi grace" is the faculty he names as active in the second stage: "for whi, is opened in beholdynge of oure lordes manhede" (30.103r. –253).
It would seem that imagination rightly directed enables the extension of meaning which is involved in the Incarnation; but as the Incarnation points beyond itself in the risen and ascended Christ, so imaginative knowledge of God is transcended by a more purely spiritual experience.
Thus Hilton says: But he is aware of the extremely close if not absolutely inseparable connection between the two modes of knowing, for: This shadow is cast by the body of Christ through the light of God.
The world of shadow is the condition of human knowledge, and imagination deals in the meanings inherent in it but points to the light beyond where it will no longer be of use:
Chapters 18–30: inward journeys
Such a conception of the imagination as mediator controls Hilton's use of language in chapters eighteen to thirty as he tries to convey understanding of reformation in feeling: a state which combines both a sense of continual movement with an awareness of a state of being in which such movement is no longer necessary.
The movement is the condition of being in time: and the most sustained metaphor for this process of profiting in grace, that of the journey to Jerusalem, is one with immediate connotations for the medieval reader.
In the medieval maps of the known world (Europe, Africa and Asia) Jerusalem was depicted at its centre.
In the Hereford world map it is drawn as a walled city surmounted by the hill of the Crucifixion — a visual reminder of the central significance of temporal life subject to change and death.
The gold letters M O R S encircle the globe, and ultimate judgement is depicted in the heavens above where angels blow the last trumpet and Christ reigns in glory.
The dual image of Christ in eternal glory and Christ crucified in time are an icon of Christian understanding of the human situation.
Devotion in the Middle Ages was often expressed by means of penitential journeys to famous shrines.
The Hereford world map marks the main stages of one such — the famous pilgrimage to the shrine of St James of Compostella.
But the most famous and prestigious pilgrimage of all was that to Jerusalem itself which could be conceived at a literal level as a journey to the centre of the earth.
Hilton urges those who would know God to think of themselves as pilgrims to "Ierusalem-ward" set out on a journey to the centre of their own inner world: He thus brings into play resonances from the traditional Augustinian image of the City of God the desire for which activates the Christian life and from allegorical exegesis where Jerusalem signifies, morally, the soul of the faithful Christian striving for the vision of peace and, anagogically, the life of those in heaven who see God face to face.
For Hilton, as for the Cloud-author, the road to this Jerusalem is "ronne by desires & not by pases of feet" .
The journey represents the great escape from destruction; it is begun in time and ended beyond it.
For those who are going to progress from reformation in faith to reformation in feeling Hilton brings into focus a vivid sense of the existential insecurity of the soul in the world.
He describes the reformation in faith, secured at baptism and by penance, leaving the soul as if on the very brink of a pit from which it has been rescued but into which it is in imminent danger of falling back.
Wisdom consists in putting some distance between the soul and such destruction.
This is the distance travelled to the greater security of reformation in feeling.
Just as the pilgrim who travels to the earthly Jerusalem leaves behind him all his possessions to enable his journey, so Hilton teaches that that which propels the inner journey is a balancing of the will and the mind in the simultaneous awareness that nothing is possible without God who must therefore be desired above all else.
He gives the disciple a mantra to concentrate his faculties: "I am , I hafe , I coueite  bot onely  luf of Iesu" (22.87r. –231).
Hilton recognises that while it is apparently unreasonable for man governed by reason utterly to devalue himself and attribute any good things which he does to Christ it is nevertheless the route to true identity, away from the temporal accidents which attract the self, to its essential which is discovered in Christ himself.
Such a recognition liberates the potential of the self from the restrictive claims of the conscious ego; it also liberates thought about Christ.
The peculiar nature of this journey, that the willed progress is experienced as a divine gift, is a consequence of this theology: In chapter twenty-four Hilton uses the repetitions and cadences of rhetoric to convey this recognition of the activities of a God whose powers are conceived in Trinitarian terms of creating giving and responding in love at the heart of the self: At this point Hilton widens the scope of the metaphor of the journey to Jerusalem — the knowledge of Christ in the soul — by warning that the way from the light of the world to the light of heaven leads through darkness which he describes as "a tymeful space bitwix two daies" (24.89v. –234).
A sense of being in darkness is common in mystical accounts of spiritual life though it may not indicate precisely the same experiences in each writer.
In Hilton it represents stages in the journey to God when the soul is no longer engaged with worldly things and as it were asleep to sin (24.90r. –235) but is not yet fully illuminated by the knowledge of Christ: The experience of the dark can be either painful or restful: painful in so far as the soul is still troubled by the pressures of the worldly  attractions from which it is hiding; or restful in so far as the soul is waiting untroubled in its longing for Christ.
Hilton embodies his understanding of this journey in images of light and darkness based on an anagogical reading of two texts from Isaiah 26:9: "mi soule  desired  in " and 9:2: Habitantibus in regione umbrae mortis, lux orta est eis which he translates "to the wonend in  contre of shadwe of dede, was spronge" [wonend: dwellers](25.92r. –238).
Memorably he describes the soul's glimpses of its distant goal, as "smale sodeyn  glideren out  smale caues fro  citee" [caues: crannies](25.92v. –238).
And just as the dimensions of a city seen from afar belie their true nature, so the soul seeking contemplation "if he may come within  citee of contemplacioun   he mikel more  he  first" (25.93r. –239).
This anagogical use of language points to a realm of experience beyond that of its immediate field of reference, and draws on the alternative life-style of the contemplative.
For Hilton openness to the reality of the dark shadows of the inner world carries a promise of life more exciting than the glare of everyday physical reality "so shynende and so confortable to hem  are blynde in knowynge of gostly " (25.92r. –238).
For him it becomes so self-evident where true fulfilment lies that those who are content to rest in the basic reformation in faith appear ludicrous.
Hilton comments: All through Scale 2 Hilton implies that the pursuit of this inner calling is open to all: He is careful not to be over-precise in formulating rules of practice which might not be helpful to all temperaments and all needs.
But one thing is common to all who follow the process of reforming in feeling: that is experience of the life of desire for God, freed from any earthly considerations, as an entry from the light of the world into a darkness in which things normally hidden from sight can gradually be discerned, and in which ultimately there grows a vision of a greater light.
Hilton also assimilates this imagery to his under- standing of the Christian life as an extension of the Incarnation.
Referring to Christ's teaching in John 10 that he is the good shepherd and the door to the sheepfold through which alone salvation lies so that anyone "that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a robber" , Hilton remarks that anyone who thinks they can bypass the way of darkness is such a "a breker of  wal" (27.97r. –245).
And in this darkness the process of crucifying the image of sin in the practice of penance is completed for the contemplative is dead to the world.
Hilton stresses that without this death there is no entry into the City of God, the contemplative state — "is no gate bot on" (27.96v. –245).
He also interprets St Paul's teaching to the Colossians (3:3) in these terms: His evocation of a silent darkness at the heart of which the soul is alive only in faith and expectant longing, combines the same sense of both end and beginning that Rolle creates at the end of his shorter Passion meditation when the process of penance linked with the stages of the Crucifixion concludes in the darkness of the entombment — a darkness which in the pattern of Incarnation is the prelude to dawn and Resurrection.
The darkness of which Hilton speaks, and the darkness of the penitential understanding in the Passion meditations, may belong to different stages of development in the knowledge of God, but they are part of a continuous pattern of experience of death and resurrection which underlies them all.
This is exemplified in Hilton's summary of the four stages in reformation in feeling (Chapter twenty-eight).
First is the excitement of the sense of calling; second, the passionate and painful struggles in overcoming sin which bring him into a darkness which initially is without savour or delight; third, the experience of light and comfort in the darkness which he describes as the work of Christ illuminating the soul "with schynynges" (27.98r. –345); and fourth, the full light and bliss of heaven which this light in the darkness anticipates.
In chapter thirty Hilton's analysis of the process of reformation of feeling comes to a climax as he brings together the implications of his analysis and imagery in a synthesis embodying his full sense of the process of contemplative life as lived discovery of the meaning of the Incarnation.The experience of the darkness reveals to the soul its essence which is that its being does not inhere in the dimensions of time: "for  soule is no body bot a lif vnseable" (30.102r. –252) and has its own mode of knowing that is not entirely dependent on bodily senses or imagination.
Hilton defines this using the traditional mirror image: "for  soule is bot a mirrour, in  whilk  schalt see God gostly" (30.102v. –253).
The mirror reflects the being which in fact sustains and underlies physical existence, validates the perceptions of faith and imagination, and is revealed in the Incarnation — the pattern of existence which constrains the Word.
Hilton is aware that the Incarnation must always be the starting-point for reforming in feeling, and only through the processes of faith and penance for the sins which deform the body of Christ can the soul come to see the reality of the being of God in man — Christ: It is this ghostly love that the soul glimpses in the darkness, and in doing so experiences the reality of the resurrected and ascended Christ who comes to man in the Holy Spirit and completes the story of the Incarnation.
In chapter twenty-four, when he identifies the desire for God which fuels the contemplative's journey with Jesus, he uses language which echoes Matthew's account of the Resurrection and comments: In the reformation of feeling the contemplative is moving beyond the love understood and expressed by means of the suffering involved in penance, to the fruit of the risen lord.
Hilton embodies his sense of how the contemplative grows in love for Christ as God, in the image of Mary Magdalene reaching out to touch the risen Jesus who says: Hilton enlarges: It is this love, knowledge and worship which is experienced in the darkness; the "lif vnseable" (30.102r. –252) of the soul"as the gift of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost who: This is the core of contemplative knowledge, not the quasi-sensual experience of heat and sweetness and light which may accompany it.
These, Hilton says, putting the over-enthusiastic followers of Rolle's spirituality into perspective, are at best outward tokens of an inner grace.