

The Russian Bear
WAR WITH THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE AND PERSIA
Nicholas's chances of losing a war were small, because although his outlook was militaristic, he did not really like fighting.
What he liked was order, which armies embody in peacetime but abandon in the field.
Since for most of his reign he avoided going to war, he hardly deserves the reputation for belligerence which contemporaries conferred on him.
He acquired it partly by accident, for war was near when he ascended the throne.
Alexander I had decided in the second half of 1825 that the international problems which derived from the conflict between Greeks and Turks could not be resolved by the Concert of Europe.
His dealings with the other Great Powers had neither benefited his Mediterranean co-religionists nor furthered Russia's long-term policy of controlling the Ottoman Empire.
The Turks had deployed Egyptian soldiers in the hope of suppressing the Greeks and were simultaneously ignoring Russian interests in the Yugoslav and Romanian parts of their territory.
If he had lived, Alexander would have had to take action.
Metternich, in Vienna, thought that the new tsar was even likelier to do so.
During the interregnum which followed Alexander's death he hoped the Russian crown would go to the Grand Duke Konstantin, whom he considered a moderate.
In January 1826 he sent an emissary to Warsaw to find out whether Konstantin would use his influence to temper Nicholas's supposed enthusiasm for hostilities.
Had he known what advice was reaching the tsar in St Petersburg, his anxiety would have been greater still.
Just after his emissary met Konstantin, a former Russian ambassador to Constantinople urged Nicholas to abandon the idea of international cooperation and present the Turks with an ultimatum.
In February 1826 the usually cautious Russian foreign minister, Nesselrode, echoed the views of the ex-ambassador.
According to Nesselrode, the empire had the right to use force and need not fear reprisals from other European countries.
The stage seemed set for battle.
Nicholas, however, proved to be significantly more cautious than the men around him.
Nesselrode's hawkish memorandum had concluded by  recommending that, before fighting, the tsar ought to provide "irrefutable proof of his pacific intentions" .
This meant addressing various specific requests to the Turks, telling them what the consequences of refusal would be, and informing the major European courts that Russia was giving the Ottoman Empire a last chance.
The tsar adopted these suggestions but reduced the number of specific requests.
Pedantic or fearful, Nicholas was reluctant to do more than ask Turkey to abide by earlier Russo-Turkish agreements.
Since these said little about Greece, the ultimatum which the Turks received dealt with their treatment of Romanians and Yugoslavs.
Where Greece was concerned, Nicholas sought an international solution.
Even Alexander, in October 1825, had gone back on his decision to deal with the Greek question unilaterally and had instigated talks on Greece with Britain.
The Duke of Wellington came to St Petersburg early in the new reign, and on 23 March /4 April 1826 Britain and Russia signed a "Protocol" .
Britain agreed to offer mediation between Greeks and Turks on the basis of Greek autonomy, thereby removing at least one of the reasons for Russian military intervention in the Balkans.
Romanians and Yugoslavs, however, remained problematical.
If the sultan rejected the tsar's ultimatum, war would break out in the Balkans despite the Anglo-Russian agreement.
Fortunately, Mahmud II proved compliant.
Turkish emissaries arrived in Akkerman on the river Dniester on 24 July /5 August 1826, and after two months of intermittent wrangling the Russian and Ottoman Empires agreed a codicil to the 1812 Treaty of Bucharest.
For the time being, differences over the "Danubian Principalities" (the future Romania), Serbia (heartland of the future Yugoslavia) and Turkish forts in the western Caucasus were eliminated.
Nicholas had shown a preparedness to use diplomatic means which was to be the main feature of his conduct of international relations.
For reasons beyond his control, the new tsar found himself at war with Persia just as he was coming to terms with the Turks.
Russia's peaceful acquisition of Georgia in 1801 had given her a foothold south of the Caucasus mountains which seemed to threaten Persian and Turkish interests in the Middle East.
To consolidate his hold on Georgia, Alexander had been moving east to the Persian-controlled shore of the south-western Caspian and west to the Turkish-controlled shore of the south-eastern Black Sea.
The talks at Akkerman had apparently cleared up disagreements with the Turks, but the Shah, and particularly his son, believed that the Russian domestic crisis of December 1825 had created enough uncertainty in St Petersburg to justify a challenge to the Russo-Persian treaty of 1813.
Nicholas sensed the danger and sent Prince Aleksandr Menshikov to Tehran for talks.
Abbas Mirza, the heir to the Persian throne, was not to be dissuaded from aggression.
Persian forces crossed the river Araxes in mid-July 1826 and forced Russia's frontier troops to fall back on the Georgian capital of Tiflis (Tbilisi).
In September Nicholas responded with a formal declaration of war.
At first, from the Russian point of view, the fighting went badly.
Nicholas  despatched Denis Davydov and Ivan Paskevich to help Aleksei Ermolov, the local commander-in-chief, but Paskevich and Ermolov differed radically in character and fell out over tactics.
Paskevich wanted to cross the Araxes without further ado and move on Tabriz and Tehran, whereas Ermolov believed that the fortress of Erevan had to be taken first.
Because Ermolov had been commanding Russia's forces in the Caucasus for more than a decade (and because he was something of a maverick), Paskevich had more friends in St Petersburg.
Ermolov was dismissed in March 1827, Paskevich took not only Erevan but also Echmiadzin, Nakhichevan and Tabriz, and by the time the Shah accepted terms at Turkmanchai in February 1828 Russian forces were moving in the direction of the Persian capital.
The set-back of 1826 had been turned into a triumph.
Persia paid a large indemnity and surrendered her Armenian provinces of Erevan and Nakhichevan, thus giving Russia a cushion against future threats from the south.
Without having courted war, the new tsar had achieved one of the greatest Russian successes in the century-long history of Russo-Persian enmity.
Despite the negotiations at Akkerman, Nicholas soon had to fight the Turks.
Because Istanbul showed no sign of accepting British mediation on the question of Greek autonomy, Britain and Russia, now joined by France, signed the Treaty of London in July 1827.
Reiterating their support for Greek autonomy, they declared that, if the Turks did not accept international mediation within a month, they would enter into commercial relations with the Greeks and "determine the ulterior measures to which it may become necessary to resort" .
This was not quite a final decision to go to war, but when allied ships under Admiral Codrington moved into Navarino Bay on the south-western edge of the Peloponnese in October 1827 and, without having set out to do so, destroyed the fleet of the Sultan's Egyptian forces, war became inevitable.
After finishing his business with Persia, the tsar sent his troops into the Danubian Principalities in April 1828.
Nicholas impeded his generals in the first campaigning season by taking the field personally, but in 1829 Ivan Dibich led the army deep into eastern Thrace while Paskevich, in the east, took Kars and Erzerum (a campaign immortalized in prose by Aleksandr Pushkin).
For someone whose nature was supposed to be grasping, Nicholas was remarkably generous to the Turks at the peacemaking.
Each of the three most recent treaties between the Russian and Ottoman Empires (Kuchuk Kainardji in 1774, Jassy in 1791, Bucharest in 1812) had shifted the tsars' frontier to a new river on the north-western edge of the Black Sea (the Bug, the Dniester and the Pruth).
The Treaty of Adrianople of September 1829 went only a little further, transferring the northern shore of the Danube to Russian control from the point where the Pruth flowed into it.
 "The annexation of the Danube delta…was no great acquisition" .
Apart from the delta, Turkey had to concede the right of merchant ships to pass through the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles (which was crucial from the point of view of Russian trade), and to surrender rather more significant territories in the eastern part of her empire (because Russia was determined  to control the eastern shore of the Black Sea and to enlarge her buffer zone around Georgia).
Russia's main concern in 1829, however, was to protect the interests of the sultan's Romanian subjects without enlarging the territory under direct Russian control.
She achieved this end by establishing a temporary protectorate over the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia under P. D. Kiselev (the former friend of Decembrists and future Minister of State Properties).
Over a five-year period Kiselev transformed the administration of the lands between the Pruth and the Danube to such an extent that it was to be hard, thereafter, for the sultan or outsiders to prevent the eventual emergence of an independent Romania.
When Russian forces finally retreated from the Danubian Principalities in 1834, Nicholas seemed to have achieved the final stabilization of his southern frontier.
Peace rather than war had been his goal throughout.
Just before St Petersburg learned that the sultan had accepted the Treaty of Adrianople, a conference of senior Russian ministers agreed "That the advantages of maintaining the Ottoman Empire in Europe are greater than the difficulties which it presents" .
This belief underpinned Russian policy towards Turkey for the greater part of the reign.
The major European states thought Russia intended to dismember the Ottoman Empire, but in fact she sought to keep it in being.
A weak neighbour could be bullied; a power vacuum would attract the attention of Britain, France and Austria.
NICHOLAS I AND THE POLISH PROBLEM
The preservation of the status quo was also Nicholas's prime concern with regard to central and western Europe, though here, paradoxically, his policy should have involved much more fighting than it did.
In July 1830 the French overthrew the main line of the Bourbon dynasty and replaced it with a cadet branch represented by King Louis Philippe.
In August and September of the same year the Belgians rebelled against the Kingdom of the Netherlands and established an independent state.
Since by this time various German principalities were also in ferment, the entire European settlement of 1815 appeared to be in jeopardy.
Determined to keep it in place, Nicholas mobilized his troops.
Soon, "a confrontation between Russia and France seemed inevitable" .
For two reasons, however, no confrontation took place.
First, Nicholas had no hope of undertaking a campaign at the opposite end of the continent without the assistance of Austria and Prussia — but Austria and Prussia were reluctant to join him.
Second, Nicholas could hardly afford to send troops abroad unless he could be sure that all was well at home — but at the end of November 1830 a coup took place in Warsaw.
Years later Nesselrode wrote that the European revolutions of  1830 "opened a new period" in Nicholas I's foreign policy, turning him into "the representative of the monarchical idea, the bastion of principles of order and the impartial defender of European equilibrium" .
This may have been Nicholas's opinion of himself, but it did not affect many of his actions.
As the events which followed the Warsaw coup illustrated, circumstances required "the Russian bear" to spend more time mauling the non-Russian inhabitants of the Russian Empire than attacking non-Russians abroad.
For most of the 1830s and 1840s Nicholas's policy towards non-Russians took the form of "inter-national" rather than "international" relations.
Ethnicity, to use modern terminology, occupied more of the tsar's attention than diplomacy.
Many reasons may be adduced for the Polish uprising of November 1830: the Russians' two-year hunt for "Polish Decembrists" ; the tsar's reluctance to be separately crowned as King of Poland; the refusal of St Petersburg to attach to the "Congress Kingdom" of Poland the provinces to the east which had once been part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth; the emergence of Polish literary figures who "understood romanticism as embodying a patriotic call to restore the old republic within its old frontiers" ; the decline of the Polish economy; the inspiration of the events of 1830 in France and Belgium; and the arrest, just before the rising, of a number of militant soldiers and students.
In the light of this long list of grievances, it was remarkable how slowly the rising took hold.
If the Viceroy, the Grand Duke Konstantin, had been firm, he could probably have prevented the Poles' discontent from escalating.
He abandoned Warsaw to the rebels, however, whereupon they convened a Diet.
Even the Diet did not immediately call for offensive action against Russia, but it decided to do so when the tsar refused to negotiate on the basis of anything less than abject Polish submission.
On 13/25 January 1831 the Poles dethroned the Romanovs.
Early the following month General Dibich led the Russian First Army into the Congress Kingdom.
Partly because the First Army had not seen service since 1814 (the Second Army having been responsible for the victories of 1828–9 in the Balkans), the Russian advance into Poland was hesitant.
The Poles won two early victories before the tide began slowly to turn against them.
The battle of Grochów in February 1831 "was…counted as a Polish victory,[but]produced at the time a state of panic in Warsaw" .
Although Dibich failed to enter the Polish capital and the tsar became increasingly dissatisfied with him, three months after Grochów Russian troops established a decisive superiority at the battle of Ostroleka on the River Narew.
Even then Dibich's death from cholera on 29 May /10 June 1831 slowed down the advance of the tsarist troops, but Paskevich had already been summoned from the Caucasus and eventual Russian victory was assured.
On 27 August /8 September the tsar's forces retook Warsaw.
Nicholas's suppression of the Polish rebellion outraged public opinion in western Europe and dealt his reputation a blow from which it never recovered.
Having welcomed his accession in 1825, the British press came to  treat him as "the master of noble slaves, the ravisher of women, the destroyer of domestic happiness, the assassin of children…[and]a monster in human form" .
Adam Czartoryski, who was forced into Parisian exile after having proved a less than satisfactory choice as head of the Polish insurgent government, found himself able, in the west, to create "a diplomatic agency which was to influence, and at times even direct, the foreign policies of the great powers" .
In France, radicals who agreed on little else invaded the National Assembly in May 1848 with the object of goading it into action on the Polish question.
Unabashed, Nicholas dedicated himself to purging the Congress Kingdom of dissent.
According to Paskevich, whom he put in as Viceroy (the Grand Duke Konstantin having died, like Dibich, of cholera), "The Poles…experienced not vengeance and retribution but assistance and the consignment of their guilt to oblivion" .
The Poles themselves must have felt differently.
The governmental, social, economic, military, legal, educational and ecclesiastical structures of the kingdom underwent dramatic changes.
The Diet was abolished; a large number of hereditary Polish nobles deprived of noble status; the woollen industry destroyed; the separate army eliminated; the legal system Russianized; the University of Warsaw closed; and an Orthodox eparchy introduced to compete with the Roman Catholic Church.
The Poles of the Congress Kingdom were not broken, for even Paskevich admitted in 1850 that the calm he had established merely reflected their "awareness of their powerlessness and their conviction of the incontestable might of your Imperial Highness" .
The tsar, however, believed he had found a better way to knit his territories together than any conceived by his predecessors.
Since the Congress Kingdom of Poland was only one of a number of outlying parts of the empire which required his attention, and since he could hardly afford a forward policy in western Europe or the Balkans until his own peripheries were fully integrated into the imperial structure, he spent more time in the 1830s and 1840s on his own non-Russian subjects than on dealings with foreigners.
Because Poles were the dominant national group not only in the Congress Kingdom but also in the region to the east of it which St Petersburg called the "western provinces" , the latter as well as the former became the subject of new policies after the Polish uprising of 1830.
Few inhabitants of the western provinces were Russian.
Apart from the Polish gentry, the main population groups were Lithuanian, Belorussian, Ukrainian and Jewish.
As an experienced head of the educational system in Vitebsk pointed out in 1832, it was "extremely difficult to persuade capable and reliable Russians to come here, even to take important posts" .
Nicholas engaged in a long-term programme of social engineering.
By closing down Polish educational institutions (notably the university at Vil'na and the lycée at Krzemieniec), by suppressing the Uniate Church (in 1839), by abolishing Magdeburg Law in Kiev (in 1835) and the Lithuanian Statute throughout the region (in 1840), by promoting the publication of history books which argued that the western provinces had been Russian from time immemorial, by depriving  many Poles of noble status, by promoting the interests of their Ukrainian and Belorussian serfs, and by insisting that local administration be conducted in Russian, he sought to make clear what he meant by allowing "Nationality" , narodnost', to be attached to "Orthodoxy" and "Autocracy" in the celebrated circular of 1833.
Nationality, for Nicholas, meant being or becoming Russian.
His Minister of Education, Uvarov — the propagator of the doctrine — understood the tsar's position only too well.
In a lengthy report on his first ten years in office he made much of the fact that, whereas "Russian was scarcely to be heard" in the western provinces at the time of his appointment, it now had "an indisputable primacy" .
Nicholas and Uvarov flattered themselves, however, if they believed that the western provinces were becoming less intractable than the Congress Kingdom.
The government's "integrationist" policies merely scraped the surface of the problems they were supposed to resolve.
Very few Russian nobles moved west, but "in 1858 the majority of the nobles in the Russian Empire…still lived in the nine western gubernii [provinces]" .
An enormous number of Polish nobles, therefore, had survived the government's attempts to relegate them to lesser estates.
Nor had Polish nobles suffered unduly from the disappearance of Polish schools, for most of them received their education at home.
Although those who studied at Kiev University (Vil'na's successor) had to know enough Russian to understand lectures, they constituted the majority of the new university's students for the first thirty years of its life and did not need Russian to consort with their peers.
It is even possible that, far from weakening the Poles' sense of their national identity, Nicholas's educational endeavours gave it a fillip.
 "One nationalism furthers other nationalisms" .
To judge by the number of Poles at Kiev University who joined a conspiratorial society organized throughout the western provinces by Szymon Konarski in 1838, exposure to Nicholas I's Russocentric educational system sometimes had consequences very different from those intended by the authorities in St Petersburg.
UKRAINIANS AND JEWS
The expansion of the Russian educational system also had unexpected effects on Ukrainians.
After the Russians, these were the second most numerous ethnic group to be ruled from St Petersburg and occupied an area which, apart from the north-eastern corner of the Habsburg Empire, included the three southernmost of Russia's nine western provinces and an equally large region on the left or eastern bank of the river Dnieper.
Ukrainians tended to be less troublesome than Poles because most of their gentry had been Polonized or Russified in the two centuries prior to 1800.
St Petersburg called them "Little Russians" and treated them like country  cousins.
Ukrainian peasants' sense of their ethnic identity was poorly developed.
They described themselves as rusyny, a term which merely indicated descent from the inhabitants of the medieval principality of Rus'.
The ethnic term "Ukrainian" , though not the geographical expression "the Ukraine" (or "Ukraine" ), is a late-nineteenth-century invention which was adopted by most of the people to whom it applies only after 1917.
After obliging the last autonomous ruler of the Ukrainian heartland to resign (in 1764) and breaking up the Ukrainian Cossacks (in 1775), Catherine the Great had subjected Ukrainians to the poll tax and extended to their territory her reform of Russian provincial administration.
These measures occasioned little resistance.
Whereas, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, Ukrainian subjects of the Habsburg Empire were beginning to think of themselves as a distinct ethnic group, Ukrainian subjects of the tsar appeared not to do so.
Despite the fact that the southern Decembrists operated on Ukrainian soil, they attracted few Ukrainian collaborators or imitators.
 "We cannot speak of 'Ukrainian Decembrists', but…only of Decembrists in the Ukraine" .
After reaching a low point, however, the notion of a difference between Ukrainians and Russians began to gain ground.
Despite adopting the Russian language, welcoming incorporation into the Russian gentry, and often abandoning the Ukraine for St Petersburg, well-placed Ukrainians tended to demonstrate a continuing affinity with the land of their birth.
Meanwhile, the introduction of Russian educational institutions into the Ukraine proved to have centrifugal as well as centripetal implications.
The opening of Khar'kov University in 1805 and of Kiev University in 1834 stimulated native interest in the parts of the Ukraine which they served.
In the second and third decades of the nineteenth century the publication of locally orientated journals, the collection of Ukrainian folksongs, and attempts to use Ukrainian as a literary language marked the beginnings of divergence between the recently dovetailed northern and southern parts of the Russian Empire.
At first, the imperial authorities saw no danger in a Ukrainian cultural awakening and even thought it might assist them in their conflicts with the Poles.
In the 1840s, however, St Petersburg took fright.
Three Ukrainians, Taras Shevchenko, Panteleimon Kulish and Mykola (or Nikolai) Kostomarov, "combined the local Ukrainian historical and literary traditions with the nationalistic terminology emanating from St Petersburg to produce new syntheses in Ukrainian literature and history" .
When Kostomarov, probably in collaboration with kindred spirits, wrote an emotive tract which concluded by saying that "Ukraine will become an independent People's State in a Slavonic union" , his cultural activities seemed to be taking on clear political overtones.
Nicholas I's regime had no interest in federalism.
After receiving information from an impoverished student at Kiev University, the authorities arrested ten Ukrainian activists in 1847 and subjected the best known of them, the poet and painter Taras Shevchenko, to military service with deprivation of writing and drawing materials.
The arrests of 1847 exposed an organization called the Kirillo-Methodian  Brotherhood, whose purpose, the regime believed, was to dismember the empire.
The authorities' heavy-handed intervention showed just how sensitive they were to the question of the empire's internal diversity, for the Brotherhood's goals were in fact much less radical than St Petersburg supposed and Shevchenko and Kulish may not even have been members.
Poles had proved in 1830–1 that they posed a genuine threat to the unity of the empire, but Ukrainians were not to constitute a significant danger for decades.
Uvarov, however, went so far as to redefine "Official Nationality" in the wake of the Brotherhood's demise.
In effect, he made the interpretation of the word "Nationality" (narodnost') even more dependent on the traditional notions of "Orthodoxy" and "Autocracy" than it had been when he promulgated Nicholas I's tripartite programme in 1833.
 "Russian Slavdom" , he wrote,
must in its pure form express unconditional allegiance to orthodoxy and autocracy; everything which passes beyond these bounds represents the admixture of alien concepts, the play of fantasy, or a mask behind which the ill-intentioned try to ensnare inexperience and entice dreamers.
By occasioning the promulgation of this revised version of Official Nationality, the first generation of Ukrainian cultural activists acquired an importance far greater than their numbers warranted.
If a few Ukrainians suffered as individuals at the hands of the Nicholaevan regime, Jews, like Poles, suffered collectively.
Whereas Catherine the Great had confined them to the western and southern borderlands of the empire and Alexander I had encouraged them to consider economic diversification and cultural assimilation, Nicholas intervened in their lives more dramatically.
In 1827 he not only obliged them to start performing military service but also declared that Jewish recruits were to be enlisted at the age of twelve rather than twenty.
Herzen came across even younger Jewish children on their way to the army in the first half of the 1830s.
A Jewish Statute of 1835 which reiterated the pious sentiments of Alexander I's statute of 1804 proved to be more impressive on paper than in reality.
The classification of Jews as "aliens" in the 1835 digest of imperial legislation seemed to encapsulate the government's true attitude.
At Nicholas's behest, P. D. Kiselev designed a series of measures in the 1840s whose aim was to quicken the rate at which Jews abandoned the traditions of their fathers.
By abolishing their organs of self-government, attempting to enrol them in secular educational institutions, and trying much harder than earlier legislators to force them out of the countryside into the towns, the Minister of State Properties intensified the subversion of Jewish communal life which had begun when community leaders had to make invidious choices about recruits for the army.
Not surprisingly, Nicholas I came to be "almost universally reviled in Russian-Jewish historiography as the Russian Haman" .
It is unlikely that the tsar felt more strongly about Jews than about other  ethnic groups.
He found them socially and administratively anomalous, but this was also his opinion of Poles.
Nicholas believed that the best thing non-Russians could do was become Russian.
Jews had a better chance of effecting the transition if, for example, they were recruited into the army as children.
From the tsar's point of view, his handling of Jewish matters was progressive.
Reform-minded Jews, furthermore, actually welcomed some of his innovations.
Michael Stanislawski paints a grim picture of Jewish affairs under Nicholas I but admits that "at no time in this period did policy toward the Jews depart from the framework and pattern of overall government activity" .
The tsar was trying to integrate his domains.
Since Jews deviated further than most other groups from the blueprint he had in mind, he needed to take particularly strong measures to make them conform to it.
THE CAUCASUS, CENTRAL ASIA, SIBERIA, FINNS AND BALTS
Poles, Ukrainians and Jews were all to be found in the western, south-western and southern parts of the empire.
Far to the south-east of St Petersburg, in the Caucasus, Nicholas fought the second of his two domestic wars.
Suppressing the Poles had taken less than a year, but the pacification of Muslims in the mountainous region between the Black Sea and the Caspian was to continue beyond the end of the reign.
Although Nicholas's victories over the Persians in 1828 and the Ottoman Empire in 1829 had made him temporarily safe from international complications in this area, they did little for the extension of Russian control over the peoples who lived to the north of Georgia.
The imperial frontier had moved to the south, but pockets of unconquered territory remained in the rear.
When congratulating Paskevich on the end of the war with the Turks in 1829, Nicholas told him that his next task was to be "the permanent pacification of the mountain peoples or the extermination of the recalcitrant" .
In the tsar's view, the new assignment was much more important than the one Paskevich had just completed.
Aleksei Ermolov, the Russian commander in the Caucasus whom Paskevich replaced in 1827, had been pursuing a conciliatory or "regionalist" policy for more than a decade.
Between the late 1820s and the early 1840s, St Petersburg tried the opposite approach — imposing Russian practices on people to whom they were totally alien.
Paskevich soon moved from the Caucasus to Warsaw, but other proconsuls continued his work.
Even Georgia proved troublesome in 1832, when a small number of aristocrats tried unsuccessfully to reverse the annexation of 1801.
Foreign rule, it seemed, had "not only united a previously divided Georgian territory, but reactivated a sense of Georgian identity" .
Muslims, however, proved to be  much more intractable than Christians.
In the early stages of the war for the Caucasus the Russians concentrated their resources in the west.
Having acquired the eastern coast of the Black Sea from the Turks, they found that forts were insufficient to protect it against raids from the interior.
While they were working their way into the hinterland, various peoples of the eastern Caucasus adopted a militant version of Islam and found a leader in the legendary Shamil.
By 1843 Dagestan, to the north-east of Georgia, was in uproar.
Fifteen years of insisting on integration had borne little fruit.
The tsar's attempts to dictate policy from St Petersburg had culminated, in 1842, in the creation of the Sixth Department of the Imperial Chancery, the only subdivision of that body to be charged with responsibility for a discrete geographical area.
Nicholas had begun to grasp, however, that even the most determined central intervention in Caucasian affairs was unlikely to further the cause of imperial unity.
In 1844 he signalled a change of direction by appointing Mikhail Vorontsov to the new post of Caucasian Viceroy.
Both the office and the office-holder were remarkable.
By creating a Viceroyalty, the tsar went beyond the policy of devolution which had operated in the Caucasus under Ermolov.
The new Viceroy was assigned greater authority than any other servant of the crown.
Even Paskevich, in the Congress Kingdom of Poland, had to defer on occasion to the ministries of the central government.
Vorontsov was an unlikely choice for the new position.
Although he had had a distinguished military record as a young man, he was sixty-two and had been engaged in predominantly civil duties for the previous twenty years.
It was doubtful whether he could take on mountain tribes.
His reputation, moreover, was that of a liberal.
Because he had been brought up in England (where his father was a long-serving Russian ambassador), his outlook was broader than that of the majority of Russian nobles.
He had been the first serf-owner to take advantage of the reformist Law on Obligated Peasants.
Although he had always worked hard to maintain good relations with the tsar and the central government, he was not a professional courtier.
His great qualification for the new post lay in the fact that since 1823 he had been an outstandingly successful Governor of New Russia (the coastal part of the modern Ukraine).
There, he had presided over a society only slightly less diverse than that of the Caucasus and had fostered its development without trespassing dangerously on local sensibilities.
This experience gave him at least a chance of succeeding in the Caucasus.
After an abortive attempt to force Shamil into the open in 1845, Vorontsov combined a policy of gradually strangling the rebellious highlanders with an approach to civil administration which allowed natives a little room for manoeuvre.
Opinions differ on the extent of his success.
Recent scholars have pointed out that "When Nicholas died in February 1855, the Caucasus remained unconquered" and that Vorontsov's "undertakings were often limited and not as successful as he hoped" .
The region remained peaceful during the Crimean War, however, and Shamil's twenty-five-year  career was brought to an end in 1859 (five years after Vorontsov retired).
In the context of a general discussion of Nicholas I's attitude towards non-Russians (both inside and outside the empire), it is more important to note the sheer complexity of Caucasian affairs than to grade the first Viceroy's performance.
So long as frontier zones of the empire remained insecure, the tsar had to eschew an ambitious foreign policy.
He could make himself out to be the apostle of order in Europe, but he had to devote far more his attention to order at home.
The Caucasus alone would have been enough to incline him to seek peace in external relations.
If the Caucasus had been easier to control or the Khan of Khiva less suspicious, the western shore of the Caspian might have become the embarkation point for central Asia.
As early as 1819 Ermolov despatched Captain N. N. Murav'ev from Baku across Turkmenia into the territory of the Uzbeks.
On reaching Khiva, however, he failed to convince the local khan that Uzbek goods ought to travel due west instead of north-west to Astrakhan.
The central Asian khanates (Khiva, Bukhara and Kokand) did not trust the Russians enough to take their advice on trade routes.
They were probably right to suspect that St Petersburg had begun to think of intervening in their affairs.
The prominent politician Admiral Mordvinov had recommended the creation of a strong Russian colony at Krasnovodsk on the eastern Caspian in 1816.
In 1819 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs acquired a permanent Asiatic desk, and in the same year Alexander I created an inter-ministerial body, the Asiatic Committee, to consider how Russia's trade with the Orient could best be maintained and improved.
If central Asia could not be approached from the Caspian it had to be penetrated from the north, which meant bridging the gap between Russia's south-eastern military outpost at Orenburg and the Aral Sea.
The nomads of Kazakhstan, in other words, had to be brought more firmly under Russian control.
In the reign of Nicholas I, "The flow of Russian settlers into northern Kazakhstan increased sharply" .
When Khiva backed the Kazakhs in their resistance to Russian penetration, St Petersburg vacillated.
It could either launch an offensive against Khiva or gradually pacify Kazakhstan by constructing forts and attempting to persuade Khiva that its behaviour was ill judged.
The problem could not be ignored, for Britain was strengthening her hold on northern India, pushing into Afghanistan and despatching agents into the khanates from the south.
The question of securing the central Asian trade began to look urgent.
In 1839 advocates of direct action experienced a severe set-back when the governor of Orenburg led an expedition against Khiva which ended in disaster.
Russia needed peace until the construction of forts in Kazakhstan had improved her lines of communication.
Fortunately, from the point of view of the tsar, the Khan of Bukhara was pro-Russian and gave him the chance to threaten Khiva from the rear.
A crisis, however, was in the offing.
Although a survey of Russia's dealings with central Asia in the first half of the nineteenth century concludes that "Bukhara, Khiva, and Kokand were not primary objects of interest" , the work as a whole provides massive evidence for the view that only  the problem of traversing Kazakhstan prevented the khanates from coming to the top of the imperial agenda.
When central Asia became a prime focus of tsarist policy in the next reign, Britain was sufficiently involved in the region to object.
Thus the time spent on securing Kazakhstan turned what might have been a sideshow in central Asia into a major international issue.
Other non-Russian parts of the empire posed fewer problems in the reign of Nicholas I than the Polish west, the Ukrainian and Caucasian south, and the Turkic south-east.
The native peoples of Siberia were allowed to go on benefiting from the reforms which Speranskii had introduced in 1822; in this area "there was no sustained programme of enforced Russification or even christianisation" .
Although the exiled Decembrists worried local officials and prompted a Governor-General to recommend that they be sent elsewhere because they were "gradually disseminating their ideas and…might be harmful" , they were far less militant than exiled Poles, whose plans to take over Omsk in 1833 seem to have given the authorities their largest Siberian scare of the reign.
Sensibly, from the point of view of the regime, Nicholas had taken the precaution of consigning the one prominent conspirator of 1825 who actually came from Siberia, Grigorii Baten'kov, to the Peter and Paul Fortress in St Petersburg.
It was not until the last decade of Nicholas's reign that a Governor of Eastern Siberia began recommending a forward policy in northern China, and not until the accession of Alexander II that he gained the ear of the tsar.
Whereas Kazakhstan was already thought to be a springboard for additional territorial acquisitions, Siberia, as yet, was not.
Indeed, Russia seemed to be drawing in her horns on the eastern edge of her dominions.
In 1821 Alexander I had tried to stop foreign powers fishing and whaling between the Sea of Okhotsk and Russian Alaska, but in 1824 he modified his policy in the light of the United States' promulgation of the Monroe Doctrine.
In 1832 Nicholas made a trade agreement with Washington which lasted for the rest of the century.
Since no more than 1,000 Russian citizens lived in Russian America at any one time in the history of the Russian-American Company, holding on to Alaska indefinitely was going to prove difficult.
The sale of Fort Ross in California in 1841 marked a well-defined stage on the road to withdrawal.
Even Finns and the non-Russians on the southern coast of the Baltic Sea gave St Petersburg fewer headaches in the reign of Nicholas I than inhabitants of the western and southern parts of the empire.
Finns, Estonians and Latvians all had grounds for complaint.
Finland had been annexed only recently, and the impoverishment of the Baltic peasantry which resulted from their emancipation under Alexander I could have given rise to extensive social unrest.
The government trod carefully, however, and the two regions remained at peace.
Finns profited from the accident that their Governor-General, Aleksandr Menshikov, was one of Nicholas's most prominent, trusted, and above all busiest officials.
Menshikov could not afford to devote much time to his Finnish duties, but "identified Finland with his own authority" .
As a result, he was unlikely to initiate a Russianizing drive  of his own but equally unlikely to let others begin one.
So long as Finland remained tranquil, Menshikov was prepared to listen to advisers in the Grand Duchy who put the interests of the local population before those of Russia.
Separate Finnish tariffs, the Finnish Lutheran Church and Finnish laws survived the reign unscathed.
The Finnish language actually gained in status as a result of Elias Lönnrot's publication of Finnish folk poetry in the Kalevala.
In the Baltic provinces, meanwhile — modern Estonia and Latvia — the tsar considered the German nobles his friends.
Russianization was pointless while they kept the lower orders in their place and went on providing generals for the Russian army.
The tsar was prepared, on occasion, to reproach German nobles for allowing the condition of the Estonian and Latvian peasantry to deteriorate, and in educational and especially religious affairs he sanctioned attempts to bring the Baltic provinces into line with the rest of the empire.
In 1845, however, he recognized the privileges of the German barons in a two-volume collection of local laws, and in 1849 he subjected the Slavophile, Iurii Samarin, to twelve days in the Peter and Paul Fortress and a personal interrogation for inveighing against the German hegemony in privately circulated "Letters from Riga" .
By comparison with his policies in the western provinces and the Caucasus, Nicholas's policy towards the non-Russians of the northern part of the empire was to leave well alone.
Despite the relative tranquillity of Siberia and the European north, coping with the frontier zones as a whole significantly reduced the imperial regime's capacity for taking decisive action in international affairs.
Quite apart from the borders' incessant claims on the tsar's attention, they tied down his troops.
In the late 1830s eighteen of the regime's twenty-three infantry divisions were stationed in Poland and the western provinces, two in the Caucasus, one in Finland, one in Siberia and one at Orenburg on the edge of Kazakhstan, a distribution which accurately reflected the importance of the various "peripheral" difficulties.
Western powers were wrong to believe that tsarist troops in Poland were aimed at the heart of Europe, for they were needed where they were.
They were needed even in the heartland of the empire.
In Nicholas's reign soldiers rarely had to deal with large-scale disturbances in the Russian part of the empire (apart from the rebellion of the Novgorod military colonists in 1831), but since the bureaucracy was small (relative to the size of the empire's population) they were constantly engaged in business which other societies left to civilians.
 "One signal achievement of the French Revolution" , writes John Keep, "was to affirm the primacy of the civil power" .
Owing to the shortage of suitable personnel, no such primacy existed in the mid-nineteenth-century Russian Empire.
Military authorities often performed the duties of the judiciary: "civilians found themselves facing court martial because they fell into one of the categories — 41 in all — which placed them within military jurisdiction" .
Between 1827 and 1846, for example, some 3,400 people were sent to Siberia as a result of judicial procedures conducted by soldiers.
Thus the fact that the tsar possessed a large army did not mean that he could risk significant external commitments.
He needed it to keep himself afloat at home.
Financial exigency as well as domestic security dictated a peace policy, for the second of the two early wars and the suppression of the Polish rebellion inflated the national debt from 652 million paper rubles in 1828 to 823 million in 1832.
Financial considerations may have played as big a part as stupidity in explaining the military administration's failure to switch from smooth-bore to rifled muskets before the Crimean War.
If they did, the tsar must have known that fighting a major European power was ill advised.
Even if they did not, he had reason enough to stay his hand.
When, therefore, Nesselrode said that the European revolutions of 1830 turned Nicholas into "the impartial defender of European equilibrium" , he did not mean that the tsar had decided to back his "impartiality" with force.
The memorandum gave that impression, but it was written in the light of developments occasioned by the European revolutions of 1848.
For the greater part of the 1830s and 1840s Nicholas I dedicated himself to international peace.
THE TURKISH PROBLEM IN THE 1830S AND 1840S
Just after Nicholas had completed the subjugation of the Poles, the Ottoman Empire threatened him with the need for further military action.
In 1831 the Sultan's Egyptian vassal, Mehemet Ali, launched an assault on Syria which challenged Constantinople's authority and endangered the strong position which Russia had acquired on her southern flank as a result of the Treaty of Adrianople.
Egyptian forces captured Acre and Damascus in May and June 1832 and continued their march northward.
In November 1832 Nicholas sent an emissary to Turkey and Egypt to stiffen the resistance of the former and confront the latter with the prospect of Russian intervention.
In December Mehemet Ali's son overwhelmed the Turkish army at Konya in southern Asia Minor.
Since France was pro-Egyptian and Britain's fleets were otherwise engaged, the Sultan had to ask Russia for more than diplomatic assistance.
By invitation, some twenty Russian ships and 10,000 Russian soldiers arrived outside Constantinople in February and March 1833.
The fundamentally cautious Mehemet Ali decided to withdraw from Asia Minor and content himself with Syria, but Nicholas realized that, to prevent a recurrence of the crisis, he had to find a way of institutionalizing his short-term assistance to the Ottomans.
He was not confident of his ability to do so.
In February he had told the Austrian Ambassador in St Petersburg, "I lack the power to give life to a corpse, and the Turkish empire is dead" .
He was not prepared, however, to involve himself in the European war which would have resulted from a substantial direct intervention  in Turkish affairs.
Only one option remained: reverting to the policy of alliance with the Ottomans which his father, Paul, had adopted in 1798.
In July 1833 Russian and Turkish representatives signed the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi, a defensive agreement under which St Petersburg promised to assist the Turks in times of crisis and Constantinople promised to prevent warships from passing through the Dardanelles.
Third parties believed that Unkiar-Skelessi marked a further stage in Russia's southward advance.
It was unclear to them why St Petersburg should promise the Turks assistance in return for the closure of the Dardanelles, when closing the straits between the Aegean and the Black Sea was a longstanding Turkish principle.
Nicholas appeared to have acted gratuitously.
The British Foreign Secretary, Palmerston, wrote in a despatch of December 1833 that there could be "No reasonable doubt…[but]that the Russian Govt. is intently engaged in the prosecution of those schemes of aggrandizement toward the South which, ever since the Reign of Catherine, have formed a prominent feature of Russian policy" .
In reality, aggrandizement was very far from Russia's thoughts.
The tsar had been slow to attack Turkey at the beginning of his reign, and had adopted an explicitly pro-Turkish policy afer winning the war of 1828–9.
He wanted an assurance that the Dardanelles would remain closed to warships because he feared the possibility of a British or French attack on the southern part of the Russian Empire.
He promised the Turks assistance not because he wished to establish a protectorate over them, but because he wanted their regime to survive and Britain had been unable to assist them.
Two months after Unkiar-Skelessi, at Münchengrätz in Bohemia, he explained his Turkish policy to the Emperor of Austria and persuaded him to act as an additional guarantor of the integrity of the Ottoman lands.
In 1834, as we have already seen, he brought to an end his six-year occupation of the Danubian Principalities.
The flaw in his Near Eastern policy arose not from its objectives, which were peaceable, but from the secrecy with which all foreign policies were conducted in the nineteenth century and which often prevented the Great Powers from understanding each other.
When, in 1839, the Sultan made a disastrous attempt to recoup his losses of 1833, all the Great Powers saw the need for keeping the new conflict within bounds.
Egyptian forces again proved militarily superior to the Turks; the Turkish fleet went over to the enemy; the Sultan died when hostilities were at their peak; and an Egyptian march on Constantinople seemed even likelier than at the end of 1832.
True to the policy of backing the Constantinople regime, Nesselrode told the Russian ambassador in Paris that St Petersburg could not allow "the Pasha of Egypt…to place…the existence of the Ottoman Empire in peril" .
Because, on this occasion, the other four Great Powers seemed to agree with the Russian Foreign Minister, the crisis promised to be short-lived.
France, however, realized that her good relations with Egypt would suffer and her influence in the Levant diminish if she participated in an international move to force Mehemet Ali's withdrawal from Syria.
The powers' united front broke down and the crisis  lasted two years.
Britain believed that she came out of it very well.
Undaunted by French bluster, she took Beirut and Acre in 1840 and played the major part in obliging the Egyptians to return home.
She then deprived the tsar of the special status he had enjoyed at Constantinople since 1833.
In 1841 all five Great Powers — France having returned to the fold — signed a "Straits Convention" which internationalized the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi.
Not just Russia, but all the major European countries, committed themselves to banning non-Turkish warships from the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles when the Ottoman Empire was at peace.
Palmerston seemed to have defeated the tsar.
Nesselrode, however, the tsar's foreign minister, had good reason for feeling satisfied with the course of the Near Eastern events.
Since, whatever western countries believed, it was tsarist policy to keep the Ottoman Empire in being as long as possible, he welcomed foreign assistance in the pursuit of that objective.
Having been unable to get it in 1833, he was glad that it was forthcoming in 1841.
Unkiar-Skelessi had been due for renewal anyway.
The enmity which arose between France and Britain in 1840 was a bonus, since it reduced the likelihood that the two countries would act jointly against Russia on a future occasion.
Far from damaging Russian diplomatic interests, Nesselrode felt that the second crisis over Mehemet Ali had advanced them.
Unfortunately, Nicholas now proceeded to misunderstand British policy on the Near East as badly as Britain misunderstood the policy he was pursuing himself.
Long years of involvement in Turkish affairs had led him to believe that, whatever he did to prevent it, the Ottoman Empire was going to collapse sooner rather than later.
Aggressively inclined courtiers like Prince Menshikov (who was much more militant as a diplomat and as Navy Minister than as Governor of Finland) were beginning to press for pre-emptive action.
The tsar still shared Nesselrode's view that the Turkish regime should be kept alive as long as possible, but he was determined not to be caught napping if the health of the "sick man of Europe" broke down irrevocably.
The way in which the crisis of 1839–41 was resolved persuaded him that Britain might welcome an exploration of the two countries' thoughts on the future of the Near East.
On a visit to London in 1844, the tsar expressed his conviction that the demise of the Ottoman Empire was inevitable.
He affirmed that he would continue to work for the maintenance of the status quo, but he felt that the Great Powers could no longer avoid discussing the international consequences which would ensue when Turkey fell.
Nicholas took British acceptance of Nesselrode's subsequent summary of his London exchanges as tantamount to acquiescence in a policy of bilateral action on Turkey.
Since he also believed, after the meeting at Münchengrätz in 1833, that Austria would take a lead from Russia on Ottoman affairs, he began to feel that he had a mandate for resolute action when the "eastern question" next arose.
In London, however, he had failed to broach a central issue.
 "The precise point which was never treated in detail was the degree of imminence of the admittedly forthcoming dissolution of Turkey" .
Had she been asked, Britain would have said that she thought  "dissolution" was much further off than it was in the mind of the tsar.
Whereas from Britain's point of view the London exchanges decided nothing, from the tsar's point of view they cleared the decks for international action.
Seeds of non-comprehension had been sown which were to lead, within a decade, to major hostilities.
RUSSIA AND THE EUROPEAN REVOLUTIONS OF 1848
In the pan-European crisis of 1848, however, Nicholas made plain that where external relations were concerned he was still fundamentally timorous.
The belief that his response to the fall of Louis Philippe was to say,"Saddle your horses, gentlemen!
A republic has been declared in France", is unfounded.
The multiple revolutions which took place in western and central Europe had a far greater effect on his domestic policies than on his readiness to engage in foreign adventures.
Admittedly, the tsar issued more threats and undertook more fighting in 1848 and 1849 than he had done when Europe last fell prey to upheavals in 1830.
The meeting at Münchengrätz in 1833 had increased his confidence not only vis-à-vis the Ottoman Empire but also in respect of the West, for Austria and Russia (and subsequently Prussia) had agreed not only to maintain the integrity of the Sultan's possessions, but also to guarantee each other 's Polish territories and to assist any established regime which found itself threatened by insurgents.
The second of these three articles of agreement had given rise to tripartite action against a rising of west Galician Poles in 1846.
In 1848, the third aspect of the arrangement looked ripe for activation.
Two days after learning of the establishment of the French Second Republic, the tsar ordered a partial mobilization of the troops on his western borders.
In a public statement of mid-March 1848 he proclaimed that he was "ready to meet [his]enemies, wherever they may appear" .
Russian troops crossed the Pruth into Moldavia in June and in August moved on to Wallachia.
For once, the occupation of the Danubian Principalities had an object other than frightening the Turks.
Constantinople took fright, but the tsar intended his troops to move west into Transylvania and attack the Austrian emperor's rebellious Hungarian subjects in the rear.
Simultaneously, Croatian forces loyal to Vienna were to attack the Hungarians head-on.
In November 1848, however, after the Hungarians had beaten off the Croatians, Nicholas ordered his soldiers not to cross the Austrian frontier.
He returned to the offensive only when a Polish general in Hungarian service, Józef Bem, took most of Transylvania out of the hands of the local Austrian commanders.
Nicholas pretended that Hungarian forces were being used in the Polish interest: "both Austrians and Russians skilfully  manoeuvred with the assertion that the Hungarian Revolution was not a Hungarian national movement, but a Polish plot against the Russian State" .
A small number of Russian troops crossed into Austrian territory in February 1849 at the invitation of the hard-pressed Austrian officer on the ground.
Driven out in March, they returned in massive numbers in June, this time from the north as well as the east and after Nicholas had obliged the Austrian Emperor to beg for help in person.
Under military pressure on all sides (in the main, as it turned out, from revivified Austrian forces under General Haynau), the Hungarians capitulated to the Russians on 13 August.
Russia fell out with Turkey before the end of the month because the Sultan refused to extradite Polish and Hungarian refugees who had fled to his territory, but this negative consequence of the invasion seemed hardly to matter.
The tsar could congratulate himself on Russia's first military triumph since the suppression of the Polish rebellion in 1831.
The Russian invasion of Hungary made Nicholas look like a firebrand, but it had not involved him in taking many risks.
 "The tsar and his generals expected an easy campaign marked by heart-warming victories" , which was more or less what they got.
Nicholas was far too worried about the possibility of domestic complications to contemplate foreign entanglements whose outcome was unpredictable.
Even in connection with Hungary he moved slowly and undertook extremely thorough diplomatic preparations.
He may really have believed that Poles were running the Hungarian rebellion and could carry disaffection north of the Carpathians.
If he did, he was bound to conclude that his vital interests were at stake.
The most wanton of his foreign exploits could thus be said to have been conceived, misguidedly, as an act of self-defence.
That Nicholas was far more concerned about the domestic than the international repercussions of the 1848 revolutions is evident from the much greater dynamism of his domestic behaviour.
According to the Prussian ambassador to St Petersburg, he was relatively confident at the beginning of February 1848 that he could prevent the dissatisfaction which was mounting elsewhere in Europe from penetrating his domains.
His complacency in domestic affairs disappeared overnight when the news arrived of the fall of the French monarchy.
After receiving alarmist reports from the heads of both the Second and Third Departments, on 27 February /11 March 1848 Nicholas set up a committee under Menshikov to recommend ways of limiting the circulation of unwelcome ideas.
When news arrived that not only France but also the Habsburg Empire was tottering, he became yet more strongly inclined to batten down the hatches.
The Prussian ambassador who had thought Nicholas sanguine about the stability of his regime in February found him anything but relaxed in March.
The ambassador reported that "The Emperor is monitoring the serious political illness which has gripped all countries, and believes his empire very far from being immune from infection" ; Nicholas was now of the opinion that"Highly reprehensible principles have been disseminated among young people who completed their university courses around three years ago, among  people who have lived abroad for a long time, and also among teachers, professors, writers and journalists.
The supervision of journalists, furthermore, has been too feeble".
On 14/26 March 1848, two days after the Prussian ambassador despatched this report, Nicholas imposed strict limitations on the publication of news about foreign disturbances.
The public declaration that he was "ready to meet [his]enemies, wherever they may appear" was aimed not only at foreigners but also at his own subjects.
Inflammatory proclamations had already been pasted on the cathedral in Riga.
A manifesto printed in Germany had been circulating in the western Ukraine.
When Vienna emancipated the serfs of Galicia in May 1848, the Governor-General of the Russian Empire's south-western provinces reported unrest among Ukrainians on the tsar's side of the Galician border.
These events make it likely that the mobilization of troops on the western borders was designed to keep order among the empire's non-Russians rather than to prepare the ground for an invasion of central Europe.
Nicholas instructed his foreign missions to issue no visas for entry into Russia without seeking St Petersburg's assent.
Foreign merchants were still to be permitted to enter the country, but Russian subjects were not to be allowed to leave and Russians living abroad were summoned home.
Early in April 1848 the committee which Nicholas had set up under Menshikov reported negatively on the two most popular journals of the day, The Contemporary and Notes of the Fatherland, and recommended the creation of a new body to supervise the activity of the regime's censors.
Nicholas accepted the suggestion instantly and turned three members of Menshikov's team into what became known as "The Buturlin Committee" (after the name of its chairman) or "The Committee of 2 April 1848" (after the date of its foundation).
The Committee of 2 April 1848 remained in being until 1855 and became one of the most striking embodiments of the tsar's descent into obscurantism.
Although intellectuals had always lived dangerously under Nicholas, they had never been silenced altogether.
Now they were.
In the atmosphere fostered by the Buturlin Committee even the work of academics became suspect.
In September 1848 Moscow University's Society of Russian History and Antiquities published a translation of Giles Fletcher's Of the Russe Commonwealth, a description of Muscovy written in the late sixteenth century.
Fletcher's book contained a "devastating description of Russian manners and morals" , but was so antique that its scholarly translators must have thought themselves safe in making it accessible.
By law they were free to publish any work which related to a period before the Romanov dynasty came to the throne.
In late 1848, however, the law was no defence.
The relevant issue of the Society's journal was recalled, the journal was temporarily closed, and the secretary of the Society, Professor Bodianskii, was banished to Kazan".
Fletcher's book was not to appear in Russian for another fifty-seven years.
Paradoxically, the Society of Russian History had felt the wrath of the Minister of Education, an official who was less benighted than some of his peers.
Not long before Of the Russe Commonwealth was suppressed, Uvarov had dismissed Sergei Stroganov as Curator of Moscow University.
To get his own back, Stroganov took advantage of the atmosphere of March 1848 to complain to the tsar of the Ministry of Education's "liberalism" .
Uvarov then attacked the Moscow University History Society because Stroganov remained its chairman.
Aleksandr Nikitenko, the liberally inclined censor, confided to his diary that "such incidents involving government officials only demonstrate the deep, pervasive immorality to which everyone is accustomed here" .
Uvarov's little victory was one of his last successes.
The Committee of 2 April 1848 had been set up partly because his ministry was thought to be soft.
The minister said that he felt as if he were being pursued by a wild animal and could only throw off his clothes to distract its attention.
 "During the reaction of 1849 there was nothing left to throw off, and Uvarov retired" .
What finally undermined him was the arrest, in April 1849, of a group of St Petersburg intellectuals associated with Mikhail Petrashevskii.
Petrashevskii, the son of a St Petersburg doctor, had been eccentric even as a teenager at the Tsarskoe Selo lycée.
He became a junior official in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1840, but was never a promising candidate for promotion in the government service.
A long black beard and a penchant for smoking cigars in the street were the outward signs of a nonconformity whose intellectual dimension consisted of enthusiasm for French utopian socialism.
In the course of the 1840s the young radical put together an informal association of disaffected contemporaries whose ranks, at one time or another, included the novelist Dostoevsky, the satirist and future provincial governor Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin, the future panslav Nikolai Danilevskii, Vladimir Miliutin (a brother of the man who reformed St Petersburg's municipal administration in 1846), Valerian Maikov (brother of a distinguished lyric poet) and Nikolai Speshnev, who turned out to be the most extreme member of the company but was also "the only one…to lead the life of a leisured gentleman" .
Not many of Petrashevskii's friends were budding revolutionaries.
When the friends met at his apartment on Fridays, "no specific projects or plots were ever worked out, but criticisms of the existing order were voiced, as were gibes and regrets about our present condition" .
The group communicated their ideas to the public by collaborating on A Pocket Dictionary of Foreign Words Which Have Entered the Vocabulary of the Russian Language, a work whose purpose was to discuss not foreign words per se but rather the social and political phenomena to which many of them related.
Maikov, prime mover in the relatively mild first volume, deplored chair-bound intellectuals in a discussion of the word "Academic" and put forward a "great man" view of history in the discussion of "Authority" .
In Volume Two, when Petrashevskii himself was in charge, "the thought of socialist writers [was]presented with reckless enthusiasm" .
Both volumes of the Dictionary passed the censorship (in 1845 and 1846 respectively), but Volume Two was proscribed a month after publication when the authorities grasped what the circle was up to.
Unrepentant, the naive Petrashevskii proceeded in February 1848 to circulate a document which called for granting merchants the right to own populated estates on condition that they dealt with their serfs in accordance with the Law on Obligated Peasants of 1842.
The timing could hardly have been worse.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs placed the circle under surveillance and delayed making arrests only because it wanted to demonstrate, by compiling the fullest possible dossier, that its investigative abilities were superior to those of the Third Department.
On reporting to the tsar in 1849, the Minister received the title of Count for providing Nicholas with more information about a group of dissidents than he had had since the exposure of the Decembrists.
Of 252 people who were questioned, 51 were exiled and 21 condemned to death.
The death sentences were commuted at the end of 1849, but only when the prisoners had arrived at the place of execution and been led to believe, as Dostoevsky put it, that they "had no more than a minute left to live" .
Dostoevsky underwent a spiritual transformation in Siberia which turned him into the greatest of nineteenth-century writers, but Petrashevskii died there and was buried in unconsecrated ground in 1866.
With the exception of Speshnev's subsection, the "Petrashevtsy" (as Petrashevskii's associates came to be known) were no more radical than others who dissented from the administrative and social practices of Nicholas I. The Dictionary of Foreign Words was one of a number of indirect criticisms of the regime to find its way into print in the 1840s.
Petrashevskii's proposal that merchants be allowed to buy populated estates hardly bespoke a passion for social revolution.
Dostoevsky's main offence seems to have been reading Belinskii's "Letter to Gogol" .
The main significance of the circle lay not in the views of its members but in the viciousness of the government's response to them.
Apart from the Ukrainophile Kirillo-Methodian Society, which the regime thought particularly dangerous because of its obsessive concern for the unity of the empire, no circle of intellectuals was treated as harshly as the Petrashevtsy in the period between 1826 and 1848.
After revolution had begun in Europe, Nicholas was less determined to send his troops abroad than to make clear that he would brook no dissent at home.
Education, in the tsar's view, lay at the heart of his domestic difficulties.
On 30 April 1849, eight days after the Petrashevtsy were arrested, Nicholas reduced student enrolments to 300 per university, a cut of nearly two-thirds.
Uvarov's position as education minister became untenable and he resigned six months later.
What little sympathy the authorities had shown for the advance of enlightenment came to an end.
Arts-based schools turned into technical colleges.
The new education minister, Shirinskii-Shikhmatov, shared none of his predecessor's intellectual curiosity.
On a visit to Moscow University he was appalled by the historian Sergei Solov'ev's observation that it was difficult to work out what precisely the medieval chronicler Nestor had contributed to the chronicle which went by his name.
In the minister's opinion Nestor's chronicle was a treasure whose  worth should not be questioned.
Fortunately, from the point of view of Shirinskii-Shikhmatov, the newly appointed Curator of Moscow University was "a typical Nicholaevan general, the limited and ignorant V. I. Nazimov" , who took the view that students ought not to go into cafés to read papers and ought to do up their jackets and wear three-cornered hats and swords.
Nazimov's enthusiasm for discipline was applied by a new Governor-General to Moscow as a whole.
Merchants were not famous for taking exception to the behaviour of government appointees, but one of them likened the new Moscow Governor, A. A. Zakrevskii, to an Asiatic khan or Chinese viceroy.
Zakrevskii's political opinions were so far to the right that he thought the Moscow Slavophiles were dangerous subversives; his antipathy to modernization led him to deplore not only the construction of new factories in Moscow but also the expansion of old ones.
The fate of the Russian educational system and of the inhabitants of Moscow was shared, between 1848 and 1855, by the country as a whole.
Aleksandr Nikitenko spoke for many intellectuals when, in 1852, he privately advised people who thought for themselves "to completely scorn this stupid nonsense, this contemporary life, while consoling yourself (if you can) with faith in a brighter future" .
From the regime's point of view, however, the policy of responding cautiously to events outside the country while insisting remorselessly on conformity at home seemed to be an unqualified success.
In the second half of 1848 the Prussian ambassador was reporting to Berlin that St Petersburg's main concerns were not revolution but a cholera epidemic, the expectation of a poor harvest and a shortage of cash.
Life, in other words, had returned to normal.
Summoning Russians back from abroad proved to be a mistake in view of the fact that the 80,000 "returnees" disseminated information about the startling developments in Paris, Berlin and Vienna, but the news was not enough to prevent the Russian Empire from remaining the one continental power to escape the consequences of the "springtime of the nations" .
Isaiah Berlin has argued that because educated Russians failed to stage a revolution in 1848 they were "unbroken by the collapse of liberal hopes in Europe in 1849–51" and lived to fight another day.
This was true, but took some time to become clear.
For the moment the tsar not only held all the cards at home but also was continuing to improve his position abroad.
Prussia's attempt in 1850 to capitalize on Austrian weakness and turn herself into the pre-eminent power in Germany came to nothing when the Austrians made plain that they had recovered their nerve and were prepared to go to war on the matter.
Russia backed Austria, only to make plain in 1851 that she was no more willing to contemplate Viennese domination of German affairs than she had been to back Prussian.
In the wake of the 1848 revolutions St Petersburg appeared to have acquired a larger say in the affairs of central Europe than it had possessed for a generation.
In 1850 Nesselrode expressed the view that "Russia's position and that of her Sovereign has not been as attractive or as powerful since 1814" .
Nicholas had put down the Hungarians, rounded up dissidents, held the ring  between Austria and Prussia, re-advertised Russia's claim to be the strongest power on the European mainland, and given notice that he could keep his regime in place for the foreseeable future.
From the point of view of the tsar, Russian skies seemed to be cloudless.
THE CRIMEAN WAR AND THE DEATH OF THE TSAR
Far to the west, however, a change had taken place which gave a new twist to relations between the Great Powers.
Habsburgs and Hohenzollerns were back in their palaces, but France's king had gone for good.
A nephew of Napoleon I had been elected President of the French Second Republic in December 1848 and was to become Emperor of the French in 1852.
In the period of his presidency Louis Napoleon's principal concern was to maximize his domestic authority in order to prepare the ground for turning himself into Napoleon III.
When, in 1849, he despatched French troops to reinstate the Pope in Rome, and when, the following year, he revived Catholic claims to control various Christian buildings in Jerusalem and Bethlehem, he was trying to convince Catholics at home of his piety.
The second move, however, had dangerous implications.
Because the tsar could not allow Catholics to challenge the standing of the Orthodox Church in the Ottoman Empire, and because he could not overlook a renewal of French interest in the Near East, he was bound to contest French claims to the management of the "Holy Places" of Palestine.
What seemed to be a "mere church wardens' quarrel" turned into "a question of power and influence" .
In time, a cloud no bigger than a man's hand produced a thunderstorm.
France's leader understood what he was doing.
Although at first he had to consolidate his position at home, it was always his ambition to undermine the European order which had come into being after the defeat of his uncle.
Since, in 1850, the one bastion of that order which had escaped major trouble in 1848 was the Russian Empire, it was likely that at some point France would throw down the gauntlet to the tsar.
By raising the question of the Holy Places the French President not only gained ground at home but also set in train a long-term policy.
Nicholas, on the other hand, was labouring under several misapprehensions.
He had probably become over-confident in his attitude to the outside world.
In twenty-five years on the throne he had suffered no major international reverses.
It had become difficult for him to imagine anything other than a successful outcome to his diplomatic and military operations.
He did not expect that he would have to go to war over the Holy Places, but if he was called upon to do so, he thought that he could produce the men, guns and money he would need for victory.
He also believed, first, that France was unlikely to be able to secure an alliance with Britain  (because of the two countries' disagreement about the Near East in 1840); second, that Britain might support Russia in the event of a Russian attack on the Ottoman Empire (because of the Anglo-Russian discussions which had taken place in London in 1844); and third, that in any event he could count on the support of Austria (because of the assistance he had rendered Vienna in putting down the Hungarians in 1849).
All these opinions turned out to be mistaken.
The Ottoman Empire, meanwhile, sensed the beginning of new friendships.
When France asked the Sultan to make concessions to Catholics in the Holy Land, both parties knew that Russia would object.
France, therefore, had to promise the Ottomans that she would come to their aid if complications arose.
Since, in 1849, the British had encouraged Constantinople to reject Russian requests for the surrender of the Polish and Hungarian refugees who had fled to Ottoman territory after the failure of the Hungarian revolution, the Turks believed that Britain, as well as France, had their interests at heart.
In other words, they felt more confident about their capacity to deal with the tsar than at any point since the end of the 1820s.
In 1850 neither St Petersburg nor Constantinople nor the western powers realized that war was on the horizon, but with hindsight it is possible to see that the battle-lines were drawn.
In December 1852, after two and a half years of dithering, the Ottoman Empire acceded to French demands in respect of the Holy Places.
Nicholas knew that he had to do something, but he was not sure what.
In the first half of 1853 he initiated or sanctioned three responses: "He appealed to Great Britain for support, and took out of the lumber room the forgotten agreement of 1844" ; he sent an emissary to Constantinople for bilateral talks; and he began to make plans for fighting.
All three approaches were highly speculative.
The British Prime Minister, Lord Aberdeen, was inclined to be sympathetic to Russian entreaties, but his government was a coalition and some of his ministerial colleagues disagreed with him.
The British ambassador at Constantinople, meanwhile, was pro-Turkish to the point of ignoring instructions from London which told him to advise the Turks to give ground to Russia.
The tsar's second response to the crisis of early 1853, sending an emissary to Constantinople, seemed to promise more immediate rewards than the first.
His emissary, Menshikov, spent two and a half months at the Turkish capital and succeeded in reversing the Turks' decision on the Holy Places.
Finesse, however, was not one of his most notable characteristics.
Having scored a point, he made the mistake of trying to score another.
Taking advantage of the discretionary powers granted him by the tsar, he asked for a treaty guaranteeing Russia's right to a protectorate over the Orthodox Christians of the Ottoman Empire.
This was unacceptable to the Turks because it would have involved them in legitimizing Russia's longstanding and deliberate misinterpretation of the Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainardji of 1774.
By pressing Russia's claims, Menshikov plucked defeat out of victory.
Russia's battle plans, meanwhile, were based on the apparently sound proposition that Austria would fight on her side.
Austria not only had historical reasons for taking Russia's part, but also was at odds with the Turks over the principality of Montenegro in the western Balkans.
It was hardly surprising, in these circumstances, that Nicholas abandoned a hair-brained scheme for launching a direct attack on Constantinople and replaced it with Paskevich's proposals for a Russian occupation of the Danubian Principalities, an Austrian occupation of Serbia and Herzegovina, a blockade of the Bosphorus, and an eventual Austro-Russian partition of the Ottoman Empire.
Depending on Austrian cooperation was unwise, however, for Austria had more to lose from the Ottoman Empire's collapse than any of the Great Powers.
It was not sensible for her to contemplate enlarging her domains.
The year 1848 had demonstrated that she was unable to control the territory which was hers already.
In the long run, collaboration with Russia would have turned her into Russia's vassal.
The tsar was wrong to think that he could rely on payment for the help he had given Austria in 1849.
 "Was not Schwarzenberg himself [the Austrian first minister who died in 1852]alleged to have declared that Austria would one day astound the world by the greatness of her ingratitude?" 
Nicholas certainly did not want to fight alone, and probably did not want to fight at all.
Nesselrode, his foreign minister, remained pacific to the end.
The crisis had been brewing for so long, however, that the tsar could not be bought off with a decision on the Holy Places.
Only an agreed statement of his rights vis-à-vis the Christians of the Ottoman Empire would have convinced him that the game had been worth the candle.
On 21 June /3 July 1853, Russian troops again crossed the river Pruth.
In August 1853 Britain, France, Austria and Prussia drew up a letter for despatch from the sultan to the tsar which gave Nicholas what he wanted.
The sultan, however, refused to avail himself of this "Vienna Note" , on the grounds that it required him to make too many concessions.
Nicholas rejected Constantinople's amendments to the note and on 22 September /4 October 1853 the Ottoman Empire declared war.
At the last, Britain's ambassador to Constantinople abandoned the encouragement he had been giving the Turks and advised them to go on negotiating, but by this time neither Britain nor France was in a position to withdraw the backing which they had been giving the sultan.
Their fleets soon arrived at Constantinople and the war promised to be the most wide-ranging since the fall of the first Napoleon.
For nearly a year, not much happened.
Russia destroyed the Turkish fleet in the southern Black Sea port of Sinope on 18/30 November 1853, but only after Turkish ships had provoked her into doing so by making sorties in the direction of the Crimea.
Nicholas had no plans for a blitzkrieg.
In a letter to Paskevich of 22 October /3 November 1853 he envisaged crossing the Danube in the spring of 1854, declaring the independence of the Danubian Principalities and Serbia, capturing the important fortress of Vidin (in the future Bulgaria), pressing the Turks in eastern Anatolia, appealing for Orthodox Christians to rise against the sultan, and using the winter of 1854–5 to raise native militias.
In early 1855 he intended to press on after assessing the degree of continuing Anglo-French hostility and the extent to which the Sultan's Christian subjects had rallied to his banner.
These ideas failed to allow for Austrian objections to Russian gains in the Balkans and grossly exaggerated the inclination of the Balkan Slavs to fight for their freedom, but they had the virtue of giving the tsar time to negotiate.
Russia's opponents acted only a little more energetically.
The Turkish manoeuvres which culminated in what seemed to be the disaster of Sinope had the object of making Nicholas look aggressive, but if the sultan hoped to increase the determination of Britain and France to put Russia in her place, he found that Britain, at least, dragged her feet.
Even after Britain and France declared war on Russia in March 1854 (more than five months after the Turks had done so), the inclination to find a diplomatic solution to the crisis remained strong on the part of all interested parties other than the Turks and the French.
Austria considered herself directly affected when, at about the time of the Anglo-French declarations of war, Russian operations got under the way on the south side of the Danube.
Increasingly aware that a successful Russian campaign would diminish her authority in the Balkans, Austria sought a statement of allied war aims.
France prepared one, hoping that Russia would reject it and that the Habsburg Empire would join the western powers.
Many members of the British cabinet were by this time reluctant to make peace on any terms short of a glorious victory, but after tortuous negotiations Austria, France and Britain agreed the "Four Points" on 27 July /8 August 1854.
These envisaged peace on four conditions: if the Russian protectorate over the Danubian Principalities was replaced by a European guarantee; if Russian control of the mouth of the Danube came to an end; if the Straits Convention of 1841 was revised in the interests of the European balance of power; and if the protection of Ottoman Christians by Russia was replaced by the collective protection of Europe's five Great Powers.
 "The Four Points were the most celebrated diplomatic achievement of the Crimean war" , but did not seem so at the time they were agreed because Nicholas had just begun withdrawing his forces from the Danubian Principalities.
Austria, consequently, lost interest in pressurizing him, and Britain and France, for the moment, lost the chance of adding a third Great Power to the anti-Russian coalition.
Only now did war come to the Crimea.
Anglo-French forces landed there in September 1854 and fought the battles of the Alma, Balaklava and Inkerman in the next two months.
The object of the landing was to take Sevastopol", but Eduard Totleben was strengthening its defences.
In the view of William Howard Russell, the first and greatest of war correspondents, the allies "had run away with the notion that [Sevastopol" ]was a kind of pasteboard city".
They soon became irritated by their inability to capture it, and turned back to diplomacy.
The Four Points came into their own.
On 20 November /2 December 1854 Austria, Britain and France signed a treaty  on the basis of the Four Points which was designed to force Russia to the conference table by the end of the year.
Nicholas was astonished by Austria's collusion with his enemies.
In a reference to events of the late seventeenth century he asked,"What are the names of the two most foolish kings of Poland?
I will tell you: John Sobieski and myself; we both committed the supreme folly of saving Vienna from destruction".
The good relations between Austria and Russia which had obtained more or less interruptedly since 1726 came to an end.
Foundations were laid for a rivalry between the two countries which was to be one of the principal causes of the First World War.
In public, however, Nicholas reacted coolly.
He accepted the Four Points and obliged his opponents to say precisely what they meant by them.
Point Three was the stumbling block, for the only significant alternative to the equitable Straits Convention of 1841 was completely to eliminate Russian naval power in the Black Sea, which would have had the effect of handing control of the region to the British.
Elucidating Point Three was probably going to have the effect of encouraging the tsar to continue the war, for if Point Three meant promoting British interests, it was probably also going to have the effect of inclining Austria not to enter the lists.
The outcome of the interested parties' diplomatic exchanges depended heavily on the course of the fighting.
From Vienna, where negotiations were taking place, the Russian plenipotentiary Aleksandr Gorchakov wrote to Nesselrode on 23 January /4 February 1855 that "A brilliant success in the Crimea would have enormous significance" .
Because, on the day of Gorchakov's despatch, the British government fell and the jingoistic Palmerston became Prime Minister, the western allies would shortly be prosecuting the war with much greater vigour.
The need for an immediate Russian success intensified, but an attack on the allied disembarkation point of Evpatoriia came to nothing.
On Nicholas's behalf the heir to the throne dismissed Russia's Crimean commander (Menshikov again) in a letter of 15/27 February.
The tsar's fortunes had reached their nadir.
Not only had his troops let him down, but he was expecting Austria and probably the entire German Confederation to enter the war on the allied side.
He had also been ignoring his health.
His son had to dismiss the Crimean commander on his behalf because after catching a cold Nicholas had insisted on inspecting troops in twenty-three degrees of frost.
The Russian winter, famous for defeating the country's enemies, this time put paid to a tsar.
On 18 February /2 March 1855 Nicholas died of pneumonia.
Despite the beliefs of foreigners, he had not really been a warmonger.
By comparison with Alexander I and most eighteenth-century tsars he had been remarkably inactive beyond his frontiers.
He knew only too well that keeping the peace at home required most of his attention.
His mistakes in foreign affairs sprang not from expansionism or malevolence but from non-comprehension, shortsightedness and an undue sense of his own importance.
 "It was one of the major tragedies of Nicholas I that his reign ended in a war over the Turkish problem which he had worked for so long  to solve by peaceful and negotiated agreement" .
It was nevertheless the case that the Crimean War represented a far greater crisis than that with which the reign had begun.
Unless Russia's military fortunes unexpectedly improved, dramatic changes lay ahead not only in international relations but in the domestic structure of the Russian polity.
A regime that could not win a war on its own soil was ripe for reform.
Nicholas's son had to decide whether and to what extent he was prepared to diverge from his father's methods.
The Politics of Emancipation
THE ACCESSION OF ALEXANDER II AND THE END OF HOSTILITIES
Making decisions was not one of the new tsar's greatest gifts.
Indeed, an upbringing which gave Alexander II many qualifications for the tasks which confronted him failed to conceal the fact that he was not very gifted at all.
Born in 1818, he had been educated under the supervision of the liberally inclined Romantic poet Vasilii Zhukovskii.
Between 1835 and 1837 he heard lectures on Russian law from the reforming bureaucrat Mikhail Speranskii.
After travelling extensively at home (and becoming the first Romanov to see Siberia), in 1838 and 1839 he toured Europe.
Having married a princess of Hesse-Darmstadt in 1841 (by whom he rapidly had six children), he was gradually introduced to his future duties.
Nicholas appointed him to the State Council and the Committee of Ministers and then made him chairman, in 1842, of the committee which supervised the construction of the railway between St Petersburg and Moscow.
In 1846 he sat on one of the tsar's many secret committees on peasant affairs, in 1848 he chaired another, and in 1849 he succeeded his uncle, the Grand Duke Mikhail, as head of the empire's military schools.
By 1855, as we have seen, he was sufficiently trusted to dismiss the Crimean commander on his father's behalf.
The historian and jurist Boris Chicherin, who was predisposed to like him, believed that Alexander had been denied "an upbringing capable of providing him with guidelines in the precarious circumstances in which he found himself" .
Another contemporary, Sergei Solov'ev, made the same point more acerbically when he said that "In the Roman Empire emperors ascended the throne from various callings" , whereas "in the Russian Empire Alexander II ascended the throne from the ranks of the heads of military-educational institutions" .
In some ways, however, Alexander was better prepared for the throne than either of his immediate predecessors.
His educational opportunities had been considerable and he had seen a good  deal of Russian government from the inside.
His difficulties did not derive from the way he was reared.
Nor, apparently, did they spring from his disposition, for his outlook was less severe than that of his father and he was quite devoid of that propensity for abstraction which had impaired the prospects of Alexander I. Although he liked parades and reviews, his inclinations were not really militaristic.
The Marquis de Custine, who observed him at Ems in 1839, thought that he would "command obedience by the inherent appeal of charm, rather than by fear" .
The British traveller and journalist, Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace, believed Alexander "had inherited from his father a strong dislike to sentimentalism and rhetoric of all kinds" and that "This dislike, joined to a goodly portion of sober common-sense, a limited confidence in his own judgment, and a consciousness of enormous responsibility, prevented him from being carried away by the prevailing excitement" with which his reign began.
His background, therefore, and some aspects of his personality, seemed to fit him for government.
The tsar could be cold, however — "he trusted neither himself nor others, and therefore lacked the ability to attach anyone to himself" — and unsympathetic observers were less sure of his temperament than the indulgent Mackenzie Wallace.
The "anarchist Prince" , Petr Kropotkin, who was a boy in the Corps des Pages in the late 1850s and a revolutionary in exile by the time the reign ended, thought Alexander suffered from a split personality: "two different men lived in him, both strongly developed, struggling with each other…
He could be charming in his behaviour, and the next moment display sheer brutality.
He was possessed of a calm, reasoned courage in the face of a real danger, but he lived in constant fear of dangers which existed in his brain only".
He was not very bright.
Even a courtier admitted that although he was tactful and judicious he possessed less character, less resolution and less intelligence than his father.
 "When the emperor talks to an intellectual," said the poet Fedor Tiutchev, "he has the appearance of someone with rheumatism who is standing in a draught" .
He let Turgenev know that he had enjoyed his Sportsman's Sketches, but his interest in them probably derived from his love of hunting rather than from the fact that the stories cast aspersions on serfdom.
If Alexander II had died before ascending the throne, it is hard to believe that some Russian Fortinbras would have said he was "likely, had he been put on, to have proved most royal" .
It was to be many months before the new tsar accepted defeat in the Crimean War.
At the end of 1854 Britain and France had received the promise of military assistance from the north Italian Kingdom of Piedmont, but on 29 January /10 February 1855, less than three weeks before his death, Nicholas had provided for a much greater increase in the size of the Russian armed forces by ordering the creation of a pan-imperial militia.
On 23 February /7 March, five days after his accession, Alexander told the ambassadors of Austria and Prussia that in foreign affairs he would adhere to the late tsar's principles.
 "These principles" , he said,"are those of the Holy Alliance.
If this alliance no longer exists, it is certainly not the fault of my  father".
The talks which Nicholas had made possible by accepting the Four Points as a basis for negotiation opened in Vienna three weeks later.
Even the relatively uncontroversial Points One and Two (the Danubian Principalities and control of the mouth of the Danube) occupied the negotiators' attention for some weeks.
Point Three, revision of the Straits Convention, proved intractable.
On 17/29 April 1855 Aleksandr Gorchakov, the Russian plenipotentiary, declared that St Petersburg was happy with the Straits Convention as it stood.
He wanted to make concessions, but his masters at home were intransigent.
The Russian government would accept no reduction in the size of the empire's Black Sea fleet.
Austria tried to mediate between the belligerents, but her efforts came to nothing.
When the Vienna conference ended on 4/16 June, Point Four (the Christian inhabitants of the Ottoman Empire) had not even been aired.
The siege of Sevastopol"continued.
The young soldier Lev Tolstoy made his literary debut by publishing the first of three Sevastopol"Stories in The Contemporary in June.
After conveying much of the horror of the siege, Tolstoy concluded optimistically.
 "The one central, reassuring conviction you have come away with" , he wrote, "is that it is quite impossible for Sevastopol" ever to be taken by the enemy".
On 27 August /8 September, Sevastopol"fell.
The third of Tolstoy's Sevastopol "Stories, which appeared early in 1856, described the" remorse, shame and violent hatred"with which the Russians evacuated the city.
The tsar remained hopeful.
He urged his new Crimean commander (another Gorchakov and a relative of the Russian negotiator in Vienna) to"think of the year 1812 and trust in God.
Sevastopol"is not Moscow, and the Crimea is not Russia.
Two years after Moscow burned, our victorious army entered Paris.
We are still the same Russians and God is with us".
In a way Alexander was right to persist.
Even at Sevastopol"the fighting continued.
The Russians had withdrawn from the southern to the northern side of the harbour, but survived there until the end of the war.
One scholar points out that, in a sense, the siege of the city lasted not 349 days but 533.
Although Britain and France had captured the main part of Sevastopol", their military prospects were unattractive.
Britain had 50,000 troops and 10,000 horses in the Crimea, France 200,000 and 34,000, but penetrating the interior of the Russian Empire would prove much more difficult than winning victories in the Crimean peninsula.
Even if the Russians could be dislodged from the north side of Sevastopol", the allies would soon reach the point where their ships were unable to help them.
They would also have to undertake exceptional recruitment measures at home.
The assistance which they continued to seek from Austria might not tip the scales in their favour.
Indeed, Austrian entry into the war might provoke a crisis in the Habsburg Empire greater than that of 1848–9 and throw the whole of central Europe into the melting-pot.
In the Caucasus, meanwhile, Russia was performing more successfully than in the Crimea.
N. N. Murav'ev, Vorontsov's successor as Caucasian Viceroy, took Kars in eastern Anatolia on 14/26 November 1855 and looked able to threaten Constantinople.
The  Russians now held more enemy territory than their opponents and could contemplate taking the war into a fourth year.
But Russia also suffered from severe disadvantages.
Her Black Sea fleet had by this time been destroyed, the allies had landed not only in the Crimea but also at Nikolaev to the west and Novorossiisk to the east, and the Turks retained a position at Sukhumi which gave them the chance of counter-attacking in the direction of Tiflis.
Away from the principal theatre of the war, the Russian Baltic fleet was blockaded at Sveaborg and Kronstadt, St Petersburg was under threat of attack, and the empire could do little to protect its Arctic and Pacific coastlines.
At the beginning of the war Russia had felt able to commit no more than a quarter of her field army to the southern part of the empire, as she needed the other three-quarters on her western frontier to defuse possible threats from Austria, Prussia and Sweden.
Troops had been withdrawn from the west, but not because the likelihood of attack in that quarter had diminished.
When Austria finally despatched an ultimatum to St Petersburg on 16/28 December 1855, the need to make peace looked overwhelming.
On 3/15 January 1856 the tsar chaired a meeting at which various dignitaries argued that Russia would eventually lose the war anyway, that she was financially exhausted, and that the loyalty of the empire's national minorities could not be guaranteed.
The Minister of War probably had the most influential voice, for one of his officials, Dmitrii Miliutin — older brother of Nikolai, the "enlightened bureaucrat" who had redesigned St Petersburg's municipal administration in 1846 — had armed him with a wide-ranging and incisive brief entitled "On the danger of continuing military action in 1856" .
Numerically, Miliutin wrote, Russia's forces looked strong, but it was doubtful whether they could withstand the fresh and well-organized armies which the enemy would be putting into the field against them.
Losses in the three campaigns which had already taken place meant that most of Russia's rank-and-file soldiers had been recruited recently and that there were not enough officers to train them.
Even if the troops currently under arms could be knocked into shape, finding yet more reserves of manpower was going to be difficult.
In theory 25 million men were subject to the draft, but 12 million were exempt on health grounds, 5 million for various technical reasons, and something over 6 million for the simple reason that the economy required their labour.
By Miliutin's reckoning, no more than 1.8 million men could actually be enlisted, and 800,000 of these had been called to the colours already.
When shortages of equipment, powder, bombs and food were set alongside the shortage of men, the prospect of eventual victory receded still further.
Even if resources had been plentiful, Russia lacked the roads and railways she needed to get them to the front.
In 1854–5 the state had spent the equivalent of three years' income on the war and had accelerated inflation by covering the deficit with paper money.
Miliutin pointed out that, if the war ended badly, all Russia's sacrifices would represent no more than "the futile exhaustion of [her]last resources" .
The tsar sued for an armistice and in March 1856 accepted the Peace of Paris.
The settlement turned on the Four Points of 1854.
To meet the requirements of Point One, the treaty contained a series of clauses which accelerated the evolution of the Danubian Principalities into the independent kingdom of Romania.
In the light of Point Two, Russia was deprived of the sliver of territory which gave her a toe-hold on the Danube.
Point Three, the main bone of contention between the two sides, led to the total demilitarization of the Black Sea.
In settlement of Point Four, the sultan expressed goodwill towards his Christian subjects in return for an acknowledgement, on the part of the Great Powers, that they had no right to interfere in the internal affairs of the Ottoman Empire.
Russia's major loss was the right to a Black Sea fleet.
When Peter the Great gave up the first Russian fleet in southern waters after being disastrously defeated by the Turks in 1711, he said that "The Lord God drove me out of this place, like Adam out of paradise" .
Nearly a century and a half later Alexander II might have been forgiven for feeling an even greater degree of disappointment.
His humiliation was smaller than that to which the country had been subjected on being invaded by Napoleon in 1812, but so was the likelihood that Russia would be able to reverse her defeat in the near future.
Sergei Solov'ev was wrong, however, to accuse the tsar of conducting the war with a lack of resolution.
He had in fact conducted it with a somewhat surprising degree of determination.
It had done him no good, but the same quality was to stand him in good stead when he turned away from international relations to the many domestic difficulties which the war had engendered or highlighted.
DOMESTIC UNREST
Dmitrii Miliutin was not the only tsarist official to speak frankly, in the later stages of the war, of the strain it was placing on the country's resources.
Just after the meeting of 3/15 January 1856 A. F. Orlov, the head of the Third Department, put his views in writing.
 "The war" , he said,"is extremely burdensome for Russia.
The recruit drafts, the militia, the interruption to trade increase people's needs and poverty ";" Russians are ready to surmount still more hardships,[but]if the government attained peace on honourable terms, maintaining its resolve and dignity, that would bring general joy to the empire".
Lesser officials sensed that their superiors were prepared to entertain criticism of the conduct of the empire's affairs and submitted devastating analyses of the particular fields of administration for which they were responsible.
In the Ministry of State Properties a long memorandum of October 1855 brought together information from the provinces concerning the abject condition of state-owned peasants.
An  employee of the Ministry of Finances pointed out at the beginning of 1856 that Russia's lowest social groups were far more heavily taxed than their counterparts in other countries.
Making fathers pay the poll tax for their under-age children, he said, hindered the growth of population, which had advanced less in the twenty years since the mid-1830s than it had in the twenty years before that.
The Finance Ministry official concluded with an indictment of the entire governmental system of the empire.
 "Nowhere" , he wrote, is there so much and at the same time so little centralization as there is in Russia.
On the one hand the ministries have arrogated to themselves the virtually exclusive right to decide all matters, but at the same time there is not the slightest link between the separate ministries…
Everyone's perpetual concern to safeguard himself against having to take legal responsibility necessitates a fearful expenditure of effort, paper, ink, and time, slows down the transaction of business, removes from the provincial and district agencies all feelings of independence, and teaches them to act surreptitiously if at all.
It goes without saying that all this stops short at the people, who have been abandoned to the authorities' exploitation.
Miliutin went on writing memoranda after the war had come to an end.
His paper of January 1856 turned out to be only the beginning of a long argument about the need to abolish serfdom in order to put the Russian army on a sounder footing.
On 29 March 1856 he wrote a wide-ranging paper on the disadvantages of Russia's current military organization and the means of eliminating them.
The prime disadvantages, he believed, were two: "Absence of a territorial military organization" and the "need to maintain a large peacetime army at great expense due to the lack of a…reserve" .
In Miliutin's words, "serfdom does not permit us either to reduce the term of service or to increase the number of unlimited leaves so as to diminish the present number of troops" .
Disquiet among supporters of the regime was to be found not only in the St Petersburg ministries but also at the imperial court and in the provinces.
The new tsar's aunt, the Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna (liberal German widow of the reactionary Grand Duke Mikhail), expressed a commitment to reform on the day after Nicholas I's death.
The tsar's brother, the Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaevich, spoke of the desirability of emancipating the serfs as early as the spring of 1855.
In a paper of late August 1855 P. A. Valuev, Governor of the province of Kurland on the Baltic coast, deplored the conduct of the war, asked whether the present structure of Russian government facilitated the development of the country's strengths, lamented the paralysis of the empire's administration, and deplored the fact that Russian government and society seemed to be at odds with one another.
Since, when he became Minister of Internal Affairs in the 1860s, Valuev was not to be noted for liberalism, it appeared that the new reign and the effects of the war were creating enthusiasm for change in places where it tended, under normal circumstances, to be rare.
At a time when potential reformers included senior officials and  members of the royal family, it was to be expected that educated people outside the government would emerge from the bunker to which they had been relegated in 1848.
The Westernizers and Slavophiles who had hitherto been able to voice their opinions only with extreme caution embarked upon a deliberate policy of circulating handwritten memoranda.
For the Westernizers the process was set in train by the young Boris Chicherin, who completed "The Eastern Question from the Russian Point of View" in the month of Nicholas's death.
Always an independent spirit, Chicherin had been particularly irritated in 1853 and 1854 by the fact that neither Moscow nor St Petersburg Universities would examine his Master's dissertation on the provincial institutions of seventeenth-century Muscovy.
The Dean of his Faculty in Moscow informed him that his view of medieval Russian administration was too bleak.
His response was to depict the contemporary Russian Empire in no less lurid a light.
His first memorandum began by indicting the government's supposedly annexationist motives for going to war and went on to inveigh against the economic and cultural backwardness which the conflict had brought to light.
In a second paper Chicherin advocated freedom of conscience, the end of serfdom, freedom of opinion and the press, freedom of instruction in the schools and universities, open governmental activity and open judicial proceedings.
In a third he concentrated on serfdom.
Without its abolition, he wrote, "no questions can be decided, whether political, administrative, or social" .
In Chicherin's view, the emancipation of the serfs had to take place before the government could reconstruct its financial system, set military recruitment on a sound footing, introduce press freedom, reform the country's legal institutions, encourage the development of industry or promote the education of the masses.
Although circumstances could be imagined in which serfdom might profit a state, Chicherin wrote, they no longer obtained in Russia.
When the inhabitants of a country were nomadic they had to be tied down in order to ensure that the land was properly exploited, but because in Russia they were predominantly sedentary state institutions could monitor their activity.
In other words, the fields would still be sown when the population was free.
Chicherin believed not only that serfdom was immoral but also that it was acting as a brake on the economy, that it could not be justified as a bastion against pauperism, and finally — a somewhat unusual argument — that it entailed the improper transference to the gentry of responsibilities which ought to be exercised by the state.
Because of the demoralizing effect of serfdom, Chicherin declared, Russians had completely lost their sense of the individual's personal worth.
Tinkering with the institution was futile.
It had to be abolished, for the peasants were resisting it with increasing militancy and a mass uprising was entirely conceivable.
The pressure for change to which intellectuals were subjecting the government was perhaps best illustrated by the fact that on the right of the political spectrum even Mikhail Pogodin, the philosopher of Official Nationality, fell out with the authorities in the course of the war.
When hostilities began he merely wanted the regime to behave dynamically.
The first  of his "Historico-Political Letters" (December 1853) urged Nicholas to abandon the policy of good relations with Austria in favour of fomenting rebellion in the Balkans.
Letters of April and May 1854 urged the government "to proclaim the independence of Poland and to create a mighty Slavonic alliance with Russia at its head and its capital in Constantinople" .
Because Nicholas himself had entertained such dreams in passing, Pogodin could be accused at this stage of nothing more than super-patriotism.
In the autumn of 1854, however, after the allied landing in the Crimea, he began to dwell on the domestic hardships to which the war was giving rise.
The Russian countryside, he observed, was dangerously volatile.
Western republican ideals were unlikely to make much headway in Russia, but a peasant rebellion was feasible.
Other right-wing intellectuals were making the same point.
The Slavophile, Ivan Aksakov, believed that landlord–peasant relationships were deteriorating by the year and could be stabilized only if the government acted quickly.
At the end of 1854 another Slavophile, Iurii Samarin, went so far as to speak up for peasants who murdered their landlords.
When riot and murder were the peasants' only means of self-preservation, he argued, "murder becomes an act of altruism" .
Pogodin addressed himself to the spectre of peasant unrest in April and May 1855 and called upon the government to allow freedom of expression.
By January 1856 he was asking not only for the relaxation of censorship but also for a constitution, various political amnesties, the gradual emancipation of the serfs, non-interference in the domestic affairs of European nations and assistance for national-liberation movements.
The spectacle of the principal apologist for Official Nationality biting the hand that fed him must have convinced many doubters that the regime which Alexander II had inherited was intolerable.
If even Pogodin had become an advocate of reform, friends of the status quo were likely to be thin on the ground.
All the critics mentioned so far kept their criticism within certain limits.
Government officials were not trying to subvert the tsarist system, but to modernize it.
Right-wing intellectuals such as Pogodin, Ivan Aksakov and Iurii Samarin were disillusioned with Nicholas I but sympathized with tsarism in principle.
Even Chicherin, the most vocal of the Westernizers, was less radical than he seemed.
 "Active opposition," he wrote, "let alone revolutionary movements, are quite alien to our character" .
He hoped that the government would set an example to the nation by inaugurating a period of change, but he did not believe that the estates of the realm should be given extensive political rights or that the power of the tsar should be dramatically reduced.
None of these intellectuals attacked the regime as unequivocally as Alexander Herzen, who practically danced in the streets of London when he heard of Nicholas's death.
Herzen had founded a "Free Russian Press" almost immediately after arriving in England in 1853, but the fifteen flysheets and brochures he published between then and 1855 did little more than lose him money.
From the start of the new reign his publications prospered.
A day or two after Nicholas's death he decided to found  a journal.
The first number of The Polar Star (named after Ryleev's almanac of the 1820s) came out in the summer of 1855 and enjoyed a degree of success which encouraged Herzen to publish further volumes and to embark on Voices from Russia in 1856 and The Bell in 1857.
Beyond the reach of the imperial censors, these publications were to play a significant part in the politics of the late 1850s.
Citizens of the tsar read them and contributed to them.
Although it became easier to speak freely at home, only Herzen's periodicals escaped the censor entirely.
When he said "Give us free speech" in the first number of The Polar Star, he made plain one of the two main things which Russia lacked.
When he asked the new tsar to give land to the peasants he made plain the other.
Up to a point the tsarist police could control the activities of intellectuals within the confines of the empire, but silencing Herzen was beyond their powers.
Although much of the dissent of 1855 and early 1856 was to be found in obscure memoranda written by one bureaucrat for another, manuscripts circulated by hand among the intelligentsia, and a journal which came out in faraway London, the Russian government also had reason to worry about dissent with a high public profile.
Moscow was the most unsettled of the empire's cities.
When Nicholas allowed the university there to celebrate its centenary in mid-January 1855 he hoped that the occasion would provide a morale-boosting opportunity for lauding one of the regime's successes.
Unfortunately, from his point of view, the celebrations turned into an open demonstration of the values which Russian intellectuals had been cultivating since the 1830s.
Kindred spirits reaffirmed loyalties which the authorities had been trying to suppress.
Slavophiles gathered at the house of Samarin, Westernizers at that of Granovskii.
Konstantin Kavelin took the train from St Petersburg and persuaded Chicherin to write the first of his anti-governmental memoranda.
 "A huge number of meetings with after-dinner speeches and greetings took place in Moscow's inns" .
In February 1855 Moscow's gentry assembly chose the retired liberal general, A. P. Ermolov (one-time ruler of the Caucasus), to raise the supplementary armed forces which Nicholas had called for at the end of the previous month.
This provocative election showed that dissatisfaction with the government had spread from intellectuals to the privileged.
When the oath of loyalty to Alexander II was administered in Moscow on 19 February 1855, a bell fell through three floors of a Kremlin church where the ceremony was taking place and prompted speculation on the part of the common people that the new tsar would be dogged by misfortune.
Even Moscow's lower orders, it seemed, were beginning to voice their disquiet.
Alexander tried to steady Muscovites by visiting the city in September 1855, but his visit was offset by the effect on public opinion of the Westernizers' laments for Granovskii, who died after a short illness on 4 October.
Slavophiles spoke out in late November at festivities for Mikhail Shchepkin, the greatest Russian actor.
Not surprisingly, Muscovites took little notice of the death among them of Uvarov, for in the atmosphere of late 1855 Granovskii and Shchepkin were dearer to their hearts than a former government minister.
Meanwhile, alarming developments were taking place in the countryside.
Nicholas's call for an all-Russian militia provoked a token protest from Moscow's gentry but a wave of disorder among the peasantry.
Although serfs became free only when they were recruited into the regular army, not when they enrolled in a militia, in the mid-1850s they chose to believe otherwise.
In April 1854 Nicholas had ordered the recruitment of irregulars in four northern provinces for the purpose of strengthening Russia's naval defences on the Baltic.
Rumours that he had granted peasants a chance of achieving their freedom spread far beyond the region to which his edict applied.
 "Whole villages of the provinces of Moscow, Riazan, and Tambov left their work and flocked to Moscow to enroll" .
Despite these difficulties Nicholas was obliged to order the creation of a much larger militia in January 1855.
Although the authorities proceeded cautiously (issuing the call to the colours at different times in different places and eventually promulgating appeals in no more than about half the provinces of the European part of the empire), trouble still ensued.
Peasants may have been keen to enlist because they were genuinely patriotic, but their mood was invariably febrile when the throne changed hands.
Since those who caused the most difficulty were Ukrainians in the provinces of Kiev and Voronezh, and since Ukrainians retained relatively recent memories of the days of Cossack freedom, it is likely that many of the rural dwellers who proved hard to handle were motivated by the belief that they could bring their emancipation nearer.
This was certainly the conclusion of contemporary intellectuals, almost all of whom thought that the government's attempts to raise additional troops created more problems than they solved.
Dmitrii Miliutin, at the War Ministry, was not alone in his view that creating a militia was no answer to the army's manpower problem.
Chicherin's discussion of the militia question ended with a rhetorical question: "When the elements of insurrection exist, who knows whether or not the age of Pugachev can recur?" 
Discontent seemed to be general.
Bureaucrats, members of the royal family, intellectuals of various persuasions, city dwellers and the peasantry all seemed to be pressing for radical changes in the structure of the Russian polity.
Tsars often ascended the throne in difficult circumstances, but the situation in which Alexander found himself was undoubtedly worse than that which confronted his father in 1825 or his uncle in 1801.
Chicherin (with benefit of hindsight) described the challenges which lay ahead as follows:[Alexander]was called upon to execute one of the hardest tasks which can confront an autocratic ruler: to completely remodel the enormous state which had been entrusted to his care, to abolish an age-old order founded on slavery, to replace it with civic decency and freedom, to establish justice in a country which had never known the meaning of legality, to redesign the entire administration, to introduce freedom of the press in the context of untrammelled authority, to call new forces to life at every turn and set them on firm legal foundations, to put a repressed and humiliated society on its feet and to give it the chance to flex its muscles.
ALEXANDER'S CAUTION
It is tempting to explain the startling developments which duly took place in Russian domestic affairs in the second half of the 1850s and the first half of the 1860s by saying that the tsar recognized the extent of the difficulties which confronted him and applied himself to resolving them.
Only six years elapsed between his accession and the emancipation of the serfs.
It is easy to make him look personally responsible for setting the process in train and bringing it to fruition.
In a speech to representatives of the Moscow gentry in March 1856 he announced that it was better to abolish serfdom from above than to wait until it began to abolish itself from below.
In January 1857 he set up a "Secret Committee on the Peasant Question" to discuss ways in which the abolition of serfdom might be achieved.
In November 1857 he instructed V. I. Nazimov, the Governor of Vil'na, Kovno and Grodno, to let the gentry of the three north-western provinces establish local committees for the purpose of determining how their serfs were to be emancipated.
By decreeing that the order to Nazimov (the "Nazimov Rescript" ) be copied to other governors, Alexander more or less forced the rest of the empire to follow the example of the north-west.
By publishing the rescript the tsar brought the government's reformist intentions into the public domain.
Since the Secret Committee on the Peasant Question no longer had to be secret it was renamed the "Main" Committee in January 1858.
In the same month journalists were permitted to discuss emancipation freely.
In the course of 1858 the many local committees which resulted from the circulation and publication of the Nazimov Rescript began sending their views on emancipation to St Petersburg.
To collate their statements Alexander appointed "Editing Commissions" in 1859.
In two waves, one in late 1859, the other in early 1860, representatives of the various provincial committees which had come into being as a result of the Nazimov Rescript came to St Petersburg to discuss their ideas with the Editing Commissions.
The Editing Commissions reported to the Main Committee, the Main Committee to the State Council, and the tsar signed the completed legislation on 19 February 1861.
When the course of the emancipation of the serfs is described in this way, the importance of the tsar looks overwhelming.
Not only did he embark upon freeing the serfs as soon as foreign affairs ceased to occupy the bulk of his attention, but also he intervened repeatedly in the process to galvanize his officials and overcome the mistrust of conservatives.
Jerome Blum assigns the tsar pride of place in the list of factors which contributed to the serfs' emancipation.
His view finds support in the memoirs of Iakov Solov'ev, one of the major participants in the process of reform, who asserted that "Only the will of the autocrat could have sustained the numerically small and socially ill placed progressive party, which without it could have been destroyed" .
Norman Pereira has drawn attention to four points between 1856 and 1861 at which, but for the tsar, forward movement might  have come to an end.
First, the publication of the Nazimov Rescript at the end of 1857 cut short the year-long procrastination of the Secret Committee.
Second, on a tour of the provinces in the summer of 1858 Alexander made plain to backwoodsmen that their committees should take a positive view of the reformist enterprise.
Third, when the provincial gentry still did not take up the cause of reform with alacrity the tsar bypassed them by appointing a majority of keen reformers to the Editing Commissions.
Fourth, when draft legislation came before the Main Committee in 1860 Alexander stood firm for change in the face of obdurate resistance from aristocrats.
 "On at least four occasions," therefore, "the emperor either personally turned things around or used one of his lieutenants to do so" .
The determination Alexander demonstrated as a war-leader undoubtedly resurfaced on a number of occasions after Russia made peace, but explaining the emancipation of the serfs by depicting him as a latter-day Peter the Great oversimplifies Russian politics between 1855 and 1861 and says almost nothing about the shape of the emancipation settlement.
Although Alexander lent his authority to domestic reforms, it is unwise to think of him as a daring pilot in extremity.
When, as tutor to the heir to the throne, Chicherin saw a good deal of the royal family in 1864, the tsar put him in mind of a major in the army.
 "Where did all those great actions come from," Chicherin wondered, "which transformed the Russian land and changed its direction overnight?" 
Not really from the sovereign.
Chapter Five argued that the main problem in discussing the peasant question in the reign of Nicholas I is explaining why he addressed himself to it at all, not why he did relatively little.
The main problem in discussing the emancipation may be explaining why Alexander addressed himself to it halfheartedly rather than why he addressed himself to it at all.
The discussion in Chapter Five pointed out that although Nicholas and his officials accepted that serfdom was immoral, believed that it was unprofitable, could see advantages in reducing the authority of the gentry, and realized that the country's competitors were abandoning landlord–serf relations, they did not feel under any obligation to take immediate and far-reaching action.
Nor did Alexander.
The relative speed with which emancipation came about after he ascended the throne gives the impression that he addressed himself to it with enthusiasm, but even in Russian politics six years was a long time.
In reality, the tsar proceeded with extreme caution.
In view of the extent of domestic disquiet in the last year of the Crimean War Alexander had every reason to adopt a policy of radical reform, but it was some time before he did so.
His speech to representatives of the Moscow gentry in March 1856 was tame, his creation of a secret committee in 1857 was the traditional way to sweep calls for change under the carpet, the Nazimov Rescript envisaged a form of emancipation which would have severely damaged the peasantry, the relaxation of censorship in January 1858 was short-lived and the provincial tour of 1858 represented yet another futile attempt to persuade nobles to accept a measure they were bent on resisting.
It was 1859 before Alexander gave reformers their head by granting them  control of the Editing Commissions, and by then the prestige of the throne would have suffered far more from the abandonment of emancipation than from allowing a version of it to go through.
The version of emancipation which became law made many concessions to the interests of the gentry.
With great trepidation and much backsliding the tsar eventually granted the serfs a sort of freedom, but if their interests had been dear to his heart he could have committed himself earlier and pressed harder for a settlement which gave them an economically viable future.
Alexander possessed no blueprint for change in 1855 or 1856.
Legislation in the nineteenth-century Russian Empire looks like a series of royal fiats, but the laws whch freed the serfs emerged from a process which the tsar barely understood and over which he had only partial control.
The complicated narrative of the emancipation cannot be reduced to the proposition that Alexander sensed he was facing a crisis and believed that attack was the best form of defence.
THE CONTRADICTORY SIGNALS OF 1855 AND 1856
As chairman of the 1848 committee on the peasant question Alexander had presided over the cancellation of the one statute enacted between 1825 and 1855 which allowed serfs to buy their freedom irrespective of the wishes of serf-owners.
For a number of years after he ascended the throne he remained highly deferential to gentry concerns.
Although his caution sprang largely from natural inclination, it coincided, up to a point, with the dictates of common sense.
The election of Ermolov as head of the militia in Moscow (and subsequently in St Petersburg) showed that, even when the country was at war, nobles would respond with displeasure to decrees which took their serfs away from them.
The Crimean disaster failed to persuade the majority of the gentry that serfdom was an anachronism.
Although the country's economy suffered intolerable strains as a result of the war, hardship was much greater in the public domain than the private.
 "It was the state which suffered most" .
The government's budgetary deficit went up six- or seven-fold, its ability to back paper money with gold went down by more than 50 per cent, and in 1856 it spent 84 per cent of its income on debt repayments and the armed forces, but the private sector suffered less severely than the Treasury and people who engaged in industry or commerce positively benefited.
The authorities' ability to pay for reforms was diminishing at a time when the gentry's lack of enthusiasm for restructuring their finances was as great as ever.
Thus even if he had wanted to introduce a programme of radical social reform, Alexander had to tread carefully.
He gave few signs that radical social reform was his long-term objective.
One of his first actions was to tell  the St Petersburg gentry assembly that its devotion to the throne had sweetened his father's last moments.
Nicholas had probably devoted those last moments, in part, to regretting that he had failed to do more for the peasantry, but if Alexander understood the late tsar to mean that he should introduce changes he was slow to take the injunction to heart.
In the summer of 1855 he dismissed a Minister of Internal Affairs who as Governor of the south-western provinces had worked hard, in the 1840s, to regulate the way in which Polish landlords treated their Ukrainian serfs.
Bibikov was no liberal, but neither were some of those who eventually made major contributions to the emancipation of 1861.
Given firm instructions the dismissed minister would probably have made a better reformer than his successor, S. S. Lanskoi, who in August 1855 "proclaimed the rights of the nobility to be inviolable" .
Since the principal advantage of being a noble was the right to exploit peasant labour, serfdom looked set to continue.
After making peace Alexander appeared to move in the direction of reform, but his celebrated speech to marshals of the Moscow gentry needs to be set in context.
When, on 19 March 1856, the tsar issued a manifesto which spoke of the blessings which were to descend upon the empire as a result of the peace treaty, he envisaged "equal justice and equal protection for everyone, so that each can enjoy in peace the fruits of his own righteous labours" .
The egalitarian implications of this announcement led the Governor-General of Moscow to ask the tsar for clarification, with the result that on 30 March Alexander made the oral remarks which are usually taken to represent the beginning of the emancipation process.
He had learned, he told his audience, that rumours have spread among you of my intention to abolish serfdom.
To refute any groundless gossip on so important a subject I consider it necessary to inform you that I have no intention of doing so immediately.
But, of course, and you yourselves realise it, the existing system of serf owning cannot remain unchanged.
It is better to begin abolishing serfdom from above than to wait for it to begin to abolish itself from below.
I ask you, gentlemen, to think of ways of doing this.
Pass on my words to the nobles for consideration.
The language of Alexander's speech was no more radical than that which Nicholas I had used in 1842 when defending the ineffectual Law on Obligated Peasants.
Admitting that "the existing system of serf owning" had to change was so commonplace in mid-nineteenth-century Russia that its capacity to shock was minimal.
Although, in referring to the possibility that serfdom might "abolish itself from below" , the tsar seemed to be responding to the rural disturbances which had resulted from Nicholas's militia creations, in all probability he simply lifted the phrase from a Third Department report of 1839 whose purpose, though reformist, had hardly been the complete transformation of government policy.
Alexander raised none of the questions which would have to be answered if emancipation  were to take place: whether serfs were to be granted land as well as liberty, whether and how they were to pay for them, and how local government was to be conducted if the jurisdiction of serf-owners came to an end.
Above all, the tsar knew perfectly well that the gentry were unlikely to help him.
Almost all attempts to improve the lot of the serfs in the previous two or three generations had failed because they depended on the gentry's goodwill.
In 1856 Alexander was very far from accepting that emancipation meant compulsion.
Only a faint line can be drawn from his speech in Moscow to the statutes of February 1861.
In the short term the speech not only failed to accelerate the coming of reform, but even postponed it.
Although the tsar's reflections lacked substance and realism, they caused a flurry among the gentry which alarmed the authorities and led the Minister of Internal Affairs to despatch an emollient circular to provincial governors.
The government abandoned public references to the possibility of emancipation and "groped for a means of resolving the peasant question by turning to the experience of the past" .
The process of information-gathering which ensued was certainly no more radical than that sanctioned by Nicholas I when he set up the Committee of 6 December 1826.
Just after the despatch of the circular to provincial governors A. I. Levshin, the Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs, began compiling a historical memorandum on serfdom which reviewed 200 years of legislation on the subject and drew on the documents generated by Nicholas I's secret committees.
Lanskoi presented the completed memorandum to the tsar in December 1856 and recommended the establishment of various bodies to act on it.
Alexander took only part of the advice.
He appointed a single, secret committee, whereas Lanskoi had sought to involve a relatively wide range of people in the emancipation process and had made no reference to secrecy.
Nor did Alexander accept Lanskoi's opinion that members of the new committee ought to be "convinced of the need to move towards a new order" .
The Secret Committee on the Peasant Question, which convened for the first time on 3 January 1857, consisted entirely of Nicholaevan grandees.
Since Lanskoi was the only appointee who could have been described as a reformer, the new body augured ill for the cause of reform.
Even Lanskoi's opinions were distinctly moderate.
He and Levshin, his deputy, knew that they had to do something, but in 1856 their ideas were unambitious.
On the one hand they doubted whether peasants should receive land as well as personal freedom; on the other they felt that emancipation had to be introduced gradually, at different times in different places.
Their philosophy amounted to introducing other parts of the empire to the relationship between landlords and peasants which obtained in the Baltic provinces.
By leaving landowners in possession of the land, the Baltic emancipation of 1816–19 had perpetuated peasant dependency.
Its drawbacks were obvious, but so long as the tsar sought noble acquiescence in reform it probably represented the only sort of emancipation which had a chance of reaching the statute book.
It was certainly the only sort  acceptable to the small number of landowners who were prepared to embark upon change.
These were mainly to be found in Kovno, Grodno and Vil'na, the three north-western provinces to the south of the Baltic littoral.
Proximity to a region in which the peasants were already free was not the only reason why the gentry of the north-western provinces were prepared to countenance emancipation.
As Poles they had been subject to St Petersburg's longstanding attempts to interfere in relations between Polish nobles and non-Polish peasants.
For nearly a generation they had been resisting the introduction of written inventories of peasant obligations, whose purpose was to prevent noblemen treating serfs in the arbitrary manner to which they were accustomed.
By comparison with inventories, emancipation on the Baltic model was an attractive proposition.
In 1855 Alexander had appointed his friend General V. I. Nazimov (the reactionary who had clamped down on Moscow University in the last years of Nicholas I) to the Governor-Generalship of the three provinces at issue.
In May 1856, two months after his speech in Moscow, the tsar met Nazimov at Brest and discovered that, in the north-west, his words had fallen on fruitful soil.
At the coronation, which took place in Moscow at the end of August 1856, Levshin, the Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs, quizzed gentry representatives from many parts of the empire on the question of emancipation and found sympathy for the idea only among the north-westerners whose feelings on the matter had already been communicated to the tsar.
On 26 October 1856 Alexander gave written instructions to Nazimov to collect the ideas of the north-western gentry more systematically.
This was the second of the two main developments in the emancipation process which took place in 1856.
Neither the creation of the Secret Committee on the Peasant Question, however, nor the orders to Nazimov promised to be significant milestones.
By setting up the Secret Committee Alexander acted in the style of his father; by ordering Nazimov to delve more deeply into the views of the north-westerners he showed sympathy for a landless concept of emancipation which belonged to the reign of Alexander I. The regime seemed to be moving in the direction not so much of freeing the serfs as of turning a blind eye to them (by consigning their future to yet another assembly of antediluvian officials) or making their condition worse (by opting for a form of emancipation which would blight their future).
If the government had executed the plans it came up with in 1856, peasants would have been justified in thinking that the devil of serfdom was preferable to the deep blue sea of reform.
Even in 1856, however, there were signs that the ideas of Lanskoi, Levshin, and the north-western gentry might eventually be upstaged.
More generous approaches to the question of emancipation were to be found not only in the many unofficial memoranda which were passing from hand to hand, but also in the minds of a few well-placed individuals whose views could hardly be ignored.
The Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna made her first practical contribution to the improvement of conditions in the countryside when she asked Nikolai Miliutin to tell her how to free the  serfs on her Ukrainian estate of Karlovka.
Miliutin, architect of the St Petersburg municipal reform of 1846, was head of the Economic Department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and potentially the most influential of the "enlightened bureaucrats" who had been consolidating their links with each other since the end of the 1830s.
 "He had a practical outlook on life, the ability to understand things quickly (even things about which he knew little), and an understanding of people" .
His brother Dmitrii had been making a good case for emancipation at the War Ministry, but his own importance, in the long run, was to be greater.
Although he was by no means a radical, he felt that the government's best chance of maintaining its authority was to give more ground — literally — than it was promising to do.
In his memorandum for Elena Pavlovna he did not concern himself just with her estate in Ukraine.
 "The preface and to a still greater degree the text of the memorandum evince the author's hidden intention to provide general ideas for the transformation of the whole of Russia" .
Miliutin either said or implied that the time had passed for half-measures like the Law on Free Agriculturalists of 1803, the Baltic emancipation of 1816–19 and the Law on Obligated Peasants of 1842.
Serfs had to receive not only personal freedom and title to their dwelling-places and kitchen gardens, but also allocations of land which would enable them to survive and prosper.
Since land allotments would be carved out of land that belonged to the gentry, serfs would have to pay for them.
Since they lacked the necessary cash, the government would be obliged to furnish them with credit.
Liberated serfs would then redeem their debts over a period of years.
Miliutin realized that landowners would not take kindly to his plan of campaign, but he felt that the government could win their support by setting up gentry committees to work out local details and by sanctioning a debate on peasant affairs in the press.
The tsar turned down Miliutin's general principles on the same day he instructed Nazimov to continue canvassing opinion in the north-western provinces.
In so far as the idea of emancipation moved forward in government circles in 1856, the landless variety prevailed over the landed.
Of the two broad social groups between which the tsar had to mediate, he clearly set greater store by the gentry than the peasantry.
Mindful, perhaps, of the events of 1801 and 1825, he feared aristocratic recalcitrance more than a peasant rebellion.
His conservative sympathies were clear.
He not only handed control of the new Secret Committee to grandees but in the same month, December 1856, raised the qualification for promotion to the hereditary nobility from the achievement of rank five on the Table of Ranks to the achievement of rank four.
Rank four could be conferred on civil servants only by royal patent.
Henceforward, at least in theory, the highest echelons of society were less likely to be permeated by gifted but landless bureaucrats than they had been in the past.
The proportion of highly placed advisers who had nothing to lose if serfs were emancipated would accordingly diminish.
Alexander seemed not so much to be moving in the direction of reform as to be making the achievement of emancipation more  difficult.
In 1856 the one sign he gave that peasants might be freed sooner rather than later was the suspension, in July, of the existing rules for recruitment into the army.
Since the existing rules applied to a serf-based society, suspending them implied that the social order on which they depended was to be altered.
Perhaps Dmitrii Miliutin's explanation of the Russian army's deficiencies had struck home.
The other Miliutin, however, had been less successful.
Despite the backing of the Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna, he had been unable to undo the work of Lanskoi and Levshin.
The peasants' chances of acquiring personal freedom were very much alive, but their chances of acquiring land remained small.
Yet if Russians had known how the process of emancipation was to develop and what its terms were to be, they might have thought that Nikolai Miliutin possessed a crystal ball.
Ideas very similar to his proposals for Karlovka eventually prevailed over those of the tsar, the gentry and his own ministerial superiors.
One reason for their long-term viability derived from the extent to which they reflected the ideas of the non-governmental intelligentsia.
Russian policy-makers could usually ignore the views of non-bureaucrats, but the abolition of the Committee of 2 April 1848 (Nicholas I's hard-line censorship agency) made it harder for the authorities to prevent reformist sentiments from appearing in print.
The tsar probably dissolved the committee in December 1855 on the grounds of inefficiency rather than because he planned to treat writers more liberally, but while he planned a suitable alternative censorship became less stringent.
The open discussion of serfdom was still forbidden, but Westernizers and Slavophiles both set up flagship journals.
Chicherin stopped writing private memoranda and started a debate on the peasant commune.
Only four works on the subject had appeared in Russia before 1850, but ninety-nine came out between 1856 and 1860.
It was to be 1858 before the government explicitly extended freedom of speech, but inadvertently it was beginning to relax as early as 1856.
It also revealed one or two clearer signs of generosity.
Passports for foreign travel became freely available, with the result that 6,000 were issued in 1856 and 26,000 in 1859.
At his coronation in August 1856 Alexander amnestied the surviving Decembrists, the Polish rebels of 1830–1, and most of the Petrashevtsy.
Signs like these were enough to convince educated contemporaries that it was worth trying to maintain the pressure on the authorities which they had already begun to generate.
Herzen observed a "sharp and remarkable" difference between essays he received from Russia in 1856 and those that had arrived in 1855.
His response was to urge the tsarist regime"Onward!
Onward!"in the second issue of The Polar Star.
Tolstoy went so far as to say that "He who was not alive in the Russia of 1856 does not know what life is" .
Not even bureaucrats could wholly ignore the prevailing atmosphere of intellectual excitement.
If it continued, radical proposals like those of Nikolai Miliutin stood a chance of more serious consideration.
THE DECISION OF 1857 TO GRANT THE SERFS THEIR FREEDOM
Radicalism, however, was very far from the thoughts of the Secret Committee on the Peasant Question.
At its second meeting, on 17 January 1857, a majority of the members tried to persuade the tsar that he should allay suspicion and dampen expectations by pretending, in an edict, that he was planning no changes in the condition of the serfs.
When this proposal was rejected the committee detailed three of its members to work out how emancipation might be achieved.
They failed to reach a consensus and in April and May submitted separate reports.
Predictably, in view of the fact that he was a major landowner, P. P. Gagarin recommended landless emancipation on the Baltic model.
Neither Baron Korf nor Iakov Rostovtsev owned serfs, but the one was faint-hearted and the other unimaginative.
The best Korf could think of was leaving everything to the provincial gentry, which Alexander had tried without success in his Moscow speech of March 1856.
Rostovtsev proposed reform in three stages: legislating to prevent landowners from abusing their current powers; turning serfs into Free Agriculturalists or Obligated Peasants; and completely emancipating the peasants at some point in the distant future.
At least he had read the available documents, but his memorandum "differed not at all, in essence, from decisions taken by secret committees in the reign of Nicholas I" .
None of the three papers was going to set the world on fire.
While the triumvirate was at work, moreover, Orlov, the senior member of the Secret Committee, completed a manoeuvre which rendered peasant reform even less likely than it was already.
At the end of the Crimean War he had convinced Alexander that if peace were to last Russia needed a major figure as her ambassador in Paris.
His candidate for the post was the long-serving and reform-orientated Minister of State Properties, P. D. Kiselev, who in 1856 was the only Russian official with the desire, the knowledge and the power to promote the idea of peasant reform in the midst of a hostile bureaucracy.
In accepting Orlov's suggestion and transferring Kiselev to Paris, Alexander damaged the prospects of reform to a much greater extent than he had by replacing Bibikov with Lanskoi at the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
The damage was two-fold, for within months of Kiselev's departure a reactionary took his place.
Orlov and others engineered factional strife in the Ministry of State Properties which in April 1857 led to the appointment as minister of M. N. Murav'ev, a man who believed that"the question [of emancipation]had been dreamed up by…academics, theoreticians,[and]sons of priests' and who planned to treat state-owned peasants as harshly as serfs.
The addition of Murav'ev to the Secret Committee, which took place on the recommendation of Orlov immediately after his appointment as minister, was probably the low point of the emancipation story.
Shortly afterwards the tide seemed to turn.
En route to taking the waters  in western Europe, the tsar met General Nazimov at Vil'na and learned that the gentry of the north-western provinces remained keen on freeing their serfs.
At the spa town of Kissingen in Bavaria he fell under the influence of his aunt, the Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna.
With the assistance of various experts the Grand Duchess had been developing Miliutin's Karlovka proposals at Wildbad in the Black Forest.
One scholar claims that "the Wildbad group was delving deeper into the emancipation issue than had any governmental or gentry body in Russia before" .
Elena Pavlovna and her principal advisers, Kiselev and August von Haxthausen, were waiting for Alexander when he arrived at Kissingen.
Elena reminded her nephew that Nicholas I had regretted his failure to do more for Russia's well-being.
Haxthausen deluged Alexander with memoranda.
Relieved, perhaps, to have escaped the obstructionism of his officials in St Petersburg, the tsar responded favourably.
He gave Kiselev the chance to comment on the Secret Committee's recent papers and expressed particular approval of Haxthausen's opinion that the serfs had to be emancipated before their dissatisfaction expressed itself in revolt.
Alexander appeared to have shifted his ground.
From Kissingen he ordered the head of the Secret Committee to abandon his delaying tactics, and almost immediately after his return to St Petersburg, in July 1857, he offset the appointment of Murav'ev to the Secret Committee by adding his brother, the Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaevich.
Even now, however, no decisions had been taken on the speed of emancipation or the form it should take.
One of the lesser members of the Wildbad group, Konstantin Kavelin, was credited by a contemporary with "primacy in establishing the principle of the landed rather than the landless emancipation of the peasants" , but neither he nor his friend Nikolai Miliutin had secured the adoption of their views as official policy.
After Kissingen Alexander made Kavelin tutor to the heir to the throne, but he may not have realized the extent of the tutor's radicalism.
In July 1857 even Kiselev believed that because emancipation with land was for the time being impossible, freeing the serfs ought to be postponed for the foreseeable future.
Alexander probably agreed with him.
In August he calmly accepted the Secret Committee's decision to adopt the slow-moving approach to reform laid down by Iakov Rostovtsev.
The tsar had been enthusiastic about change so long as he remained in the orbit of Elena Pavlovna, but in St Petersburg his convictions or his courage deserted him.
Few people outside the government knew that the regime was even considering emancipation.
In the first number of The Bell, in July 1857, Herzen reported a rumour that the Secret Committee had been established.
He added, however, that it was said to have broken up without achieving anything.
The non-achievement of the Russian authorities remained the keynote of Herzen's journalism.
In the August number of The Bell he published an anonymous letter from St Petersburg which pointed out that two years of the new reign had elapsed to no purpose.
In September he used recent edicts to illustrate the government's indecision and halfheartedness.
In October he invented the celebrated image of"Chinghis-Khan with  telegraphs' to buttress the argument that Russia might be turning into a sort of latter-day oriental despotism.
Negative evidence confirms the impression that educated Russians had no notion they were approaching a watershed.
Intellectuals had begun reading Alexis de Tocqueville's The Old Regime and the Revolution, a seminal study of eighteenth-century France which came out in Paris in 1856.
The book's first Russian readers seem not to have taken up its principal insight, that the most dangerous moment for an authoritarian government arrives when it tries to reform itself.
The reactions of Lev Tolstoy, who sympathized with Tocqueville's admiration of paternalism in the French countryside, and Chicherin, who admired the French centralization which Tocqueville found distasteful, said much about the two men's very different attitudes towards the quandary in which Russia found herself, but turned on the second rather than the third part of Tocqueville's study.
It was the third part of the book that spoke about the danger of making changes; in the summer of 1857 Part Three may have seemed less important than Part Two because the tsarist authorities had yet to give an unequivocal sign of their commitment to reform.
At last, however, they did so.
If the Grand Duchess Elena lost ground with the tsar after his return to St Petersburg, General Nazimov could be put off no longer.
In late September 1857 he reported to the Ministry of Internal Affairs that the north-western gentry had expressed formal approval of landless emancipation.
To convert the principle into practice he needed detailed instructions from the centre.
In October he came to St Petersburg to press for them, and by 20 November, after intense activity in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Secret Committee, the instructions were ready.
The document which embodied them, the Nazimov Rescript, marked the real beginning of the peasants' emancipation.
It is true that, at first sight, the rescript left a great deal to be desired.
The government decreed that land was to remain the property of the landlords, that peasants were to remain subject to communal organizations (which reduced the likelihood that they might turn into entrepreneurs), that the gentry would continue to exercise police duties in the countryside, and that state and local taxes were to be paid as before.
Peasants were to be given their household plots, but had to pay for them.
They were to be allowed to use some of the gentry's farmland, but not necessarily in perpetuity and only in return for labour services or cash.
The authorities also gave themselves the most important voice on the gentry committees which were to decide on land boundaries and the size of the peasants' payments.
On the face of it, this plan of campaign did not seem very innovative.
Instead of speaking of "the emancipation of the peasants" , the rescript referred only to "the improvement of the peasants' way of life" .
It related, moreover, only to a small and atypical part of the empire.
Yet all those involved in Nazimov's instructions sensed the importance of the step they were taking.
The tsar thought he had found a model for ameliorating the condition of the peasants which the gentry would accept.
The Minister of Internal Affairs was becoming increasingly sympathetic to the views of  Nikolai Miliutin and saw the rescript (which was drafted by Levshin, his deputy), as a means of wresting the initiative in peasant affairs from the Secret Committee.
Even the Secret Committee had a reason for allowing the Rescript to be promulgated: by committing itself to a relatively modest programme of reform, the government seemed to be discouraging radicals from pressing their case.
If conservatives could hold the line, they stood a chance of enacting a settlement that suited them.
The main importance of the rescript, however, lay not in its relatively modest provisions or acceptability to the various policy-makers in central government, but in the rapidity with which it was circulated and published.
 "The government's open acknowledgement that preparation of a peasant reform was under way…marked a dividing line in the political behaviour of the absolute monarchy" .
Whereas neither the statutes of 1816–19 which freed the peasants of the Baltic provinces nor the south-western "inventory reform" of the 1840s had been included in the Complete Collection of the Laws, in late 1857 the government went public with major plans before they had even been finalized.
In effect, the tsar involved the educated community in the making of law.
To use the vogue word of the hour, he ran the risk of glasnost.
This was the really startling feature of the official policy adopted in late 1857.
It is harder to explain why the government involved the public in its actions than it is to explain why the various parties involved in the preparation of the rescript thought it could be turned to their advantage.
Although the Secret Committee formally agreed to publication of Nazimov's instructions, many contemporaries recorded the attempts of committee members to prevent it.
According to Aleksandr Koshelev, Orlov warned the tsar that he risked destroying the gentry and losing his throne.
Alexander seemed to have become a decisive proponent of reform.
He seemed, indeed, to have become much more decisive altogether, for at exactly the same time as he signed the rescript, he created a new governmental body under his own chairmanship, the Council of Ministers, whose purpose was apparently to strengthen his grip on the central administration.
Even at the end of 1857, however, depicting the tsar as a committed reformer is unwise.
The picture sits ill with his behaviour in general.
Though he could be determined, he was rarely incisive.
In all probability he failed to understand the consequences of his actions.
The summer conversations in Kissingen, the presence in St Petersburg of the Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaevich, the greater enthusiasm for reform of Lanskoi at the Ministry of Internal Affairs — all these undoubtedly altered the balance of opinion to which he was exposed and made him more susceptible to reformist sentiments; but he may also have been naive enough to believe that the gentry at large would follow the example of the north-westerners and welcome the measure he was putting to them.
In this he was to be disappointed.
Far from having run its course, the struggle for the emancipation of the serfs was about to enter an even more heated phase than the one it had just been going through.
THE DECISION OF 1858 TO FREE THE SERFS WITH LAND
The principal question, whether the serfs were to be emancipated at all, had been answered, for after the circulation of the Nazimov Rescript to provincial governors and its publication in the journal of the Ministry of Internal Affairs there was no doubt that the relationship between landowners and privately owned peasants was going to be put on a new footing.
Discussion turned from the question of principle to questions of practice: how change was to be effected and what post-emancipation society was to look like.
Resolving these issues without generating revolts on the part of the gentry or the peasantry required a balancing act which tested the regime to the limits.
Broadly speaking, 1858 witnessed commitment to emancipation with land, 1859 the preparation of statutes to bring it about, 1860 and 1861 the modification of the draft legislation and 1861 its implementation.
The first of these stages was much the most important, for despite the promulgation of the Nazimov Rescript a betting man would not have laid money, at the end of 1857, on the proposition that peasants were going to acquire both freedom from manorial jurisdiction and some of the landlords' property.
In the first half of 1858 gentry committees like those which the Nazimov Rescript set up in the north-western provinces came into being throughout the European part of the empire.
Legitimately confused about the sort of emancipation they were expected to recommend, provincial nobles bombarded the central authorities with requests for a fuller statement of their intentions.
The Secret Committee — now called the Main Committee — produced two very different policy statements in the course of the year.
In April it inclined to the view that, apart from personal freedom, serfs should acquire no more than their dwelling-places and kitchen gardens.
In December it decided that they were also to acquire farmland.
Explaining why the authorities changed their mind and committed themselves to the transfer of land is a prime difficulty in the history of the emancipation.
Five considerations, three of them long-standing, two novel, seem to have been particularly important: pressure from reform-minded people outside the ranks of the government; the growing influence of enlightened bureaucrats in the Ministry of Internal Affairs; unrest in the countryside; chaos within and among the provincial gentry committees; and the unpredictable swing to the left of Iakov Rostovtsev, one of the key traditionalists on the Main Committee.
Even the longstanding considerations (the first three) took forms in 1858 which increased their weight, but it was probably the last two that tipped the balance in favour of the radical solution.
One of the reasons why pressure from reform-minded people outside the ranks of the government intensified in 1858 derived from the fact that, up to a point, the authorities gave it their blessing.
In December 1857 the new head of the Third Department, V. A. Dolgorukov, revealed an unlikely  enthusiasm for cooperating with the liberal intelligentsia when he asked the Slavophile Aleksandr Koshelev to send him his hard-hitting "Memoranda on the Dissolution of the Enserfed Estate in Russia" .
The following month the government relaxed its rules on censorship.
In February and April 1858 The Contemporary took advantage of the relaxation to publish an article entitled "On the New Conditions of Peasant Life" , the second part of which asserted uncompromisingly that "the government cannot agree on any pretext to emancipating the serfs without land" .
Since, in April 1858, the Main Committee was adopting a landless rather than a landed approach to emancipation, this second instalment of the essay caused a storm.
It appeared anonymously, but the author, Konstantin Kavelin, had been circulating his views in manuscript since 1855 and was readily identifiable.
When someone who was a protégé of the Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna, a close friend of Nikolai Miliutin, and the tutor to the heir to the throne decided to run the risk of going into print, conservatives realized that they were being subjected to a deliberate attempt on the part of reformers to prevent them from treating serfs harshly.
Kavelin lost his position as tutor and the government reinstated its ban on discussions of serfdom.
The press, however, remained lively.
The second half of the year witnessed a superficially arcane debate on vodka which touched on the whole question of government finances (because more than one-third of the state's revenue derived from its involvement in the vodka trade).
The newly founded Military Miscellany acquired a readership of 6,000 in a few months by adopting an openly reformist position vis-à-vis the army.
One of this periodical's editors, the radical journalist Nikolai Chernyshevskii, had been behind the publication of Kavelin's work in The Contemporary and was finding many subtle and not so subtle ways to advance reform in the St Petersburg press.
Everyone, moreover, seemed to be reading The Bell.
Kavelin had caught the empress with the second number in her hands as early as August 1857, and by the end of 1858 the head of the Third Department was passing copies from the tsar to Prince Menshikov.
Lanskoi and Rostovtsev read the magazine avidly.
Although the first issue for 1858 welcomed the Nazimov Rescript with a banner headline, and although Herzen freely acknowledged that Alexander II had earned his place in history by setting the process of emancipation in train, by May 1858 The Bell had restarted its pressure for emancipation with land and soon it was insisting that much remained to be done before the process of reform bore fruit.
Thus Herzen, in London, filled the gap created by the government's response to the appearance of Kavelin's essay in April.
Meanwhile, reformers within the bureaucracy were coming into their own because they were concentrated in the ministry whose expertise was now at a premium.
Since large serf-owners tended not to live on their estates or to know much about rural conditions, few of the people whom the tsar had charged with thinking about emancipation had any idea of the complexities of the task.
So long as the possibility remained that nothing would happen they felt no compulsion to educate themselves.
After the  Nazimov Rescript they had to start wrestling with details.
The best source of information was the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but the ministry's leading figures were virtually unanimous in their support for a version of emancipation which provided peasants with land.
Lanskoi, the minister, had moved into the reformist camp and become reliant on Nikolai Miliutin.
Miliutin understood the need for landed emancipation as a result of his collaboration with Elena Pavlovna on the plans for Karlovka.
When, in March 1858, the need to cope with the technical questions to which emancipation gave rise led to the creation of two new sections within the ministry — the Land Department and the Statistical Department — it was hardly surprising that Lanskoi and Miliutin staffed them with people who combined specialist knowledge with liberal sympathies.
An emancipation settlement that turned on the advice of the Ministry of Internal Affairs was likely to treat serfs generously.
The precise part played by peasant unrest in the genesis and character of the reform has long been hotly disputed.
Daniel Field wrote in 1976 that "The fear of peasant unrest…cannot be shown to have been decisive in the decision to emancipate" , but Larisa Zakharova took him to task eight years later for failing to explain the emancipation in terms of "the fear of a peasant rising or the moods and struggle of the peasantry" .
So far as the early history of the emancipation process is concerned Field's position is probably stronger than Zakharova's, for although Nicholas I's call for a militia gave rise to disturbances among the peasantry in 1855, although almost all the memoranda which circulated in private during the Crimean War referred to the possibility of peasant risings, and although Alexander II alluded to the prospect of rural uprisings both in his speech to the Moscow gentry and in his comments on the papers submitted to him by Haxthausen, it is hard to prove that rural developments took pride of place among the reasons for setting reform in train.
It is not hard, however, to make a strong case for the view that unrest in a particular part of the empire in 1858 loomed large in the regime's decision to opt for the version of emancipation which gave peasants land.
The "Baltic path" to emancipation — the landless variant — was discredited at the very time disagreements over the way forward were at their height.
The year 1858 witnessed about 100 peasant disturbances in Estonia, almost as many as the 123 which, according to one estimate, took place in all the Russian provinces of the empire put together.
If the free but landless peasants of Estonia were dissatisfied with their lot, replicating their experience in the empire as a whole looked unwise.
Not only the intelligentsia but also conservative officials and the tsar appear to have recognized the fact.
It seemed unlikely, however, that the committees of provincial gentry which sprang up in the wake of the Nazimov Rescript would welcome any form of emancipation, let alone emancipation with land.
The Poles of the north-western provinces who responded enthusiastically to the tsar's entreaties were untypical.
Nobles in other parts of the empire were likely to prove obdurate.
Predictably, most of the new gentry committees did  indeed reveal hostility to emancipation, but they also revealed two other things.
First, although the majority of the provincial gentry were determined "anti-abolitionists" , not quite all of them were.
Aleksandr Koshelev, whose memoranda on emancipation Dolgorukov had been keen to acquire at the end of 1857, served on the provincial committee in Riazan".
The Kaluga committee included three one-time Decembrists and a member of the Petrashevskii circle, none of whom had abjured the political opinions of his youth.
Aleksei Unkovskii's enlightened activities on the Tver"committee occupy pride of place in one of the best-known English-language books on the emancipation of the serfs.
When, therefore, the government obliged the gentry to put their views on paper, chinks began to appear in the armour of gentry intransigence.
Second, and more important, even nobles who were determined to be recalcitrant expressed their recalcitrance in many different ways.
The central authorities were not in the habit of seeking advice on legislation, and did so in 1858 only because of the importance of the issue.
When provincial committees produced two or even three sets of recommendations, the centre's longstanding inclination to act as it saw fit returned in full measure.
On his six-week tour of the provinces in August and September 1858, the tsar encountered a spectrum of opinions which ranged from Tver"on the left, where Unkovskii was at least as radical as Nikolai Miliutin, to Nizhnii Novgorod on the right, where the local gentry wanted serfs to pay not only for any property which they received in the event of emancipation, but even for the freedom of their bodies (which the gentry did not own).
The range of opinions expressed by nobles on the provincial committees made plain to St Petersburg that it had to act alone.
It had to do something, because uncertainty had to be brought to an end; but only enlightened bureaucrats at the centre could cut through the diversity of opinion in the provinces.
The provincial gentry's disunity reduced their capacity to obstruct the work of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
The Ministry benefited to an even greater extent from a remarkable shift in the opinions of Iakov Rostovtsev.
As a member of the Secret Committee of 1857 Rostovtsev had given no indication that he might turn into a keen reformer.
In the first half of 1858 his inclinations seemed to be as conservative as ever.
Because of his betrayal of the Decembrists in 1825 and his long identification with the regime of Nicholas I, he had few friends on the left of the political spectrum who could advise him on the way in which emancipation should proceed.
He knew so little about the serf question that at first he thought it involved no more than granting the peasants their personal freedom.
After realizing that it also involved reordering agrarian relations he proceeded to fall under the spell of Mikhail Pozen, a large landowner from Poltava who was determined to prevent emancipation from damaging the interests of the gentry.
Via Rostovtsev, Pozen's conservative opinions became enshrined in the Main Committee's unimaginative April programme.
Rostovtsev had committed what one enthusiastic reformer called "a grave political mistake" .
Anonymously, Miliutin launched a  campaign against him in The Bell.
Yet in August and September 1858, when on holiday in Germany, Rostovtsev wrote the tsar four letters in which it became apparent that he had changed his ground.
He admitted in the first of the series that providing serfs with land seemed to pose insuperable practical difficulties, but in the last he argued "that the acquisition of landed property on the part of the peasants can be accomplished durably and even quickly" .
What occasioned these letters is unclear.
Rostovtsev always took assignments seriously and tended to work hard at informing himself.
Perhaps the conservatism of his views in 1857 derived from the fact that he had spent too much time studying the narrow-minded documents bequeathed by Nicholas I. In 1858 he was certainly impressed by The Bell, by reports of the disturbances in Estonia, and by his correspondence with Evgenii Obolenskii (one of the three Decembrists of Kaluga).
Perhaps he sensed an opportunity to make amends for his behaviour in 1825.
Whatever the cause, there can be no doubt that the effects of his conversion were far-reaching.
Of the many reasons for adopting the concept of emancipation with land, none weighed more strongly with the tsar than the advice of a proven traditionalist and long-term friend.
In mid-October 1858 Alexander lent his imprimatur to Rostovtsev's letters by putting them to the Main Committee.
Emancipation with land had found its way on to the agenda.
GETTING PRINCIPLES ON TO THE STATUTE BOOK
By December 1858 St Petersburg had taken two of the three decisions which led to the statutes of 1861: the decision to emancipate and the decision to emancipate with land.
The last two years of the emancipation process were devoted to the third decision: how to turn statements of intent into workable laws.
In February 1859 the tsar put the conservatively inclined Main Committee into cold storage and created "Editing Commissions" under Rostovtsev for the purpose of drawing up legislation.
Originally there were to be two of these, one for the preparation of a general statute and one to deal with local variations, but the arrangement proved unworkable and by the end of April 1859 there were four, each with responsibility for both the general and the particular aspects of its field.
Since a number of key personnel served in more than one section and since the new body had plenary as well as sectional meetings, it makes better sense to speak of a single "Commission" than to use the plural terminology of contemporaries.
The creation of the Editing Commission marked the apogee of the reform drive.
With the zeal of a convert, Rostovtsev rigged the membership.
Iakov Solov'ev calculated that of the thirty-nine appointees only thirteen  could be called opponents of reform, and three of those withdrew when they realized their helplessness.
The Commission was supposed to be guided in its deliberations by the Nazimov Rescript, the programme adopted by the Main Committee in December 1858, and the schemes devised by the provincial gentry committees, but the first and third of these were too conservative for its taste and in the first year of its life it gave them short shrift.
When delegates from various provincial committees came to St Petersburg for consultations in August 1859, Nikolai Miliutin cut the ground from under their feet by presenting them with an outline of the Commission's views which went far beyond what they had in mind.
In 1859 the terms of the emancipation settlement looked likely to benefit the peasantry at the expense of the gentry.
In February 1860, however, Rostovtsev died.
Conservatives were delighted by the appointment as his successor of Count Viktor Panin, a reactionary whose lack of enthusiasm for discussion was reflected in the fact that he kept parrots because they said what he told them to.
Petr Semenov, a liberally inclined participant in the emancipation process, believed that in appointing Panin the tsar had in fact "revealed a greater degree of far-sightedness than any of those active in the peasant question" .
By choosing a non-reformer, Semenov argued, Alexander allayed the fears of the gentry without jeopardizing the work which had already been completed.
There are grounds for doubting this opinion.
Rostovtsev's last memorandum and Panin's first differed significantly.
Whereas the former emphasized that the whole point of emancipation was to provide serfs with land (not just to grant them freedom), the latter spoke of enabling peasants to acquire land only "when feasible and necessary" .
If Panin had had his way, peasants would have waited for land indefinitely.
A second group of provincial delegates arrived in St Petersburg just after his appointment and provided him with a sympathetic audience for his opinions.
The tide of reform began to ebb.
When the Commission completed its work in October 1860 (after 409 meetings in a little over eighteen months), conservative bodies, the Main Committee and the State Council, made further inroads into the legislation which had been drafted under Rostovtsev.
The principle of emancipation with land survived, but the statutes of 19 February 1861 fell a long way short of the dreams entertained by radicals.
The tsar was well aware that the legislation left much to be desired and delayed publishing it until 5 March, the first day of Lent: "alarmed by the prospect of riot," wrote an admittedly hostile contemporary, "he hesitated a long time before choosing a day for promulgating the sham freedom and eventually chose the day when it was least of all expected" .
A soldier involved in the extensive security operation which attended the publication of the statutes regretted the need to quarter troops in villages but admitted the force of the Latin tag Si vis pacem, para bellum: "If you want peace, prepare for war" .
If peasants could get out of hand when the government was trying to raise a militia, it was not unreasonable to suppose that they would run amok on learning what the government meant by freedom.
What exactly the government did mean by freedom was hard to discern in the nineteen legislative Acts which together constituted the emancipation.
The General Statute was perplexing enough, but the local statutes not only divided the empire west of the Urals into four broad areas — Russia, Ukraine east of the Dnieper, Ukraine west of the Dnieper, and the north-western provinces (although even this is an over-simplification)— but also subdivided the four areas into zones (by type and profitability of economic activity).
A summary can hardly do justice to the corpus as a whole, but it is easy enough to point to the settlement's principal weaknesses.
In apparent contravention of everything for which committed reformers had striven, the statutes stated explicitly that all land remained the property of the gentry.
Admittedly, nobles had to grant serfs "perpetual use of their domicile" and the use of "a portion of arable" , but serfs had to "fulfill obligations to the noblemen" in return for them.
Lords and peasants were given two years to prepare charters which would map out the peasants' "portions of arable land" and define the extent of their "obligations" .
While the charters were being drawn up, the existing relations between landlords and serfs were to remain in place.
If the statutes had gone no further, it might have been said that the regime was simply trying to turn all serfs into "obligated peasants" (in line with Nicholas I's statute of 1842).
In reality, the tsarist authorities substituted for the Nicholaevan concept of "obligated" peasants the slightly more beneficent concept of "temporarily" obligated peasants.
The new charters were to be a staging post.
Once they were in place, not only could peasants buy (rather than just occupy) their dwelling-places, but also in certain circumstances they could "acquire in full ownership" the land which the charters assigned them.
If they bought both — the dwelling-places and the land — they ceased to be "temporarily obligated" and became independent smallholders.
Theoretically, therefore, the statutes made possible the social transformation for which liberals had been striving.
The snag lay in the circumstances under which a peasant could move from permanent use to "full ownership" of the land which he worked.
Although he could buy his dwelling-place whether his former owner wanted him to or not, he could acquire farmland only if the owner chose to sell it.
Thus nobles who decided to be obstreperous could perpetuate "temporary obligation" indefinitely.
Remarkably, nobles chose to be accommodating.
 "At the beginning of 1881 no less than 84.7 per cent of former serfs had become owners of their allotments" .
The gentry permitted their former serfs to become smallholders because the legislation of 1861 enabled them to part with land on extremely advantageous terms.
The statutes laid down the maximum size of peasant land allotments.
Where peasants were already working areas larger than the maximum, landowners were allowed to trim their holdings.
Predictably, they took the parts from which they could make money.
Since, in the last stage of the reform's passage, the State Council reduced the maximum size of peasant allotments to a point where many existing  peasant holdings exceeded it, the provision for "trimming" came into operation very frequently.
Provided, furthermore, that peasants were not reduced to possessing less than one-third of the maximum allotments, landlords were entitled to at least one-third of any land under discussion.
On estates where the nobleman had not been engaged in farming, this was a second provision that had the effect of reducing the quantity of land which peasants received.
Miliutin and other committed reformers had hoped to assign peasants the areas they were working already, but in the event they lost about 20 per cent of the land they had been using.
By the time the gentry had increased the quantity of land over which they exercised direct control (and improved its average quality), most of them were keen to sell off the rest.
With cash in their pockets they could pay off their debts and plough money into their restructured estates.
The sums they received, moreover, usually exceeded the value of the land they gave up.
The peasants' "redemption dues" were calculated not on the basis of the land which came into their possession but on the basis of the rents and services that they owed under serfdom.
Since no detailed register of these existed at the point of emancipation, one of the main purposes of the post-1861 charters was to set them down on paper.
Landlords usually managed to inflate the levels of the peasants' obligations, as the arbitrators who supervised the preparation of the charters belonged to the gentry estate and tended to take the landlords' side.
Once high levels had been set, nobles who chose not to turn rents into cash were acting to the detriment of their own best interests.
Admittedly, they received rather less than the capitalized value of the rents if they decided to move from "temporary obligation" to redemption without the consent of their peasants.
Even the smaller sum, however, was large enough to encourage them to proceed.
They would have been less well advised to move from temporary obligation to redemption if they had had to wait for the money which the peasants owed them, but the government realized that peasants were in no position to redeem their obligations overnight and advanced most of the money to which nobles were entitled in the form of interest-bearing bonds.
Thus although the laws of 1861 succeeded in turning serfs into smallholders, the methods they employed were heavily biased in the gentry's favour.
Because peasants had to pay back the sums of money which the government advanced on their behalf at 6 per cent interest over forty-nine years, it was to be a long time before their freedom was complete.
The formulae employed to calculate their annual payments produced figures no higher than the rents laid down in the charters, but as we have already seen, and as Alexander Gerschenkron stresses, the rents laid down in the charters were excessively high.
Prosperous peasants, furthermore, were unable to become independent agents by paying off their debts quickly.
The statutes made peasant communes rather than individuals responsible for redemption payments, with the result that an economically successful peasant was prevented from bettering himself quickly by peasants whose entrepreneurial inclinations were less well developed than his own.
It looks, then, as if the reformers had laboured in vain.
A severe critic of the statutes of 1861 might respond to the question "Why did Alexander II free the serfs?" by saying that he failed to do so.
Without going quite so far, historians have indeed been critical.
Academician Druzhinin held that the object of the framers of the statutes was "to retain in the hands of the gentry estate the maximum quantity of land and to facilitate the gentry's transition to more profitable farming based on free labour by providing them with the essential capital and reserves of the necessary manpower" .
In two closely argued and provocative essays Alfred Rieber claimed that the object of the emancipation was not even to benefit the gentry (let alone the peasantry), but rather to put the principal institutions of the autocracy, the treasury and the army, in a position to recover from the ravages of the Crimean War.
Whether the emancipation was as limited or reactionary in its effects as these analyses imply is the subject of Chapter Nine, but it is certainly unwise to imply, as does Rieber, that ill effects derived from malign intentions.
The enlightened bureaucrats who were primarily responsible for drawing up the legislation of 1861 may not have achieved everything for which they were striving, but they were undoubtedly trying to achieve more than the modernization of the gentry's sources of income or the revivification of the state machine.
We have already noted Miliutin's desire to maintain the size of the peasants' landholdings.
Reformers knew that the peasant commune stood in the way of economic diversification in the countryside, but felt that it had to be retained because it served to protect the interests of peasants against those of outsiders.
Rieber's view that the purpose of the emancipation was to fill the state's coffers with the peasants' redemption payments does not square with the background to the reform's financial arrangements.
At the beginning of the emancipation process reformers had hoped to transfer land from the gentry to the serfs by drawing on the resources of the exchequer.
In 1857, however, the state had started encouraging the creation of private joint-stock companies for the construction of railways, with the result that investors had taken their money out of state banks and put it into railway-building.
By the end of the emancipation process, the authorities lacked the wherewithal to pay for the transference of land.
As a result, the framers of the statutes of 1861 had to saddle serfs with mortgages, which was very far from their original intention.
Since historians who confuse effects and intentions may be mistaken in other regards, the question whether the emancipators had laboured in vain is one which should be handled with care.
The legislation of 1861 was undoubtedly flawed, but it also set in train changes which affected most levels of Russian government and all levels of Russian society.
The consequences of the emancipation were to be even more remarkable than the political process from which the statutes emerged.
In the Wake of Emancipation
RESPONSES TO THE LEGISLATION OF 1861
Immediate reactions to the emancipation were hostile.
 "On reading the [General]Statute," wrote Herzen's collaborator Nikolai Ogarev, "the first question you involuntarily ask yourself is: for whom is it written?" 
 "Least of all" , he believed, "for the peasants" .
The length and complexity of the document were such that"not a single literate peasant will master it and not a single illiterate peasant will listen to it.
A statute for peasants has to be written on a single sheet of paper".
The one thing the serfs did understand was that they were not yet free.
Because their relations with the landlords were to remain unaltered for at least two years (while charters were drawn up describing the obligations they were supposed to redeem), they believed that the government had cheated them.
Disturbances occurred in forty-two of the forty-three provinces to which the legislation applied.
According to the Ministry of Internal Affairs (which admitted that its statistics were highly approximate), 647 incidents took place between April and July 1861.
The sharpest clash occurred in the village of Bezdna in the eastern province of Kazan", where a certain Anton Petrov began claiming that the statutes really did grant wholesale freedom.
Thousands flocked to him, soldiers fired on the crowd, dozens died, and Petrov was executed.
The gentry were almost as dissatisfied as the peasantry.
On the right of the spectrum, nobles in the province of Tula lamented the effect of emancipation on their economic interests and sought a way of preventing the central administration from overriding their interests in the future.
To this end they proposed that gentry representatives be summoned from all parts of the empire to a national commission which "should have the right to present its drafts of proposed laws directly for consideration" by the tsar.
The equally conservative nobles of Smolensk echoed Tula's belief in the need for joint discussions with "representatives from other provinces', while the nobles of Tver" , one of the few gentry groups to espouse the cause of immediate emancipation rather than the conversion of serfs into temporarily obligated peasants, argued that the new laws had been botched, that "the  reforms so urgently required cannot be achieved by a bureaucratic order" , and that the "convocation of elected representatives from all the Russian land represents the only means for a satisfactory solution" .
Radical intellectuals were the most disenchanted of all.
The Bezdna affair evoked an indignant response from Afanasii Shchapov, a graduate of Kazan "Ecclesiastical Academy who began teaching Russian history at Kazan" University in November 1860.
 "I enter the university department of history," Shchapov declared in his inaugural lecture, "not with the thought of statehood, not with the idea of centralization, but with the idea of nationality (narodnost" ) and of regionality".
Five days later he illustrated his radicalism by lecturing sympathetically on the Decembrists.
At the Kazan "requiem for the victims of Bezdna (which took place in the emotionally charged atmosphere of Palm Sunday) he stepped forward at the end of the service with a commemorative address in which he referred to the dead peasants as" friends, killed for the people".
 "The history of the Russian people" , wrote Shchapov from prison a month later, "fills our heart with the belief and the hope that sooner or later a time must come for the Russian people when it acquires political self-consciousness and, as a result, political self-government" .
If opinions like those of Shchapov could emerge in remote Kazan"— they were partly generated, it seems, by members of the local ecclesiastical hierarchy — it was hardly surprising that the more sophisticated radicals to be found in other places expressed even greater disillusionment with the government's performance.
In London Herzen pointed out that not even the eighteenth-century rebel Emel'ian Pugachev had been shot "on the sly" like Petrov.
All but one of the five parts of Ogarev's provocatively entitled "Analysis of the New Serfdom" concluded with the ringing declaration that "The people have been deceived by the tsar" .
Anonymous writers began calling for action.
 "A Great Russian" put out a flysheet in St Petersburg in July 1861 which argued that "The educated classes must take the conduct of affairs out of the hands of the incapable government and into their own" ; otherwise, "patriots will be compelled to call upon the people to do what the educated classes refuse to do" .
A long letter to The Bell argued that expecting Russia's "educated classes" to solve the country's problems was futile.
What Russia needed was revolutionary cells with roots among the people and contempt for abstract theory.
The so-called "Great Russian" — by this time a committee — put out two more pamphlets in September 1861, only to be upstaged by the simultaneous appearance of a much more forthright proclamation.
To the Young Generation averred that "We do not need a tsar, or an emperor, or the Lord's anointed, or a robe of ermine covering up hereditary incompetence" .
The authors wanted an "elective and limited" executive, the abolition of censorship, "the development of the principle of self-government" , equal rights, and the collective ownership of the land.
If necessary, they were prepared to "call for a revolution to help the people" .
The Bell had asked in July, "What do the people need?" , and had answered its own question by  saying "It is very simple, the people need land and liberty" .
 "Land and Liberty" became the name of an amorphous political movement which operated in various parts of the Russian Empire between 1861 and 1863 and strove to convert the radicalism engendered by the emancipation into action.
In March 1862 the novelist Ivan Turgenev satirized Russia's revolutionary youth in Fathers and Sons, but the fires that devastated St Petersburg two months later led many to suppose that radicals were tough enough to engage in arson.
At the moment the fires began, Petr Zaichnevskii, a twenty-year-old Moscow University student who had been in prison since the previous year, managed to publish Young Russia, "the most bloodcurdling and extreme" of all the calls to action which circulated in the wake of the emancipation.
Unlike the "Great Russian" and the authors of To the Young Generation, Zaichnevskii made no bones whatever about using violence.
Rather, he looked forward to the day when those who sympathized with him would "kill the men of the imperial party without pity" .
As the summer of 1862 began, the regime seemed to be under serious threat.
The authorities had compounded their unpopularity among radicals by appearing to draw back from reform after publishing the emancipation statutes.
Without conceding that the gentry of Tula, Smolensk, and elsewhere were justified in calling for an assembly which would give them a chance to vent their spleen, Alexander II seemed to be no less frightened than they by the enormity of the changes he had sanctioned.
At the end of April 1861 he dismissed two of his brightest stars — Sergei Lanskoi and Nikolai Miliutin, the Minister and Acting Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs.
In June he replaced an enlightened Minister of Education with an admiral who had conducted the Russian mission to Japan during the Crimean War and was identified in the public mind with oriental despotism.
The incoming Minister of Internal Affairs, Petr Valuev, had been accounted a liberal when he criticized the state of the empire at the time of the Crimean War, but had apparently become less enthusiastic about change with the passage of time.
In 1858 he had moved from the Governorship of Kurland to a position in the Ministry of State Properties, an institution which had forsaken the sympathy for reform which it had displayed under Kiselev.
By 1861 observers considered Valuev to be the creature of M. N. Murav'ev, his benighted Minister, and of Viktor Panin, Rostovtsev's conservative successor as chairman of the Editing Commission.
When Valuev became Minister of Internal Affairs Dmitrii Miliutin wrote that"The landowning party had every justification for counting on [him]for the realization of their views'.
At the end of June 1862, not long after Young Russia and the fires in St Petersburg — and immediately after an attempt on the life of the Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaevich — Valuev produced a paper on the internal condition of the empire in which he admitted the many difficulties under which the government was labouring but proposed no more than converting the State Council into a somewhat more representative body and bypassing the judicial system to deal with radicals more speedily.
The  government's main concern now seemed to be stifling dissent before it became intractable.
Enacting further reform was apparently far from its thoughts.
A historically inclined contemporary might have been tempted to compare Alexander II's outlook in mid-1862 with that of Alexander I in 1805 or Nicholas I at the end of 1830.
In different degrees, both the earlier tsars had devoted their first years on the throne to improving the condition of the empire, but one of them had been distracted by Napoleon and the other by foreign war and a rebellion in Poland.
Neither had succeeded, to any great extent, in returning to the path of reform.
By legislating for the emancipation of the serfs Alexander II had achieved more than either of his immediate forebears, but he had also upset peasants, nobles and intellectuals.
He had revealed a capacity for giving with one hand and taking away with the other.
Many indicators suggested that reform was too dangerous to be allowed to continue and that the tsar's capacity for embracing change had been exhausted.
The regime recovered, however, from the immediate aftermath of the emancipation, and continued to work on modernizing the empire's institutional and social structure.
It is doubtful, indeed, whether the difficulties it faced in 1861 and 1862 were as great as they look, and it is highly unlikely that the tsar decided in 1861 to substitute conservatives for reformers at the heart of the imperial administration.
Peasant disturbances were numerous in the spring and early summer of 1861, but declined sharply thereafter.
P. A. Zaionchkovskii calculated for the period June 1861 to December 1863 that even if the number of incidents in which troops were used against peasants is doubled or tripled (which may be a legitimate procedure in view of the possibility of under-reporting), no more than 4 per cent of the places where peasants lived were affected.
It is sometimes thought paradoxical that, when part of the rationale for emancipating the serfs was the elimination of disorder in the countryside, the legislation of 1861 increased it.
In fact, violence soon diminished.
Once serfs began paying redemption dues they discovered that their new taskmaster, the state, was less efficient and less demanding than the gentry.
Even if the authorities had wanted to rule the countryside with a rod of iron they were in no position to do so.
The regime did not employ the equivalent of the landlords' bailiffs.
As the peasants put it, "God is high and the tsar is far away" .
More to the point, the pre-emancipation budgets of the gentry were less well able to sustain a deficit than the post-emancipation budget of the regime.
Both were unbalanced, but the former reached breaking point sooner than the latter.
Peasants under serfdom tended to be forced to fulfil their obligations.
When pressed too hard, they rioted.
After 1861 (or rather, after they started making redemption payments), "Peasants could and did accumulate huge arrears without any definitive confrontation with the authorities" .
Alexander II was well advised, at the point of emancipation, to plan an elaborate security operation, but he did not have to maintain it indefinitely.
Nor did he have to worry for long about hostility on the part of the  gentry.
A combination of minor adjustments to the statutes of February 1861 and a show of determination enabled the tsar to scotch aristocratic demands for participation in government.
In April 1861 even the head of the Third Department thought that the regime would be forced to grant a constitution, but he added that "not only would the emperor not make up his mind to assent to the gradual introduction of constitutional forms, but he had even spoken out firmly against it very recently and had evidently not changed his mind on the question" .
Alexander's resolution led on the one hand to the arrest of liberally orientated nobles in Tver"and on the other to the last of his propaganda campaigns in the countryside.
 "Just as his 1858 trips had made known his commitment to emancipation, those of 1862 showed his determination to preserve the prerogatives of the autocrat" .
In September 1862, for example, Alexander ran a risk when he visited Novgorod to celebrate the thousandth anniversary of the putative foundation of the Russian state.
Since the province was a hotbed of gentry resistance to the emancipation, confrontation looked a real possibility.
As the royal ship tied up on the river Volkhov, however, the courage of the assembled nobles deserted them.
When Alexander addressed the nobles the next day they were practically eating out of his hand.
The regime was less keen to placate intellectuals than it was to calm the gentry, but despite the alarming pronouncements of "the Great Russian" and the authors of To the Young Generation and Young Russia, it had less need to do so.
Thinking people agreed on the need for a radical liberalization of the empire's social and political structure, but disagreed about the means of achieving it.
Relatively few intellectuals took the view that the regime should be kept under constant pressure.
The perceptive Boris Chicherin spotted as early as 1858 that The Bell was "better at throwing government and society into confusion than at suggesting the precise path they should follow" .
After visiting Herzen in London he accused him of substituting passion for reason.
 "By moderation, caution, and the rational discussion of social questions" , he wrote, "you could make the authorities trust you; at the present time you are merely frightening them" .
At the end of 1862 Chicherin gave his letter to Herzen a wider currency by assigning it pride of place in a book of essays on the principal political questions of the day.
By then other intellectuals had come out against the radicals.
In the autumn of 1861 the Slavophile Ivan Aksakov tried to dissuade students from engaging in disturbances by urging them to return to their books and to "study Russia and the Russian nationality (narodnost), in order to fill the gulf which still separates us from the people" .
The writer Nikolai Leskov, who at the time of the emancipation was far from hostile to the cause of change, launched a virulent attack on contemporary "liberals" in May 1862.
 "Alarmist and badly educated people" , he wrote, "do not understand that it is possible to be an outright enemy of the entire contemporary order without being a liberal" .
Leskov was prepared to accept the utility of the term "liberal" , but only if it referred to advocates of moderation.
 "For people who take a sober view of life," he said, "a person is liberal who is prepared not  to take thought for his personal interests but to expend all his energy on standing up for the juridical independence of every citizen and the freedom of every action which does not undermine the well-being and the tranquillity of society" .
The key words were the last.
Leskov believed that "undermining the well-being and tranquillity of society" was the principal object of the intellectuals whom he sought to put in their place.
In the case of his bête-noire, the literary critic Nikolai Chernyshevskii, he was right.
The two men's inability to make common cause illustrated one of the main reasons why the government had less to fear from oppositionists than the radical manifestos of 1861–2 appeared to suggest.
Even if intellectuals outside the government had been agreed on the way forward, it is unlikely that they would have been successful in generating widespread enthusiasm for their opinions.
The authorities were quite prepared to intervene against radicals, and radicals were inexperienced in the ways of conspiracy.
In June 1862 the government imposed an eight-month ban on The Contemporary, the journal which published Chernyshevskii.
Herzen's suggestion that it continue in the West created more problems than it solved.
His circle had been penetrated by an informer.
An emissary from London to St Petersburg was picked up at the imperial frontier and a large number of compromising letters fell into the hands of tsarist investigators.
Not only Chernyshevskii but also the leading light in the St Petersburg branch of "Land and Liberty" were arrested.
Although Chernyshevskii lived another twenty-seven years, he never again walked the streets of the capital.
The key figure in "Land and Liberty" , Nikolai Serno-Solov'evich, died in Siberia in 1866.
Until radicals grasped the need to conduct their affairs in absolute secrecy, their chances of conspiring effectively were remote.
Their views might have attracted wider sympathy if the regime had been engaging in repression across the board, but although the tsar appeared to move to the right when he appointed Valuev to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Admiral Putiatin to the Ministry of Education, he was very far from abandoning the cause of reform.
He was determined to restore order in the countryside, to avoid giving the impression that nobles could force him into concessions, and to silence the most determined of his critics, but he neither abandoned the task of implementing the emancipation statutes nor fought shy of enacting the additional measures to which freeing the serfs gave rise.
The appointment of Valuev was not quite the retrograde step that some contemporaries thought it to be.
The worst that can be said of the new minister is that he "undoubtedly possessed a definite political programme, but he was too cautious and too indecisive to carry it out" .
It is true, as Sergei Solov'ev pointed out, that "Fate did not send [Alexander II]a Richelieu or a Bismarck" , but neither did it send him a Metternich.
In September 1861 Valuev wrote a long paper on the progress of emancipation which concluded by acknowledging that "Sometimes the need arises to legitimize things which have not been and could not have been envisaged by a law" .
The paper contained many suggestions for streamlining  the way in which change was taking place in the countryside.
It implied, furthermore, that the regime had to approach the reform of local government and the law courts with a much greater sense of urgency.
Although most of the adjustments Valuev proposed to the statutes of emancipation appeared to favour the gentry at the expense of the peasantry, one of them, the abolition of the peasant commune, might have had the opposite effect, and none of them was designed to turn the clock back.
State agencies other then the Ministry of Internal Affairs, furthermore, either had become convinced that the government would run more risks by abandoning reform than it would by continuing with it, or were acquiring ministers whose commitment to change was actually greater than that of their predecessors.
The Third Department recommended in an official memorandum of 1861 that the government strive "to retain in its own hands the standard of the progressive movement which it itself has started" .
When Putiatin rapidly proved a dismal failure at the Ministry of Education, the tsar replaced him with the much more enlightened Aleksandr Golovnin.
Viktor Panin gave way at the Ministry of Justice to Dmitrii Zamiatnin.
Murav'ev lost the Ministry of State Properties.
Nikolai Miliutin's brother Dmitrii became Minister of War and Mikhail Reitern Minister of Finances.
The new appointments, all made at the end of 1861 or the beginning of 1862, bespoke a regime that was about to make further changes.
The emancipation of the serfs had been drawn up at a time when most of the tsar's principal advisers belonged to the age of Nicholas I. Within a year of the promulgation of the statutes, most of the chief posts in the empire were held by people whose sympathy with the new social order was greater than that of the emancipators.
The chances of further liberalization were considerable.
MILITARY AND FISCAL REFORM
Slowly, the rate of change began to accelerate.
In 1862 the regime was hesitant about addressing itself to the broad governmental and social implications of the emancipation of the serfs, but new developments in the military and fiscal spheres signalled that its enthusiasm for reform was returning.
In respect of the army, something had been achieved already.
Although Dmitrii Miliutin's predecessor as War Minister, General Sukhozanet, had been considered an unimaginative choice for the position at the time of his appointment in 1856, he had instigated or been obliged to accept "Literally hundreds of changes" in the conduct of military affairs.
Most of them were paltry, but a few made plain that Alexander II's attitude to the army differed from that of his father.
Large numbers of soldiers were demobilized.
The draft was suspended between 1856 and 1859.
Military colonies which supplied infantry (but not those that supplied cavalry) were dissolved in 1858.
In the same year, the tsar involved himself personally in the foundation of the reformist journal Military Miscellany.
In 1859 he formalized Nicholas I's reduction of military service from twenty-five years to fifteen.
Above all, Alexander overrode his cautious War Minister in the one region of the empire where troops were still on active service.
By making his close friend Prince Aleksandr Bariatinskii Viceroy of the Caucasus and ordering him to take all necessary steps to bring the campaign against Shamil to a successful conclusion, the tsar gave an innovator scope for the exercise of his talents.
Bariatinskii captured Shamil in 1859 after introducing "greater independence for local commanders, more practical training for officers and men, and more stringent criteria for promotions" .
He had shown what a little flair might do for the army as a whole.
Since, in the year of Shamil's capture, a partial mobilization of Russian troops on the empire's Galician frontier took five months, the regime had every reason to extend the lessons it learned in the Caucasus to the rest of the military machine.
Well placed at the time of Alexander II's accession, Dmitrii Miliutin had been a penetrating analyst of the empire's military weaknesses at the beginning of 1856.
The appointment of Sukhozanet distressed him, but he served as Bariatinskii's chief of staff in the Caucasus and was the real architect of his triumph.
Success in the Caucasian war and the friendship between Bariatinskii and the tsar restored him to favour at the centre and gave him the chance of putting his ideas into practice.
Though committed to reform, he was no radical.
His political opinions were probably more right-wing than those of his brother Nikolai.
 "Reform" , he wrote, "can be undertaken here only in an authoritarian manner (vlast'iu)" .
Popular initiative was to be deplored: "any revolution which smacks of fanaticism, a violent revolution, a people's revolution…merely destroys without creating anything new" .
Within clearly defined limits, however, Miliutin believed in change.
On 15 January 1862 he submitted proposals to the tsar which became "the basic blueprint" for his multifarious activities at the War Ministry.
The new minister had long known why Russia's military outgoings were larger than those of her competitors.
 "The main reason for the size of the [military]budget" , Miliutin wrote in 1862, "is the number of troops" .
Before the emancipation of the serfs the government had been reluctant to return peasants to the countryside after they had served in the army, for fear that they would use their training to promote discontent.
In effect, soldiers in the pre-reform army served for life.
After emancipation the state could transform recruitment by enlisting more people each year but putting them on the reserve list much sooner.
Miliutin pointed out that if 125,000 men were enlisted annually but required to serve for no more than seven or eight years, in seven years the country would possess a trained reserve of 750,000 men.
If annual recruitment were higher still, recruits could be released earlier and the reserve would be larger.
The War Minister was  already thinking in terms of extending the obligation to serve in the army from the peasant estate to the community as a whole.
He also had strong views on the way in which the army was organized.
As things stood when he became minister, the empire created wholly new regiments and divisions when it expanded its forces in wartime.
Miliutin rightly believed that this practice gave rise to major administrative complications.
His alternative was to increase the army's number of permanent divisions from thirty-one to forty-seven, to maintain them at a relatively low level in peacetime, but to triple them in size on the outbreak of war.
Summoning troops from the reserve would be easier if the formations in which they were to be deployed existed already.
Suddenly creating new formations was a recipe for administrative chaos.
These were only the most important of Miliutin's ideas, some of which took effect very quickly.
Between 1862 and 1870 the size of the reserve went up from 210,000 men to 553,000.
The division of the empire into fifteen military districts in August 1864 made possible the more efficient call-up of reservists in wartime and the partial transfer of decision-making to local commanders.
The induction of recruits became a more civilized process in September 1862 when Miliutin declared that their heads need not be shaved and that they ought to be conducted to the barracks in everyday clothing rather than clothes that made them look like convicts.
Military education ceased to be a sort of "royal secret" and became the preserve of the War Ministry.
A commission established in October 1862 created gymnasia for aspiring officers in which the curriculum hardly differed from that of secondary schools for civilians.
In future, officers received specialist military training only after they had been educated in the round.
Miliutin had begun not only to reduce expenditure, but also to introduce military personnel to the spirit of post-emancipation society.
Like the War Minister, Reitern at the Ministry of Finances accelerated the introduction of changes which had been in the air since 1855.
A committed member of the circle of reformers which centred on the Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaevich, he spent four years in the second half of the 1850s investigating the financial procedures of various west European countries and the United States.
Before he returned home, another economist with experience of foreign practices, V. A. Tatarinov, set in train the changes which came to a head in 1862.
Tatarinov argued that all ministries and other governmental institutions should be obliged to produce detailed estimates for the year ahead at the time they submitted their annual accounts.
In this way the centre could compare past and future.
He advocated a unified central approach to budgeting and recommended above all that the State Control, the regime's auditing body, be given access to the accounts of all government agencies.
The tsar had good reason to listen to the advice of his financial experts, for not only were his finances in a desperate state but also he could not easily borrow on western markets so long as the empire's accounting procedures remained inadequate.
Many of the contemporary suggestions for improving the management  of the empire's finances bore fruit during Reitern's first year as minister.
The state began publishing its accounts.
The government tried to drive out inflation by announcing that it was prepared to exchange paper money for specie.
The tsar improved the Ministry of Finances' chances of introducing economies by ordering that state agencies would have to prepare detailed estimates of their future expenditure.
A decision was taken in principle to require agencies with independent sources of income to transfer them to the central treasury.
The rights of the State Control to check accounts began to increase.
Above all, Reitern presided over the abolition of tax farming.
Only one farm remained, for vodka, but abolishing it was a major step in view of the fact that it was the source of about two-fifths of the state's total revenue.
Because merchants paid enormous sums for the right to sell vodka, the imperial government had long been prepared to overlook their chicanery at the point of sale.
St Petersburg had become increasingly aware, however, of the corruption to which imperial officials fell prey as a result of their involvement in the merchants' activities.
The authorities were particularly anxious, moreover, to prevent the recurrence of rural disturbances like those of 1858 and 1859, when peasants had boycotted the taverns and rioted because vodka had become too expensive for them.
As early as 1860 "it could be said that the abolition of tax farming was…official Imperial policy" .
Two years later, under Reitern, the decision was taken to replace the vodka farm with an excise tax.
When the tax came in at the beginning of 1863, vodka became cheaper and more readily available, state revenues held up, and the former monopolists of the retail trade began to invest their accumulated capital in railways, banks and mines.
In financial and administrative terms the reform proved to be one of the greatest successes of the 1860s.
Indirectly it also constituted the biggest single indication, in the immediate aftermath of the emancipation, that the imperial authorities were still interested in altering the relations between social classes.
Although the War Minister had considered imposing conscription on members of the privileged estates, he had not yet dared to recommend it.
Centralizing revenue collection and publishing the empire's accounts had won Reitern the respect of financial experts, but had not done much to earn him the applause of the community at large.
The excise, on the other hand, benefited the poor.
Although the government changed its way of profiting from the sale of drink mainly for negative reasons — to stave off rural unrest and reduce under-the-counter payments to civil servants — the abolition of the vodka farm looked like a victory for the common man.
THE CHURCH
The work of Miliutin and Reitern made plain that the Russian government retained its commitment to reform even in the immediate aftermath of the emancipation.
Having addressed themselves to the army and the treasury, the authorities turned to the Orthodox Church.
Ecclesiastical dignitaries had been contemplating certain reforms of their own, but pressure for a radical approach to the church's problems had been generated by a rank-and-file priest and by laymen.
The priest, Ivan Belliustin, devoted a lengthy manuscript to the wretched lives of the non-monastic clergy.
Their education, he said, was irrelevant to their duties, their poverty such that they had to spend most of their time keeping body and soul together.
Bishops were unlikely to help them, for "Whatever the cost, even if it means the destruction of the church,[bishops]try to preserve that power and significance which prelates possessed in the fifteenth to the seventeenth centuries" .
Belliustin called upon the tsar to circumvent the ecclesiastical hierarchy and breathe life into the clerical estate.
A minor clergyman from the province of Tver"appeared to have little chance of influencing the government, but Belliustin was in touch with Mikhail Pogodin, the longstanding apologist for Nicholas I who had discovered a capacity for criticizing the regime in the course of the Crimean War.
Via Pogodin, Belliustin's diatribe was published in Paris in 1858.
Under the title A Description of the Rural Clergy, the book circulated widely in Russia and impressed important people.
Even the highly conservative Procurator of the Holy Synod, A. P. Tolstoi, thought many of its arguments justifiable.
In 1859 the tsar intervened personally to prevent church leaders from consigning Belliustin to a monastery in the White Sea.
The Description alarmed the regime because of its implications for the maintenance of order in the countryside.
If the condition of the rural clergy was as bad as the book claimed, who was to speak for the government in the provinces?
The secular authorities needed priests who could attract the loyalty of their parishioners.
Valuev had been critical of the ecclesiastical hierarchy since at least 1855, when he asked why the church needed the physical force of the state to prevent schism and re-convert dissenters.
By the end of the 1850s the state had an additional reason for addressing itself to the fate of priests.
In the western provinces, where the Christian population was overwhelmingly Catholic or in communion with Rome, peasants were refusing to fulfil the economic obligations which they owed to the Orthodox clergy.
Ever sensitive to the possibility of internecine strife among the nationalities of the empire, the tsar compelled the Holy Synod to consider ways of resolving the matter.
It reported in mid-1861, but suggested only that the peasantry of the western provinces fulfil their obligations in cash rather than labour.
By this time the government was of the opinion that difficulties which arose in relations between clergy and peasants sprang not merely from the economic arrangements on which the livelihood of priests  depended, but from the priests' character.
Only better priests could achieve satisfactory relations with their parishioners, and producing better priests meant giving thought to the clerical estate as a whole.
As Minister of Internal Affairs, Valuev was by this time in a position to act.
In August 1861 he made clear that he wanted to move beyond the problem of the western provinces to the problem of priests in general.
 "The Orthodox clergy and Church in the western area" , he said, "will not assume the status appropriate to their rank so long as this same clergy at the very centre of the state remain in their present condition and on their present level" .
Though the tsar remained principally interested in solving the riddle of the western provinces, he allowed his minister to broaden the debate.
Nikolai Pomialovskii's fictional Seminary Sketches, which began to appear in The Contemporary in mid-1862, put part of the case for church reform to a wider public.
Despite resistance from successive heads of the Holy Synod (who resented the intrusion into their business of the Ministry of Internal Affairs), Valuev secured the establishment in December 1862 of a commission to investigate the life of the church: "the 'emancipation of the clergy’ had begun" .
HIGHER EDUCATION
While the ecclesiastical commission was deliberating, the government put its mind to resolving the complex set of problems which had arisen in the universities.
Soon after ascending the throne Alexander had relaxed the constraints on higher education which his father had introduced in the wake of the European revolutions of 1848.
In the second half of the 1850s the Ministry of Education abolished enrolment quotas, exempted the badly off from the payment of fees, readopted the principle of despatching promising scholars to western Europe for postgraduate training, allowed women to attend lectures, ended the practice of monitoring students' off-campus behaviour, reintroduced contentious subjects like west European law and the history of philosophy, and appointed broad-minded officials to the headships of the empire's educational districts.
Above all, the ministry effected a radical transformation of the professoriate.
Of the staff employed in universities at the beginning of 1854 50 per cent had left their posts by the end of 1862.
Afanasii Shchapov of Kazan"University was perhaps the most radical of the new appointees, but most of the newcomers differed sharply from their predecessors.
Quondam dissidents joined the establishment.
The Ukrainian federalist Mykola (Nikolai) Kostomarov, who had been banished to Saratov after the exposure of the Kirillo-Methodian Society in 1847, became a Professor of History at St Petersburg University in 1859.
Boris Chicherin joined him as a Professor of Law in 1861.
Since St  Petersburg University also employed Konstantin Kavelin (the prime advocate of conferring land as well as liberty on the peasants), Vladimir Spasovich (an enthusiastic Polish nationalist), Aleksandr Pypin (a cousin of the trenchant journalist Nikolai Chernyshevskii) and Boris Utin (a former associate of Mikhail Petrashevskii), it could have been said to represent almost all the forward-looking opinions of the day.
At Moscow University, where the political economist I. V. Vernadskii found ways of advocating the emancipation of the serfs even before discussion of the subject was officially permitted, the staff changed so much that the liberally inclined Sergei Solov'ev began to look like a conservative.
At Kiev the historian P. V. Pavlov captivated students by dwelling on the putative democracy and federalism of pre-Petrine Russia.
The appointment of the famous doctor and educational theorist Nikolai Pirogov to the headship of the Odessa educational district in 1856 demonstrated that under Alexander II enlightened academics could not only serve in educational institutions, but also run them.
Only at the University of Dorpat, in Estonia, did the intellectual atmosphere change rather slowly.
From the point of view of the authorities, revitalizing the universities was a policy fraught with danger.
Politically motivated intellectuals tended not to fall silent on receiving official positions but to capitalize on their prominence.
Shchapov was only one of the newly appointed professors whose inaugural lecture hinted at a political programme.
Kostomarov expressed an almost identical antipathy to the state in his inaugural lecture of November 1859.
Boris Chicherin's (very different) political opinions found equally clear expression in his inaugural of October 1861.
Students, meanwhile, grew in number and changed in character.
The student body was still tiny (just under 3,000 in 1854, just under 5,000 in 1860), but the rate of growth outfaced administrators.
The removal of entry quotas encouraged young people who had been denied access to universities in the last years of Nicholas to enter them under Alexander, with the result that students tended to be older and more politically engaged than they had been in the past.
Because undergraduates could engage in off-campus activities without being supervised by the university authorities, they began to play a more significant part in society at large.
Although about two-thirds of students still came from the gentry estate, an increasing proportion of them seem to have been poor.
Many took advantage of the new regime's financial generosity.
 "By 1859," for example, "two-thirds of all registered students at Moscow University were exempt from fees" .
In short, the government's liberality turned universities into a powder-keg.
Staff spoke out and students began to organize.
The lectures of the former and the associations of the latter appeared to be serving not only academic and economic purposes but also the promotion of political instability.
Which of the many recent changes played the major part in the university disturbances of the early 1860s is unclear.
Patrick Alston emphasizes the students' poverty, Regina Eimontova their political opinions, Daniel Brower the interaction of the two.
Incompetence at the Ministry of Education  certainly lit the touch-paper.
Before leaving the ministry in mid-1861 the sensible Evgraf Kovalevskii came up with a programme for reducing the volatility of the universities which might have been effective if it had been introduced gradually.
The new minister, Admiral Putiatin, acted on the programme forthwith.
Abolishing the remission of fees, prohibiting student meetings, taking over student loan banks and closing student-run libraries alienated not only the students but also their professors.
Even Chicherin, whose inaugural lecture recommended deference to the state, called the ban on student associations "a preposterous thought" and the non-remission of fees "impolitic" .
Most of the leading professors at St Petersburg University resigned their posts.
By the end of 1861 the university had been closed.
With the professors' backing, disaffected St Petersburg students tried to set up a "free university" at the beginning of 1862, but they gave up the attempt after a month when the government arrested a professor for lecturing in a supposedly provocative manner on the upcoming national millennium.
The fires of May 1862 only confirmed the authorities in their antipathy to students.
Since the St Petersburg pattern was repeated at universities elsewhere in the empire (except at Dorpat), the higher education system appeared to have fallen apart.
In June 1862 a four-hour session of the Council of Ministers which suspended The Contemporary and decided to open only one section of St Petersburg University in the coming academic year left the liberal Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaevich "deeply sad" .
In view of the way in which the government treated universities in 1861 and 1862, the law of June 1863 which redesigned their modus operandi preserved a remarkable degree of the generosity towards them which had been evident in the second half of the 1850s.
If there was a sphere in which the authorities had a certain justification for retreating from the policy of reform (and in which they could have afforded to act without alienating a numerically significant part of the population), it was that of higher education.
Yet the tsar replaced Putiatin with Golovnin, appointed a commission which "conducted the most extensive investigation into the idea of a Russian university ever undertaken by the old regime" , took advice even from the liberal Professor Kavelin, and introduced a law which improved the funding of universities, gave professors a large degree of control over university affairs, maintained the principle that universities were open to all classes of the community, and allowed universities to go on dedicating themselves, first and foremost, to the study of the liberal arts.
As James Flynn says, this was "in most important respects a faithful return to the statute of 1835" , which sounds like a dubious compliment until one remembers that Nicholas I's supposedly restrictive statute on universities actually preserved most of the enlightened principles of the statute of 1804.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
By mid-1863, therefore, the regime had given several indications that its interest in remodelling the state's institutions had survived the shock of emancipating the serfs.
Its confidence appeared to be growing, for in 1864 the tsar enacted three measures that were second in importance only to the emancipation itself.
The first of these dealt with local government.
As we saw in Chapter Five, even in the reign of Nicholas contradictory principles had informed the autocracy's attitude towards administration.
The growth of the tsar's chancery had embodied a "personal" principle, whereas the abolition of the majority of governors-general had implied adherence to a "ministerial" principle and the reform of the municipal government of St Petersburg had intimated sympathy for a "representative" principle.
In Nicholas's lifetime the personal principle prevailed over the others, but once his successor embarked on emancipation the other two had to be considered more seriously.
Severing the umbilical cord between landlords and peasants vastly increased the proportion of the population for which the centre was directly responsible.
Before 1861 the state had left most rural tasks to the gentry, but nobles who had been deprived of their serfs had no reason to think of themselves as agents of the government.
How could the centre "maintain its administrative ties with the masses to ensure adequate national defense and tax collection?" .
It was unreasonable to suppose that an enlargement of Nicholas I's "personal" principle could fill the vacuum in the countryside, for when the serfs were free they were even more likely to misinterpret dictates from the centre than they had been as bondmen.
The logical alternative was to promote the "ministerial" principle by strengthening the chain of command which led from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the provincial governors.
But although the imperial bureaucracy was growing in size, it was too small to take over all the duties for which landlords had been responsible.
Nor was it well enough coordinated to give the Ministry of Internal Affairs a clear run.
The third and least well developed principle, the "representative" principle, began to come into its own.
Frederick Starr calls the second and third principles "decentralization" (which involved giving local officials more power but preserved the notion of bureaucratic or "ministerial" hegemony) and "self-government" (which meant introducing representative organs and giving non-bureaucrats in the provinces a larger say in the management of their affairs).
These were Alexander II's only real choices, but before he decided between them the notion of tying the provinces more closely to the centre had to be ruled out of court.
At the beginning of the reign the tsar seemed to favour decentralization (the "ministerial" principle).
In a decree of October 1856 he strengthened the hand of provincial governors.
They and the Ministry of Internal Affairs were delighted, but other ministries with outposts in the countryside objected to the new constraints on their freedom of action.
In the first months  of 1858 conservatives at the centre proposed the reinstatement of Nicholas I's "personal" principle.
They believed that, instead of conferring greater powers on provincial governors, the regime should create an additional network of provincial administrators who would owe their allegiance to the tsar and whose prime purpose would be the maintenance of order rather than the fostering of local initiative.
Military governors-general were to be put in charge of groups of provinces throughout the empire, not just in the imperial borderlands and in St Petersburg and Moscow.
At the district level new officials, "district captains" (uezdnye nachal'niki), were to be introduced to enact the decrees of the governors-general.
In accepting Murav'ev's proposals the regime made plain that, although it had just committed itself firmly to the emancipation of the serfs (in the Nazimov Rescript), it was not yet prepared to adopt the principle of decentralization or to move towards provincial self-government.
Nikolai Miliutin was appalled.
The vitriolic anonymous letter he despatched to The Bell in the summer of 1858 had much less to do with the half-hearted way in which the government was handling the question of emancipation than with the way in which the regime proposed to run the empire after emancipation had been achieved.
Military rule, he believed, would wreck the country.
If the proposals of early 1858 reached the statute book, "The whole of Russia will turn into nothing more than a military colony (obratitsia v odno voennoe poselenie), and who will save it from the new Arakcheev who is emerging in the person of Iakov Ivanovich Rostovtsev?" 
Fortunately, from Miliutin's point of view, the 1858 project aroused extreme dissatisfaction among the gentry.
If it had been implemented they would have lost not only their control over the peasantry but also virtually all authority in provincial affairs.
In view of the emergence of an unlikely alliance between reform-minded bureaucrats and provincial noblemen, the government abandoned the idea of running the countryside autocratically.
When, on 25 March 1859, the tsar announced the principles on which Russian local government was to be based in the future, he acknowledged that provision had to be made for involving the public.
The representative principle had superseded the ministerial and the personal.
Two days after changing tack, Alexander set up a Commission on the Reorganization of Provincial and District Institutions to work out how the new principle was to be embodied in legislation.
Plans for the reform of local government were now in step with those for the emancipation of the serfs.
Just as the regime had decided, by 1859, to make land available to serfs (not merely to emancipate them), so now it grasped that strengthening the centre's authority in the countryside ran counter to the policy of increasing the freedom of its subjects.
From March 1859 it was clear that, when the empire's local government was put on a new footing, people other than bureaucrats would be participating in it.
What was not clear was the manner or the extent of their involvement.
In view of the fact that Miliutin was made chairman of the new local government commission the prospects for a generous solution  looked good, but the commission made little progress in the first year of its life.
Miliutin himself was at fault.
However strongly he objected to military governors-general, he also believed strongly in the maintenance of law and order.
As a result, he devoted more attention to the question of policing the countryside than to the creation of local representative institutions.
 "In 1857, in [Iaroslavl',]a province that covered almost 14,000 square miles and sheltered more than 950,000 people, the Ministry of Internal Affairs had at its disposal only 244 policemen" .
Since other provinces were no better off, policing was a major issue; but spending time on it impeded the development of representative institutions.
In April 1860 the Minister of Internal Affairs presented "Temporary Rules on District Land Offices" to the State Council, but in June the tsar returned them to the ministry to await the preparation of a Statute on Provincial Institutions.
The reconstruction of local government was to take place only after the serfs had been liberated, by which time Miliutin's days at the Ministry of Internal Affairs were numbered.
Inadvertently, Miliutin not only impeded but positively retarded the coming of local representative institutions, since the Commission on the Reorganization of Provincial and District Institutions proposed the introduction of "peace arbitrators" .
The idea behind these was beneficent.
They were to be elected by peasants from among the ranks of the gentry in order to defend peasant interests in the wake of the emancipation.
In due course, after the ties that bound nobles and peasants had been finally severed, they were to become elective Justices of the Peace with jurisdiction over all estates of the realm.
In conception they were a "first step toward further reforms in the field of local administration and the courts" .
In the event, however, they were appointed rather than elected and usually served the interests of the gentry estate.
Charged in 1861 with supervising the charters of peasant obligations which had to be drawn up immediately after the emancipation, in most cases they sanctioned charters from which the gentry profited.
Peace arbitrators thus came to epitomize not the "representative" but the "personal" or the "ministerial" approach to the management of the countryside.
Another part of the emancipation legislation appeared to do more for the cause of local representation, but proved to create as many problems as it solved.
Legislators believed that although peasant communes were well qualified to take decisions about the planting and harvesting of crops and the repartition of peasant landholdings, they were imperfect instruments for the conduct of administrative and judicial affairs in the countryside.
The emancipators thought a commune could serve administrative and judicial purposes only if it embraced a coherent area of peasant settlement.
Since the gentry had tended to buy and sell land without reference to the administrative cohesion of the parcels they exchanged, two or more communes often existed side by side in a single centre of rural population.
From the point of view of the emancipators, "where a settlement consisted of various estates and more than one commune, there, evidently, two units had to exist…: one economic (the land commune), the other administrative" .
To bring the second of these into being, the authors of the 1861 legislation created a level of local administration below the levels which existed already.
Small peasant communes were grouped for administrative and judicial purposes into cantons or "volosti" .
The office-holders and agencies which ran the new units — the elder, the clerk, the executive board, the assembly, the court — were elected by the peasants whom they served, but it is only with considerable reservation that volosti can be said to have increased the representative character of the imperial polity.
The ancient word "volost'" meant "authority" (in modern Russian, vlast').
Introducing a new source of authority in the countryside was the principal reason why the emancipators believed volosti had to be created.
Although the new level of provincial administration gave peasants an additional form of self-government, its real purpose was the improvement of St Petersburg's line-management.
Because there were fewer volosti than communes, the former could be pressurized more easily than the latter.
Even in so far as volosti marked a victory for the principle of representation, they did so without improving relations between the different estates of the realm.
Indeed, because they were exclusively peasant institutions they actually widened the gap between peasants and privileged.
To make the principle of representation effective, the regime had to create institutions in which the various social orders interacted with each other.
Ironically, it was the cautious Valuev rather than the enlightened Miliutin who brought such institutions nearer.
In Valuev's opinion new local assemblies would reward the gentry for parting with their serfs and enable the government to buy off liberals.
Neither of these reasons for creating assemblies at the district and provincial levels implied a desire to make them broadly representative or to give them much clout, but as the draft legislation passed through the upper reaches of the government keen reformers got their hands on it.
When, on 1 January 1864, the tsar legislated for the creation of the new assemblies — "zemstva" (or, if the plural is anglicized, "zemstvos" )— they seemed not only to represent provincial society as a whole but also to possess considerable authority.
Delegates to the district zemstva were elected for a period of three years by three categories of voter voting separately: landowners, property-owners in the towns, and delegates from the volosti.
Delegates to the higher assemblies were elected by the lower.
Assemblies met only once a year but set up permanent executive boards.
Zemstva could raise taxes and had the right to make representations to the central government.
They were explicitly instructed to involve themselves in local economic affairs, education, medical care, prisons and road maintenance.
They were supposed to "function independently within the sphere of activity entrusted to them" .
On paper, they were the most significant addition to the structure of Russian local government since Catherine the Great's reconstruction of provincial administration in 1775.
Their creation appeared to mark a clear victory for the "representative" approach to administration at the expense of the "personal" and the "ministerial" .
PRIMARY SCHOOLS
Zemstva made an immediate difference to the prospects of Russian primary education.
Neither Catherine the Great's Commission on Popular Schools of 1782 nor the education statutes of 1804 and 1828 nor the foundation of elementary schools by the Ministry of State Properties and the Holy Synod had succeeded to any great extent in promoting the cause of peasant literacy.
The empire contained many more primary schools in 1850 than in 1780, but fewer, relatively speaking, than the countries with which the Russian Empire was competing.
When, in 1856, Nikolai Pirogov began to write about educational matters in the press, the government responded by re-establishing the long-dead Academic Committee of the Ministry of Education.
In 1858 the committee started preparing a primary education statute, but between 1859 and 1862 the most striking development in respect of primary schools owed its origins to private individuals.
First in Kiev, then in St Petersburg and elsewhere, Sunday schools appeared like mushrooms.
 "Within three years there were 500 literary clinics in operation without a ruble's expense to the state" .
In theory, the Ministry of Education welcomed schools which it did not have to pay for and in which the instructors — student volunteers — confined themselves to teaching adult illiterates how to read and write.
In practice, however, the authorities viewed Sunday schools with considerable suspicion.
By the end of 1860 the education minister was reflecting darkly on the fact that one of the Kiev schools was teaching history and one of the Moscow schools both French and German.
Since the Third Department had convinced itself that Sunday schools were hotbeds of sedition, it was hardly surprising that in June 1862 the government closed them down.
The rate at which Sunday schools sprang up nevertheless strengthened the authorities' conviction that they would have to make better provision for the education of the masses.
Between 1860 and 1863 the Academic Committee of the Ministry of Education produced three versions of a statute.
Although it sought to make schools accessible, it also held that attendance at them should be voluntary, that pupils should pay for the instruction they received, that public education should be developed gradually rather than immediately, and that, although schools would still be run by different agencies, societies and private individuals, they should teach the same things and be managed identically.
The main weakness of the programme was that schooling could hardly be called accessible when those who were supposed to benefit from it had to pay for tuition.
The proposed legislation also failed to commit the authorities to a definite programme of school-building and put forward an extremely unambitious curriculum.
Primary education was to cover only religion, reading, writing and arithmetic.
The full course of study was to last only a year.
Admittedly, the draft legislation made provision for a more demanding sort of primary education in parts of the country which expressed a desire for it, but the likelihood  of this superior version taking root was small in view of the poverty of the peasants who would have to pay for it.
Despite its highly unambitious character, the version of the statute which reached the State Council was toned down still further.
References to a "higher" form of primary education were cut out.
Instruction in languages other than Russian was prohibited.
Sunday schools were legitimized, but required to teach boys and girls separately (with the result that they needed extra buildings and instructors).
Advocates of the view that primary education should be placed in the hands of the clergy failed to win their case, but priests were given entire control of religious instruction and assigned a major role in the new provincial schools councils.
One scholar holds that the many "changes and corrections [to which the statute on schools was subjected]confirm that the government had no serious intention of promoting even the most elementary primary education among the people" .
This conclusion needs to be modified in the light of the changes in local government.
Late in the genesis of the law on zemstva, the new assemblies were permitted to use their resources for schools.
They were not supposed to play a part in managing them, but it soon became clear that they would do so.
When the final version of the law on schools was enacted in July 1864, zemstva representatives received two places on the newly created school boards.
Other agencies received only one.
Although the extra representation for zemstva did not arise out of St Petersburg's enthusiasm for local government (but out of the determination of central agencies to prevent any one of their number dominating the rest), it nevertheless ensured "a large dose of decentralization" in primary education and gave primary schools a better chance than they would have had otherwise.
A law on secondary schools which followed in November 1864 gave further evidence of the government's preparedness to devolve certain sorts of power from the centre to the provinces.
Since universities had become relatively autonomous in 1863, the authorities' general attitude towards education seemed to indicate a readiness on their part to give up some of the prerogatives of the central bureaucracy.
COURTS
The reform of the courts in November 1864 reduced the power of the centre much further, but the origins of this striking development were even more remarkable than its outcome.
What turned out to be the most far-reaching of all the post-emancipation measures of Alexander II derived, ironically, from the government's concern for the gentry.
The court reform is sometimes thought to have originated in concern for the peasantry.
One scholar writes that whereas before 1861 "a Russian serf had been a legal  nullity" , afterwards he received "entirely new legal entitlements and obligations extending into every basic transaction of everyday life" , with the result that the government had to redesign the empire's judicial system in order to integrate the peasantry into the community at large.
Another scholar claims that since the government was trying to create a class of peasant smallholders, it had to safeguard the peasant's person, his property and his entrepreneurial activity; "Securing these conditions without an apparatus of justice was impossible" .
Though logical, these arguments are inaccurate.
The government did indeed make new judicial arrangements for the peasantry, but it made them in 1861.
The statutes which brought serfdom to an end introduced new courts at the level of the volost"which dealt solely with the affairs of the peasantry.
The authorities did not intend to give peasants legal parity with the other estates of the realm, but to continue treating them as a separate estate.
Although "the designers of the [volost" ]court viewed it as a transitional form of rural justice ", volost" courts remained outside the general judicial system of the empire until 1912.
Why then, if the government dealt with the problem of peasant justice at the time of the emancipation, did it reconstruct the empire's legal system in 1864?
It is true that enlightened officials and liberal members of the intelligentsia were pressing for change.
It is true, too, that reform was necessary.
Nicholas I had put some order into 200 years of imperial legislation by publishing the Complete Collection and Digest of the Laws, but he had done nothing to alter judicial procedure.
Herzen believed that the reputation of the courts suffered more from the way in which they transacted their business than from the verdicts at which they arrived.
 "[A]man of the humble class who falls into the hands of law" , he wrote,"is more afraid of the process of law itself than of any punishment.
He looks forward with impatience to the time when he will be sent to Siberia; his martyrdom ends with the beginning of his punishment".
The unreformed legal system was both slow and malign.
In civil cases it was designed to protect the interests of debtors (the gentry).
In criminal cases the accused was guilty until proved innocent.
There were no juries or lawyers.
Judges sat behind closed doors and took only written evidence, basing their decisions on the records of preliminary investigations conducted by the police.
The executive arm of the administration interfered constantly.
In view of these deficiencies, it was hardly surprising that the reformers who centred on the Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaevich addressed themselves to transforming the courts very soon after Alexander II ascended the throne.
Unil 1861, however, their victories were few.
Viktor Panin, the longstanding Minister of Justice, and Dmitrii Bludov, the equally well-established head of the Second Department (the body which codified Russian law in the 1830s), resisted the thought of root-and-branch change.
Bludov was prepared to adjust the existing system, but not to substitute adversarial for inquisitorial justice or to introduce barristers, juries, open courts and elected Justices of the Peace.
Dmitrii Zamiatnin, the deputy Minister of Justice, and Sergei Zarudnyi, Bludov's assistant at the Second  Department, were juridical radicals, but although they registered a few successes in their quest for change (notably the foundation of the enlightened Journal of the Ministry of Justice in 1859), they needed more than idealism to convert their superiors.
Discontented gentry unlocked the door which legal reformers had been unable to unlock for themselves.
In the immediate aftermath of the emancipation most landowners felt even less warmly towards the imperial bureaucracy than they had felt in the past.
Having relied on the administration to perpetrate abuses on their behalf, they now believed that it was abandoning them.
They thought a redesigned legal system might constrain the civil service and protect their economic interests.
Having lost their serfs, they realized that they would have to alter not only the basis on which they conducted their money-raising activities, but also perhaps the activities themselves.
Some of them were likely to become entrepreneurs and to start taking risks.
They needed a dependable legal environment for the conduct of their business.
The judicial system now had to protect creditors instead of debtors.
The arbitrary judicial procedures of the Nicholaevan age could not fulfil the economic purposes which, in the view of the gentry, courts now had to serve.
Valuev put the gentry's case to the tsar.
In his first memorandum as Minister of Internal Affairs he argued that nobles were justified in saying that the emancipation threatened their economic interests.
He believed that the threat was temporary and held that, if nobles took a broad view, their prospects were good, but he also sensed the extreme urgency of the state's need to foster entrepreneurial activity.
 "Material obstacles to this" , he told the tsar, "have long been discerned in the inadequacies of your judicial structure and judicial procedure" .
Although projects for the reform of the courts were being drawn up and had in some cases been completed, "the date of their publication cannot yet be predicted with any certainty" .
 "This report" , says the major student of the nineteenth-century Russian legal system, "determined the fate of the judicial reform" .
The tsar responded immediately to Valuev's call for the acceleration of the reform of the courts.
In October 1861 he took the matter out of the hands of the old guard and transferred it to keen reformers.
Before the end of the year he went on to make P. P. Gagarin head of the Department of Laws of the State Council.
Gagarin epitomized both the pre- and the post-emancipation interests of the gentry.
Having been a diehard opponent of freeing the serfs, he was very interested indeed in continuing the fight for noble rights through the medium of the courts.
In respect of the law he became a radical.
In January 1862 he convinced the tsar of the need to permit Russian jurists to derive their reform plans from the examples of west European states.
Within a year his civil servants produced a document called "The Basic Principles for the Reform of the Courts" , which recommended all the steps Panin and Bludov had resisted for twenty years.
Most of the "Basic Principles" found expression in the statutes of November 1864.
The stated aim of the legislation was "to establish in Russia courts  of justice that are swift, equitable, merciful, and equal for all our subjects, to elevate the authority of the judiciary, to give it the independence that befits it, and in general to strengthen among our people…respect for the law" .
The statutes established a five-tier system.
District zemstvo assemblies elected Justices of the Peace (JPs) to deal with minor offences.
They had to be twenty-five years old, to have received at least secondary education, and to be substantial property-owners.
Joint sessions of JPs constituted the second tier of the new judicial administration.
Although judges were appointed by the authorities at the remaining levels (circuit courts, judicial tribunals, and the Senate, which acted as a court of appeal), they could be dismissed only if they broke the law themselves.
Because they were well paid, they were disinclined to take bribes.
Their independence reduced the executive's capacity for interfering in the legal process.
Elements of the old inquisitorial system of justice survived in the appointment of examining magistrates to collect pre-trial evidence (a practice sanctioned by French judicial procedure), but the creation of the profession of barrister turned trials into open adversarial contests on the pattern of judicial procedure in Britain.
The most startling innovation was the introduction of juries.
The framers of the "Basic Principles" sought above all to generate a sense of law in the mind of the public.
The involvement of the executive in the unreformed courts had led people to believe that the law was their enemy.
Juries tended to dissipate this feeling.
Although conservatives believed that juries were appropriate only in societies whose population had already achieved a degree of sophistication, reformers argued that they could promote the social responsibility from which they were supposed to emerge.
Time was to prove the reformers right.
THE PRESS
Unlike the movement for judicial reform, which owed much to the right of the political spectrum but finished on the left, the government's attitude towards freedom of the press began by reflecting the views of the left of the political spectrum but finished on the right.
The "Temporary Rules on Censorship and the Press" of April 1865 plumped for constraint at the expense of glasnost.
When, in December 1855, the tsar abolished the notorious Committee of 2 April 1848, he implied that he would be treating the press with a new generosity.
His first Minister of Education, Avraam Norov, began contemplating censorship reform in March 1857.
Briefly, in the first half of 1858, the government seemed to lift press restrictions altogether (with the result that Kavelin was able to publish his plea for emancipation with land).
In January 1859, however, the cause of press reform took a turn for the worse when the tsar appointed a Committee on Press Affairs which  smacked of the committee of 1848.
The following month Alexander complained to his brother of "the unbridled character of our reckless literature, which ought to have been reined in long ago" .
The 1859 committee was dissolved a year later, but only because the government had decided to treat the press with greater subtlety.
No one in authority thought of abolishing censorship altogether.
Enlightened bureaucrats sought to put it in the hands of a newly created ministry; conservatives proposed transferring it from the liberal Ministry of Education to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
An influential official argued in January 1860 that although glasnost was laudable, "it must always have an indissoluble link…with the bases and forms of the State and civic structure" .
In 1861 the benighted Admiral Putiatin, Minister of Education, not only supported the idea of transferring censorship to the Ministry of Internal Affairs but also proposed the approach to the press that eventually found its way into law.
Offending works, he thought, should be suppressed after they had been published rather than when they were in manuscript.
This sounded like an improvement on the status quo, but it turned out to be a two-edged sword.
Between 1861 and the beginning of 1863 the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Internal Affairs ran censorship jointly.
Gradually, the latter prevailed over the former.
Even a sympathizer conceded that Aleksandr Golovnin possessed few qualifications for heading the education ministry.
He enjoyed a number of successes in respect of the new statutes for universities and for primary and secondary schools, but where the press was concerned he was unable to turn his liberal inclinations into workable edicts.
He tried to persuade editors of journals to back the government, but made clear that he would prosecute them if they refused.
This was "a difficult and devious policy to implement" .
Some of the problems he faced were not of his own making.
Censors were having to deal with an unmanageable number of publications.
In the past they had reported to the tsar every month, but by the end of 1861 newspapers had complicated their task to such an extent that they were reporting daily.
The press seemed to be full of stories about the fractious behaviour of students, the circulation of revolutionary appeals to the population, the degeneration of relations between Russians and Poles, and the fires in St Petersburg.
In the view of the government, discussing such matters in print made resolving them harder.
In May 1862 the authorities issued a set of press rules which enabled them to suspend The Contemporary and a number of other journals.
In July 1862 Valuev persuaded the tsar to inaugurate a campaign of press management.
State publications were to be instructed and private publications "stimulated" to present the activities of the authorities in a favourable light.
In January 1863 Golovnin acquiesced in the outright transfer of responsibility for censorship to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
After the usual lengthy period of gestation, the government produced the "Temporary Rules" of 1865 (which remained in place until 1905).
Superficially, they made publishing easier, for editors of the country's leading periodicals received permission to print their material without seeking prior  approval.
What the government gave away with one hand, however, it took back with the other.
Under the old system editors, writers and printers were technically free from the threat of punishment if, by hook or by crook, they managed to defeat the censor.
Under the rules of 1865 they remained responsible for their publications after they had seen them into print.
Editors still had to submit their material for inspection (after it had been printed, but before it was distributed); they could be penalized both by indictment in the courts and by direct action on the part of the Minister of Internal Affairs; and they had to lodge monetary bonds with the authorities to facilitate the payment of fines if the government moved against them.
Nikolai Ogarev correctly divined that "the censorship reform constrains the press more than it liberates it" .
Some editors believed they would be better off if they refused to take advantage of the new rules and continued to let the censor see their material in manuscript.
Valuev foresaw this possibility and let it be known that, in so far as preliminary censorship continued to be available, it would be harsh.
Aleksandr Nikitenko believed that Valuev had embarked on "an enormous plan…to destroy any tendencies in literature which he considers harmful" .
In 1868 Valuev admitted as much.
He had been trying, he said, to arm the government with "preventative, defensive, and repressive measures which were no longer to be found in the earlier legislation on censorship" .
The minister's one regret was that he had not been able to implement his scheme in full.