

Has anybody come across those terms assertive aggressive and passive?
Yeah.
A lot of training goes on about assertiveness training and maybe the word has got around assertiveness is good and everything else isn't so good.
I think maybe that's right on some occasions, but the thing about this is that very much depends where we are and what situation we're in and we may actually choose to use one of the other types of behaviour.
What sort of situation might you choose to use that type of heading ?
Possibly, yes er a situation there where you might actually  well you tell me what you think, so it's actually declining, backing off, yeah?
So maybe we'd use it in that situation.
Or working within a bank and somebody runs in with a shotgun, what sort of behaviour then?
 
there aren't too many people who actually go aggressive and wrestle the gunman to the ground, yeah?
There may be the odd one or two, but the risk he's making his head blown off by doing it, so against most of us will say here you are take my money and run  passive behaviour.
What about aggressive behaviour then, what  choose to use that?
rob a bank  aggressive behaviour yeah.
 
Why not  organization?
When all else fails really.
Right I mean it could be as a matter of a last resort yeah.
Maybe he's a bit cranky about the scale  so it may be a conscious decision that  goes without.
he's feeling aggressive 
Right, yes it's quite often aggressive people  passive people who like maybe having passive people around and just needs somebody to walk over  to shout at and behaving in an aggressive way, so maybe we have to go aggressive when we deal with an aggressive person.
So perhaps the first thing about that continuum is that none of them are right or wrong we all dis-represent the ways of behaving and it's very much a personal choice which one will use at one stage.
right or wrong.
The  to say anything is that we all have natural places where we feel comfortable, we all have particular styles where it's easier to eat it's more comfortable, perhaps  is an example and very comfortable just staying where we are being passive it's nothing particularly prognostic about that for us.
So we actually choose to be wherever we want to be, it's very much a personal choice.
The third thing about that is that it represents us saying continuum.
Now we've got very much a personal perspective and we see things through our own eyes so  somebody may see somebody behaving and regard that as an assertive behaviour, somebody else may actually see that as aggressive  it's very much a personal view of actually where we see the people lying and also indeed the people who prefer to deal with them.
Maybe these people here prefer to deal with aggressive people or indeed passive because you can completely walk over them   don't like dealing with anybody they're totally passive on the far end of the scale  passive.
So we all have personal preferences with people who we like to deal with and indeed how we see people as well.
So got to continue on there on behaviours  recognize people that you see around about  recognize to be aggressive, some as assertive some as passive.
What are some of the clues if you like that tell us if people behave in an assertive, aggressive, passive way what are some of the other clues  take that away from us?
Right  body languages.
A very good example  on  sort of the clues some behaviours that make us say yeah it's aggressive, passive, assertive.
Tone of voice certainly.
Anything else about the voice?
Yeah, volume.
Voice, tone, volume, what else?
What other sort of visible symptoms is  behaviour?
Right I mean,part partly related to body language, but it  things like proximity 
Yeah, absolutely yeah  why is it people who use the aggressive words are gonna be totally different from the words  individual  passive behaviour .
So there are a host of clues there if you like about the sort of things that people will actually do  and these are all underlaid by an attitude.
If you've got a slightly different attitude  also an attitude.
Okay what I'd like to do is get you to work in three syndicates looking at body language, voice tone, words, proximity, attitude, voice volume  but what we'd like to do is actually work in a syndicate that is out of style, out of keeping in your normal style.
So for example if you're normally aggressive, we'd actually like you to go with a syndicate that's passive and work  passive.
If you're normally passive, we'd like you to work in a syndicate that will be aggressive.
Okay?
Now we're obviously  even split two in each three so  aggressive group   So remember want it to work in a group that  a normal style so volunteers for groups?
Anybody else?
I'll be aggressive.
aggressive.
Okay 
assertive.
passive.
assertive.
Yes  
 
Yeah  well I dunno maybe  I was gonna say is because what we'd like you to do in your feedback is actually give you a feedback using the style that you were holding back on.
So for example the group who are doing the aggressive   I don't say that until after .
Report back  about being aggressive and we'd like you to report back modelling an aggressive style, yeah?
Assertive group report back modelling an assertive style and the passive group you report back modelling a passive style of 


If he can actually think about getting up yeah, okay?
So if you would like to prepare yourself responses and  ready for a preparation, not preparation, presentation erm it's coming to half past nine give you twenty minutes on that preparation, so if we can be back ten to ten this  group please.
Can you just flip the thing
Yeah, sure.
So it's body language, tone, volume and voice, things like proximity the words they might use and also what's the underlying attitude that fires the behaviour you're looking at.
In terms you wanna word  hay loft, conservatory.
subject matters.


Now I'm being totally passive about that one.


 

How you getting on?
Yeah.
Done?
Yeah.
Yeah?.
Done?
Looking good.
Okay now at this stage you don't normally have to ask for volunteers for the first group because it usually sort of  role then off they go.


So guess who's gonna go first.
Morning  aggressive.
 
So we don't need to go through this.
Now you're gonna get on and read it and you can report back in ten minutes and I don't want any questions.
Right.


Ah oh, oh, shame.
presentation.
Short and sweet.
Think he got the message.


Did you get the message  other groups?
Certainly knew which one they were doing.
Right   okay  so what you say about it?
Body language, expressive, eye contact, talking at them and power striding, what's power striding?
Sort of power striding up and down, walking up and down and bouncing almost.
Yeah, okay.
So it's very much body language that is actually directive, sort of right up people's noses quite often very, very close to people yeah?
Er voice tone, voice certainly loud, short sharp phrases er little chance of pauses.
Raised tone.
Yeah.
Likely to be aggressive, likely to be, certainly likely too loud.
Yeah   Think about  domestic silence.
What's wrong?
Nothing.
So they sit there and you think there's nothing being said but the atmosphere is very much full of aggression.
Frequently is loud, but sometimes absolutely the complete opposite, silence can be actually very aggressive particularly with somebody you don't normally get that silence from, you know they're normally warm, pleasant individuals and all of a sudden silent and that's actively aggressive as well.
Certainly a word you must, you will, I  imposing  language.
Positive and threatening  conversation.
I'm sorry I can't read that.
Yeah so it's likely to wanna be out on their own.
Competent, controversial .
Okay?
What's the underlying philosophy behind that type of behaviour  aggressive behaviour?
What's really just sort of quick  summary of all of that?
lack of self-confidence.
Possibly, I mean aggression could be a response to lack of self-confidence you're quite right.
If you're lacking in self- confidence you may, don't want, you don't wanna get other people's views and meekness  impose them.
So perhaps the underlying philosophy is  I win  you lose  yeah?me, I'm gonna win and gonna be loud and be aggressive, I'm gonna stand over you, I'm gonna stand very close to you, I'm gonna point my finger at ya, I'm gonna stare at you.
It's all about I win, you lose, I need to beat you, I'm gonna stamp on you, I'm gonna make sure they actually beat you.
So that's the underlying philosophy of aggressive, it's gonna be I win you lose.
Okay, thank you aggressive group.
Who's gonna come next?
Right 
this is gonna do.
Right  the er body language  voice tone, volume  social dominance  the words  and attitude 
Thanks .
Again it comes this, but assertive behaviour  body language etcetera.
It's very much middle-of-the-road  aggressive person 
Yeah.
Yeah, I think that's a good point, cos certainly if, if you're towards the aggressive, we've actually got  go 
 
you might shout a bit louder, shout a bit louder and what happens if it doesn't work.
All at the end you do is losing your voice  and, and if you don't get your way, then you  it up louder and louder and louder and if you don't get your way you may have to back down then and the aggressive person backing down to sort of a submissive doesn't always hold very much credibility.
Maybe the assertive person might be able to be more flexible certainly cos he can move between.
I've never had somebody from my class should be able to beat passive  assertive  that way find it difficult to do that one.
What about the philosophy for this one then assertive?
Yes.
Yeah the attitude is very much about I respect your rights as an individual, you've got equal rights as much as I have.
The individual who's gonna be assertive is likely to be open and honest or likely to admit things that are not so good at  honest  those, but they're not gonna necessarily apologise for those, they're gonna treat those as statements of fact and they're certainly gonna try and involve other people and actually say what do you think  this, what are some ways forward er but it doesn't mean that they're gonna be walked all over and they still stand up for the things that they firmly believe in.
They may not always get what they want, but at least they're standing up for them and actually feel good about themselves afterwards because .
At least I had my say in it, and had the opportunity to put something in.
Okay, so goodness from the assertive group.
Passive group.
Right well erm
We decided to er change 


Well  I think the 


I decided that what  I did it for small reasons 






Thank you very much.
Thanks David.
Comments from the others for that passive behaviour?
It's very apologetic.
Right.
It frequently is apologetic yeah.
Why, why is it likely to be apologetic?
Yeah, I mean it's about to decide whether you lose situations now I lose  Everybody else is much better than me, everybody else has got a far better right to actually  
 
They often can be related to  in hierarchy  terribly aggressive to his subordinates but the company or his boss  quite often the position the attitude that we actually take  passive, aggressive, assertive.
So a range of behaviour is very important in influencing that we identify where we're coming from and where the other party's coming from as well, so that we can maybe begin to mould our behaviour and decide what is appropriate  maybe on some occasions towards a passive  actually gonna help us achieve for influence.
We may decide let's be passive and move to battle  decide is actually an important issue and wanna be aggressive and they actually bring in a relationship  so important .
On other occasions we may decide assertiveness is an investment actually got to use that style of behaviour to get my point across and to listen to them as well.
So the choice is the choice .
right you've got a view but the other party  the other party actually has a point of view  you don't know  you need to look  change.
Change is probably the biggest  sitting with their arms crossed  quite long periods  involved with what is going on  people who sit with their folding  sometimes change of attitude  how people react 
Indeed and one of the points  can be more difficult  you don't know 


Okay.
So we've had a look at the three different erm behaviour types  passive, aggressive, assertive.
stage further though, and begin to think about what we're dealing with people with different behaviour types.
How do we actually manage to deal with them,some of the ways that we can actually do that.
So we'll do, let's just split into two groups, one group to have a look at aggressive people, one group to have a look at passive and what I'd like to do is identify any groups.
How you gonna deal with people who are, we get this side of the group to be aggressive people  passive side, we'll give the right hand side of the group as I'm standing look at the passive people.
How are you gonna deal with passive people on the right and how are you gonna deal with aggressive people.
What are some of the things that you can do when you actually have to deal with these people, particularly remember if you  try to achieve influence on a course here, that's what we're here for.
We'll leave the assertive alone for this particular point in time  what are we to do to deal with aggressive, what are we to do to deal with passive.
Again,some feedback on the flip chart  erm let's give you fifteen minutes for that so it's coming up to five past  twenty past 
 
We'll take a bit of feedback on how you're gonna deal with those people.
Yeah the clock, the clock's there I always get groups that say  where's  the clock cos they can't sort of see where it is and I'm sort of saying it's the angle  tell the time .
Okay so a quarter of an hour and we'll take some feedback    I think the er  last one is perhaps    So if anybody's got  or anything else perhaps 


Okay who would like to come and er give us a  feedback?
This is the group that are dealing with passive behaviour.
Erm they can start by relaxing erm  and a passive person  erm and at the same time try and increase their .
Always use encouraging words  see their point of view involve instructions as possible, understand what their, what problems they have  and try and provide where possible erm reward  positive feedback .
Er  establish trust  much as possible and involve er and try and get involved yourself if you can in any way to er show that you're, you understand the task that they're doing .
Erm try and where possible to use the individual communication with them as opposed to erm communicating to them as a member of a group  preferably in a relaxed environment er rather than a sort of  erm including any decision making  pass on as much credit for that decision as possible 
Yeah 
erm  possible identify their impassive reasons for their .
Good, thanks a lot.
Yes certainly  deal with pa passive people  probably more difficult  people 
 
When I was out on the road I mean before I came into training I was  so I laid my cards at the table at this point in time to say yes I need to sell insurance erm and I always remember  particular broker who  you go in and  and he's saying well so how many of these particular products would you sell over the next year and he said oh  twenty five and you go in great, guy's  promised to sell twenty five domestic contents policies over the next year.
Unfortunately the rules inspector would come in next and the rules inspector would say to the guy how many rules policies are  and you say oh  G A inspector  and to every one he actually gained  in fact it wasn't there was no commitment there at all get rid of people.
difficult people to deal with they get much commitments out  they're so frightened  they won't actually say no, they won't point out what is the objection to that and none of us got very much business out of the guy at all.
I mean how he even got to be a broker I never understood .
But he just could not give very  very very difficult to actually deal with.


Actually there are quite a few infuriating people  went out for a drink  what are you having to drink and she said oh whatever you're having


and who have never ever been assertive  oh well whatever you're having I'll have the same.
Yeah, that's right.
situation where you  why did you do that and the silence is absolutely incredibly aggressive and you feel quite put on the spot.
So silence can yes be a very good technique but too much  it can actually be sometimes a bad thing  very, very aggressive.
alright, that's what you want, that is what we'll do .


Thank you passive group.
aggressive .
avoid the confrontation 
Yes.


two of you against one of them  back you up 
whatever it means, whatever it means to you.
situation
Yeah.
Yeah, thanks John.
Yes please.
Again any sort of comments on some of those tactics there?
you absolutely get them going off  but sometimes  you actually want to use  all's fair in love and war also  actually use those sort of tactics .
In terms of how  rant and rave for probably not very long  and you don't get  aggressive behaviour, got nowhere else to go, you gotta  get to come back down  hang on to the chair to grim death  absolute shambles never used it like this.
You can actually get a lot of information out of the group.
The passive person, you sit there .
Okay.
don't try and stop them  and they start all over again  it's incredibly hard work 
shouting
what do you mean shouting you, you think I'm shouting though, you wait till I get going  you know,okay, right   incredibly powerful  trying to work out exactly what he wants er  eyes were bulging   don't do that, don't do that, I'm in charge, don't do that.
Don't you dare I'm in charge of this interview  and erm   and erm  and erm  what's caused this and why  discussion  what has caused this change  to try and find out and put him off  Horrible feeling  you see two people shouting at each other two people shouting at each other get the impression that the other party is actually doing an impression of a goldfish and going like that.
Did you ever see that  actually talking  concentrating  at what you're saying 
Okay, shall we break for coffee?