

You could assess them on on  on that, and just say right I I think you're a  and A or a B  on this particular booklet.
Mhm.
Because I've done it, with you.
I mean, that's no reason, but we shouldn't be sort of saying, well look let's not, lets all not do this booklet now 
Mm.
and I think it's something that we ourselves  should look at.
Yeah, I I just wondered because there are some of them that don't have any relevance to national curriculum and I want to 
Why?
I just thought maybe, you know, sort of miss them out  do level one.
Do another type?
Do level one and level two, the ones that you you have to do  and if there's any time left at the end of the year do the ones that  that you missed out.
That are left , aha.
Yeah!
You know that
Ah
you know are, are non-essential.
I'm sure that, would the would they be flexible and and and look at, I mean certain things  you know  rhombus and parallelogram.
Yeah.
Do you really feel 
It's just that 
that that's  terribly 
Yeah.
important?
And it,the there are some of the extension   that are much more appropriate.
Yes, we don't, yes 
And some of the children never ever get to the extension booklets!
Have you  do you think it  it might be better for some of the brighter ones to stretch them, to go through the whole  lot  do you know what I mean?
Instead of just doing all of one A  you know how yo , how you follow the the  the map?
Yeah.
To do, go through and do the extensions at the same time, follow the topic straight 
Mhm.
through.
It would be 
Do you think they would 
Sometimes it is, yes.
It would be  it would be better for them than doing all the extensions together  cos doing all the extension booklets 
I know.
together is really hard!
I don't think it it is 
It's hard.
and it's erm  I don't 
Mhm.
think it's very meaningful to them.
Yeah.
What I've, what I've tended to do is to do two B and two E
Together?
together.
Mhm.
That mi , that might be more 
Aha.
sensible.
Well I haven't, you see but I I've thought about it and thought 
Yeah 
it would be a good 
I've done 
idea.
I've done that, cos what I've said to them is well it's, it's too much for you to do all the extensions together.
Mhm.
Mhm.
Mhm.
If you do two B and two E, and two E and three A.
Mm.
Mhm.
And mix them.
Yes, so you, you would you would look 
Cos three A's easy isn't it?
Ooh , ooh yes!
You would look at one A and one B
Well that's it, they find that 
probably together 
a doddle don't they?
would you?
After doing er
Oh!
Sorry?
One A and one B so so yo yo or or would you have all of yours completing one A before they started on one B?
Well  have you got 
Or do you 
that map?
Is it in there  or not, the map?
Yeah it's in it's in that  the that.
one.
You know, the map that we've got all  or not?
There.
You mean with all the
Aye, it's not in there is it?
Aye, the one that, the one that we printed out.
Is it?
Yeah, that's it!
No, that's er
It doesn't give all them  
No, it doesn't.
Er 
Mm.
I don't know where the map came from originally 
Mhm.
but it wasn't in this book.
Well the , I me , it does follow across doesn't it?
Yes.
From one A  one B
That's two A, two B 
That's it.
and two E, so that 
That's right , yeah 
that shows that one.
Mhm.
Yes, you see  the  the they're suggesting that when you've done area one  that you might like to
Aha.
go on to multiplicational area.
Aha.
And that, if you've done  erm  bum bum bum  digging into history  that you could do coordinates and coordinate patterns.
Mhm.
Well it's, it's not so much a suggestion it's more that you can't do multiplicational area until 
Oh yes!
you've done area one 
Aha.
isn't it?
Yes.
Yeah.
But I think the link-up is suggesting that 
Mm.
you could 
Yeah.
just  follow on there.
Mhm.
 
So really the they're working on the whole scheme then  er
Well
from one to four aren't they?
Some 
A 
of them, do you think it'll
I I tend 
create problems
I tend to sa sa to say right  you know, one A and one B  are all out together.
Oh yes, that 
but 
that's  but once they start 
well I didn't used to, I used to have one A at the beginning  but of course, it was impractical because the there weren't enough booklets to go round.
Well  I mean a all the reasonable kids  don't do  all 
No.
the numbers one, two, three, four, five anyway.
So 
No 
that's
but you still have to take care in case somebody says well I've just done fractions two, and you say but  you haven't done fractions 
Yeah!
one!
You know !
Aha.
Mhm.
Yeah, but I mean the bright ones do the  the bypass sheet  they have the fractions one, and they 
The fractions and the 
don't do that either!
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah and if you block it all  you're gonna get some kids who will never  go beyond number.
Yes, the ma , the ma 
They won't experience
They might
 
and they 
No.
might concentrate 
 
No, I me yes, no, it's not practical to do the whole lot but to erm
But, well certainly lo one and two you could couldn't 
Mhm.
you?
Mhm.
See, you just use your own judgements, some 
Yeah.
some kids, you know
I mean I do I don't think that as a department 
Depends on the ability of the child.
we should start saying this is what we all do.
Yeah.
We we do 
Mhm.
Mhm.
what we feel  we want them to do and 
Mhm.
what see it seems   
I think it, this is whole scheme is just a case experimenting and trying things  with different work 
By the time we ge 
 
By the time we get it right 
Yes, after about ten years !
the scheme will be redundant or we'll have retired at 
That's right !
you know, but er  that's what it's all about.
Yes, you'll go 
 
and somebody'll come in a say, oh I don't like this  and get rid of it !
Yes, when I retire somebody'll say well we're gonna do, smile now!
 
 
So you're not bothered if at the end of  the two years they haven't  even 
Reached level four 
the best kids haven't reached level four?
Because 
I would 
have  working three lessons a week  some of mine are scarce, sort of struggle to onto four.
Mhm.
I'm not saying that I wouldn't say 
Mhm.
I'm not bothered but I would be happier if  they will  very familiar with the work that they have done
Mhm.
rather than 
Mhm.
race through 
But you might find that it's 
the booklet.
it's  easier because you missed some booklets out,.
Yeah.
You wi they will have had support  and yo you might say we're gonna miss  little things out that  we've already covered on or are not relevant anyway  erm  I think we've just gotta wa , just got to see how it works  and
A are we going to decide  what we think can be missed out?
No, I think, I think 
No,, yeah.
I think you yourself can decide what you want to miss out.
From what you've taught in that third lesson 
Alright.
really isn't it, a lot of it?
So,we we're looking there at a a a reasonable amount of  sort of  extra work but I I think we will find a benefit   from doing that.
Mm.
I say, we might 
Part 
if we sort through all the work sheets we've got we might find  you know
So 
Yes.
some 
quite a few
Are we going to try and get some work sheets?
I think one of our first 
that we can  we can 
jobs 
all use.
Yeah.
Mm.
Are we also going to try and match those up with the attainment targets, so that we can say they've completed  a work sheet successfully?
Mhm.
Yes.
We can give them something.
Yes , we'll put that on  mhm.
Put it on their record?
Yes.
And we could, if we've gotta collect evidence we could use those work sheets as evidence.
Mhm.
And we've also got
Mhm.
yes,we we've got to look at this  in in in  in the assessment er  procedures as well but we've go we've got to try and link this up with er the  the the computer work that we're doing  erm  we we've got I I I think really we we should have  possibly a reasonably hefty session one evening next week to say right, how are we going to put this into practice?
Let's, you know  I mean Judith's saying, well I've got some good work sheets on this, I mean we can all say that  if we  all know where the work sheets are
Mhm  I think hoiked most of mine !
No but
I think I've cleared 
Mine are pretty dog-eared
Well yes, yes I've think I've had 
Oh I've got loads!
I had a damn good clear out I think most of mine have gone.
Hundreds!
I might have a copy of some.
Well it seems pretty pointless, me sort of saying oh here, you know, they're never gonna get the hang of negative numbers and Judith saying, oh I've got an excellent work sheet, and you think well, you know
Mm.
if I'd known about that that would of great!
Mm.
I think if we all know what's available it would, it would be a lot easier than, than just operating as as  you know, five separate units.
Oh yes, I think so  for that, and, so then we've gotta bank our work sheets
Mhm.
what we keep in the  then, just all to use.
I mean it's not gonna be, it's not gonna be easy but  if we start developing it erm  there's no reason 
Mhm.
why  you know, it shouldn't work reasonably well.
Go and get my  down and get a bit more room.
Right, well we've only got erm  not much more than ten minutes left  erm, I'm ri I'm  well we've got to be  we've got to be early for lunch so  you'll need to go 
It's only across there!
Take us ten minutes 
you'll need to go 
to walk there.
and shower and such like.
And change !
Well you can stay here till twenty five past if you want  that's up to you!
Erm  am I right in thinking 
that this after , that this afternoon  your
I'm, I'm technology for the rest of the
right.
for the two days  
And I'm somewhere else.
It's just us two  we're gonna do 
and you're 
our assessment  
you're looking at  graduated assessment?
Mhm.
Okay.
You won't be around  for  the other sessions
No  that's me finished.
aye, is 
and I'm not  
how many sessions are there this after ,da do we have a session together this afternoon or not?
Yes.
Yeah.
Well yo you're  not  just  just the three of us.
Is there only one session this afternoon?
Mhm.
Two  there's the one with  Judith and I  and then  you join us  for the last session.
Right  that's fine then!
So we'll sta er you do erm  graduated assessment this afternoon, then we'll start looking at  erm, our assessment procedures  we , you know  S M P national curriculum  and I mean, if you're not around  you know  well  
I can't do the presentation.
you know 
Aye.
What presentation?
Aye.
Don't know about a presentation.
Yeah, I don't anything about a presentation.
Mhm, well you will when you're sitting in front of the staff tomorrow so don't
So erm  you know,wha what else do we feel  I mean,tha that's  that will take up this afternoon,wha what else do we feel is  you know  vitally  er, important
Ooh, how about a jacuzzi?
so I should remember remember that there's a, you know it 
Having a jacuzzi!
I do ju hey !
There you are.
That's Judith  er er speaking jacuzzi first!
 
 
Wasn't me!
The head, the head  has said he wants er  a duplicate copy of this!
Has he?
 
He he's slipped 
Right.
me a few quid to give him and what have you!
Right Judith the ja jacuzzi for Judith, right.
Erm  well in actual fact er  S M 
 
you know, S M P er erm  national curriculum is is  gonna take us  an  
Forever!
Mm.
so
Well look, if if  you're wanting the next thing to do, I mean you've done that for seventh year
Aha  yes.
Is it not worth sitting and thinking what you're gonna do with the eighth year?
Some of the things for eighth year, oh yes!
Yes,
Yes.
But I do I think  that would be very useful  but we've got to make sure that we get this assessment  started, so, if we don't get round to eighth year  then that's tough!
Mhm.
We've got seventh year, sorted  erm  I think we've gotta look at the assessment.
Now,we while you're here  you know wha just to sort of ten minutes  erm  I mean Ian's produced these  sheets
Yep.
which we can photocopy
Mhm.
now now basically what we're thinking is  that  no, we're not thinking, we haven't really got round to that!
But I I would feel that that 
 
you know we we must be talking about July  when we sh when we present, when we produce  erm  one of these pieces of paper.
For the present year seven?
And eight 
Yeah.
or just 
Yeah 
seven?
Seven and eight.
Sorry , one of these pieces of paper?
Well one of these records.
National curriculum records.
Oh right!
Now, I don't know whether  what other people would, would say about doing it the way we're suggesting  like  somebody has completed  levels  one A, one B, and two A, therefore they've got this and perhaps 
Mm.
a few odds and ends added to it?
You're wanting to produce a certificate for the kids is that what you're talking about?
Well, not a certificate, just a record 
No just our records!
just the national curriculum
Just a record!
They're records!
record sheet!
Who, haven't got it .
You not seen them?
No.
Ah!
Oh !
Look at this, straight in the briefcase 
Oh!
and it's there!
No it's not!
Oh I've got my national curriculum in here as well!
Erm
Did you hear, that was Alan just  making it 
I wondered where that had gone!
Hadn't I lost it, no?
No, I did definitely bring it.
Well look  why don't you just  sketch it out on there so I know the sort of thing that yo oh, you've got one have you?
Ian's got me one!
Hey, Ian I'm glad somebody's organised!
Oh!
Do you want the old one or the new one?
The newer one.
Right.
Right  yeah, I knew 
This is it.
that you'd done that because I started it as well on the computer
Right  well I've done it  all the way through.
Right fine.
Right up there to the yellow books.
Right.
So what are you wanting from me?
Right, so wha what we're looking at  is  you know  we we would have  that
Mhm.
now, you're gonna get anybody with that, but let's suppose that you did have somebody that was really  there  we  want that blacked out really
Mhm.
and we would need to have national curriculum, name, date  and so on which 
Mhm.
I mean, just a few odds and ends that you could do from your  nice 
Mhm.
printing on the computer
Mhm.
now, what we would say like, if somebody has erm  you know, by the end of year seven  done that
Yeah.
right, this would be the national curriculum record so we'd have something, but I don't know that it's wise  to 
No.
to really have that in to say look you know, to make it that obvious.
Well I mean that wasn't in for that reason.
No.
It's not
Oh yeah!
I wasn't thinking ahead to a final document.
S so we would look at that  and you would need as well to be looking at 
Blacking in  what, levels one 
li 
and two 
little bits
and anything else that  we
and anything else
we're saying that 
there 
we're going to cover
Aha.
on there.
But  I mean when you think how long it was taking us  taking a blank one of, and I know the 
One of them.
attainment targets have changed, but a blank one of those, and colouring the damn, ooh sorry Pete!
The er, things in erm  you know, I mean, that was horrendous!
Why?
Well it was me that did that 
 
in the first place 
Yes.
for the other one so I know!
It has to be remembered as well that this is my interpretation of the blurb that S M P have sent out.
We're happy with your 
Because 
interpretation.
I mean  the first time at a lower level  something appeared, I shaded half a square
That's what I 
Yeah!
did!
and next time it appeared 
Yeah.
I shaded the full square 
Yeah.
in, now whether that's right or not I don't 
That's 
know.
that's what I did, and I I thought the same thing.
Really, what we needed to do was to read through make sure that it was covered adequately  but on the other hand, if they've come across something  twice  and  not if i , if it was in brackets I didn't count it, did you do 
Mm.
that as well?
If it was just in brackets then I ignored it 
Yeah.
it had to appear twice properly 
Aha.
before I coloured it in.
Yes, I mean the other thing is if we are absolutely honest, which we shouldn't be with a microphone in front of us but, if we're absolutely honest, you know  this, this is a bit of work that we're trying to make simple
Aha.
when is anybody going to come  and make use of that?
The o the only thing is  that when the kids do the sats
Yes.
Right?
Aha.
And they are given a level from the sats  how are you going to record that on there?
Mm.
And how are you going to record  ar are you still  you see, you can't use colours, if you're gonna do it that 
So 
way
this would just be dated  and then  er, by year nine  they would have  er, a nineteen ninety three one, a nineteen ninety four one, and nineteen ninety five one.
Right, so you need a year as well?
You're going a 
Really that you need a space for dates.
Are you going to explain to me this afternoon how this works are you?
Well if they've finished one A, you photocopy that.
If they've finished level one A. 
You give them one of them.
You photocopy that with their name on.
Oh!
Oh, well that's good!
If they've finished one 
Yeah?
B, you photocopy that and put their name on.
But we're not, but we're not going to da , we're going to do it one by one  next July you will say where is a kid?
Right 
And then you just say I've got five 
there'll be three A 
who have finished one A
get a three A sheet out  their name on.
then you get a three A sheet 
So you won't need all the others?
No, no.
The on , the only, the only 
Oh right!
that you still  either gonna have to fill in anything else that you've covered with them
Aha.
And attainment 
separately 
target one.
That's the  one.
Attainment target one.
But, even then I was thinking that we might, in actual fact, start looking at attainment target one and certainly fill in, you know 
Mm.
the first, I mean  there's 
Mm.
no way that we could 
Level one I think are we, are we ignoring 
level one and level two 
what, I, are we ignoring the stuff that comes primary school then?
Well, it'll be interesting to have them, but I mean 
It'll be interesting to have it, but I mean we 
you can't sort of 
we've got to asses kids on that.
assume that they're at that level when they come to us and  follow on from there.
See I sometimes wonder whether it's not worth giving them some kind of er  a proper test.
National curriculum test.
When they come in 
The beginning.
Mhm.
Mm.
and saying  right well  you're at level
Well that, that was another thing that we did debate
Mhm.
should we in actual fact  produce 
Give them give them time to settle in.
Well we we should, well yes because I suppose eventually we could have them fo , we've got one now haven't we, for the end of year eight?
Aha  but if you 
Well we can it off the end of year seven and  one for the begi , for next year so they 
Well no if  if we wanted to we, we could produce erm a level three test.
I mean when they when they do the sats 
What i , what's what is it we've got now?
Three, four 
when the 
and five?
when they, when the a the, when they do the sats  then we'll, we'll have something that we can trust, won't we?
When they have 
Well, mm mm!
public sats.
Mm.
But it, if if we wanted to to change what we've done already  we we could at a certain stage have a level three, I mean I've  I've ordered  these books, you know mathematics level by level
Mhm.
so we've got what we've already got and we could produce  i it it just worries me because we're going, we're going back to eleven plus days you know!
Mhm, I know 
And saying a lev , you know
Well they are anyway cos they've been doing the test at eleven!
Ya, well that's what it is isn't it?
In 
But 
different levels
we we could have a level three test  that they could try.
Mhm.
And then we could say, well yes this confirms what, what we've  what we've said here .
Well how do they get the levels in the junior school?
How did Mrs  do it?
Erm
Ooh, tick sheet isn't it?
Sorry?
It's a tick sheet isn't it?
It's a , mhm.
Yeah  but some of them have had sats obviously  the ones lower down.
But I mean, they 
But, but then 
they're insisting on kids, they're they give them a problem which is a typical level  four or five or six or whatever, and because they get that one  problem right they say that that kid  is a level six
Oh!
You know,ju just 
So I mean tha that's 
looking at one
Aha.
single aspect for  you know
But, but the other thing about giving them a standardised test at the re , when when they first arrived with us, is when you get the parent who comes and says well  how they were level five in the primary school and you've only given them level four?
You can say, well I'm sorry but on our  tests
Mhm.
when they arrive in school in September  they were level  two  and they've now moved up to level three.
That, of course is that, that of course is the the problem of national curriculum  it's your interpretation of of the national curriculum  and there is  I mean, if Judith says a child is level three, I would accept that  but if somebody from Spring Garden said this child is level five, I'm certainly not going to accept that without  evidence that I have !
Yeah, but what I'm saying is that , yeah, but what I'm saying is when the parent comes to you and says  well the primary school said they were  you can say well  well yes but by  by our standards and our assessment when they arrived here
The the problem is that that 
they were that , and they and this is pre the progress that they've made 
The thing you are saying about 
The parents are going to naturally assume that you're a  if you're at level five  at one stage 
the ones you buy in a shop I've heard of six 
that you would either remain at level five, or go up to level six 
six is the .
which is not gonna be the case when they transfer from school.
So you can  six.
I know, I know!
At regular intervals,, but when you get to higher  
But at least it would give us some  because you could say well yes, there has been progress, erm  primary school might have said
you only have one  level five  for all  
 
and like,did was three.
Mhm.
I would think so.
And if they, that's what you say that they're doing
Well more or less.
They di di yo 