

The disaster, what other emergencies that they might
harmful effects to the environment
Right, now can you think of a particular example of where that has happened fairly recently, Alison?
Erm, the Rio hurricane
The hurricane, yes and you, were you there?
so do you know anything about it in particular?
Well it's not just that it destroyed
and what's, what's happened since, do you know what's happened since?
Well, erm, of course it took them quite a while that the people
I thought he flew down there
to actually offering aid
or whatever, and what's, what's he done then since that week, has he actually
He's ceased fire
He really is
yes
because you see once it's gone out of the news, erm, we don't hear any more about it, the, the immediate distress of the people isn't obvious
Yeah because of the
that's going to be long term then isn't it the water
Yeah
How far is
in, in order to help, do you know?
A couple of hours
Right, and how big this
will be, bigger than our
pack full is it?
that's brilliant, yes.
Tom can you think of another match
got anything to say about this one?
In, in Russia when we had that, that 
Yes 
that er nuclear, nuclear
yes it's Chernobyl, he was looking for the real word there, a nuclear what?
A nuclear power station
Alright, no, but the actual ray of the, of the plant, the nuclear reactor, right what, what happened?
Do you remember what happened then?
Well the, the
that's right
It's still, they, they can't afford to shut it down but should they shut down cos it's very, a lot of the works safety standard.
Yes, what's a good word for a
safety standard becoming an
make certain that it's safe.
What happened to the surrounding area, don't you know?
yes and
yes, er those that were willing to go
Yes
they made the area around the reactor a non living area, the problem is of course people that have lived there for a long time don't want to move and so over
intended to stay, because the immediate reaction to something like that happening isn't necessarily erm, all bad, I mean people are quite glad that they are still alive and they're quite prepared to put up with the possible fallout of the consequences of that so that they can stay in their own homes.
The reactions after Hiroshima, er when the bombed had dropped were erm, somewhat strange, people with documentation say that people even though they were injured didn't actually want to move away from their home early, erm, and so that possibly the same sort of thing happened in Chernobyl.
What about letting the rest of the world know, did Chernobyl have any effect on, on the rest of the world with that explosion?
Damage anywhere else
right, if so what happened to that then?
and, erm acid rain
Well that's slightly prospect, yes, there's something else.
What would the world do erm to find out how much damage Chernobyl had done?
Well then did we all just sit there and say well you know don't rot there's nuclear sort of fallout and er oh dear erm what we going to do about it and decide should we get on onto it
They did put
over and see how much
there was and what could we do about it
They actually did send teams of people erm, nuclear scientists to Chernobyl to try and get just how much damage was being caused and going on being caused, but there was, I think you probably don't remember because it went right by
hurricane has gone out of the news now, once something like that has happened there's always another disaster coming behind that actually takes over the headlines, so, about six months, a year, two years afterwards they were still finding that in parts of Europe the general level of nuclear activity was higher than it had been before Chernobyl, why would that happen?
Erm
Welsh Wales, in Wales and in the Lake District they found that the er level of nuclear activity on the surface of, of the field as it were and therefore reached the animals is higher than it has been, how would they manage to do that?
Well if doing an explosion I'm not really sure the nuclear reactor materials
Right
put into the clouds
The atmosphere
and in the atmosphere and they would be blown over
That's right
 
Yes exactly, the Government 
with the er man with no
in the world
Right
and it was because of, of a nuclear explosion
right
and all the sheep had died and
Yeah, and what did you get you see, you get mutations going on in plants so that you get at the moment when the plants themselves are altered, it doesn't necessary, necessary mean that they're killed off, it doesn't necessary mean that they are killed off, it means that the actual genes alter, that they go on breathing so you get ginormous sort of cabbages, you know, cabbages that'll normally be about that size, suddenly become that size
that they're the biggest
in the world
Now why?
I'm not sure, but I, I
no well that in itself that's not another problem
but er, the cabbages is like, is huge and
Mm
like twenty
 
Where, why might it be that if, if we're actually talking about this mutation and things have changed it?
How do they test nuclear weapons for instance?
Well not, not to, no, no they, they test that for
but they actually have controlled explosions and what sort of places would they need for those?
In the desert
Yeah not in the middle of Manchester or London or wherever they use 
 
they use er, a very sort of sparse unpopulated area obviously and so you do get erm plants and animals having to, well change it so that they, er you take as it were that the genes changed, some does mutation probably alright, some probably not.
Wasn't it that the Australians who, who about twenty odd years ago had Britain test all of their erm nuclear weapons 
Yeah 
Mhm
in er sort of Scarborough
that's right yes 
 
and it used to be Christmas Islands where, where literally they, they did the first
of nuclear protection and the people that were involved in doing that
have actually mutated themselves in as much as it seems to be that
which is a mutation itself actually is more is course
it is, have been associated with nuclear activity.
Right, can we leave that one then, the other one that I, I thought about is probably an oil disaster, here we have an oil tanker, what was that one off the, the north of America, do you remember where it was?
Yes that's right, and what happened to that?
Yes an enormous amount of oil and what was
Well all like fishes and they would destroy them and
yeah
And the, the animal life that was destroyed there, in fact that amazing picture of the oil slick that looked liked the sea, remember it
Yes
Yeah
and said that it
in the same sort of way, salt water
there was a kind of  to the whole thing, can you remember it?
Yeah
I mean it was in a sense beautiful, but really
okay can, er Nicholas go ahead and read number nineteen please
States shall provide prior and time timely notification and relevant information to potentially affected States on activities that may have a significant adverse trans transboundary 
Transboundary 
environmental effect and shall consult with those States at an early stage and in good faith 
Right
what do you think it means?
Now take it sentence by sentence, what about the first one?
I don't know whether if you think there's going to be a nuclear fallout and you have to inform all the other countries in Europe and the world or whatever
If we were talking about testing weapons or if we were talking about testing new equipment which involves that then you would
other states as a country and inform other people, what about the next bit?
Take the last phrase  at an early stage and in good faith 
country in Europe so they think they're going to be testing their weapons and for the
tell the rest of Europe that they
Yes, you've got to have an agreement haven't they?
And so that and, and this is how erm states, countries actually learn to get on together and trust each other.
The underpinning thing is it for
is that er we learn, we learn terribly slowly to actually trust each other rather than be enemies.
Can you do the next one James please, thank you.
Women have a vital role in environmental management and development.
Their full participation is therefore essential to achieve sustainable development 
Right, that's a very
one isn't it?
Yes
Right,Women have a vital role in environmental management and development 
Well it shouldn't just be men, men, you know, it should be women as well.
You can get
in there and er children will grow up
Right, now what do we call when you say doing it, what do you actually mean?
Erm, helping to clear up
what up all the time?
Well erm, it's sort of 
that erm, there should be, there, there are a chair, they are a chair of women that erm, that still knows the chairman
Yeah
and called the chair person
Yes, so we put, we, we will be becoming politically, politically correct, yeah
We shouldn't erm offered more sort of more
If we actually, very quickly, which round the world was meant to be, erm, those of you which are familiar with other countries, what about women in, say America, Ashley, are, are they, do they participate in the same way as they do here?
For instance you've got a, you've got er staff here, half of them are women, would that be the same situation in schools in there?
No, probably more than that really
Right, why would you say that?
I can't, I can remember having a games teacher
Being, being a man and, and the rest, but then he would be
wouldn't you, and women are naturally alongside young mature
has anyone got any comment on that, do you think that it's, a, a sensible thing to happen or do you think men ought to be infants' teachers.
Well er, at our school it's just like that and then, then
three or four years into the school
Yes
be a games teacher and all that
Yeah, you don't know my
 

still in, in one way, in European and North American situations women do seem to have the same sort of job opportunities as men do what about somewhere like Africa what about the West Coast of Africa, we talked about Nigeria and West Africa quite a lot, what about women involved in there?
Erm, erm
Anybody idea of what, what that is?
Or
and, erm they sort of work and most of it, some of them
walk, sometimes walk ten miles just to get two bottles of water
Yeah
So you're gonna go and live there Tom
erm, yes, when I, when I was living in, in Nigeria the women were the one that, at the lower end of society, they were the ones that lived
they were the ones that organized the mini markets, run the
town, they, they would have a minimal allowance of vegetables or meat or whatever to sell, it was the women that did the bartering, it was the women that actually got enough money to feed the family and, and the men were really quite an
lot, they, they thought that lot was set below them, that the women had to sort that side of things out and they erm really set a great
put in a great deal of their time erm going to work and that could be working for er a European or an American right, er some sort of help in the house, or in the garden or whatever, so you had the men doing the same sort of tasks the housework as it were for Europeans and Americans and the women looking after the, the economic development of that little
do you see, completely different to work, I mean I tried to imagine my husband, me coming in here to work and he going to erm the little sort of erm the maid in
was actually, it isn't right, it doesn't feel right, does it?
Cultures are different, what about India?
What happens there?
Any idea there?
Erm 
I think it depends what members of society we're talking about, right, if people are educated and they have a way forward to improve their understanding, then they become less and less involved with a
day to day tasks, right.
Here when they're talking about women, I think James was right, women do have a vital role at the beginning in all cultures, what I'm trying to say is that they have a vital role increasingly as they become more and more educated too.
Nick.
I think in India anyway, I think there's more of the man that do the work because the women, or the men makes the women stay at home, and sort of, sort of make themselves look very beautiful and
How do they do that?
and, and bring the children up very well, become great
business men and women
I think of it when we make these great generalizations that is
they do all sorts of combinations of things in India combined to make their lifestyle different but they would, some people in
if you're rich enough, if you have the wife that you want and you've got the children that you want and you've got enough money, then you can live that sort of lifestyle, if you were obviously quite
er you may never of had a house at all and yet you still got your family
a different lifestyle in fact.
We're going to go, go around actually looking
varied situations in which that sort of lifestyle as possible, but the absolute opposite happens within the same city as well.
Could we just go on to twenty one and we might just sort of stop this part of the lesson there.
Could you erm read that for us erm Adrian would you
Which one?
Twenty one
The creativity, ideals and courage of the youth of the world should be mobilized to forge a global partnership in order to achieve sustainable development and ensure a better future for all 
Right, that was a very big statement, the youth of the world and you happen to be the youth of the world, there's a lot of you, so how, there you are, you're in charge of the world, how are you going to do just that?
The creativity, has anyone got a definition of creativity?
prospect of, of they're not
too many people, over population for our supply of toxic fumes, oil, gas and coal, they might run out so creativity is the erm inventing finding out the
right, good, right, now what about the ideals that you, what ideals have you actually got?
Come on you've got to live somehow or other
good, right, now what do you mean by a good life?
Well you see things, go places have
like out in the car or around
So I have the
going to do anything to anybody else?
Well
Adrian what's, what's your comments, serious comments on that?
I don't know, on what?
On having ideals, like as you grow older, I mean you're quite an ancient person already, within the next ten years you'll have to choose the sort of lifestyle you want and you really have to choose as well whether you're going to involve other people in it for good or for
have you thought about it at all?
No
Can you think about it just off the top of your head?
Don't know.
How do you see yourself, you've, you've actually left
you've got yourself around the
what's going to happen next.
Your own team, you've got three A levels and they're all ace, what you gonna do?
Erm
Go to Oxford
Yeah
Go to Oxford, yeah, right, what you going to study when you get there?
I haven't thought about that
What are you particularly good at?
Erm I'm alright at maths
You're alright at maths, so it looks as if maths might as a scientist possibly might be
there you are, you're, you've got your first class honour degree, you're going to do your P H D
Right
and er Adrian, Doctor Adrian  has just got his er ticket for life, now are you going to do anything, er can you imagine what you might like to work at?
No
You have a little think about it, I'll come back to you in a minute, Anthony
Well I'm gonna be a lawyer
You're gonna be a lawyer?
Yes
Right, and how is that going to help the world by Anthony being a lawyer
Erm to stop too many criminals, be safe, and innocent people
right, so there's your loyalist family
are you going to work in there or are you going to work in
No
you're going to work in there, you've just been given a, your, your standard value which is gross, thousand and thousand of dollars, now how are you going to spend that money that you've got for
bearing in mind your lifestyle is finished, bearing in mind what the sort of thing your father is doing, erm, where, where are you gonna live?
tell us about being
well, erm, I put
a majority of
erm I'm not sure, you can get, can get in a big office
Right
and then
right, and are you, what sort of fee are you going to charge us?
would it depend on the circumstances of your client?
Yeah
Okay, there was a little bit of doubt in there
there you are, you are an idealistic person
Ha
you're a great expense in English and also in
where, where
you got to eighteen, chosen your A levels, you've just finished your A level, you got your results and the best way, they go to what?
all As and what subjects are they going to be in?
Are they going to be the ones you er like and that means the ones, those are the ones that you do well 
Erm, a scientist
  

erm
and then you, after you've
you've got your degree, what you gonna do?
Bearing in mind this is the world's
question
here I am world, what's the attitude to the world going to be?
Er, I'll certainly pull a few changes and
yes
so I'll have to think of someone that may need, need help in
better, better changes for the
right
yeah I think what, what has happened at the moment is that he would be almost helpless because there are so many things that are wrong with the world that it seems to be because we get so much information as a
if you watch the news, watch the nine o'clock news tonight and try and sift out how many things you could put into a negative pile and how many you could put into a positive pile and I think that you would find that the negative pile
seventy five per cent way up, now there's something in the human spirit that actually says I would like to change that, but we really don't want the children to die in Somalia do we?
We don't want the children from Columbia on the streets etcetera, because there's sort of an awful helplessness about us, because we think we're doing one person, how on earth can we actually do anything, you see if enough people think together that if possible the change happens, then it can happen, right, and you  are actually  the ones that are going to have to be considering that you are a world's visitor, you are not just Tom  and you're not just Anthony  right, erm, you've really got to think, what about Jayne, there you are ideal Jayne
right
and I'm not really sure about
what about your life, do you see yourself just really
do you think that's the sort of thing you'll like?
Erm, that's
yes
so you think that
Yeah
I don't really mind
no I know it's a bit early erm, but it's not too early to start thinking that you are a world citizen, you're not just Jayne  and you've got a contribution to make, because if you've got this
opinion that you've got this
you're not just giving it just to James.
What about you Adrian now, have we got you into any, any particular situation, are you going to follow dad's footsteps do you think?
Well, erm
yes
yes
are we saying that that's us?
Yeah 


I mean would you like to, I mean dad works from home doesn't he, he has link ups with London but he's basically got all his equipment at home.
Do you see yourself having the same sort of lifestyle now like James
No I couldn't, too complicated
Right, you don't think you couldn't, you're not at
I don't, I don't think I'd be able to put things together
Right
or in, in this case
right, but on the other hand it's early days yet.
What about your involvement with anything that might help the world
  

yes


that might be very useful as long as you didn't er


right, well we've not got very far erm, what I wanted to do with you next week is going to go immediately onto this programme, which I promise I'd let you see, and the first one is actually funnily enough
it's er  you get film of erm a Third World
where the population is far in excess as the
and you then get more film at a modern
somewhere in Mexico, the central part of it where it's still falling to bits and
Okay, right, good morning to you.