

Erm a farmer bought a new tractor yesterday 
A farmer bought a new tractor yesterday, good, right can you read the next four out, er Trevor
Bother, winner, winter,dr driver 
That's okay
The river was very cold 
The river was very cold, right, can you do the next one four  Charlie
Never, number 
The blazer was very warm 
The blazer was very warm, right, yeah, erm
 

Erm, I have a, a warm jersey 
I have a warm jersey, good
Remember, Jack,
helicopter, er the helicopter was very big 
The helicopter was very big, good, so you've all had a chance to use one set.
Can we have a look at the ones underneath, in the orange block and will you do the first one Heather?
The bomber opens the gates to attract the driver 
Good and the next one, Charlie
When spinning its web a spider makes a clever  pattern 
Good 
My brother does a paper round and delivers a hundred newspapers every morning 
Good
A
crossing the road always remembers stop and  
Go on
Ca camels in, in a desert 
  

Yes without water, right, Edward
In the  modern  
Hold on 
travelled by helicopter 
Excellent so you've already got percentages sorted out there, can we just look at the next block of words, and  hello, hello, right, no, yeah  well I, yes I  I think it all went great, unfortunately  erm, so I really can't really consider on, on that.
But that details of that actually has a  but I don't think it's a total story okay so I'll, I'll put it all down on, on paper and then we'll take it from there, okay, thanks, bye .
Right, sorry about that, so shall we start this time with Charlie, first four Charlie, what's it say?
What's A R E saying there?
There
Yes, what sort of there is that?
It's erm, nothing
There, nothing
there are
There are yes, you've got nothing on like your, there, your body is there, you're running around
right
You can't bear it any longer 
You can't bear it any longer, does that act as the same?
Yes
No
No
No it doesn't does it, it's spelt in a different way isn't it?
What's that bear it any longer 
That's right B E A R that's right 
Same as the animal 
it's also the animal so that you're actually left with three er words that sound the same, two of which are spelt differently and the third which is the name of an animal, okay.
They did, do then, put a pencil to there, mm  you've already done it haven't it
There was lots of bare people on the beach 
Oh dear me, there are lots of bare people on the beach, right, what about fare, what are you going to do about that?
What sort of fare is that?
Er for hair
No this is fare
Oh, oh yeah 
How do you spell , how do you spell fair for fair haired?
F A I R
F A I R yes and this one is F A R E
no  that's spelt the other way F A I R  anyone help him?
F A R E what does it mean?
Is it, it was a fair idea
No that's the same as
erm was it like erm you gave me a fair amount of
no, that's the same thing, you're going on a journey
no  oh you are slow, come on  you're going on a journey, not in a car
Fairly long time
Ah, no  
journey
Journey, we're going to travel, right
no, you're getting warm, no, no
a fare ticket
A fare ticket, yes a ticket.
What is the fare?
How much does it cost to get there?
And that's how you spell fare for that F A R E, alright, okay?
Yes
The next one then er
hare, now what sort of hare is that?
Rabbit
Yes, it's, it is the same sort of family as a rabbit a hare.
How do you spell the other sort of hare?
H A I R
H A I R and that is the hair that's on your head, I've got long hair, dark hair.
Now what about, what's the next word?
Scare 
Scare 
Scare, now put that in a sentence
Erm,
What sort of word is scare?
Erm a kind of, when you boo somebody it's scare
Yes so it's a scare, so what kind of word is it?
Come on get it right
Is it, er, can I put it in a sentence?
No, would you tell me what sort of word it is remembering what we did at the beginning of the week
yeah, but that's the, what it means, I want to know what kind of a word it is 
Yes I know it's spelt
Is it a verb?
No it's not a verb, come on, what is it
A noun
Yes it's a noun, it's a name of something isn't it?
Because we were doing that at the beginning of the week, a scare, you could actually get
right, so can you put it back into, into a sentence again then
Shirley?
You've got a scare on, I saw Dracula
We've got a scare on, we saw Dracula, yes, that was it.
Right what's the next word?
Share
Share, what does share mean?
You share out
You share out, can you put that in a sentence?
I like to share out my sweets
Oh that's lovely, I like to share out my sweets


digging
Digging, they're going onto double Gs now, why would it be double G?
One put dig and then and then -ing
Yes, but there is a rule isn't there
Oh yeah
Ah yes, Trevor
because, because, is it cos of erm, if you put D
no, not quite, you're nearly right, come on
Is it because the I sounds like
yes you would actually get, a magic E right, or a magic I making that vowel right say its long name, so it would be quite difficult to say dig  giding 


Right, lets try the next one, what's the next one?
er bigger
bigger that's for the same reason, there you've got an E, and so because you've got the E we can double the G to make the I go on, go on say short for
It would be  beager 
It would be  beager , but what is G and E say itself
G isn't it?
Yeah, so you've really got to protect, you've got to protect that I, okay, so can you put bigger in a sentence Trevor?
Erm, er er the man was bigger than the boy
A man was bigger than the boy, good.
Charlie the next one
Erm parents
Yes
I love my parents
Oh I am pleased, I love my parents, good, spare, spare
I let someone borrow my spare pencil, I let someone borrow my spare pencil
Prepare
Prepare, what does that mean?
Erm, you prepare something
Can you put it in a sentence for me?
I prepare for my music exam
I prepare for my music exam, if you're going to do prepare, what are you going to put on the end?
Yes I would care for when I had to do something, rather than just go straight into that, good
Giggle
Giggle, mm, we know all about that don't we?
I giggle when somebody
I giggle when somebody
erm
no if you say giggle you're actually saying the present tense, so giggles
Giggles
giggles would be better, because it sounds as if they've already chosen
we all have a giggle, yes it can be a giggle until, if you're using giggle and a giggle what sort of word is it?
a noun, yeah, if you use giggles, then Ashley what sort of words is it then?
What, oh dear, oh
It's not an oh dear word, no
It's a verb
Thank you, it's a verb, right, to do something, so it's the same spelling that can be used in different ways.
What about the next one 
Goggles
Goggles
I wore my goggles in the swimming pool
I wore my goggles in the swimming pool, good
Right, the next one
Erm, trigger
Yes
A man pulled the trigger on his gun and shot him
yes absolutely
Luggage
Luggage
Erm, I had to have my luggage checked at the airport
I had to have my luggage checked at the airport, you see what's happened to the end of that word, look at it  right, you've got age at the end because what rule is working there?
Got a double G
Pardon?
Got a double g
No have a look, you're only looking at the beginning of it  here try again
It's got the E on the end
And what sort of E is that?
Not the magic, magic E
Yes it's the magic E, isn't it, and what's it making that A say?
A as opposed to U isn't it, so it's really like  lugg age so if you say it quickly together it becomes luggage, yeah, okay, the next one, oh sorry put it in a sentence
Suggest
Suggest
erm, I, I have to suggest that the erm the had er
mm, that's right, I had to suggest the captain's orders.
I suggested
how, what would you put on the end of suggested?
E D
E D, even though when we say it, it sounds like
if you said I made a suggestion, what sort of word would that be?
Come on, you're all asleep, now a suggestion what would that be?
A nou 
Yes come on Charlie be brave, a noun, yes, a something isn't it, a, if you write a or the in front of a word it's usually a noun, okay, so just keep listening for the a and the.
The next one, Trevor
Erm beware
Beware, right and a sentence please
Beware of Frankenstein
Beware of Frankenstein.
Charlie
Erm 
third one down
I had a nightmare last night
You had a nightmare last night.
What happened in your nightmare?
Don't know
Come back to life again
because when you woke up this morning
and the next one
Juggle
Juggle
Erm, I know a clown that juggles
I know a clo a clown that juggles.
Why couldn't you actually have J U G, one G, L E?
why couldn't you have the spelling J U G L E?
Something would happen to the L
Something would happen not to the L but to the vowel.
Hello  I'm terribly busy Norma actually, I've got a full lesson at the minute, erm, I'll, I'll try and, and sort that out as soon as I've finished this lesson
okay, thanks for telling me Norma
thank you, bye .
 Jugle 
Yes because what happens when you've got just a very thin L, the magic E can even work through it, U, right, so it will be  jugle , yeah, jugle , that wouldn't be the right pronunciation at all, okay, let's go on to the next one
Erm struggle
Yes
I had a struggle getting the ball out of the scrum
Well done, I, very good, I had a struggle getting the ball out of the scrum, right
Wriggle
Wriggle
Erm  I had to wriggle out of the scrum
I had to wriggle out of the scrum, right, good
Farewell, is that farewell
I have to say farewell to my
yes cos what's happened to him?
is he really, is he really?
Yes
Oh I didn't know that, I thought the army was
no he's going to
Gloucester and then he's erm going to erm
Cheltenham and Gloucester is the poly that he's going to?
Yes polytech
Oh right, I see when you said that I thought he was going to an army regiment that they put up in Gloucester
Oh I got that mixed up, sorry about that, right when does that happen then?
This October
Erm, the twenty first
Right, and what's he going to do there?
Oh is he?
Oh good, oh I, I'm rather pleased about that
right, can we do the next one, the last one
It's a  boggin crash
It's a  boggin crash
What
Yes, that's what you're going to do today
Well
that's perfectly alright.
I've tried to make them a little bit longer.