

Here, sign the minutes  of the  the last meeting  and the special meeting for  the, the special meeting thing but it doesn't matter.
And er  are there any apologies?
Yes, Celia  and John   .
John  who?
and I  
Ah yes!
Yes!
And er  they got
, right.
And him?
Erm  one of those er  that I've got two er, points to make, one is to, to, there's a recording  somewhere  going on  er  er  it's erm  not anything really to do with er  us, but we have agreed or someone's agreed on  our behalf but er  the person can do  the recordings but it's er  of an educational nature to er help students with their language, but er we shall be  completely anonymous so  if 
Is that  rough language ?


so we'll er  just erm  behave yourselves this evening!


And er
and speak coherently  and erm  and and then forget that er, anyone's here.
That's the first one, the second er  point is, that we have on our agenda on eleven D  er, the Three Hills re er, redevelopment  and er  we have er  the er association here to  erm  to make a presentation.
I wondered if you'd  agree with me that we , if we do that first and so  then we can get on  with our business afterwards.
Would that, I hope that will  that er, you will agree to that, because we don't want  people hanging around waiting for us to go through  all our items so  I hope you'll agree with that.
Yeah.
Yes.
You know I suggest
Make it, just a minute er er Bill.
Simon.
Thank you .
Could you ask  who, that is making the recording?
Are we allowed to know who who's making the recordings?
It's Longmans.
They're doing it for a dictionary for  erm  sch for  students.
So  are getting his copyright  are they ?


Yeah, but is, is it, if it's for commercial  er, enterprise?
Is it a  well I suppose they're not going to  make a loss out of it!
But I don't 
 
they'll make a erm  they won't make a su , a surplus, I don't like the word profit so I'll say  surplus  out of this er  little gathering here tonight.
I don't think that it's all, all that er  important.
When you're in public life you have to put up with er  cameras and er  things going erm  around so  and we're going to be er, completely anonymous in er  that, so
I think Simon's suggesting that we might benefit in terms of.


Well erm  er, well yes of course, I didn't think of that.
I never think of er  you know, commercial things, I'm just thinking of we , well providing a service, but then 
Oh yeah.
we don't all work on the clone do we?
However, coming back to  
 
er Bill wanted to say something.
Same question, I just wondered who it was that was all.
Oh!
Right!
Erm  we can er  now  er  get on with the er  Three Hills er  er redevelopment.
Does any of the officers want to say anything 
Yes I would.
Er Paul?
Do you want
Yes, thanks Joan.
Er, the reports on  Three Hills redevelopment  er, next phase  starts on page a hundred.
Erm  and includes an appendix  one, the proposals from Moat Housing Society with erm  Nick   from Moat  and some of his colleagues are going to  er, run through a bit later.
Erm, also we will see,u up here  er, displays erm  of the  proposals.
Erm, these are the same  displays which were shown  to  er    the tenants meeting public at Three Hills.
Or in anyway, can't be made at the meeting.
Erm  we both feel you've had a chance  in detail  and they'd been quite blank in design.
Er, just to take you quickly through  er  the first part of the report and then hand over to  Moat.
Erm  as  part of the agreement  on the demolition of the four remaining blocks of Three Hills  erm  Moat  er  became our partners  for the rest of our development  of Three Hills.
As you were aware, they had been involved in Three Hills  in er  developing Ayletts Field  and successfully with us  on our  our most recent one.
This  scheme has almost been seen as our  joint number one priority  in terms of social housing projects  along with, obviously, getting social housing on to er, Church Langley.
We are  we are very close now to completing the final  lease agreement with Moat  erm  as we're not quite there yet I'm  I'm gonna be suggesting  if it's possible to  er, amend er one of the recommendations  er, recommendation B, er, to take note of the facts that we quite  er, finalised the agreement yet  erm  I wanted to try and get in line with the  er, programme for the recommendation  which came out of Great Parndon Neighbourhood Committee.
And I think it should read erm  as it does, but without the final full stop  it will then go on  er, when in a form  satisfactory to Council's Legal Officers.
There is a separate paper which has been circulated as well is the  comments on  on financial liability of the scheme  which you should have as well.
Erm, as I've said there is a display there  and  Moat are here to ask  ask  ask as many questions obviously as you'd like and hopefully they'll be able to clear up any  er, issues on the .
Erm  this has been to Great Parndon Committee  so it's been through the neighbourhoods er, community cycle  and there has been an exhibition following that committee  on Three Hills, which was very well attended by  by tenants and residents  and main feelings coming out of that was that erm  the residents were keen for this to happen, certainly wanted something to happen  erm  er, on the estate particularly demolition of the four  empty blocks.
At the Great Parndon Neighbourhood Committee  members requested that our building control service being used  er, the developers throughout the scheme, and that has been taken on board and Moat are perfectly happy for that to happen.
There is one further complication  which has arisen, and that is, that we  er, need to apply  have applied for a high waste   er, the roads on the estate  are, in fact, adopted  erm  so we do need to get that through.
Erm  fi , finally what I say on, is, that we do  need  er, some firm indication this evening  erm  in order to enable Moat  Housing Society to  draw down the housing association grant  for the housing corporation  erm  and to enable us, obviously to  sign  a  er, the legal agreement with them.
Perhaps it's best if I  hand over now to Nick  to  run through the proposals  there are some amendments  to the one that you had as appendix one  erm  I don't think any of them are too substantial.
Perhaps if I just  quickly point out the main ones  erm  they have been amended in  er, a later version of the document.
Er, I think the main ones  really, are on page one o six  the  final two lines of the  first paragraph  which says   the two vacant blocks   now really, there's four  it should just read,and does now read the demolition of the vacant blocks .
On page  one o eight  paragraph two point two  er,the society proposals of the  er, in accordance with the  objectives  we've taken out overall, it wants to be  clear that it must mean it's  in total, the objectives.
Page one o nine  the second paragraph then  we've taken out  erm  first  from first priority, so it should read   in agreement with Harlow to place a notice through the scheme  as it's priority with the housing fund in the future years as required .
And, the next paragraph down  we've taken out  best  now, so it'll read erm  the legal technicality we will substitute reasonable, which er  erm  has a al altogether different meaning to  term.
Which paragraph is that, Paul?
On this one?
That's paragraph three, on page one o nine
Oh yes.
first line.
Mm.
Finally  on page one one four  the anticipated start and completion dates are different.
It should be spring nineteen ninety five  to spring nineteen ninety six.
Okay, with that, I'll le I'll hand over to Nick  to take you through the  their present proposals..
If you don't mind I'll stand up cos I'm gonna have to shoot over there to   the plans in some stage in the, in the presentation.
I'm Nick  and I'm the development director for Moat, responsible for all of our new development activities  and I have with me tonight Sally  our assistant development manager  for Essex, who'll be responsible for this project  and also two of our consultants dealing with the scheme, Alan  from Anglian Design  who are acting as architects on the scheme  and Howard  from  Space, who have been acting as our employer's agent  and consultant and will administer the building contract for, for all the phases of this, this project.
If I give you some background to, to Moat and to the project itself,an and how we're gonna approach the scheme  I'll then hand over to Alan who will talk about the design issues  and the master plan  and we'll price the Three Hills and how they'll  they can meet  that subjective.
Moat put considerable store in this scheme at Three Hills as the  the next stage of our partnership  er  with the Council  and erm  we are committed to doing the scheme in accordance with your overall master plan that you've adopted for the Three Hills area  er  our proposals will com complete the re-development of the vacant sites at Three Hills  providing a further a hundred and nine  properties for  for social housing  both for rent  and for low cost home ownership.
The scheme will meet the local needs of the area  those needs being identified by  the district council.
If I say a little bit about Moat  er, we are a registered housing association  who are obviously monitored by the housing corporation  responsible to a committee of management.
Er, we've been going for twenty six years  er, and we now manage around about three thousand properties  and are building er  and  selling around about seven hundred properties a year for, for rent and low cost home ownership.
Er, we've been working in Harlow for a couple of years now  and as you may know, we  as Paul said, finished the first phase of Three Hills which is the Ayletts Field scheme  which provided sixty six properties for a low cost home ownership  and two special needs properties  and we'll also be starting in the next couple of months  er, on providing low cost home ownership in Church Langley  erm  it's funded by yo , yourselves.
We currently have a small office in Harlow, staffed by full-time member  er, and we'll be opening in late November  er, an of , a fully staffing housing management office  er, with with three members of staff, it'll be located in the town centre.
We're committed to Harlow  er, as an area  we put considerable resources of our own into the first phase of  er, the Three Hills  and you'll hear tonight  we'll be putting in a conditional  er, two hundred thousand odd into  into this  phase from our own reserves.
As I said, our proposals fulfil commitment to  er, the Three Hills area and the overall master plan.
The hundred and nine properties that we will provide will be split between seventy one  er, rented units  some of which again, will be for special needs  and thirty eight low cost home ownership units.
These will be shared ownership properties  whereby the purchaser will buy a percentage  usually forty to fifty percent  but then pay a rent on the remainder  and they will  er, be able to staircase to buy further parties into an outright ownership.
So again, it's a low cost option for people to to  to get their own housing.
We've currently been allocated  just over one point three million  from the housing corporation  which represents about forty one percent of the money that we need to do the scheme.
We need  two million pounds more from the corporation  er, and obviously we will be making that our first priority for investing into Essex  er, and to obviously  erm  as Paul said  er  you're prepared to make that a priority as well and through the housing corporation.
Our consultants for the project will be for, for all three phases  er, Leonard Space Partnership an and Anglian Design  who were involved in the initial master planning of  of the  er  Three Hills area  so we feel that gives continuity  er  to to the overall planning of the scheme.
We're also committed to  tenant participation  and er  we've done a couple of exercises already on the scheme  and we've secured some funding from the housing corporation  to employ Anglian Design on our behalf  with the  the  housing association  er, to involve the tenants as fully as possible  in the  er, development process.
The properties that we're building will be available  er, the initial lettings  a and sales will be one hundred percent  er, to council nominees  subsequent lettings and nominations will be at seventy one percent  which is the maximum level that we can agree under the housing corporation rules.
Er, however  we have agreed, and we're perfectly happy  er, to have an undertaking  which, obviously you can't enter into within the  a, a legal document  cos we wouldn't qualify for a corporation grant  to make the remaining twenty five percent  available to the council as well.
You're the statutory housing authority  you identify the people in the greatest housing need  our aim is to house people in the greatest need  so, you identify the  the tenants.
In return for that  you're providing a  to, to the society.
We will be entering into a legal agreement with the  er, the council to  basically erm, set the criteria for the scheme  this will establish the mix and the tenure  er  of the, of the  er  the scheme  and to ensure that it  it adheres to the, to the master plan.
And we've written into our arrangements with any contractor, in the tender documentation  that they have to adhere to the  er  requirements of the master plan.
The development agreement requires that we complete the scheme  by the thirty first of March nineteen ninety seven  er  obviously subjective to your support and funding i in the corporation.
Er, if not, then we return  er  the  the elements of the site we've now developed to yourselves  er,and we get reimbursement for the cost that we've  incurred in the demolition of the blocks.
The legal agreement requires us to demolish er  the the the blocks that are on the site  er  and this will cost approximately, including interest  etcetera  over two hundred thousand pounds to the society  er  so obviously it's a  a reasonably substantial commitment from ourselves  tying up our own  our resources in  in Three Hills.
In return for us putting that money into the scheme  er  straight away er  as Paul said  the council will be agreeing to, to make us priority for handling corporation funding  and if that's not successful  er  to use your  reasonable endeavours  to try and find  the remainder of the scheme yourselves.
As I said, we've already got forty one percent of the the the main funding required  er, for the project  and er  we're  relatively  erm  confident that with our own money going in  and yourself putting the  er  the loan  in for the nothing  er  that a  our bids are gonna be successful in future years.
If I just nip round to the drawings  I'll just give you an indication of of what exactly we're, we're doing.
This development here is the first phase  called Ayletts Field which we've already completed, the sixty eight units for  er, rent and shared ownership.
We've got funding already from the housing corporation to do twenty four category one sheltered flats  on this part of the site  and we'll looking to start that in  late  er  Novem November nineteen ninety two, this year.
We've got all the approvals we now need from the corporation  er  and the tenders  are out  and erm  we're awaiting their return.
The next phase will be  er  this phase, site three  er, which we will be providing  twenty one  er, flats to rent as your nominees  er  three units for the special needs  and for those  like I told you, it's about twenty four rented to nominees  we've had the funding for that pre-allocated by the housing corporation so they are  er, committed to, to funding that.
And we anticipate starting that scheme  er  in spring nineteen ninety four  latest  and the completion  is nineteen ninety five.
The balance of this site  we'll be doing, as I say, twenty five shared ownership properties  and that's subject to a bid  er, in  for the next financial year  er  which again is obviously subject to, to your support, but as I said, it will be our first priority.
We then move over to the  er  jus , what is called site two  and, on that we'll be doing another twenty one houses for rent to your  your nominees  with a further two units for  special needs  and the balance of the site  can be made  er  available for shared ownership, which is another thirteen properties  and the timetable for that is set to follow on  after this site's been completed  so that's why the phase has been  er, changed to nineteen ninety five  in your reports.
So  I think Alan can talk in a bit more detail about the design of the master plan issues and then  be perfectly happy to take any questions you may have.
Thank you.
 
 
I think it might help if I  stand near the drawings .
I thought that I was gonna have to er, talk about phasing but I think that he's dealt with that quite adequately but  I certainly will be happy answer any questions afterwards if  if there are any.
Erm  before we started this drawing  which  so if I co , perhaps if I stand here everyone will be able to see  which is  probably fairly familiar and  in, in most respects it goes back about six years to the first master plan that was  produced for the estate  erm  to provide a combination of regeneration  and new build.
and in essence  it's been our, our prior aim to  keep to that which was agreed by the council  back in nineteen eighty six.
Er, in a number of ways  I think everybody will agree that it's been improved  by er  the er  demolition of  the terrace blocks, rather than refurbishment  and the opportunity has been taken to  create  erm  perhaps a  a more comfortable relationship between bungalows that are about to be refurbished  and the new houses, because the new houses are designed in such a way as to  keep the scale down so  whereas the  terraced blocks were anything up to four storey, the new houses will only be two storey  and  in  a number of cases they will  they will be a relatively low two storey so that erm  I will just point out on the front elevations that  the roof comes down fairly low  relative to the  first floor windows  so that it's not too much above  the, the roofs on the bungalows, we're not talking about compromising people's heads on the internal though!
So, the other things that  had  erm  we've endeavoured to incorporate  is to try and not divide the estate, one of the  one of the aims of the master plan has been to  seen to integrate bungalows and any new housing together  and  in  a number of respects the demolition of the terraced blocks and  the  er er, putting back of more conventional two storey housing  has allowed us to do this by  rather than having  a  access road running the whole length of the estate and similarly the  that are running  past the length of the estate away from the houses  we've  we've put the houses where the road is  and the road where the house, where the terraced blocks were, erm  to form more of a conventional street scape so that people can look out  on their cars  and  that we, you actually got the new houses facing the existing ones.
Erm  generally, the er  design of the houses compliments those which have already been built  at the er, Southern Way and the side of the Ayletts Field, and the extension to  Fern Hill  er, in terms of their materials  in terms of the landscaping, and they will  er, as close as it's possible to do  match  the refurbished bungalows  in terms of including features such as block paving  and erm  car ports.
I think one point that erm, I wasn't sure if you were gonna mention it, is that  the proposals do actually encompass the allowance for additional parking for  erm, the residents  and proportion of garaging as well, and that's something that Moat are including within the  er, within their  construction contracts.
Erm  so in in broad terms the master plan is is  unchanged in concept but we think improved in detail  the   is the other thing at each end  erm  represents on the left hand side  er, what is currently Honey Hill  I believe the name may be changed in due course  erm  and those behind me here are  the houses on the Fern Hill side  and then, although some of you will have difficulty seeing it at the moment, at the bottom there are  detailed drawings showing the internal arrangement of the houses and flats  and, and detailed drawings of the elevations  with dimensions, so one can have a  have a bit of a feel for the  the sort of space standards that we've aimed at, but there are in fact, furniture  plans shown on the drawings.
Erm  Nick has obviously talked about the er, the phasing of the estate  erm, just to point out that  the reason for it, perhaps seeming a bit of long drawn out er  affair, it's, it's a, a minimum time as far as  erm, all the  people who have been negotiating feel it's achievable in  if we are to make sure that  the estate doesn't remain a building site  as as a  as a total entity fo , at any time, so  this site here will not commence until this site is completed so that there will be some  er, rest bite for the  bungalow residents and  of course, somewhere to park their cars in the  in the interim.
Erm  I think that in in broad terms that covers the architectural aspects  we we have of course, as er, Paul mentioned at the beginning  erm  talked  the these designs through with the  Clark Hill, Honey Hill and Fern Hill Resident's Association and  they have erm  been, been shown the exhibition on the estate  and er  we believe that they've been well received  towards seeing what


the co , the confirmation on that .
Erm, but certainly we we're, we're happy to answer any, any questions if there are any.
Thank you.
Right, er, members, any questions to  the speakers?
Yes, Bill?
I'd just like to ask er  if it's not to start on the  er  phase three before  the spring of ninety five, it seems a long time  two and half years  time  before they a , they make a start!
Would it not be possible to  make an earlier start  in view of the great need for a  for homes, it seems a long time to wait?
Er, for the, for the phase three, which is the one that we've got, the one's that are rented already  the, the money doesn't actually become available until  er  that date, spring ninety four.
We're currently negotiating with the  er  the housing corporation to bring it forward, we wanna bring it forward  er  and we're, we're asking them if we could do that.
We will also be taking a decision ourselves  er, as to the  the tender  part 
 
of it as well, because obviously  we could take advantage of the cheaper prices now to  to do it.
As I said, spring ninety four is gonna be the latest date for the  site  we want to start that phase as early as possible so that we can then get onto to the other phase  as early as possible because we obviously don't  particularly want to wait until  nineteen ninety five  ninety six  to, to finish the whole thing.
Er, so our intention is to do as quickly as we can.
Okay Bill?
Any  body else, Ann?
May I ask a question on the  this   er, the speaker said er erm  that it will be   down so that they  on er er  or no particular help   on his accordance but  o on these here,o on the  ones this isn't the case.
Yes i , on, on the side which we believe er  matters, if you like, the side that faces the  er, the road, and faces the bungalows we we've sought to achieve that  erm, on the rear elevations it's perhaps a less important issue so  looking at any of the  erm  large coloured  elevated sheets  the upper drawing represents the street side, the side that faces the bungalows and the side where  scale issue becomes  er, more important and the lower drawing erm  where there's er  an eaves and gutter above the first  is are actually the  the back garden side that erm  will be seen perhaps less.
Do you know how many    two bedroomed    one of the others.
Also, are, are this lot, are on this 
Speak up!
lot  er  pulled down?
it's a   
 
but  is there  a particular one?
Er
Yes, yes.
this one here is it?
Is this, is this it?
That one here  
That one is the same both sides but I think that 
Yeah.
More of them.
These ones 
Yeah.
that's 
don't know this one.
that particular on there  actually only occurs the once, it's in this position is  er, a cluster of  four houses together   that erm is, if you like, as a, as a signature at the end of this particular
So this one, this 
er, access road.
is the main design?
Tha , that is the one that occurs the most frequently, yes  by, by far.
Thank you very much.
Okay?
Yes, Bill?
On this question of priorities here I understand that  if we go along with local presses,to the housing corporation that this is a priority  and then they, they  can see to that  make the money available  when can we go along again  with another priorities?
Erm  really it's an issue about the amount, what little amount of hag that  housing association grants are a  comes into  Harlow via the housing corporation  we don't have a lot to play with on any .
Since I've been involved in  er, in the partnerships we've always  tried to have  a joint number one  with Three Hills and Church Langley as I explained before  and it's always been a very difficult balancing act  you know, to keep both going along.
I'm sure you will agree that there'd be nothing worse than to start into a  erm  er, regeneration  idea on an estate and then  have a  a year or two's hiatus where nothing can happen because we're  er pushing the hag funding  elsewhere  in the town.
Erm  by saying it's a priority we're not saying it's our only priority, we have  a number of priorities and it's  it's up to us to  in debate with the housing corporation  er, to come to the best agreements for Harlow.
Jim?
Anybody else want  yes Tony?
we'll be able use    where are they going to go?
Right  Well garages  the there are already some  here  and here, both in here and here that have been built as part of Ayletts Field.
Are they entangled with the, the house, are they?
No, the the  well some of them are, those particular ones some of them are joined but they are to all intents and purposes separate in that they can be  er, rented out separately  they're not tied to the house  erm  in that they are  they go with it but  the  housing department  have the opportunity to rent them to  whoever applies for them.
And what would the rents be, any idea?
Tha , that  I can't tell you !
That's probably 
Considering the er 
a question for housing department really.
on what the county council are gonna 
Erm 
erm  then  we've got some more  erm  here in this position  and some more down here  and in fact, I think that we've managed to squeeze a few more into  erm, this position for the  bungalow refurbishment, that's obviously  an aside it's not part of  erm  what, what Moat are  proposing.
So there's a few 
 
on each side of the estate.
Where are the parking spaces?
The parking spaces for the erm  bungalow residents  erm  are  are generally spread around in in a, in such a way as to  be as close as possible to the bungalows that they serve, they're not if you like, specific car park, but on this drawing they're, they're identified  it's simply that  the proportionate parking that the planners require for a construction of new houses is there  and then over and above that  there is further parking  which, if you like, will satisfy the need of the bungalow residents, though  they  may not necessarily be identified specifically.
Er, as you can imagine if you try and tell somebody to park in one place that somebody else has parked already, you could end up with some  some misunderstanding, so there is  erm  a generous amount of parking to  bring the total parking to the whole area up to the level that was  erm  put forward in the first master plan.
An and what about the disabled parking?
Well  there are a number of spaces that are in positions which could be used by disabled, in other words, they are not sort of, sandwich tight against other spaces  and what's happened in the past is that erm  when a need has arisen  an and when perhaps there's been er  generally a bungalow that has been  er, occupied by somebody who's disabled then the housing department have  erm  modified that space  I mean,wha what we've actually done is we've er, taken a certain amount of block paving out but put back  some block paved logo, sort of , standard white er symbol that erm  that identifies disabled space  and  and, and that space is actually earmarked for that person, and it could happen in a variety of different locations  erm  it's just that  there's probably  not so much point in doing it until you know that there is  er  a specific need.
Okay?
Do you think they're wider?
They're wider, yes.
Oh good!
Yeah  yeah.
Right.
Anyone else?
Thank you very much  I've 
 
Oh sorry were you trying to get attention?
I I know the question about rent was mentioned  but, I'm just talking generally now, I asked this question to another housing association  how do you justify  rents of sixty pounds and above for accommodation and social housing?
I mean, I know it's something to do with funding but could you just explain that for me?
Yeah.
Because we, I do not understand  how I
All average rents on our  stock  across the whole of the south east  is twenty seven pounds a week  erm, I think is, is the figure now  the bulk of that funded down to the old  er regime that we had from the housing corporation  where we got  er, a lot more grant and we had the residual line and the money we've had to borrow ourselves for the scheme was actually from the corporation themselves  that all changed in the ninety eighty eight housing act  and we now get a fixed  er, sum of monies, it's fixed percentage of local cost  from the housing corporation  and the balance has to be borrowed from a private lender just like anybody else going out and  and buying a home, if you like  er, from a, a bank, from a building society or somebody like that  and we have to charge a rent  er  to the property that will repay that loan  and, the way in which we actually do it is, is we charge a lower rent and actually who pays the rent quite substantially below that  er, because erm the rent on these properties if we i if we charge what the the housing corporation's grant as it's set would be round about ten, twelve pounds more expensive than that.
Er, it's not a funding system that er  that we would choose to  to work under, we would want to keep the rents as low as possible  er, but it's one that's set by  central government through the housing corporation  and that we have to live with.
What we do do for our residents is employ a welfare benefit service  so that they can  maximise the er  the housing benefit section that that they're eligible for  to to make the po properties as affordable  as as they can be.
And obviously, we're, we're concerned that people  erm  will rent our properties  who will then be reliant entirely on housing benefit er and and and if they  increase their income they may be worse off!
Er  the fact of the matter is, it's the system that we as housing associations gonna have to live with  er  if if we're going to build new homes.
Thank you.
Alright secretary?
Anyone else?
Right!
And can I then er draw attention to  the recommendation on one o threes  on er  one  er, sorry, on er      B  the amended notes  that er  came  from  er, the area committee  er  and er  C.
Are you all in favour of those?
Oui!
Oui!
Mm.
Do you want to  show  a a raising of  hands so that we can assure your agreement.
Okay.
Anybody against?
No.
Right.
Thank you very much.
Then  sit down now.
 
Right  erm  we'll come on to item  three  er, with the questions from the public and er  Becky  is going to  talk to  about er  questions.
Thank you Chairman.
Erm  on the supplementary paper sent round you will see at  I think it's page one and two, a letter received from the Carters Mead Resident's Association  erm  I hope you've all had a chance to read that as it was circulated to members in advance.
Erm  this matter was raised at  committee and I'd like to explain the item of  committee that prompted the letter  from Carters Mead Resident's Association.
Can I just say a few brief things to this, firstly, I share their concern entirely and totally  and I don't think there's an officer round this table who wouldn't agree with that, and I also believe, having met with all the board members this morning, I know that the board members similarly agree.
Erm  we have taken various steps immediately, one is that the vandalism that taking place over the   erm  we have immediately re-secured, I have to say there's been about fifty erm  tickets out to re-secure those  those, that site over the summer but  they have been re-secured and tomorrow morning  there will be the commencement of bricking up  of the doors and windows of the ground floor of block D,block.
Can I also say that the  erm  the fear expressed about Woolwich, I believe to be fairly well founded  Woolwich building, a Woolwich er, Building Society  had been on   erm, entered into  a long time ago on this  erm  and the letter that was read out at Potter Street area committee from Woolwich indicated that they hadn't yet decided whether they would proceed  and er  I think is  I've talked to the publican since they have promised us an answer this week  er  we are intending, we have spoken, Dermot's also spoken to our managing director  we are confident we will have an answer from this week  and I have to tell you that I think the answer will either no, or it will be so hazy that we'll need to take some action and make a decision.
I sa , as I say, I met this morning with the three members from Potter Street  erm  we do have various alternative proposals  for sa ways forward should the village back out  and what I can say to you at this stage is that we have another meeting scheduled for next week, we will be meeting with the Resident's Associations keeping them fully informed  erm  we will ensure that the letter goes back to Mrs  who  and the other Resident's Associations who expressed concern there  and that we will be taking, I hope, I hope because I'm gonna have to say if Woolwich back out we're going out we're going have to move very fast and do some quite  erm  in-depth work.
We hope we will be able to take new proposals to Potter Street on the second of November  if nothing else, we will certainly take them  an honest indication of where we've got to so far  and what proposals will be taking place, and what we will be proposing  erm  for the future.
But, I mean the concern Carters Mead Resident's Association I think is well founded, I think there's been a lot of problems   and er  I think it can come upon us all to keep talking with them and to improve the situation should  the  should Woolwich back out.
Thank you Melanie.
Er, I noticed Mrs  is in the audience, is there anything you'd like to say referring to what the officer 
Erm 
has said?
just to  to verify the fact that we are making so many , you said about  pulling out as well is there a possibility of that?
Erm
Well hm  you can see that er, members are also very concerned about it  and er  we've er,i there are external circumstances that  you know, we have to look into first.
But erm  Mrs , said she will keep you informed of  will discuss with the er, residents and the board of councillors.
.
If I could just say one other thing, that is that  I've had a  an initial of, of the blocks done  and  pending the outcome of Woolwich  which I expect to get tomorrow  erm, if they are backing out then I will be getting a full structural, engineers structural survey  within a couple of days, this is the actually meeting plan.
Mm.
Yes.
Er er anybody got any questions to put to Melanie, er about er  yes, er yes er Norma?
Yeah, I'm  rather concerned that this kind of thing seems to be happening rather a lot, I mean this is so reminiscent of what happened in the, the four maisonette in  in Fern Hill where we had empty blocks left for a long time  erm  becoming a magnet for  vandalism and all kinds of everything!
We've also seen it happening, to an extent in properties in Bishopsfield as well erm  I really think we need to get to grips with  what we seem to be doing, which de-counting people prematurely early  er, in response to, to housing developments which we are planning to undertake in in partnership with other people  and leaving ourselves open to this  and not  
Well what could we be doing you tell yourself,.
not only can pose as a danger but it presents  er  the unsightliness  erm  an and all the other problems associated with that.
It seems to be happening far too often, and I wonder i I wonder  what's actually going wrong that this happening so often and in so many places, seems to be something that  you know, perhaps we need to address it  far more generally as a problem of housing management as a whole.
Er  well if I can er  answer some of those er, points.
Er, first of all, I ensure that people are not de-counted unless they have er, wished to go  and maybe that their  their dwellings are er, in er  a state of er, disrepair  or there's something structurally wrong that they feel unsafe er, in them  and then er, they are, I don't like the word de-counted, but  then they er, are offered er other accommodation.
I would agree with you that if the  if we have gone along and said to people, well er yo , we've got alternative accommodation for you  and they haven't wanted to go then, well I'm sure that we hope not to give them that er  er, alternative accommodation  er, and it's not in our interest at all to er, keep er, places empty, and further more we haven't really got er enough  er, alternative places to put er, these er  tenants in  so I'm that it's as the result of the sort of dwellings that er  we've er  we now find ourselves with  as a result of the er  initial buildings  in the first place.
But we won't go into that, that's history!
But it would be very interesting if er  you had a positive er  proposal or something constructive to make which we might be able to examine, but I can tell you at the end of the day  money is required and this government won't allow to spend er, the money that er  we have got er er erm  at the moment that we could, er use but they won't let us.
And further more, they don't come up er, with the er right amount of money for our needs   er, but er it is er, duty bound er  to us.
I'm not disputing that, I'm simply saying that perhaps we have a management problem here where we could be doing things differently and I'd like to hear some positive suggestions from housing officers as to how you can address that.
Oh!
Well now er, if you've got some  critical comments about the management of it perhaps you could write and we have a look at them.
Alright?
Any other members want any  comments on Carters Mead  indeed other ?
No.
No.
Right.
Thank you.
Well thank you for your comments anyway erm    we'll get er back to our next er  item er, on the agenda.
We've got a couple of erm  er, oh that was the only one from the er  questions is it?
Yes, that's the one from there 
But it's 
right.
Er, unfortunately
Perhaps Bill could
contentious items  I've suggested five D and eleven  eleven
Got it here.
ele eleven D yes.
five hundred copies.
five.
Oh yes, that's right we right yes, five  and er  eleven D.
Er, eleven is 
B. 
the same.
B  B.
, yes.
That's right.
Sorry about that!
Er, then erm  er, we come to  er, museums  er,spoken .
Right, thank you very much June.
If I could draw members attention to the supplementary papers  erm  and it's page three  which is the second report  and it will become  I will make it clear with regards to the er  linking up of the two reports, both museums and Essex committee  linked up to the museum registration.
Erm  members will re ma , will be reminded the report was requested at the last personal services committee with regards to the council's involvement  in the current museums and Essex committee  er, I'm also requesting  er, the financial contribution that this council actually makes to that committee.
Erm  the report identifies the history  of the committee  and outlines the benefits that Harlow has achieved through membership.
I'd like to highlight the er  a quote by the county museum's officer  with which the predominately the amount of er contribution which was agreed by this council on the twenty third of March ninety ninety  er which actually relates to the size of the population, I will actually point that the thousand pounds  has actually increased to one thousand three hundred, this year, because of, population has actually increased since then.
We've already valued the use of free displays or whatever  erm  if I could point out the recommendations that the members agree in the report, the members agreed Harlow Council's continued membership of the museums and Essex committee.
Right.
Are there are any members any  comments to make on these?
Agreed.
Are they 
Agreed 
for it?
Does anybody oppose the recommendation.
No.
Thank you.
The, the actual link is  linked to museum registration  which I'm sure members will remember erm  with regards to the long running saga of  the additional storage facilities.
And going through on page  sixty five  in the main agenda  this outlines the current plan  to achieve registration for Harlow's museums  in order to achieve  to achieve the a the a a and tangibility to grasp  to to obtain  aid from the museum's national bodies.
Agreed.
Agreed.
Right.
Thank you very much .
Erm  seven, neighbourhood er welfare candidate.
Rejected.
Yes, at the last meeting these committee members  did ask that er  he produce some  details of  help and   and a number of cases dealt with  have been apparent  and the details are  presented for, for amendment..
Thank you.
Who was it who wanted to know something on that?
Yes I
It's it's  me.
Yeah, I would like to do is just mention that  it's so surprising really that er  the resources used are  out of all proportion to  what we used to er  do on it, on the other central panel.
We've had ten meetings and only thirty cases, and that'll be the three cases where  each meeting spread over a  five different locations, which er  doesn't seem a very good way to use our resources!
So what I was wondering was er  the scheme is in it's infancy this  and I'm all in the favour of the  decentralising   in principle, but  I think we ought to perhaps look at it  a bit closer, and I would suggest  that we have an up-to-date report  at the next meeting of this committee  so we can compare  it over a longer term  so, as that we might then  reflect on a  if we're doing the right thing or not.
But it seems a waste of the resources to er  have er, ten different meetings for thirty cases we that's, that's my view but, I would like to see another report at the next meeting  so as we can compare.
Right  er Frank have you got any comments er  to make on that?
Yes, I I  Councillor  is quite right, I mean it is a new  new departure to centre these panels in the neighbourhoods, it was always our intention to come back  after a  a period had elapsed  er,we , with the new system to  bring to members attention the success or otherwise of the neighbourhood  panels.
Erm  and certainly  I think  I think in going to neighbourhood panels it was  it was to serve a democratic process of  tenants being able to panels local to their  that area  and  I think in that sense erm  it has been successful  and certainly, I think as far as we were concerned  er, it avoids the  perhaps intimidating nature of, of tenants appearing in a large  centre of the various panel  which er  I think was  er, certainly one of the members wishes when we started  on a neighbourhood basis  but, yes it was our intention and, I would think that it's quite reasonable to ask us to bring the report to the next meeting  er  with a better explanation of how the council works so far.
Yeah.
May I ask  er, another question is  of the thirty cases  in the neighbourhood  the tenants don't need .
No, I haven't that information,tha that  that detail was asked  for, but I do know that er  that certainly in a majority of cases  because they are local  erm  the attendance from tenants was  certainly substantial  and I would of, but certainly far more than you would expected if the panel perhaps had been  inside a  .
.
Er, just a minute, I'll ask Ann and then Lesley.
Ann?
I wa I wanted a a point that er  respond  er neighbourhood  and the manager I spoke to said that the areas that were the case  since er,de decentralisation  because er  people are  er er in coming to  neighbourhood offices and that of the  of the managers   arrange er er  er   aims or er     either run in in two neighbourhoods er  er  I I feel personally it's been very worthwhile because we were able to  talk to the   er, they they they were never able to go  and and and they came to the   er, the neighbourhood offices international conducive er er  er   or er er ah i i in areas they want to talk to  , so I I, I personally would would like to see  this continuing er for  perhaps a  it isn't the best value for money i i i it certainly far better for for for  can come to their neighbour office   Speak to 
Thank you.
.
Thank you Ann.
Les?
Thank you,.
Er, as you know, I haven't been exactly an enthusiastic supporter of neighbourhood erm  areas, but I have to confess 
Some never attended them!


I have to confess  that on that, in so far as those that I've attended, and I've had a couple in my area  I have to confess my surprise at the efficiency of them!
And I really see that the public now  certainly  they give  certainly for the benefit of the a ten , the tenants that 
A 
are presented 
Yes.
there  in comparison with the archaic way of old Bill's seventeen round this table   
 
Oh that's  
quizzing people  don't go back to that way, that old system!
The people there are  that's going to the neighbourhood are getting  a fair crack of the whip  and they're being the centre of that every week.
Er er, I wish the man wo wouldn't put words into my 
For what it's worth 
mouth Chairperson!
No.
I understand.
I say I think that's quite 
No.
wrong!
I I 
Interpretation was
You're not archaic and the and the er  the me er 
 
the meeting to be called not 
And we 
archaic cos we have the   
Don't take it personal Bill!
It wasn't meant 
Well er, he meant it, you meant it personal!
Yes , alright, yes.
 
Do breakdown 
Could we do it  
Come along!
of Councillor  conversion, decentralisation 
 
Yes!


Yes!
Yes!
And   
I think that'll be 
gone on very late, yes.
Jim?
Yes Chairer, why don't we pat ourselves on our, on the back about this  it would it be useful i in in the the report, a further report that's gonna come forward  if there could be some indication as to actual format that was  adopted  when a person goes to one of his welfare panels, cos I've been to three and there doesn't seem to be any consistency whatsoever  in the way that things occur or whatever!
I don't think 
Right.
it's entirely fair!
Yes, I think that's up to the Chairer so
Oh, I think it's up to the council Chairer to say what, what procedure should be so, in fairness,.
Yes, yes.
There is one other  point, although  erm  you know, it's good that they are  in the er areas which the tenants  er, live so it's er  not very difficult for tenants to come and see their councillors  but er  er, there is a difficulty at times  when er  the er  air the housing manager  has to ring around to get the er members, who are able to  sit on that panel  and sometimes that is difficult because we have just three members  and sometimes they can't all fit in  the , whereas when you have a larger group  if one member can't attend, there's invariably sufficient there to  be able to come to a decision so I think that that's on the other  side of the balance sheet.
But, altogether yo , er  sorry, you wanted to say something on that?
Yes, I do sorry!
I, I don't often agree with Jim about anything , but I really do agree with him about this, that there has to be some  clear guidelines, I think, as to how these are fixed, they are not going be  have the potential of being very unfair to people because people operate in different ways in different areas and I would  suggest that it would be a good idea if this community were to ask for  erm  guidelines to be drafted for this committee to agree so that there is  a more even  fair, laid down procedure for dealing with the cases coming before the panel.
Right, well we'll look into  we'll look into that.
Any other members got any comments on this?
If it's a problem with numbers and  why don't we extend the numbers on the panel?
I mean
No!
Couldn't put the numbers up!
Well I think that that is 
the problem is with  how  the  is conducted  who gets the first bite?
Who puts their case first?
Who
Yeah.
that that type of thing.
I understand that but  
what I'm talking about.
Three people on the panel is that right?
Well t yes, and it has 
Well no I haven't got a problem 
I I have feelings about it, I I I mean, my, generally my experience  I don't know I haven't discussed  with other members but er, when I  the panel that I  er, allocated to erm  and I was telephoned, could a make, and certain dates were made and I finally made one then I was told, oh no that's  not convenient!
At the end we er, of the day  I had to opt out because it wasn't possible for me to fit in  and someone else a , I'm just thinking of the time  taken for er, er housing manager or one of his  er, staff  to erm  er, you know, to do that practical thing that's all
Oh yes 
that I'm 
of course it should!
saying.
But we'll look into er  the format I think.
Can we have a further report please?
Yes, there's going to be a procedure and a report er  is er   and and we're going to have another  report Frank, yes.
Thank you  er, very much.
Right, now we get  er back to  the er, and we've got er, item which is  er, the council's er response the proposed merger of the health er  authority.
Erm  er, it's Vince  .
Thank you Chairer.
Erm, the latest round of erm  proposals to come before you as part of the N H S reforms are the consultation document that we  we received recently  and proposals to the merge the three existing  area health authorities in North Essex to form  one merged unit.
We've attempted, Chairer, to  assess this proposal and then to set a criteria  I think it's  important for members to understand that currently there is a consortium  that er, is in operation, fully operational  that is carrying out the tasks erm, that are identified in the consultation document  mainly  erm  the consultation document itself does erm  show exactly what the health authority is doing  erm, the proposal now before you is to extend that erm  to one merged unit of health authority  with one executive board  erm  based with three local health clinics  erm, to provide the service.
We've  made an assessment on the single reports, yeah  and we're asking members to  erm, give us guidance on the principles it and your response  in order to, to get a response to  the regional health authority by this Friday.
Erm  I do apologise for this  but er  unfortunately we have no choice I suppose  .
Right  er, any comments from members er, from this er, report?
Anyone  
Yes Chairer er  I think Vince's report is a  very fair summary of the er  the  the issues which face us  erm  truth is, is what we've been as  in this  proposed consortium which no doubt will go through with it's  most of the reforms of the N H S  despite the er  consultation mechanism which they've gone through you know, but  largely these are  beforehand given the unaccountable of the  N H S management!
What we're actually lo doing here is   those of longer members who remember  we used to have a thing called the area health authority  which was proposed in a three tier structure  by  a corporation called the McKenzie corporation at great expense charity governed by three quarters of a million pounds  to invent structure of the National Health Service nineteen seventy two  some years later they came back and said, well give us another million pounds and we'll go back and look at it again, and say actually we were wrong, and they abolished the areas, and produced  districts!
And what we're getting here actually is a recreation of the area health authority  they're actually gonna be situated in the same office block  where the old area authority used to be in Witham  erm, and the community health council which I represent this authority on  has certainly been  er, raising a number of questions about this  for fear of centralisation in Witham, erm  with perhaps  the lack of accessibility to local needs of West Essex  and in Harlow particularly,.
The question that the senior, the middle management staff  will propose the authority, has been drawn almost exclusive , exclusively from North East  and the Mid-Essex health authorities and not from  West Essex.
Cos, of course, the West Essex management staff  have been co saddled with another project which is to provide a trust  for the East Herts and West Essex  health providers, i.e. P A H and associated health services providers  and surprise surprise!in this council chamber  Chief Executive of the West Essex Health Authority has become the Chief Executive of the provider trust  despite that, it's not gonna be approved by the Secretary of State, but certainly a conference which she's speaking at in , she is named as the Chief Executive!
Actually, I didn't see the job advertised, I must admit, I was going to apply for it myself of course!


Ah but, surprise surprise!
It seems she's been appointed without any advertising which  would seem to flow  equal opportunities promises here, the government and the health service really believe in it!
So  because they don't like the sound of this  the other two have drawn off their magic stone and got them into the top jobs in  er  consortium!
Er  now it claims, of course that this is a more efficient purchasing mechanism  on behalf of the patients and the community of this area  the problem is, of course, it depends what you mean by efficiency  and the truth is, that we may get  increased our purchasing in terms of frugal as they put it delicately  our patients!
But actually it doesn't tell you anything about the quality of the care which they're purchasing  and the evidence that we are getting increasingly from the community health council is the experience of people of the health service  is that actually the quality of the care is getting worse  and this is not due to the staff in the health ee the  more detailed plans coming to the next meeting of the e the  more detailed plans coming to the next meeting of the for an operation  er, four years, it should to be said  er, she's been waiting despite the government's claim that all operations are done within two years  er  for very severe varicose veins and  surprisingly enough she got them because of course most varicose have been removed her, the north-east Thames region  erm, and er  she turned up on the Wednesday and  the operation had been postponed twice previously  er, she was er  gone through all the er, various tests which took her four hours cos she had to  find all the places herself, there was nobody to show her to X-ray and various other places  erm  she was prepared for the op and then was sent home because there wasn't a bed available!
And told to turn up the next morning, waited another four hours, finally  a patient who'd had an operation  for a serious gall bladder operation two days before hand was kicked out of his bed and sent home  so that she would be put in the bed, given the operation!
This is actually the state the of health service  and the truth is that all of these organisational changes  are really not gonna solve the basic problems of the health service which is under- funded and under-resourced.
So, I think we should say  we are sceptical, and I think the paper puts it correctly  er, we are sceptical of whether the reforms of the first consortium in fact, is going to meet the needs in terms of new health area  and I know that time will come, they're talking about the lot, it's gonna wonderful and that the  our economies  should get  all I can say is that the likelihood is  the only f the area committee  er, so that residents can  comment managers, but since we've already had  a nine hundred percent increase in senior management in the health service in the past five years  up from nine hundred to  over ten thousand  at a cost of fifty to two hundred and fifty million pounds  I'm rather sceptical about that one as well!
So, in general, I think we should be  as sceptical er and critical of any of these proposed changes  and the key point of course was the  at the lack of accountability, but there'll be even less accountability  one suspects  in the new consortium.
Final question perhaps we should raise  is  well  is there actually gonna be a need for it in two three years time down the track?
If all providers going into trusts  and if all  er  purchasing gonna be done by fund holders, the majority of whom are confident at this stage  they'll become fund holders  what actually is the role of the purchasing consortium that be  and role of the health authorities, as such  er, other than perhaps to collect statistics in the future of our time  the climbing and quality of the health service in this area?
Thank you Hugh.
Anyone 
 
who wants to
Yes,?
Thanks.
Erm, I really feel that this consultation is coming  more than a too late because we started on the slippery slope when the consortium was er  first dreamed of o , you know about a year ago and set up in April  and that really this is the sort of the inexorable  next move, and this consultation is far far too late!
Erm  I think that  Vince has raised of very personal questions that we have ask about this  erm  the question of local accountability  of the  health authority  board that will be created by this  the  to service this new  joint health authority, would in fact, be the size of the existing one for West Essex and we would ha , have only a third of the representation that we currently have the whole of West Essex  we'll only have two non- executive members on the  health authority board and I don't think that that is terribly accountable but certainly  a considerable reduction on what we've got at the moment.
Erm  not only will people have to travel a lot further for treatment, as was admitted at the public meeting  erm  last Monday, here in Harlow  but  er  if people want to is maybe they'll one or two less senior f the area committee  authority  they will have to travel to Witham or Colchester or whatever, by absolutely execrable public transport if they don't drive a motor car  to actually attend those meetings and that's not democratic or accountable either!
Erm  on the financial side, I don't think savings of a hundred thousand pound or the pay an non-executive out of a budget of  two and hundred eighty million for the total of the three health authority is actually  a heck of a big saving to justify what's happening!
Erm  what this is really about, I think we all recognise this  is  the  erm  purchaser aim to increase their leverage in the contract situation as against the providers on the other side of contract  and in fact, I think we ought to tie this very much more in with what  this authority has been saying about the proposals of the trust on the provider side because  I think that this is an argument against the whole district N H S trusts that we're getting, but it is  encouraging the situation in which health authorities have purchasers on the other side of the contract are going to want to band together and merge to create a larger block in which to negotiate with their whole trust providers, I think this is a  a very dangerous situation and think we needed to tie the two together  as an argument there.
Erm  and i also need to be concerned that  the health authority I think is claiming that this merger will actually give them a better  erm  size population for research purposes for  for purchasing, however, I think that it may well be that particular health needs, people in West Essex and Harlow in particular which has, for example, a rapidly ageing population and therefore needs facilities had not been planned into the town  by way of health  erm, that those statistics, those pockets of need are going to get overlooked in a much more large and vast disparate  statistical picture, stretching from Hertfordshire right across to the coast  I think it's too big a sample and we need to make sure that our specific needs aren't going to be overlooked in all that.
Erm  it's quite clear there's going to be no more  new money for patient care and  without that I don't think we're going to get the increase in quality of service but  that we actually need.
I think also in those  very tough times ahead I think it's a very difficult decisions to be made about what services are provided  erm, and what operation people are actually going to be able to have done  and I wonder how much local people are gonna have a chance to say anything about that in the situation in which their health service  their health authority is based so far away.
Erm  I've  mentioned accessibility, I would raise that again, I'm a non-driver  erm  it's easy to hop in a car and get from here to Chelmsford, if you want to do it by public transport it is a nightmare  erm  the meeting here on, on Monday which was very poorly attended, and I understand that's been the pattern right across the area, and I don't think the health authority is that interested in finding out what people have thought to be honest!
Erm  it is admitted that people are gonna have go much further to get their treatment  ah, that was quite clearly stated as part of the the down side of it, and I don't think we can tolerate that until we've got  a decent public transport system that's going to allow patients  to get by public transport from here to Colchester or Witham or Clacton or wherever and er  and their, their relatives and friends  to be able to follow to visit them if  you know, as necessary.
Erm  so that's a a whole of responses to  to this, I think we need to be far more clear  in our opposition to this, I think it's a very dangerous situation it's one that's happening  across the country, we're not the only sufferers and I think consortia have been very dangerous things from the beginning, and are leading  inextricably to the merger that we  we put before us as a proposal tonight, and I think we really should be quite strenuous in our position to it.
Thank you.
Any other  comments??
Simon?
Hello .
As you  saying to us all only to be said  interest in the matter  i in the  erm the merging matter to  .
The problem I've found with  paper  erm  it was  confusing, misleading  and erm  very misleading .
Throughout   visions of, people who also come out tonight there's  there's been  obviously er, a potential saving of a hundred thousand pounds on  on  members  erm  I  I'm not gonna  I don't that's right.
That's your salary Simon!
Yes.


Yes.
too closely   I don't actually recall seeing in the  er  in the actual wo consultation documents  erm   funding  is not one of the issues  being addressed by  the merger with .
You went to the public meeting Simon, that's the problem!
I'm sorry?
You went to the public meeting, that is what 
They 
they said!
They actually quoted a hundred thousand pound 
Er 
figure did they?
can we just have er  just one person talking please?
Simon will you continue.
They were .
Sorry?
What  what the government, what the erm  the consortium and   paper's about  er, is improving  the, the identification band that was hanging over of of health care, once that recipe is  will get much larger consortium  er, it's much widespread of  er, devotion, expertise  er, er  professionalism in in assessing health needs  er  think about one of those areas that have been  saved from  in West Essex over the last  over the last few years  and by going into a much larger group with more resources erm, there will, they will be able to  actually  er  work  er  far, far more effectively in  sorting out what's actually needed.
One of the other things I found that people are conflicting in the paper  erm  is  of people having to travel further  erm  if I can just  yes, on pa , on page three, paragraph this is the  choice that seems  of the area  and the travel  and on page four, paragraph one  the version says that local people will still get a choice of   i in the London hospitals.
We could only    er  er, in   it's not quite clear whether  erm  we're in favour of sending people all the way down to London for their health care, but we're not  in favour of sending  anywhere,anywhe where more local  for  the the   erm, you know I, I'm not quite sure what you want  you know what what  point the lady's trying to get across there.
In
Er
In a minute Vince if  
but recent problems on  
.
.
I know they propose   
Then o on page  five  I found  a quote that   there was nothing  particularly in the consultation document for  merger  referring to finance apart from the  increase coming from the changes  and that question  er, the, I take your points   er, in fact  referring to the   and provider unit.
Well  in  when you're considering  the the possible merger of the three health authorities, they haven't positioned any one particular private  er, provider unit is, is not really the crucial issue at hand!
If you wanna make a point about that well  well we'll point about them  erm  there is  er  a comment  erm  in this erm  erm  yeah on paragraph, paragraphs four and five, page five the first of  we will buy them  including all the legislation that  will reduce  and if you got up to page three, paragraph six  there's a claim that  levels are eight percent higher on the same money!
But  you know,the these people ha have hardly been treated   erm  and a, a contract for obtaining more health care year by year  so, you know  if yo , if you're saying that  erm  these  wi will will reduce or that the action has already taken place, it can't reduce  erm  so, then again it's, it's not really relevant to  erm  the  proposal of running a, a health authority, you know, these people should talk .
Erm  I've, I I think I'll  erm   was talking about  people attending the health authority meetings at the moment  but the local health authority do move meetings around, Saffron Walden  Bishop's Stortford, Harlow and and and one over at   erm  and this apart from it's  was only us coming from Harlow at the meeting last week  and the health authority met in Harlow  er, you know  the me the meetings are moving about, they are there for people to come to  but if they're not coming to  to the meetings while they're o on on the doorstep  then, then really what else can the health authority do  to me , to make people come?
You know I  erm  Hugh was talking about erm  somebody being thrown out of hospital after  gall bladder operation after only two days  well fortunately  these days there are  one or two strives in er  in in health care  erm to    erm  which is very much easier to  er, operate on people if you're  if you  if you're going to put them out  cos the operation's more  er  simpler  it's far less stress on patients and and, and they they're becoming  a lot quicker  er, clearly if faded out  er, the way  is completed then er  obviously things are serrated with  with the  chief executive of the  health authority  and  I'd like to give you this   October when  when the Chief Executive was  .
!
Yes.
Best person I think , you know.


Erm  there is  just one, may I just  er, make one final  point  erm  paragraph on page four refers to improvements in services of minority groups  and  also on  page five and six   the need for sa input, input into  priorities shall not be able to  for this .
One of the main purposes of o of a consortium is actually looking at the health needs  erm  it's   impressions that I've  I actually got o on a number of occasions that I've er  I think involvement in  assessing health needs  but I've actually  answered anywhere  er, and I'd very interested as to how  or what kind of  input erm  we will be looking to  on that?
Thank you, er Simon.
Er er  if they want to come back on anything  Hugh?
Do , do you, no?
No, no, I mean 
No, right.
I could come back and then
Yes.
can I say to Simon that  
Er, but is, are there any other questions before er er  on the report  that er  Dermot and Vince has 
I think we ought to have a  an adequate response Chairperson to the
Yes, well just a minute!
I want  er, I'm just asking if er, anyone's got er, comments to make to Vince  and then Vince will reply to them, that's the point, he's got to reply to  some of the comments er, that er  Simon has made  and then we'll come to  what we want  our response to be.
So as there's no other comments  er, Vince would you  have you got any?
Yes Chairman, the figure of a hundred thousand as we said did, was erm  a figure quoted on  by account chief's executive of the purchasing consortium  erm, that was spoken at a public meeting held here in Harlow last week  erm  the issue of the the transport around the area  erm, was accepted by the the chief executive of the health authority  erm  or of that of the consortium  erm, and the and the view that  it would be much more difficult with the lack of public transport to get to the more relo , remote areas of Essex  the  the reason that the erm  reduced use of London was put into this report was also  erm, clearly stated by the chief executive,i it's their clear aim  to provide more of, to purchase more of the services from within the north Essex area, and that was stated in a major part of the conta , of of their  erm  achievements  and that automatically means a reduced amount of choice for those people who would  otherwise  for, to London.
Erm  it is er fair to say that London's far easier to get to  er, from Harlow than certain areas in Essex are  erm, those are direct comments from  the chief executive of the proposed  erm health authority.
The financial position of the provider, this was erm  well in the report  because  the consultation document that was    it quotes a figure o of   erm, in the amount of  patient's treated  erm, with the same amount of money.
However, one has to bear in mind that at the last meeting of the West Essex Health Authority erm  they are saying that they can't carry on treating the same amount of people  erm, because they're  overspend already this year  and that they will not treat these er, extra contractual referrals  without prior funding being approved  and that was co , that was actually stated at the meeting last week.
Erm, so that that was put in the meeting to show a balance, if you like, between, yes they've achieved an eight percent but over last two years  the providal unit have run deficit  and erm  one interacts with the other  and that was, that was also something that er  that's 
Erm 
not true.
The last thing I would say Chairer on the erm, what else can the authority do?
Health authority meetings can't, they aren't very well publicised  erm  and in fact, sometimes we have go over and, and get our own agendas  and er  I would suggest that perhaps  would it be possible for them to be much better publicised than they currently are?
Yes.
Thank you Vince.
Now, er erm  are there any members who want to add to er what's  er, has been written in er this er  response?
I think that er
  
Vince has has raised a point about er  erm, informing er and consulting local people and  to let local people  know  erm  when the meetings are then local can't go, I'm sure that  if they really wanted people to come they'd make it much more  er, in  erm  with the advertising so clear that er people would be able to  and also if they had it at the times when  a their meeting  at the times when it was  mostly convenient to  er, the general public.
Hugh, do you want to comment?
Yeah I was gonna move erm   on a suggestion that we had not been convinced of the need for this consortium by er, so far  and and that certainly we as an authority  er, have remained opposed to it on the grounds that we've stated the terms of accountability  in terms of the er, sensitivity to local needs in terms of transport issues  and in terms of the clear intention to restrict patient choice  erm  which I think is a key think which should be emphasised
Yes.
the evidence that we've found out already from C H C  is that the operation of the N H S reforms has restrictive patient choice  because  crucially those referrals to London teaching hospitals which used to made as a matter of course if treatment is unable er, unavailable in Harlow   have actually been largely stopped, I got the detailed figures from the purchasing director  erm  er, recently in the C F C minutes  and it shows a miniscule number of patients being referred to London teaching hospitals  erm, and this is clearly the reason as this points out in this paper that London teaching hospitals are in serious financial problems and  four of them, indeed are being threatened with closure by  the Tomlinson report  and I think many patients in Harlow would much rather  as er, people have pointed out, go to er, Middlesex and U C H, should they still exist  than to go to Colchester  and er, but this is this a key question, so  on the the basis of the this consortium doesn't meet those criticisms indeed,make the situation worse I move that we oppose it in principle that Vince  reports on that line.
So seconder for that?
Seconded.
Seconded, yes but Lorna?
Erm  ya, I mean I've already  had what, I've had what I've had to say about the  the the content of the thing I was  merely going to ask where we go from here?
I'm aware that our backs are up against the wall as regards time because the response is meant to be in by Friday  erm  I don't think actually that this is  the the paper that Vince is presenting, although in fact, surely raises issues, I don't think it is actually response as it stands, I think it is a paper which raises  items of issues for  this committee to consider, I don't think in itself it serves as a response.
Erm  I wonder how substantially it's going to re-written, first, in order to make it a response rather than an issue raising paper  and ah, secondly, in the light of what we've all had to say this evening  and, if it is to be re-written  I wonder  erm  who is going to actually see it and approve it  before it goes off  in time to get to the health authority by the day after tomorrow?
Well that's er
cos normally they 
a matter will be er  that we going to fight er, easily  er  so  I mean i , it meant that the er, that er  er  some  more  should be brought out so that it er  does er  adhere to  what er these er  er  government departments er  expect as a response rather than er er as this considered issue raising er, we can er  facilitate that er  quite er easily but er  I think er  the  the main point is what  Hugh has said, that er  we opposed it because it's not going to help  in my view  it's not  going to help er the patients, the patients are not going to come off any better as a result of er, these er  er what I would say and I feel   and er  the, I I  I'd like to know what er the GP's think about cos GP's usually  erm  er, advise their patients if they have to wait a long time  from one hospital, they would advise them to go into London  and er, if that's been stopped as been er  that's been stated  erm  then erm, er the GP's are not going to feel very happy about their patients  er, getting er  erm  a lesser service.
So, the patients and our residents are our main er concern  and er, if we all  er, oppose it in principle and er, er er then er let us see how  we'll erm  er, revamp this er  response.
Alright?
Jim?
 
Yes Jim?
 
 
considering, I mean, there is a closing date quite quick
Mm.
well may I propose that  we put all this  along of the lines with flexible  that they expressed the committee tonight and use ?
Exactly!
We use  
 
Right, thanks.
Er, I don't know if you  er, meant er er er  the various plans to achieve  er,i in that order but I certainly  want obey patient's choice  er, er er a a at first that's the reasons I've found.
Well yes, that will come out er  .
And and you mentioned GP's, I mean, this is one way of almost perhaps forcing some GP's to become er erm  a fund holders, because then they can go an an an and buy their er er  patient care from wherever they the they want to!
But this er er er if they're not fund holders that they  er er er and then it's a way out for  er .
Yes.
Yes.
Right, thanks er, Ann.
Right, we agree with erm
Agree.
.
Thank you very much.
On the next er, item er, the er  erm  an elective member to represent the council on the purchasing strategy group ee er er  you would 
I would  like the move .
Well, I was going to say we're take it to council  alright?
Alright.
Yeah, okay.
Erm, can I ?
Yes.
And I've kept .
And now 
last week.
erm  on the next er, item  er we have er on item ten we've got the welfare  rights and er advice and we've  got quite a long report which I hope you'll agree  is an excellent report, er and er  Sue  is here to present it.
Sue  please?
Page seventeen to ninety four.
Erm  because the report is er  quite a long report  mainly the  er part of the  report erm  I will pick out the most important comments  and  if I could take the first part of the report first  erm  this concerns a new staffing structure between  er, newly emerged welfare rights and advice service.
Erm  the council erm, the welfare and associate advi advice centres since nineteen seventeen eight  however, until March of this year  erm  the staff  the counter staff within the advice centre were divided into to two departments  er, the information and community services department  reported to committees  and, as a result of the general move within the council and  the service department to er  neighbourhood  erm  offices and called the support services.
We were asked to erm  come up with a new structure  erm, and  and it, the purpose of this report and to put that .
The  I think the erm  the main point that I'd like to make is that erm  the structure  as it's posed  erm    is for  the same number of staff  erm, however, the three, what were supervisory stroke managerial posts  erm  have  changed, we feel, as a result of the merger  and therefore, and there are three  er little posts  mainly, a head of, people called a head of   and a head of the support, support   a support services manager  and a support services officer  and erm  the appendix details the main  er, functions in each post, er those posts.
But erm  certainly they  er  if they are  er, graded as we anticipate  there will perhaps be a small saving, in fact, as a result of the merger.
And I think they are graded  slightly higher than the as , they they will come out at the same cost, same overall costs.
And the new structure  erm  moves towards  erm  team working across the advice centre composes of three teams  er  and also, takes on the critical self managing team  so that erm  in terms of the  this work and technical support that er, has in the past been offered by a team leader, er, team leader and advice centre manager  that will be, in the future will be offered by a senior member of staff  erm, for each other and for less experienced staff .
The teams will er, in the service part, which is the second part of this report is, is who ?
Erm  the the service channel will be divided into the three teams  and the teams will be expected to deliver  erm  an agreed level of service within the  which ever is available .
So chaired  the first part of the report I recommend that the structure as outlined  erm, be approved  and that the necessary recruitment take place as soon as possible.
Er, I understand that if that  those recommendations are approved this evening  that that will then go to erm council staffing   erm, which is currently erm, decided  the overall  er, priorities intended .
Okay, I don't know whether I repeatedly  er, members of the council like to ask questions about the structure so they can ask, and I can move on, so
The next, well I'll give them tha , er ja , er Jim, yes?
Yeah,I I will take only part of this debate as my daughter works in .
Alright Jim  Okay.
Er, Ann, yes?
Now personally I understand that the benefit shop is o er er er will be moving to the advice  dispensing of  centre shortly.
Er, what  co-operation or a ar ar ar ar you,?
The these could of been   yeah, they were bringing er er an , I'm bringing it in because I
Ann I'd rather you keep the reports if you don't 
Yes.
mind!
An and perhaps  for that, I've never heard that one before!


.


Or or jumping up the council's face!
The the the the the the  of the Benefit Shop, I make people advice  and several of us were set on, on on on er er  that you handled recently  er er er er i it was the .
Am I allowed?
Yes, you can.
Yes, but er  we're really dealing er  with 
Yes.
the advice centre and what has happened to  with erm  er, I've er, if you've read the reports you'll see that er, that had been working er under er er er a considerable amount of er  er stress and strain.
Erm  there's been a reduction er, in the  er, staff er because er er people have moved on  and er, I take Sue's point about er if it weren't for the fact that erm  they'd got fully e e experienced staff who've been there some time, they haven't, not used to this churning over o of, and therefore, that has paid off in er  in er  in erm so far as being able to deal with the problems that have arisen  and er, you'll see further on  er, addition profiles of the work that's been done with er  in this area over the town .
Er, the, so something must be done quickly, I fear, about the er, management er  of er, er the, the new structure  and I hope you would agree to it unless anyone else has got, yes?
Er i i is 
Harry?
council gonna  erm  pose it in the areas closer to it ?
Well, er that's been, that's been outlined in er  er,i in the er, the report!
Yes, but I think .
All, all I wanna ask really is that erm  er, is the staff happy with it?
I mean  that's the main thing,i in   that staff .
As long as you  that situation, I mean that's the main thing.
Well
 
that it means that we've got, there's going to be  er, a certain amount of extra staff though required, that's what's in  in the report.
Well you can start by not depending on the structure er er   the structure of which Susan's speaking
Yes.
Yeah.
seems to me is a very sensible  organise the system  most effectively  er  whether there's any   but that's not affecting the structure.
bit 
And the the  structure.
I've just asked Sue, I'm sure you wrote this with the full support of your staff?
Yes.
Yes.
Well I'll second what Peter said.
What did you say again?
Erm,structure.
 
And very   system 
 
Just a minute!
structure is the 
the 
the er  Sue wants to write it down what you've said  are you moving  that we
Yes, that er, the recommendations that er  , presumably our service  approved which has got structure in it, does that er
Yes.
Bu but Chairer it's not a practised little structure  it's a guaranteed performance and what's it committee.
They do that with this recommendation.
Sorry?
The the  
It's not the practice, the  questions of structure guarantee performance erm  P and Q committee .
Er, yes but er  er, I under stand that this is going to
Yes, you've said that I mean to 
er another panel isn't it?
It's going to be  erm
In actual fact, Jim is right it's slightly complicated.
Service plans  come  with  relevant committees, being this one in this case  but structures and structures strictly speaking, are still the remit of P and Q, so I think it might be a courtesy to let me have a look at the structure  because they are simply right, guardians of the organisation P and Q 
Yes.
As I think Shaun would phrase it.
Yes.
Erm  but I think it would, really be a courtesy.
Certainly the request of staff then could turn into  of the panel  erm  but but  I think at the same time if people want to look at the structure so that they have a complete view of the structural organisation 
Yes?
That would be erm 
that would be a part of it.
in 
Okay?
We agree with that?
Agree.
Agreed!
Nobody against that?
No.
Right!
Thank you 
 
very much.
So that er  finishes er  er, and erm  the page.
Now we go on to er  housing er, issues.
Er, and this is er  Paul is it not?
Yes, thanks Chairer.
Yeah.
The report on   
!
Oh sorry!
Sorry!
Sorry!
There is the second part of the   
Oh!
But I thought we 
erm 
just explained that?
to service the service clan  which, I don't think will be controversial but erm  I did just  seat for the first part of report, the little bit about  .
Yes.
Did you  want to, er well 
Well 
I thought that members had  raised
Yes, I thought, but then there's, but briefly er  Sue, I was going to  wanted to point out in fact er  you just er  if you don't mind Paul I'll just go back 
Mm.
to  Sue wanted to point out that er  erm  how well your staff had er  worked on er  that what they  had done er er  all over the town i in some instances er  enabling people to get to their  rights by  you know, taking them to tribunals which is quite er  time er  er  exercise.
I, I certainly don't erm  propose to go through the service requirements  to approve it but I did say that to start with, I just wanted to clarify that  all the policies have been  
 
by the people  and 
Yes.
that I don't  .
Yes.
Yep!
Moving straight up there  
Mm.
Right.
Thank you very much.
Right er  Paul, we're going over to
Yeah, page ninety five, ninety 
Yes.
six  report on  Field development.
Erm  members will remember at the last  er, personal services committee on the twenty fourth of June  er, the option  to put forward by the Environment Trust and  Widdings er, builders was accepted as the one that er  officers could pursue  and to  actually get some  final proposals worked up  and bring back to both the neighbourhood committee  and this committee.
Erm  at that erm  meeting members did er bring up a number of points  er, the comments and questions which have been put to the Environment Trust  and the answers to them  are  there on page ninety five under progress to date  and, and on  onto page ninety six  er, the main ones really  are the question as to whether  er, any  rented housing could be provided  erm, in the scheme  is dealt with there  the Environment Trust only develop for sale  or for equity share  er, they're not a housing association, they're a charitable body  erm  so they didn't feel that they were able to  er, take on the  role of er, provided rented housing in the scheme.
Erm  the other main point which was raised by planning  if you remember, was that erm, they wanted  officers to evaluate a two block scheme  er, because they wanted  er, good access to the land  to the rear of  Franklyns for  er, perhaps some future development.
When this was put to the Environment Trust  erm  they were  er, unaware before that stage that there were  erm  may be proposals of developing that land  and expressed an interest in being involved  if that ever came to fruition.
Erm  now we have, as an authority   to negotiate  er, to put that land together  erm  the Scout's hut is on some of that land  at the moment, and we've failed  er, to do that in the past.
Where, the environment trust, since our initial meeting have spoken  er, both with Essex County Council  and community groups in the area  and have made substantial progress  erm  on the idea of  er, using some of the land to the rear  of  er, the existing  Franklyns block  er, so they  do want to come back with some  wider proposals for a larger scheme  which will  be much the same as regards the  Franklyns block  but will include nine  er, additional homes  erm, and they will be two three bed houses  and seven  er, two bedroom houses.
Erm  it's  it's quite an interesting  erm  er, addition to the er original proposal but clearly members will need to take a view as to whether  er  they want  erm  the Environment Trust to do that  but erm, er what I would suggest is that we bring back  er, some final proposals from Environment Trust at the next meeting  er, for members to have a look at.
The  er, other recommendation really is just a member's note  the outcome of discussion so far, it has been to the  erm, we did take the paper to the Hare Street, Little Parndon  er, committee  er, in this cycle and there were no comments that came  er, from that committee.
Right.
I don't remember  maybe I've  got a poor memory but er  I can't remember you mentioning that the erm  area committee but er there was erm  going to be another block  there and that er, the er  this er trust, er Environment Trust had  let one of the Northbrooks er  and consulted with the Northbrook's  people?
Okay, at that point in time they hadn't actually  er taken 
Ah!
that consultation, they were waiting to meet with the county  er 
Oh!
to  .
Yeah.
Er well erm  I'll be very interested to know whether  er, what sort of consultation with the Northbrook's  er, people that they've had and erm  when er, I recall asking about erm  er, some of these er dwellings being  for rent and erm  I thought that , you said er  i it was a possibility.
But then you come and tell us well they're a charitable trust I would of thought that a charitable trust would of been very er, happy to have seen the  some rented accommodation?
So er  but er, that's just  maybe a bit 
Yeah.
bit of a .
Yes yeah, I, I'm also very disappointed that er  er, in the negotiations that they didn't er  er, come up with any sort of housing  erm  I think the, it's mucking any future negotiations with other partners or developers,speculators whoever they may be, I think it's important that we have, er we strike a balance between bu houses for sale and rented accommodation  because, I mean they need to  now  the building  er, this house for sale  and each time we we we  we knock down flats or building  and ga gave the land free of charge to the speculators  we have to de-count people, those people are moving th the existing te er people on the waiting list and they're getting moved further and further  back and er  I think i i i it's a very worrying situation where we are continually giving land free of charge and they're getting no rented accommodation.
I mean  well if I remember in Harlow  er,we we i i in in nineteen seventy eight  we had twenty thousand er, social er, council housing  and about nine thousand owner occupiers  the situation, that ratio's been reversed where we, where i by the end of the century we practically have about three thousand social social housing and about twenty two thousand er  er, owner occupiers!
Erm  but er  I hope you're not going to way that er  Westminster Council has gone, for each er er er, er er th their property  into disrepair  they bought it up, do it up and flog it on the open market  when a few yards away there are people no a er now sleeping under bridges and canals!
Now I think that's disgusting!
And er, we'll be a part, I know as councillors, Labour councillors we are caught in a trap  because due the financial constraint that the government has placed upon us there is very little we could do but, oh I'll get I I er crumbs of comfort from the speculators who may decide to to give us a few social housing.
I'm concerned for the people who are waiting for housing, I'm concerned about young people who are living in i i in ten er, on the tenth floor of high rise flats, these people have been waiting a very very long time  and each time er, the er these  they are, the properties are  er, de-counted  they are going further and further behind.
So I think any future in and negotiations with the er,there has to be provision for social housing.
Well I think that when yo , we're going to get a hundred percent nomination there .
Yeah perhaps I could  erm, reply to one or two of those points.
Yes, as you pointed out we  have been offered one hundred percent nomination rights  to er, these equity share units  the er, partners which members have shows as  erm  er the Environment Trust are a charitable trust, they're not  they're developers, they're not speculative developers.
Erm  the point that they were at pains to make as well was that erm  that because of the low cost nature of these homes  erm  the charge for a mortgage would actually be less than  er, is  is common in a charge for most association properties with similar  sites  erm  in terms of rent.
Erm  members may also remember that er  for the schemes that came forward on  Franklyns were a result of a  er, an advertisement being placed  three of the schemes put forward  erm, were for sale of equity share, one was put forward which came  er, to the last meeting in this committee  which was a rented scheme  erm, but was for people  for members took a view the  erm  the Environment Trust scheme er  would prove a better option  er, in Harlow.
Chairperson.
Yes erm  Hugh, I want to ask you as erm  the Chairer of the  area er committee erm  if you're happy with
Yes I mean, I think  that we had a big discussion at the last area committee on the scheme and the problem was of course that the  detailed plans  er, for the consultation erm to the, I'm at, I'm a bit worried that  at this late stage there's this new idea of  of building on the green wedge at the back  and I wouldn't like to think that the scheme should be delayed  the important thing, it seems to me, is that it should  press ahead and   
 
and , and Northbrooks ever since it was built right next door to me when I was living there  er, many years ago and er  get the, the new development done, and so that I don't think we should hold on.
Erm  I'm rather sceptical about the notion of building on that green wedge at the back!
It's does smack to me a bit of  in-filling  and er, Northbrooks is quite a dense area already, a ve , a very dense area  erm, and erm I'm I'm, you know, I'd like to see any detailed plans on that before we even  look at one in principle.
I don't think we should hold up this one because of it, er  so I would like to see the  more detailed plans coming to the next meeting of the area committee  er, so that residents can  comment on this.
Yeah, but isn't that going to be incorporated in as one  package?
Well I wasn't sure whether Paul was saying it's gonna be held up because of that?
No, erm
We 
no, I've I've had a meeting wi with colleagues around the table with the Environment Trust in the last couple of days  and er 
Yeah.
just that issue was raised that we would not want to see demolition of  Franklyns that block held up by this.
Mm.
We would not want to see the scheme a held up  or at least, the timetable that we could set down.
Right.
Erm  the assurance from the Environment Trust is that  i it need not happen  erm, it may not hold things up
Mm.
erm  providing they could get some planning applications   at the next  er, committee cycle.
Mhm.
erm, yes this is part of the planning process in any case the  er  the suggestion proposal all being  .
Yeah.
Okay, thanks Paul.
Yes, you wanted to say?
It was the thing about  er, my understanding is that people in the area  and it's probably the most densified area  in the whole of the town  are very very cagey about this!
I think in general term they will go along with the  erm  the de-furbishment or the destruction of the   er but  my understanding is they are reserving their judgement until they've seen some version of the plan.
Mm.
but er  any attempt to put anything on at the back  to the extent, right up to the Scout's hut in Beech Hall  will, I think, generate  a lot of feelings about 
Mm 
it in in, in the area.
Something like, I think we've seen before, so er
Mm.
Yes.
Right, so 
Yeah can I just
Sorry?
Oh Annabelle!
wa wa wa wa wa wa wa wa , thank you.
Paul was saying that I mean, they're a hundred percent nomination housing  the people who need the housing most are aren't the ones who  who'll be able to er, to use the    and there's no housing strategy on on er  o o on the equity part,the the there might be, only a tiny bit, on on on the rent side  but it doesn't  homes fo for the people who  really need it, even if they've got a hundred percent nomination flats!
Okay, could I actually say something here?
Erm, listening  both to what Anna and Terry are saying here, I think er myself and and the colleagues in housing are very well aware that what this council doesn't have is a pre-developed strategy of social housing.
Erm  we've we've actually developed social housing really rather  as it's been an opportunity we've grabbed it and we've done it, you know, some of it's been very very good an and nobody's knocking that but I think it is time that we took stock and actually had a  a proper policy and a proper strategy on sa on social housing.
Can I just say to you that that's already been developed and worked out  we're intending in the next cycle to bring you proposals for a housing strategy, er on social housing, and within that we're intending to run a series of short seminars for members to give members, all members, not just members of this committee but members of all area committees  until everybody has that information  background information on things like, social housing, partnerships, housing association grant so that everybody's in a position to actually er, see and make a decision on what this council wants out of social housing, but all of that will take place in the next cycle Chair.
Mm.
So that I think the sort of questions that are being raised here will be addressed and will be able to be put within that complex, that overall strategy which I think now is  sort of pretend, it doesn't exist at the moment.
And I think it is important so that decisions like this can be made within a  er, a framework that we've all, you know, been part of, and na are happy with  agreed to.
Though I think that that will be happening in the next cycle.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah, that's very helpful.
So could we get back to the recommendations.
Agreed, the recommendations?
Agreed.
Thank you.
Next er, item is er  on er  the consultation paper on the gypsy site policy  and illegal camping.
  
Thank you Chairer.
Erm   
It's on page ninety nine.
Yes, page ninety nine of this er, thank you Chairer.
The er  consultation and  on the eighteen of August erm  was circulated to many members on the fifth of the September, a thirteen page document  erm, it was true to say that the er  consultation paper  contained some fairly radical proposals for  changes in dealing with er  gypsies and travellers.
Give them !
Erm  amongst other things erm  ceasing the responsibility of local authorities to provide sites  erm  have the new powers to move er  illegal or unauthorised erm   on, from  the land including  er, season caravans in certain instances  erm  the curtailment by the government of er, grants for local authorities to provide and construct sites having  spent fifty six million pounds  erm  doing just that since nineteen seventy eight according to the report.
Er, various changes in  planning proposals  erm, and indeed  erm  encouraging travellers who are perhaps no long travellers, those who are resident on the sites to move progressively into government housing.
Er, a particular concern at the time of writing the report was the position concerning the long outstanding proposals to develop  to redevelop the two sites in Harlow  erm  to date we have no information from the county, er, there was scheduled to be  erm, the  meeting  due to take place on the twenty second of September  but the county er  cancelled that meeting so it's impossible at this stage to  give any further comment on that  erm  although I believe that matter's being taken up.
Er  comments are required in to the  by the thirteenth of November  er, and the Associations of District Councils have asked us to comment indeed by next week  er, so member's views on the consultation paper are .
Chairer?
Well, er  I've got quite a few comments but I'll ask 
 
first, Bill?
The  
Yes, but   On the last comment that er  Chris made er  bringing us and the  letter to county about the  the failure of the meeting on the twenty second  cos we feel that they are just lying down  to the situation and not pursuing a  pursuing the D A P about  whatsoever  and erm  we are, certainly in John's letter  probably get it signed tonight  complaining and asking for a  a meeting as soon as possible because  we feel that that they ought to be pursuing  the question of these two sites, they're dragging their feet!
On the question of the government's proposals  I'm entirely opposed to the er  the idea that they should wash their hands of their  er, obligations er, the nineteen sixty eight act  as as  a number of members know  er, gave it as they are  the duty of a local authority to acquire some sites for gypsies  some local authorities er, obeyed that and er  they actually provide the sites, like Harlow, other authorities just ignored it!
Completely ignored it!
So if they, if they removed the local authorities judging  we'll be in a terrible position!
An absolutely diabolical situation because  then the the  the local authorities that have continued to avoid doing what they ought to have done will  be rubbing their hands with glee  while the others who have a  a social conscience, a moral social conscience will be put under tremendous pressure!
So, we must oppose that  and er  also they're asking for new powers  er  to move illegal travellers from land  this is just another device  because of their failure to provide sufficient sites throughout the country  and if the  of Essex County Council do their job  er  they they don't need these new powers, what authority  ought to be ha , er having  are powers to provide some  er, camping places for people.
And er  the question of the grants as well, I'm opposed to  the fact that they  they're going to  if we don't hurry up  er, these two sites in Harlow will not, never be completed!
If they stop the altogether we have to act very quickly.
So I'm against all their proposals, I think they're  an absolute disaster!
Chairer?
Thank you Bill.
Er
Could I just ask a question?
Yes.
Could you tell er  could  I mean, have you got any information about the grant here?
Er, because  er  our submission for a grant  regarding these two sites were submitted prior to all this coming forth 
Yes.
so therefore, it must be granted.
Now, will,tha I had hoped that we'd have an information  that we'd have information at this meeting, it's the thirtieth now!
Mm.
Right?
And I had hoped we'd  get the information, have we got any information on that?
Well, it's a hundred percent grant that the D of E gives to er  the er county council, so then it's  really it's transferred to us isn't it?
Except the payment of  er, the erm  th the manager of the sites  or the warden of the sites.
But Chairer I have 
 
spoken to officers at county  in the last few days to 
Mm.
try and get some information on this  they felt that they were confident that at the end of the day  that erm, approval would be given  but erm  I I I asked for it in writing and they said we wouldn't be getting that.
Oh!
Well


We would be getting it?
Ah we wouldn't, you wouldn't.
We wouldn't be getting it.
 
Well  I ca , I'll ask a question then so that will have to be  answered.
But, in reply to er  Terry when  yes, of course, we should get it if it was prior to their new act 
 
er but er 
 
the there's no morality with this government I'm afraid Terry, as you and I well know!
Lorna?
Right, thanks Chairer.
I've already put in our comments in writing on this to  to Chris and I'll just  sort of draw some of them save me repeating them.
Erm  certainly, as a group we  we welcome the fact that there is a provision for  travellers in Harlow on the two permanent sites and we also welcome the upgrading er, of the  to  to happen, although I very much hope it doesn't .
Erm  I'll go through the  consultation paper and pick out sort of paragraph by paragraph  and any that we particular agree or disagree with.
Er, certainly in, in the first paragraph we would say that we have drawn attention over the years  to the nuisance of illegal parking  erm, by travellers particularly in Stewards  erm  while travellers have the right to live their own lifestyle we also believe that other residents have the right to live  free from that kind of nuisance and problem and that it does need to be addressed somehow.
However, this definitely isn't the way to do it!
Erm  we will continue to say that Harlow should have applied for designation years ago  erm  it's very 
Sorry can you repeat that?
Harlow should of applied for a designation a long time ago  if Harlow had been designated  then  surrounding councils would have had to live up their responsibilities to provide adequate sites for travellers which they have not done  and successive governments have also failed to apply the caravan sites act nineteen sixty eight adequately.
If they'd done so, if they'd insisted that local authorities did provide the sites they are supposed to provide  I believe there would now be sufficient pitches for all travellers  and that they wouldn't be used for illegal parking  erm  at the level that there is at the moment.
Er, on paragraph nine the government's own figures show that there is a  shortfall of glee  while the others who have a  a social conscience, a and that they've mixed, the site provision isn't keeping pace with the growth of the number of caravans  and yet, what it's proposing to do in this paper will  make the situation worse by removing any incentive  erm  and any requirement on local authorities actually to provide the sites that are needed to make up that shortfall  and it's quite clear that what this is about is actually what it  is happening in housing in general and that is shifting provision from the pri , from the public to the private sector.
Erm  there's also a very strange statement in paragraph which says that the nineteen sixty eight act is intended to provide a network of sites to enable gypsies to move around or settle, but in practice many gypsies are settled on permanent sites  and it seems to me that that is the logical result of having insufficient pitches in that if th you know there aren't enough pitches for you, you are not going to get up and go from a permanent that you've been living on and move off in case you can't one somewhere else and that seems to be the inevitable  logic of the government's own failure to make sure that there is adequate provisions in local sites.
Erm  the caravan sites act nineteen sixty eight  er, paragraph fifteen did actually, I think address the provision government sites quite well, or it would have if it had actually been properly implemented in that there was  a carrot and stick, there was stick or requirement 
 
for a  site and the carrot is actually being able to apply to designation  whether you lived up to that.
Now  it seems  that successive governments have  just haven't lived up to their obligation to wield the stick, and Harlow council just haven't had the sense to reach for the carrot in that  that local people are caught in the middle!
Erm  on paragraph twenty  erm  the government's proposals will penalise all the camping which takes place outside recognised sites while at the same time  I've already said, removing any incentive or obligation for local authorities to provide enough sites anyway so  i it's, it's a a total squeeze that on the one hand the government is restricting the number of pitches and then penalising everybody who hasn't got one!
Erm  paragraph twenty one, we'd certainly oppose any move to give local authorities the right to cease homes of travellers  erm  especially in view of the shortage of the good pitches I  that is just totally  and I don't think that that's on, I hope we can oppose that.
Erm  I don't think the  on paragraph twenty three and consequently the suggestion that that kind of permission really are realistic at all, erm  I think this government is totally obsessed with owner occupation at the expense of all kinds of housing, whether it's permanent, rented or  or anything else!
Erm  and this seems to be the whole kind of class of  which the government is coming to this  this document.
I