

How long has he lived in Harlow?
Thirty two years.
We came here  on the ninth of June  nineteen fifty.
What did you  why did you move to Harlow?
Well my husband  had a job here  we moved from Highbury in in London  because his firm moved  from Highbury in London to  here  and erm  got so we had to move with my husband because of his job, you see?
And er  but my husband was down here  er  a good year before we moved down here  because  there wasn't accommodation available  for us to move with i him you see?
So erm  he travelled  backwards and forwards for  a year prior to us  coming to live here permanently.
What did you think of it when you first moved here?
Well   it really was so different from  a built up place  but er  um, when, but the day that we came in  it was  mm, pouring with rain  everywhere was muddy  and er  of course,i i there were only erm  one part of this town  this area, rather  that  had been occupied because all the other parts were all fields.
There was just the erm   Broomfield  Staffield  Tanys Dell erm   Glebelands and that was the  all the area that was built up when we came here.
Our children  had to go to Chingford to school.
My daughter was of er  grammar school  erm  tuition  but we couldn't put her into anywhere here because there were  no schools available  Loughton wouldn't take her  neither would  er, Bishop's Stortford because they were the only two grammar schools available here and erm  my dau , other daughter  with many other children er, well all the, children of the residency in  Tanys Dell and the  Glebelands had to travel  to Chingford every day to school.
Then the infant school  the first class of the infants  we had in a hut  on Netteswell Road  and then we went, they came from that hut there to the servant's quarters of Mark Hall.
The o , the Mark Hall  only Mark Hall wasn't there because it had been previously burnt down.
So  that was our first  se good school, as you may say then  and then within about four years  they built  Tanys Dell and erm  we just  you know, we formed a  quite a a  a very good community here because we were all people from different areas  we all had the same problems trying to  re-adjust in a new place  and I think then, we had  more  relationship with, with our neighbours than people are having today.
Because
Yeah.
yo you know if we had problems we'd each  talk to them and we had of course, we had, we formed a resident association and we took our problems to the resident's association  and  and we wo , you know, if we had problems which could be ironed out  the man , general manager of the development corporation, Mr   would come and listen to our complaints  and  we seemed, you know, we we got along very  very well really for  such a small place with nothing  because the only shopping facilities were in the old town  or we had to go to Epping  or Bishop's Stortford  you see?
Mm.
How did the people in the old town feel?
They resented us in the beginning  but I think as the years have gone by  and they have seen the facilities that  a new town has brought to their advantage  I think they're more acceptable now, but they did resent us in the beginning.
Well I think everybody would, that had had their privacy  erupted like  they had been because they'd been a small community  for  well through the years you see  and for strangers to come in, I think it applies  in every place that you go to, new places, you know  that are built up  after it just being a little country village people do resent you  but I think now that they, they are  really  erm  accepting us for the fact that we have brought things that they would never have had  had the new town not been er  sta , you know started here.
So have you always lived in this house?
Yes.
I came down when my husband was working on the factory site then  as I say, prior to us coming to live here  this was  hadn't been even built  so we've seen it grow from  the floor  to what it is today, you know?
I it really was  an adventure  it was really was an adventure.
What business was your husband in then?
He was an engineer  and erm  he he was  he made co , he worked on conveyers and things  and then he changed his occupation  became a civil servant  and he worked at the Admiralty  down on  Templefields  until it  closed  about ten years, cos my husband has been retired about five years now.
Er 
How do you feel about Harlow now?
I think it's a wonderful place!
And I think  the council  are trying their utmost to  make facilities for all ages.
I mean, when we came here, as I say, we had nothing, our children, if they wanted erm  any entertainment  we had to make our own entertainment, which we did.
My son started a youth club  in one of the common rooms and  we as residents we got together  we really enjoyed ourselves in  our way, you know?
But er  I think,people that have got so much now  feel they haven't got enough.
Mm.
They want more!
But  they've got to realise that  Rome wasn't  built in a day !
And I mean, through the years which this town is about  thirty four years old?
That's including  Chippingfield if you had seen it as we saw it when we came here  you would recognise how much work has gone  into  building the town  because I was on the  the council then  I was asked if I would stand for  the council  which was then  only a parish council  there was no  urban district council  that wasn't formed for  four or five years afterwards  and  of course, we had to fight for  lights  everything that, er that we needed we had to fight for  because there was  no  lighting on Netteswell Road  where our children were going to school, and there were little ones.
We had to fight for  parks  swimming pools  everything that we wanted, we had to fight for!
But people now are coming in  and they're expecting everything to  be here.
They don't realise that  it has taken many years to bring the town up to the standard it is now.
And, very hard working people have had to do the fighting for what we have got!
Did you have erm, any special job on the council?
Well  erm  I had different kinds of positions.
I was er  Chairman of Public Health  and  various chim , I was Chairman of the Road Safety, which I was very interested in  I was very road safety conscious  and  we each were given a job  which we tried to do the best we could with  and then  we  well, whatever we were asked to do we began to make  a good town, you know?
This is what we, we were aiming for  we were trying to make a town for the people.
And for, our children  when they grow up  cos I had three children  nearly every one that had come into the town had little ones  so you see we were trying to build a town  for our children to benefit  which I don't know whether you think  that  it's a town worth living in  but I think that we have done  very well  and it's a town that is caring  for  such as the elderly  they really do care!
Cos, lots of towns and  even  good towns that yo you would of thought that are better off than Harlow would have been  would have been  don't do half as much  for the  pensioners as Harlow does.
I think they are very caring!
If o , people would only appreciate the fact that  you can't have everything, you just can't have everything!
I mean, schools  the only thing I was, I'd been governor of a  a school for thirty years  that was  used to depress me with the fact that we couldn't get  for our schools  the things that we needed  because to me and to all the people in Harlow who have children  are concerned  that we are  being stopped so much money on education which is the most vital thing  in our children's lives!
Without education what kind of a country are we going to have?
It's so important!
So important!
So do you use the Leah Manning?
Dame Leah Manning was my very best friend!
She  came to me one day and asked me if I would stand for the council, which I did.
I have her book here.
She  ro did an autobiography of a   education  and she was the most wonderful person  that you would ever wish to meet!
She fought for  the working class  she fought for education  she fought for everything to benefit the community  she was a wonderful person!
She really was!
Do you think that erm  any of the town's been  badly designed for the old people?
Well I don't se I don't think that it has been badly designed for the old people, I think the object of building the town as it has been built  is to  integrate the  erm  the old people  with the young, perhaps the young people  resent that  but I think we have got to have a  mixed community  in as much as we have got to  be aware that old people need  attention  in as much as they need  companionship  and if they are  not integrated with the community they are going to be  I really se , just left out on their own  which in lots of cases there are very, very many lonely people, old people  but if they are  put within the community  I think the community will look after them, in as much as giving them companionship  whether the people, some people resent it or not, I don't know, but I do think  that they should  not be segregated.
When you were a councillor was there anything so , erm that you did definite to  help the old people?
Well, there weren't so many old people then  when we came here    we were classed as one of the oldest people because er  they were all very young people  and  you were talking about Dame Leah Manning  and she came to me one day and she said we're going to have a problem on the town because it's a very young town.
She said, what do you think of us starting a family planning clinic?
Because we had people coming into the town  that had come out of rooms  one and two rooms  in Har , in wherever they came from to Harlow  and  there were so many things that they required for their home  that they couldn't afford to have  big families  and  pay their way.
So, we opened  a family planning clinic at Nuffield House  with all volunteer workers, nobody was paid!
The doctors gave their services, the nurses gave their services, all the lay workers give their services  and from one clinic  we went to seven clinics in a week!
And I was in charge of the clinics.
Mm.
Erm, how did you get involved with the Barnardos then?
Well  one day, I had a knock at the door  and  it was a Mr  from  Stepney Causeway that is the headquarters of  Barnardos.
Erm, I mean  headquarters as from adminis , the administrative erm  part of it  I don't know whether you saw the  Barnardos This is Your Life lady
Yeah, I know.
last night?
Mm.
Well, Barkingside was a big home  they also have one out at Ware  they also had one at Upshire  but the Upshire one were for disabled children.
So this gentleman came and he was i , said  would I be prepared to  run a fete  in aid of Doctor Barnardos Home?
Well at that particular time I was already on the council, I was doing family planning  which took up an awful lot  of my time.
So he said  it wouldn't involve much, but to run a fete does involve a lot of work.
Mm.
So we talked and  I said well we would think about it and we would let him know  so we collected all the friends that we thought would  like to help  which were many  people were very good to help!
And  the following  visit he made here he brought with him Miss Virginia   she was one of the personnel at  Stepney Causeway she was the Miss Virginia , the niece of the  line  and she came  and she said that she would help  in erm  doing some organisation and and  giving us some insight as to what we had to do, because we had never run  a fete in all our lives!
So  we got everyone together here  the bank manager, was Mr  then, Barclays Bank  we got two or three of the industrialists  all of the members that were prepared to help  and  we started from there.
We wrote to  oh I don't know how many stars  for articles that they wish to give  so that we could raise money by them.
The  catholic school  which was the only  school available then to us  fo with the field that was  we which we needed.
The Sister Constance, who was the then the principal sister there  she let us have the field  so we got  entertainment laid on  we invited a celebrity, I think our first celebrity was erm  I think it was Lord and Lady    and  then each time we had a different one, we had entertainment the whole time we started, about half past two and then we had entertainment until six  then we had an interval  then we had entertainment till twelve o'clock  I even took my piano down onto the field so that we could have music.
We raised quite  a good sum for the first time  and that went to the Barnardos home.
Then the following one  we had  erm  Lord and Lady   they came as guests of ours.
Then we did another one  and Tommy Cooper came!
And  we've, each time we had someone  of importance to bring in the people.
Now, Tommy Cooper he never charged us one penny!
All we had to do  was to pay the expense of the helicopter that brought him in  because at that time he was appearing at the Prince of Wales and it was a matter of him  fitting his time in with his performances, you see?
Which we did.
We brought him here  ou , he changed his clothes from his  own suit into the pied piper  and erm  then we got him back to the Prince of Wales Theatre.
Well the money that we raised from there  and also from another one was about three thousand  nearly four thousand  three thousand something  and we presented  er  Tommy Cooper with the cheque on the Prince, the stage of the Prince of Wales Theatre, but that cheque was to buy  a special ambulance  for the children of Upshire, which is the home of the disabled  and this special coach had erm  places where you could  wheel the children into the coach  in their chairs with the clamps and those children that could be taken out of their chairs and put on seats  put and had their belts put around them  and that was the only way that these children were able to get out!
Then on our next project we  raised money for  the swimming pool that they required.
Then, for the following one  we bought the first meals on wheels van  so that with all the money that we've collected for Harlow day we bought something out of the money.
And we really had a wonderful time doing it!
We took the children, when we had the bus  we took the children to Southend  that was the first time they had all been out together  and the owner of the Kersal  and the person responsible  on the council for  the erm  maintaining of of Southend, such as the Chairman, they put  the Kersal at our disposal!
And before the children left  they were given a carrier bag with  all sorts of things that you could think of  and to see the delight on those little children's faces!
It was worth all the hard work  that we had put into it  because  it got that we used to use the town park towards the latter part of Barnardos day  and all the men that we had gathered together  used to have to erect  every piece of fence  to enclose  like it is now, the park, is enclosed now with with fencing  the men that were helping us did that all voluntarily!
And mis the  the constructors here  they loaned us different equipment and we worked from Monday to Friday getting the  things ready  we worked all day Saturday doing the show, and we worked all day Sunday clearing the field!
It was very hard work but it was worth it.
When did Barnardos day become the town show?
I can't remember  erm  they took  I just can't remember when they took over from us.
But erm  I don't think that the town show   perhaps I was   I'm prejudiced to the fact that, that we'll be losing money rather than making it  but  it wasn't  anything like we put on for entertainment!
Nothing at all!
They put it on a bigger scale  but the entertainment  far below ours!
I may be bragging  but   it er  we had a wonderful day!
We had the American band, we had the horse guards  from London  we brought them all up on the train, the horses and the guards and  we had wonderful times!
What other entertainment was there in Harlow at the time?
Well  not very much unless you made it yourself, you know, if you were, the factories used to have their own erm  dances  and  the  Embers, it used to be the Embers then, that's the place in the Stow, they had danci , yes, they had dancing there  and they put on competitions for different things  and my son, with lots of others er, did erm  a rock and roll thing  which needed thirty six hours.
And  we  made our own entertainment  that is the thing about it, you know?
There wasn't much laid on for you because er  I think with new people you've gotta get them  into the spirit of doing something  otherwise you sit here, all sitting down doing nothing!
This is  how we felt.
And we had so many good people  in the beginning, as I say, that really  wanted to help  for to make  entertainment, you know?
Erm  do you take part in any of the entertainments now?
Not now  no.
I resigned from the family planning about  seven years ago when my husband retired, as I say  because he used to help me very much  and  when he retired  and my children had all  married  I felt it was time that I should retire too.
I'd done twenty years  in the family planning  and I'd done twelve years  on the  council  and I'd done thirty years  as school governor.
So  now I'm sitting back doing nothing!




Oh is, looking back, do you think that Harlow's been a successful project?
I think so.
Oh.
I think so.
But, you see the thing about it is  we have got a  take towns  for what we make of them  you see  we could just all sit back, people say they're bored!
There's nothing to do!
But if you look around  there is so much to do!
And there's so much voluntary work to be done  if people have got spare time  to go and help  but, I don't know whether it's the  sign of the times that people only want to  do jobs  for monetary gain.
That maybe  the idea, but  there are so many things to be done  by voluntary workers  if people would only  say well I've got half an hour  an hour  it could be  so much  of an advantage to  whoever they're giving their services to  because we're having to cut costs on this and costs on that  an hour or two given voluntary  would  cover those jobs that we  can't get the money to pay for.
Has your view of Harlow changed over the years?
My view of Harlow?
Yeah.
It hasn't changed, no  because  we er haven't gone back  we are going forward all the time.
I mean, we've had the facilities as we have now in the town centre  I mean, it has improved this town immensely!
We're not only catering for Harlow people  we are catering for people  outside  which is bringing  money into Harlow  helping the finance of Harlow  and  I think we are just progressing  with the times.
We're not going back.
If we had more money to spend I'm sure there would be far more things that the councils would like to  do  but without money you can't do it!
And things are  very expensive to do.
When we say  and we've often said it, well we could do with this, we could do with that  like we used to say , we wanted the swimming pool  well  that cost an awful lot of money!
To do the town park  that cost an awful lot of money!
People think oh, you can do this, you can do that!
We could do a lot of things  but without the finance you just can't do it!
Don't think I've got any 
Aha.
more, can't think of any more questions.
Is there anything you'd like to tell us?
Well  the only thing is that I hope that  the next generation that is coming along now  will appreciate  what has been done  for  their generation  because  it took a long time for us to  get what we wanted for our children  and now with our grandchildren are coming along  I hope the town will improve  with their growth.
As the town has grown  with our children.
And, if people would appreciate it  and keep it  as it should be  cos to me, I think  there's a lot of error in people neglecting their places.
Which is detrimental to the town  and we are trying to keep this town  as  we think it ought to be kept.
Do your children still live in Harlow?
Yes  not all of them.
I have erm  one daughter living here  and a son living here  but my eldest daughter is in the United States  and  my granddaughter is just finishing her last year of law.
So  what just i , well my  eldest daughter away  and she's been away this  month  twenty six years.
That's a long time innit?
It is a long time.
Yeah.
Seems like a life time !
Have you ever been over to see her?
Yes  we were  there last year because my granddaughter got married.
We go quite frequent, my daughter's you know
Mm.
wants us to go over as often as we can  and we try and  and often as we can.
The only thing about it it's not    very inexpensive to go there


it's not just like  going  going on a bus and   but erm  my daughter's very generous and  seeing that we  we get to her  and we spend about three months  with her.
Cos you can't go and say well I'm only going for a couple of weeks!
Yeah.
Stay for the weekend !
Yeah !
We would like  we would like to go every week you know
Yeah.
but erm  she phones us and  you know  oh I had a  car , erm letter from her yesterday with er photographs and things like that.
Mm.
And she was saying how well my granddaughter was getting along in the University.
She has  just this last year to go  and er  we hope for her sake everything goes well for her because she's  brilliant, and as you see I have to fly the flag for her because she's
Yeah.
she's so Americanized you see?
But erm  we have to fly the flag!


But as I say  what do you feel as  as students  do you feel that you have  the facilities here that  could be improved on  or  or 
Well 
are you satisfied with what  you have?
I think that wha what we've got 
Well 
is very good!
Yeah.
I just can't believe that  that just things that are ha , going to be happening  
Yeah exactly!
Out of the sixth  from the sixth form that you're 
Yeah, that's right.
going to  Yes, we've tri 
The school have 
we  been trying to fight that but
Yeah.
the ones above us are  stronger than we are, as I say, finance comes into it again you see?
Mm.
And the thing about it is  such as erm  well not only  Tanys Dell that  biggest part of school is here  the population has decreased  so much in the last ten years  that we having now to close schools
Mm.
where we were trying  desperately to have schools  because  we had no schools when we first came here as I say.
But  now they are closing them  we've got so many good teachers out of work  where  ten years ago we were fighting to get good teachers  and smaller classes  but now  you see, we've got smaller classes
Yeah.
but  we haven't got the  children  to  engage the teachers, you see?
Mm.
What do you think about the comprehensive schooling?
Well
I think it's good.
yeah, I think it's good!
We've never known anything different you see.
You haven't?
No.
You haven't known anything different?
Well as I say, my daughter was a grammar school tea , er pupil  but erm  my so , grandsons  I have one now at  he'll be twenty two this year, went to Burnt Mill  I have another grandson in Burnt Mill
Yeah.
I have a granddaughter now  going up to Burnt Mill  and I think  myself, they couldn't have done  any better  in the grammar school.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well
Yeah.
I mean, my sister's school they have  right from the start  and er  they don't  I don't think you get a wide enough circle of friends really.
Yeah.
Instead just
Like, stick to your own type.
And your social assets  just develop so much better at a comprehensive.
Too much segregation
Yeah.
Yeah.
at school?
Yes, well this is, this is what the intention of the comprehensive school was in the beginning  was to  ha , let every child  have the same opportunity  which I'm sure they're getting  in the comprehensive school.
People do say that  erm  there are far too many pupils  but if you've got the stuff  and the accommodation, which our school provide  they're not overcrowded.
If the if they're provided with the right kind of teacher  then I think the pupil  will be  given that opportunity if it's, the potential is there  to  bring it out, but you some of the children don't want to learn  well that's not the fault of the school!
No.
That's the  the child themselves  you see?
I mean if you don't, think, oh well I'd  I don't want to be   well it's not the teachers fault cos you don't get on!
But the thing about it is the school gets the bad name!
Yeah.
You see?
It isn't the child, they say oh oh oh!
They're not doing this or that  but  in lots of cases, and I've known of lots of cases where children just don't want to know!
Mm.
You see?
So you go  are you  going now from your sixth form  into the college this time?
No we'll have finished.
No we'll have finished then.
You're finishing 
But 
now?
Yeah, well next 
No.
year after we've done our A levels.
Af , you're ow , you're doing the le the levels now?
Yeah.
Yeah.
That'll be it.
And that'll be end of the school  
And what what are you erm  qualifying in?
Well
What levels are you taking  for what?
I'm doing English, History and Chemistry.
And I'm doing  Maths, Physics and History.
Very good!
Oh well.
Well, I wish you  every success!
Thank you .
Thank you .
And I wish you every success in your project too.
Mm.
And I hope that I've been of some assistance.
You have
Yeah.
yeah!
So
I, I can't think the there's anything else you you'd  like to ask me?
No, I don't think so.
Can't remember.
That erm
Turn the tape off.