

Doctor  's obviously a more frugal character than me because he had this room and the radiator was turned off.
I have turned it on and it is doing its little best  but our guests from the south are obviously  
 
I'll, I'll  
 
sequins, it sounds like  Come Dancing .
 



Oh I don't know I'm sure  say anything rude.
No  honest.
Do they?


some voices aren't allowed to er appear.
Are you still in here?
It it's okay carry on it's alright I'm, I  
Right.
Okay I'm sorry I haven't had level three supervision groups before so this is a whole new experience for me 
Well we're very high powered you know  
 
Chris has given me my instructions so 
Oh no 
I'm supposed to first say is th are you finding the course okay and to ask you about your projects.
So course okay so far?
supervisor.
So Mike have you got your project sorted out?
Well it's more or less in hand, yeah.
What what you're doing?
Yeah 
With Stewart?
yeah.
So is it just a continuation of what you've done anyway?
Well more or less but he weren't amused at any of the results so 
Oh I see right.
I've  got to start again .
That's rotten.
So are y are you just do 
No it's quite fair actually.
are you just doing are you just doing one er sorry j er are you just doing one project  a t a two term project?
Yeah.
Right so you're s you're sorted out.
Charles what are you doing?
Er I'm doing something on wild salmon.
Oh right.
Who, who are you er with?
Er with Gordon.
?
Yeah.
Oh right, so what are you, tell us about it, what are you going to do?
Erm well  Alex and I are both doing it but Alex has got his own rivers  so he's doing it on his own sort of thing 
 
Alex 
and er I'm  I'm, think I'm doing mine more sort of related to er the eggs.
Right.
So where 
Well sort of looking in that, that s er on the Tyne.
Oh right.
So I mean is this eggs that are put in by the, I mean I 
Er yeah I think it will have something to do with that, yeah.
I've sort of er I've
So are you just doing a lit is it, is it a two term project as well?
Yeah.
And you're just starting a  research?
Yeah.
Right.
I've started that, I've gotta, just gotta  I went and played on the computers yesterday.
You went what?
And played on the computers yesterday  
Oh right, oh right.
Have you all, by the way have you all tried this C D rom thing
Mm
in the library?
It's quite fun.
It's quite fun, have you tried that?
Yeah that's what I tried yesterday.
Has anyone got anything useful out of it yet?
No it's  
 
Yeah I know but they're not exactly over run with them are they?
 
in the library or down here we have to do  
Have you got to be more specific with your requests?
I haven't tried it.
Well probably but it do it s I mean it, you either put in  I, I mean I  most, most 
You're doing  
most of the things that I've done have been on Atlantic salmon and you put in Atlantic salmon and you get seven thousand eight hundred 
Yeah.
and forty abstracts out  
Right 
forget that.
And you narrow it down and you get zero.
Oh right, right.
Right, so you've got to play about with the system a bit more?
I think so I think so.
Right.
ASFA I think it's more helpful I think than C D rom isn't it?
What's the difference between ASFA and C D rom?
It's spelt different.
No but ASFA is just on the  scientific end