

JANUARY
Harrier!
East Anglia
‘The weather's improving — to dreadful,’ declared Dave.
For the past hour we had been standing at the top of a Norfolk heath in swirling snow.
Now, at last, the snow was easing a little .
It wafted, floating gently, settling softly.
The wind had dropped and visibility was no longer close to ‘nil’.
In winter we go, whenever we get the chance, to the east coast.
We trudge the shingle banks, or slip and slither our way along muddy sea walls, or negotiate sand dunes, or sea-watch for ‘fly-bys’ from tall cliffs.
Buffeted by winds — or shrouded by mist — or hailed or rained upon, we binocular scan the sea, the salt marshes, the mud flats, the freshwater pools, the fore shore.
A flock of snow buntings, a skein of brent geese, a flotilla of eiders, a great skua or a lone gannet makes it worth the waiting.
It has become a ritual to return via Roydon Common, for there is always the chance on this bossy stretch of heath land of wintering hen harriers.
It is best to arrive an hour or two before the light grows dim.
We are never the first.
Others will have already staked a claim with tripods and telescopes.
There we all stand in companionable silence, stamping our feet, swinging our arms, pulling woolly caps down over ears, getting colder and colder as the skies darken.
More folk tramp along the sandy track with their paraphernalia.
Fingers and toes grow numb.
‘In two minutes I'm going back to the car,’ I keep muttering.
Then — suddenly — there it is.
A ghostly pale grey shape rises from the woodland edge, fingered wings held typically in the shallow V: a male hen harrier.
Low over the heath he flies, elegant, graceful.
With a leisurely flapping of wings, or a soft gliding, the splendid bird rises above the skyline and disappears behind the trees.
I let out my breath.
There he is again now, sailing low.
White in the gathering greyness of dusk    he quarters the shrub by ground.
He turns, and now we see the contrast of black tips to the wings.
In the grass below he sights movement.
With a sudden drop-pounce, he plummets.
Then, back up into the sky explodes the ‘jump-jet’ harrier and over the heath he sails.
Woolly hat and binoculars
‘A favourite common’.
The dark shape of a ‘ring-tail’ rises from cover.
It joins the male and together they hunt.
A third bird appears.
We catch a shock of white above the banded tail.
These white-rumped dark birds can be immatures — or adult females; difficult to tell apart and hence, colloquially, known as ‘ring-tails’.
Now a blue-grey merlin, the smallest of the falcons, hurtles across the heath.
It settles, to sit statue-still on a post.
Half-an-hour later it takes off with swift darting flight and rapid wing beats.
A bonus.
The hen harrier is the commonest of our three harriers.
But still sufficiently rare to be given special protection under the law.
The breeding status of the marsh harrier and the Montagu's harrier in Britain remains precarious.
The hen harrier is also the least migratory of the three species, more able to tolerate the cold.
Our wintering birds may have travelled south from British breeding grounds, or arrived, cross-Channel, from the Continent.
But wherever they have come from, I have no doubt that, as winter approaches once more, we shall again be standing, frozen to the marrow, on that blasted heath — waiting for the weather to improve to ‘dreadful’.
Quality Birding
North Norfolk Coast
We stood on the high shingle bank, striving to keep our balance.
A force eight wind was blowing straight into our faces, making it difficult to hold binoculars steady.
Waves crashed deafeningly on to pebbles beneath.
The temperature was below zero.
Snow was forecast.
I was very glad of my thermal vest, three layers of woollies, and waterproof and windproof outer garments.
We were sea watching, hoping for red-breasted merganser, Slavonian grebe, black-throated diver, auks, sea ducks…
‘Prepare for a squall,’ warned our leader.
‘See those kittiwakes?’
Far out, a sprinkling of small white birds swooped up and down in hurried flight before an ominous sky-darkening.
Two minutes later hailstones painfully whipped our cheeks and we retreated hastily into the comparative shelter of the land ward (salt marsh) side of the shingle bank.
‘You can always tell kittiwakes by their great swoops.
They sense a squall and flee before it.’
It is said that the north Norfolk coast is the best place in England to see birds of passage — and to meet well-known bird watchers.
Bryan Bland is a ‘well-known bird watcher’; we (the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds Leicester Group) had borrowed him for the two days of a winter weekend.
‘Is it quantity — or quality — you are after?’ was his first question that morning.
‘Quality,’ decided the majority.
Rarities are fun.
So grapevine contacts were consulted, location of latest new arrivals checked on, hunches followed, and an efficient itinerary worked out to make the very best of the limited time available.
‘Glaucous gull at Salt house.’
We drove the short distance along the A149.
There, on the edge of mud flats, was a mixed flock of gulls.
But which one was the glaucous?
‘Large size, square flat head, huge wicked-looking bill, pearly grey mantle, pure white bunched primaries, no black: that's the glaucous.
Iceland gulls also have white wing tips, but they are smaller, with gently domed heads and less massive bills.
Here, I'll show you.’
Bryan took up his drawing board and, with a few quick strokes of his black felt-tipped pen, he drew outlines of the bills, head shapes and size differences of the two gulls to make all quite clear.
We were soon to discover that he specialises, not only in deft, on-the-spot sketches, but also in brief pungent descriptions with much use of cunning metaphor.
Identification of birds is never easy; novice bird watchers need all the help they can get.
‘Why won't the bird stand sideways, nicely in profile, looking to the left — just as it does in my field guide?’ we ask.
‘How can we tell whether the wretched creature's legs are red or not, if it won't come out from behind that clump of grass?’
Birds are so inconsiderate.
They perch too far away in bad light.
Males and females are often differently be feathered.
Plumages change according to season.
And rarely do individuals deign to oblige by giving us that nice, clear view of white rump, dark eyestripe, or green speculum we are so anxious for.
Bryan's aim was to wean us off complete reliance on precise diagnostic features, and to get us to concentrate on the ‘Personality’ of each species; on the way it holds itself, feeds, moves, calls; its general behaviour and first glance appearance —‘jizz’for short.
(‘Good word that for a Scrabble board.
Worth a lot of points,’ muttered someone.)
Field guides are handicapped by the pocket-size requirement.
Now was our chance to learn some of those useful tips which have to be omitted from their pages and which a really experienced bird watcher acquires for him/herself over years of serious looking and listening
‘Lapland bunting’ was top of our shopping list.
Off we drove to Wells-next-the-sea.
But how were we to tell apart these winter visitors from Greenland and the ridiculously similar (according to the handbook's artist) reed bunting?
‘Lapland buntings look like squashed reed buntings,’ said Bryan.
And they did; all flattened and crouched, creeping low in the grass; quite unlike the sprightly reed with its flashy habit of fanning out the long tail to show off white outer tail feathers.
At Holkham we looked hopefully up into the pine trees planted long ago to help stabilise the sand dunes, and we ‘pished’.
‘Pshwishwishwishwish,’ we whistled (with backs of hands pressed to lips) hoping to entice possible fire crest, siskin, brambling.
A great spotted woodpecker flew curiously over, ties of several kinds moved in close and a very tame robin appeared, to accept crumbs from an outstretched hand.
In the car park we eyed the puddles in the tarmac where parrot cross bills sometimes drink after a meal of sticky pine seeds.
The big-headed silhouette with its strangely twisted mandibles surprises motorists on a day out to the seaside.
But the lone pied wag tail today would raise no eyebrows.
We drove back towards Titchwell Marsh, stopping to look out over the miles of salt marsh on the way.
There, in the far distance, were wintering geese.
Several species.
But how to tell?
‘The brent [German brand = burned]goose looks as if it has stuck its head and neck up a chimney and emerged sooty black — although with a little of its ‘clerical collar’ still clean.
See the white mark on its neck?
The smoke analogy holds well for flying brents too.
Look for a factory chimney cloud — or a wisp of smoke curling across the sky; that will be brent geese.
They are small enough not to have to fly in V-formation to get ‘lift’ like the larger geese.
‘Now sort out the pink-footed goose from the bean goose by shape.
Both   have a very dark head and neck.
But the pink-footed looks as if someone has pushed a tennis ball up into the top of a short sock: round head, short neck, with a small beak stuck on.
Whereas bean geese have long stocking necks with longer heads, longer bills.
Siskin
‘White-fronted geese?
They're the ones that could have been made up from a kit, I always think, each part clearly demarcated (bill, box-like head, neck)— a rather angular goose.
Grey lags, by contrast, have thick necks and large heads merging into a huge triangular bill in one more or less continuous line.‘
We squelched through the oozy wet mud of the long sea wall at Titchwell Marsh.
We looked down to see goldfinches and snow buntings feasting on fallen seeds in the heaped litter of salt marsh plants: sea lavender and sea purslane.
The goldfinches pecked neatly and precisely: The snow buntings burrowed energetically, discarding dead stalks and leaves with a quick flick of the head; then dug deeper to get at the hidden seeds, their busy movements leaving visible impressions.
The bright red and yellow colours of the goldfinches contrasted with the subtle brown, grey, chestnut and white plumage of the snow buntings.
A short-eared owl beat low over the salt marsh on long rounded wings.
It braked, twisted, pounced — and resumed its to-and-fro search, the owl species most likely to be seen, in Britain, hunting by day.
We reached the beach.
Mussels had colonised the remains of an ancient forest and we asked about waders, so busily taking advantage and feasting there.
With a few well-chosen words and a quick sketch or two, Bryan sorted them out for us.
Redshank or spotted redshank? we asked.
Bar-tailed god wit or black-tailed god wit?
Golden plover or grey plover?
Dunlin or little stint?
Waders in winter plumage are not easy.
White fronted geese
Back at Cley, a long-tailed duck rested on Arnold's Marsh.
But where was the ‘long tail’?
It was a female, explained Bryan, and only the male proudly carries the two extra long black tail feathers.
More ducks.
‘Eiders are the ones with Roman noses falling off the tops of their heads.
Tufted duck and scaup are similar in plumage but the latter's heavier, more angled head and larger bill give it a less cuddly look; a tufted duck would make the more suitable ‘soft toy’ for a toddler.
Golden eye have heads which look like blobs of dough scooped up from the bench and plonked on.’
(And they did).
The useful epithets continued: black-headed gulls are ‘spiky’; common gulls have a ‘benign’ look; the wingtips of herring gulls are ‘polka-dotted’.
We walked along the shingle bank — and it was then the blizzard hit us.
But it had been a good day.
We retreated, as dusk fell, to the warmth of ‘The George and Dragon’.
We talked on — but not for long.
There was the possibility of kingfisher and water rail for early risers on the morrow.
A trip to Hun Stanton Cliffs was planned for fulmars, and to Holkham for Egyptian geese.
Collectively we saw just over one hundred species (102) in the two days.
So, in the event, both quality and quantity were achieved.
Red-Breasted Rarity
Slimbridge New Grounds, Gloucestershire
On our arrival at the Wildfowl Trust Refuge, we headed straight for the STOP-SPOT board in the foyer.
‘January 22nd,’ we read.
‘9.00am.
Red breasted goose in front of Loke Hide.’
It was now 10.30am….
We hurried past the Big Pen.
And one of the first birds we saw?
‘Surely that's a…?’
‘…red-breasted.
But one of Sir Peter Scott's tame ones.’
Only thirty-odd wild red-breasted geese have ever been recorded in Britain.
1 hey breed in Siberia and, in September, fly south.
But this one, like the others, had strayed too far to the west, away from its regular migratory route.
At first light on Tuesday, 17 January, a wide-awake Warden scanned the flock of white-fronted geese grazing on the banks of the Severn estuary — and found the exciting stranger in his telescope.
And it was still here.
We walked the length of South Finger with its series of wooden hides.
Conceived and built as one unit they give good views of the Top and Bottom New Pieces, the Tin Shed Grounds and the Four Score Field.
We were screened from the wild birds as we hurried along behind high earth banks planted with willow.
On the far side lay a large scrape, created by the removal of earth for the banks and much appreciated by incoming wintering ducks and waders.
We reached Loke Hide.
‘Birds have ears ’, read the stern notice at the entrance.
We tiptoed past, not daring to whisper even.
Talking in a loud voice whilst approaching a hide is the guaranteed way to become an expert in identifying the back ends of birds flying off in a panic.
Inside the hide it was crowded: in fact there was a queue.
A considerate Warden was letting each person in turn peep through his telescope.
Miles of salt marsh stretched before us, reaching to the shores of the River Severn.
But closer to, in a large field enclosed by hedges, 2,750 white-fronted geese grazed.
Somewhere in amongst them was a lone red-breasted, perhaps the world's most beautiful goose?
‘See the gate,’ directed the Warden in a low voice, ‘count the posts to the right, one, two, three.
There: third post, eleven o'clock.
See it?
Bother, it's put its head down, I've lost it.
No, wait a minute…’
It was my turn for the telescope.
‘Come forward from the second post,’ I was directed, ‘to the left of that group of six…it's lifted its head.
Now!’
And I saw it.
A bold white flank stripe was the give-away.
The chestnut red neck, and the distinctive black and white patterning of the back and head and belly were clearly visible as neighbouring geese spread themselves to either side.
‘Approach the hide quietly.‘
The world population of red-breasted geese has decreased this century.
Hunting and habitat loss are the most likely reasons.
Changing agricultural policies have transformed former wintering grounds, bordering the Caspian Sea, into cotton fields — which are shunned by the geese.
A resulting westward shift in winter quarters could mean that British sightings will occur with greater frequency in the future.
Curiously, the decline of the peregrine falcon may also have affected red breasted goose numbers.
The geese seek protection from their enemy, the arctic fox.
They build their nests close to an eyrie; because they have learned that peregrines are highly efficient at driving away foxes?
Janet Kear writes — in Wildfowl World , No 84 —‘We assume that the peregrine is ‘programmed’ not to hunt near its nest (if it did it might feed on its own young) and that this immunity extends to the goose and its goslings.’
Because the red-breasted goose is clearly a bird in urgent need of special conservation measures, Slim bridge Wildfowl Trust has long hoped to breed from its collection.
Success was very limited until, in the summer of 1983, a colleague discovered the secret.
Triumphantly he promised four breeding pairs from his own small collection to the Trust.
But first the staff at Slim bridge set about creating a faithful replica of his garden: water spaces, land areas, nesting boxes, feeding devices — all were as near as possible the same.
The geese moved in, felt at home, laid eggs — and a most satisfactory twenty-four goslings hatched that year.
But today, from Loke Hide, we were looking at a single wild red-breasted goose.
It had arrived in the company of a flock of Russian white-fronted geese.
A white-fronted goose can be identified by the small white blaze on its face at the base of the bill.
Plumage is grey-brown in colour, neck feathers are furrowed and there is distinctive dark barring on the belly.
White-fronted geese also breed in low-lying, shrub by tundra.
Each winter flocks return to Slim bridge, the largest congregation of the species in Britain.
The presence of a very occasional lesser white-fronted goose from Scandinavia on the reclaimed land of the Severn is well-known to have been a crucial factor in Sir Peter Scott's choice of site for the new wildfowl refuge and research station he had dreamed of creating during the War.
The ‘lesser’ is smaller, with a pinker, shorter bill and a yellow ring around the eye.
A ‘birder's bird’, it is one of the most difficult species on the British List to identify at a distance.
Slimbridge today attracts both ‘twitchers’ and ‘birders’.
It draws people who come for a fun day out and it provides for the serious ornithologist.
Beginner bird watchers brush up on their identification of British ducks, geese and swans in the European pen with borrowed binoculars; the more advanced tackle the two hundred foreign species; research students arrive from Universities to write theses.
Grandparents introduce grandchildren to the simple pleasures of ‘feeding the ducks’; photographers and artists appreciate views of birds in close up; the visually handicapped can follow a braille trail; the disabled have their own boardwalk and comfortable hide; the Tropical House offers an impression, in miniature, of a tropical rain forest where brilliant humming birds hover at hibiscus flowers.
Red breasted goose
But, right from the start, Sir Peter's wish has always been to attract truly wild birds close enough for people — lots of people — to enjoy.
And today, in one of the large hides, we were getting splendid views of geese .
The white-fronted geese, when they arrive for the winter, spend nearly all the hours of daylight grazing on the banks of the River Severn.
I could see them now, slowly advancing and snipping off, scissor-like, the vegetation.
The STOP-SPOT red-breasted rarity had been swamped again and was now hidden from view.
The next person to look through the telescope would be less fortunate than myself.
‘See the post where the little owl has perched?’ said the helpful Warden, ‘call it twelve o'clock, try coming down to a quarter past, near those three lap wings…there's a chance…’
Lesser white-fronted goose
FEBRUARY
Turning to Ducks
The Ouse Washes, Cambridgeshire
‘You'll have good views today,’ the Warden of Welney Wildfowl Trust Refuge told us.
‘The light is just right.’
The Ouse Washes are about twenty miles long and half-a-mile wide.
In summer they are grazed by cattle.
In winter they act as a safety valve when the two straight bordering rivers, dug in the seventeenth century by a Dutchman, Cornelius Vermuyden, become swollen with rain and overflow.
Torrents of water pour into the Ouse River System, sluice gates open and excess water floods the meadows.
High tyke banks keep the surrounding agricultural land free from flooding.
In fly wetland birds from the far north — to winter on the Washes.
The Warden pointed out the most likely spot for short-eared owls on the hunt for stranded voles, told us that there were plenty of field fare about, and said it was a good year for ruff.
We walked the long, covered-in wooden bridge which led us over the Hundred Foot River to the members' observatory.
Through the large plate glass windows (a pleasant feature of all Wildfowl Trust Centres) we looked out on to a deep lagoon, dug especially to attract wild birds.
Graceful white swans — the resident mute swan, and the wintering Bewick's and whoopers with their black and yellow bills — sailed to and fro, or upended to feed, or preened ruffled feathers on islands.
The whooper and the Be wick's had survived a 2,300-mile flight from Siberia, families arriving together.
Pairs greeted noisily, neck-stretching, head-bowing, wing flapping.
And there were the ducks.
‘From troubles of the world, I turn to ducks…’ wrote F.W. Harvey, the poet.
Handsome drake mallards swam with their dowdy mates in tow.
‘By December each year,’ said our expert, ‘most male mallards are already in breeding plumage.
Pairing and courtship follows.’
The mallard is the first of the ducks to swop dowdy eclipse plumage for   breeding plumage: bottle-green head, curly tail, white neck ring, rusty breast and blue speculum.
Of all the European ducks, the mallard's breeding season lasts the longest — which accounts for its undoubted success as a species.
We were near enough to compare the drake's greenish-yellow bill, with his mate's orange (it is the female mallard which alarm-quacks the loudest).
Ouse Washes
Tri-coloured pochards with chestnut heads, glossy black chests and pale grey bodies paddled beside grey-brown mottled females — and then upped and dived smoothly, disappearing under water to bob up again many yards distant.
And black and white tufted ducks tacked to-and-fro, the wind blowing their crests into stiff little top-knots.
We left the observatory and followed on behind the willow-planted screening banks into which small fibre-glass hides were set.
‘Don't let your heads bob up,’ had warned the Warden, ‘or the ducks will take fright’.
And we didn't.
From the hides, shimmering water meadows, fingered spits islands, orange-tinged osiers and countless bobbing birds lay exposed to view.
There were waders, too.
Snipe — striped plumage camouflaged the colour of dead winter reeds — probed the mud with bills bizarrely long.
A flock of dunlin flew across the marsh in a silver swirl, catching the sun, dazzling the eye.
Handsome green plovers patter Ed at the edge with round floppy ‘lap’ wings and jaunty wisps of head crests.
Seven ruff, without as yet their elaborate courtship adornments, fed at the northern tip of a tyke.
The Ouse Washes is the largest inland area of regularly flooded marshland in Great Britain.
So important is it to wintering wildfowl, that it is included on the International List of Wetlands of the RAMSAR Convention and must be especially safeguarded against threats of reclamation for farmland and industry, and against over-shooting by wildfowlers.
Fortunately, more than half the area is now owned by conservation bodies.
The hours passed swiftly.
I recall the amazing blue of a field fare's sunlit back (drab grey on a grey day); the tantalising glimpses of a secretive water rail which crept and scuttled in the shelter of a ditch (red bill, black and white striped flanks, richly streaked brown back, bluish-grey neck); and the rusty red flanks of a redwing which shot up in front of me as I walked past willow scrub behind the barrier bank.
A pair of black-tailed god wits flew low over the reed beds.
Two cormorants landed on posts and stood black and gaunt.
A little grebe paddled with surprising speed through the water.
Black-headed gulls with red legs and red bills loafed on small islands.
And more ducks.
The Warden was right about the light.
The pale winter sunshine enhanced duck colours perfectly.
The aqua marines, sienna browns, yellow ochres, greens, purples and turquoises of plumage were sensational against the ‘silver meadow’ background of glittering water.
Hundreds of wintering wigeon grazed at the water's edge, tinted-pink breasts, yellow Mohican-hair-piece crowns glowing gold.
The whistling of the males carried far across the water-logged land, a wild and haunting sound: ‘Peee-yoo, peee-yoo.’
And there, the smallest duck, a teal.
It bobbed, bright yellow triangle on its tail, metallic green eye patch and white ‘Plimsoll line’ above the wing.
Near by, boldly patterned shovelers filter-fed, swooshing their odd-looking spatular bills through the shallows.
Wigeon
A lone pair of gad wall preened on shrinking tussocks.
The drake, speckled and freckled, showed a rectangular blaze of white wing band.
Slim, elegant pintails rose suddenly from the water and flew, a small flight of nine, the curving white line on slender necks and the long tail feathers clearly visible.
We watched until the light began to dim — and then we returned to the observatory.
The Warden at dusk each day distributes grain, a supplementary food supply.
In flew the ducks, crash-landing, splash!— up-ending, tail wagging, bill-dipping, wing-flapping, dabbling, diving, quacking, gobbling, waddling along the edge.
(‘Ducks are comical things…’)
Next time it rains hard back in the Midlands, I shall remember that February fill-dyke day.
I shall imagine the water pouring in torrents into the Ouse River System, sluice gates opening and excess water flooding over the meadows to create the shimmering acres once again.
And I shall picture all those thousands of appreciative ducks — and swans and waders — in their safe winter quarters; and forget for a while ‘the troubles of the world.’
Avocets on the Exe
River Exe, Devon
The mouth of the River Exe is the largest and most important estuary for birds in the south-west peninsula of Devon and Cornwall.
It is of international significance for its numbers of wintering wigeon, ringed plover and black-tailed god wit.
In winter too, that elegant bird, the avocet, is to be found on the mud flats of the Exe; each year since 1947 it has returned in increasing numbers.
The best way to see the avocets, enticed back to breed in Britain forty years ago by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, is by boat.
And how better than to join the RSPB's own ‘Avocet Cruise’?
Each winter, from December through to the beginning of March, cruises are organised on the Exe for close views of waders and wildfowl.
And this year, I found myself in Exmouth, with members of my local RSPB group, boarding the Devon Princess 11 at 1pm on the last Saturday in February.
Our guide was Stan Davies, the Regional Officer for the South-west.
‘I'd like to welcome Leicester, Huddersfield and Welwyn Garden City.’
Stan's voice came over the loudspeaker as we left the quay and headed sea wards.
He told us that the end of February is the peak period for avocet numbers, ‘record count so far this year is 170 birds.’
Then he went on to warn us that, during the cold snap earlier in the year, ice floes had swept in from the sea dragging buoys from their moorings.
‘The  Captain is having to rely on his memory to negotiate the channel.
’ Help!
Low tide is the best time to see birds from a boat — and low tide, especially the very low tide of early spring, is the best time to get stuck on a sandbank!
But there were no ice floes around today.
It was as warm as summer, the temperature an amazing 15.5° C. So warm that we had earlier seen a comma butterfly on the wing.
We'd been warned to bring thick clothing but now found ourselves stuffing woolly hats into pockets and loosening scarves.
‘Shag on the rocks ahead; red-breasted merganser diving for fish near pink buoy; sanderling running along the edge of Dawlish Warren.’
We chugged past the famous Dawlish Warren, a sandy spit, rich in wildlife, which juts out across the mouth of the Exe.
At the edge of dunes is a two-storey hide, open to the public, which gives wonderful views of the estuary and its birds — for those not lucky enough to be aboard a boat.
‘Maer Rocks, to your left.
Dark-bellied brent geese feeding on seaweed.’
Maer Rocks is where children love to paddle in the pools in summer.
In winter it is given over to turnstones, purple sandpiper, oystercatchers and other shellfish-eating birds.
But at this time of the year brent geese are also to be found foraging.
Their favourite eel grass supply is used up and they must turn to other sources of food — including the farmers' cereal crops on fields inland.
But very soon now the brents would be flying back to their breeding grounds in Arctic Russia.
Except for some of the younger birds, Stan told us, which stay on until April.
The dark-bellied brent goose is small, neat and sooty black, with white neck streaks and a white stern.
Almost half the world population of brents winters in estuaries around the British Isles, nearly 100,000 birds.
The boat veered and, leaving the sea behind, headed upriver.
Stan pointed out Cockle Sands, mega-feeding area for many waders.
Through our binoculars we  focused on grey plover, curlew, redshank, dunlin, bar-tailed god wit.
Black -tailed god wit we would see later, at the mouth of the River Clyst.
As we had been warned, our progress was punctuated by the boat grinding to a halt where the water shallowed.
Were we to be trapped there until high tide lifted us off?
No, each hitch was only temporary — and the few minutes of unplanned stillness was welcomed by photographers.
Oystercatchers on a mussel bank; a small party of golden eye; a pair of eider duck; three wing stretching cormorants.
Pintail, shelduck, teal.
Cameras clicked away.
Then off we would go again, chugging upriver.
Stan's commentary continued.
‘Slavonian grebe’ had everyone rushing to starboard.
Slavonians, with their black caps and white cheek patches, are the most maritime of our grebes.
‘Possible great northern diver’: more excitement.
But, as we drew closer, it turned out to be a great crested grebe.
‘Well, you can't win 'em all,’ said Stan.
He told us that during the January ‘freeze-up’ there had been a great influx of shelduck.
Numbers were less now.
Wigeon, too, were dispersing northward.
‘The boat headed upriver.‘
Four miles up, past the fallow deer in the grounds of Powder ham Castle, past Lympstone with its red sandstone cliffs, past the eyesore high-rise blocks where Prince Edward rejected his career with the Marines — until we were below Topsham.
The sun was low in the sky now, shimmering the mud flats in a golden glow — and there were the graceful avocets, sweeping long curved bills from side to side through the fine silt, scooping up their favourite opossum shrimps and rag worms: a marvellous sight.
But then, as RSPB members we were bound to be biased!
We hoped some of these beautifully marked black and white birds were from our own RSPB Minsmere Reserve in Suffolk; others could be from Holland…
The tide was rising.
The boat turned.
The wind blew off the sea and it was growing cooler.
Herons stood incongruously on tops of trees in the large heronry — as if super-glued.
Already they'd built their nests; even would have laid eggs, said Stan.
Two, standing below in the shallows, showed off bills tinged with orange — a sign that they were breeding.
Greenshanks were flying over to their night-time roost in the park.
Hundreds of gulls circled above Dawlish Warren; numbers would build up to thousands by dusk.
Skeins of dark-bellied brent geese flew down-river after a daytime of feeding in fields.
And red-breasted merganser headed purposefully out to sea — as our four-hour boat trip came to an end.
Over 2,000 people enjoy an Avocet Cruise each winter.
Hot pasties and hot drinks are served below deck at the bar, a comfort on chilly days.
In Stan Davies, who has written his own booklet on the wildlife of the River Exe, we had an excellent guide.
And we came away with a true understanding of the value of the estuarine habitat.
The RSPB is ever on the alert, ever vigilant, for estuaries are constantly under threat — which means that the thousands of wintering birds they support are threatened, too.
Starling Spectacular
Abbey Park, Leicester
It was almost dusk on a February afternoon and we stood with Will Peach, ‘Starling Man’, in Abbey Park, a 73-acre green space in the centre of Leicester.
For the last hour between half-a-million and a million starlings — impossible to estimate accurately — had been flying in from every direction.
From daytime feeding grounds up to twenty miles away, they converge on Abbey Park to roost for the night.
The gigantic roost first hit the headlines in 1979: ‘50,000 starlings…foul droppings piled high on paths…whitewashed bushes…branches broken…tremendous noise…disgusting stench…picnic tables ruined…
Abbey Park a wasteland.’
The years passed and each winter the starlings returned, numbers building up to a peak in March.
All manner of scare devices were tried — bright lights, tapes of starling distress calls, a tame fox, water hoses, flares, fire crackers, dogs — but to no avail.
The City Council, faced with the noxious problem, decided to grant-aid a study of starling biology in the hope that a long-term solution might be found.
Leicester Polytechnic's Will Peach, a biology graduate, was chosen to head the Council-sponsored ‘Starling Squad’.
And tonight Will was with us to tell us a little of his work.
We walked along paths slippery and evil-smelling.
Corrosive droppings produce a ‘grey acid’ effect on the soil's ecology, killing plants and shrubs.
‘Forty per cent of holly bushes have been lost,’ said Will, ‘and trees are actually being uprooted by the weight of the birds as they land on the branches.‘
In the first year of the study the Starling Squad, under licence from the Nature Conservancy Council, wing-tagged over 1, 500 birds.
Noise and lights were used to drive the starlings into an 18-foot long net suspended on two 30-foot poles and held aloft.
‘Sometimes,’ Will told me, ‘so many starlings flew into the net at one time, that the men holding the poles were knocked over backwards!‘
Each bird was carefully removed to be aged, sexed, weighed, measured (more northerly populations have longer wings) de-loused and released.
A florescent orange tag was fixed to the left wing of females and to the right wing of males.
Juveniles were given yellow tags.
The tags, stuck on with tape, were expected to stay in position for up to three months.
Sexes can be told apart by bill and eye colour.
The male starling has a steel blue tinge to the base of its bill and the female, a pink tinge.
(Blue for a boy, pink for a girl!)
The eyes of the male are a uniform dark brown; a pale-ringed iris distinguishes the eyes of the female.
That winter Leicestershire folk were astonished to see starlings with — it appeared —orange wings feeding on their bird tables.
Seven hundred reports of sightings were phoned in to the Starling Squad, to be pinpointed on a map of Leicestershire.
The birds were feeding at all compass points around the county, as had been suspected.
The Squad also put numbered rings on 2,500 birds.
Some of the individuals they trapped were found to be wearing rings already.
Recoveries since prove that Abbey Park starlings come from Russia, Finland, Holland, Belgium, Norway and Sweden — and areas of Britain.
So 1984/5 had been a winter of hectic activity for Will and his group.
And to their — admitted — bafflement, the following year the starlings stayed away!
Had all that netting and noise been sufficient deterrent?
Large roosts were reported elsewhere in the county, but Abbey Park remained a pleasant place.
Children played on unpolluted grass; old age pensioners sat on dropping-free seats; shrubs and trees began to recover.
The Council congratulated itself and congratulated the Starling Squad.
But too soon.
The roost was slow to build up in autumn 1986 but, by now, February 1987, numbers were as high as ever.
As we stood beneath white-washed trees, Will spoke admiringly of his study-bird.
‘Highly organised, great exploiters, supremely adaptable and efficient…’
Probably the world's most successful bird.
The starlings' daily routine in the Park begins at dawn.
The birds awake and ‘converse’.
The twittering gradually reaches a crescendo — then, quite suddenly, the exodus begins.
Flocks leave the roost in waves.
Wave after wave of starlings take off at short 2–3 minute intervals, with a great roar of whirring wings.
Blackening the sky, they move out from Abbey Park in well defined flight lines to feeding grounds.
In late afternoon the return flight begins.
The sun was low on the horizon now and the birds were still flying in from ‘pre-roost assembly points’.
More than twenty of these points have been documented around the county.
The starlings gather, the noise increases in volume then — suddenly —whoosh !
Flocks rise, swirl and head for the city.
The silence that follows their going is as extraordinary as the overhead formations themselves.
We watched as flocks swirled over the Park's outer perimeter, performing astounding aerial manoevrings.
What is the secret of their superb synchronisation?
Like spiralling clouds of smoke thousands of birds swept and soared, stunt-riding the sky.
At invisible signals they dropped into trees, then rose again to stream upwards, circle, and resettle.
The noise was immense.
What is the purpose of it all?
A sparrow hawk appeared — and all hell broke loose!
And another.
Birds of prey must be attracted from miles away by the spectacular aerobatics.
It is a mystery why starlings, expending precious energy by doing so, choose to overfly suitable roost sites closer to daytime feeding grounds.
Do they gather in such huge numbers to learn from each other the whereabouts of the best  food sources?
Do they ‘communicate’ in some way?
Now it was dusk.
Towards the central area of trees and bushes starlings streamed, alighting on branches which swayed under the weight.
They settled, great clumps of blackness outlined against the sky.
Starling literature suggests that each bird prefers its own ‘personal space’ at the roost, but photographs taken by the Squad show examples of individuals squatting close, touching, huddled for warmth.
This year Will and his team, under the supervision of Dr Jim Fowler, are fixing radio transmitters to the feathers of a number of individual birds to monitor behaviour by radio-tracking.
They hope to find clues to the structure of the highly complicated social organisation which hints at a hierarchy with ‘leaders’ and ‘subordinates’.
I left Will Peach to yet another night of work in the Park.
‘You sound fond of those starlings,’ I said.
Perhaps there are Leicester citizens who will feel just a little sorry if the bird we all love to hate were ever banished; no longer to amaze us with squabbling antics in the garden, purposeful flight lines at the end of day, noisy pre-roost assemblies — and starling spectaculars at dusk.
‘Starlings flew in to roost.
MARCH
Winter on the Wash
Freiston, Lincolnshire
Winter can be a cruel time for waders on the Wash.
We found tragic proof of this on the most bitter 1 March for many years.
Freezing mud.
Temperatures down to — 10° C. Ice on the sea.
Scrunchy snow underfoot.
Piercing east wind.
We were walking along the sea wall at Fries ton in Lincolnshire, possibly the coldest place in England that day (we learned later).
Fries ton is on the north coast of the Wash.
We had driven through Boston with its ‘stump’, the incongruously tall church tower visible for miles, and then parked in a car park not far from the wall.
We struggled to the top and faced the sea.
Saltmarshes with winding creeks, and a great expanse of mud flats lay exposed: wide, uncluttered, beautiful in their loneliness.
Behind us lay bleak fenland with its fertile silty soil which, since the Roman times, has been reclaimed by degrees for agriculture.
Well-lagged though we were, the wind made our eyes water and the cold eventually penetrated — however many the layers of clothing.
But visibility was good and the birds exciting.
Dunlin twisted and turned in fast-weaving silvery flocks.
Skeins of brent geese flew over.
Parties of knot patter Ed on the icy mud flats.
Ringed plovers scurried in their busy way.
Eider ducks bobbed offshore, dodging the ice floes.
Handsome shelduck swooshed in the shallows.
Lapland buntings and skylarks swirled and settled, searching for the last seeds of salt marsh plants below the bank.
Sea aster, sea purslane, sea lavender and glasswort fruit late in the year and provide winter sustenance for small seed-eating birds.
A pied wag tail flew across and landed, its long tail shivering.
What insects would it be finding on such a bitter day?
Not all memorable sightings were on the seaward side of the wall.
A merlin was hunting inland, a small agile bird of prey, skimming low over the tens on narrow pointed wings.
All telescopes and binoculars swivelled at the first shout of ‘Merlin!’ and trained on the dashing raptor.
Sheep sheltering below the wall huddled together for warmth.
Behind them were miles and miles of inhospitable flat land criss-crossed with reed fringed frozen tykes and patched with snow, blown into drifts by the ceaseless wind.
Our first tragic find was a kittiwake.
The smallest of the British gulls, it lay dead in the snow, pale grey and white plumage, grey cheek patch, greenish  bill, short black legs; quite frozen and in near-perfect condition — as if stored in an open air deep-freeze.
Usually kittiwakes are seen only far out at sea in winter; this one must have been blown inland, to die.
After that we found more dead birds, their beauty still unspoiled.
Grey plover: ash grey with feathers white-tipped, the diagnostic dark patch of feathers beneath its wings.
Redshank: uniform speckled brown-grey with some white on tail and wings, orange-red bill and orange-red legs.
The next find gave us the chance to see at close quarters an auk, a fine winter-plumaged guillemot.
Poor thing, it too was quite frozen.
Auk ‘wrecks’ can occur in a hard winter.
Many birds die and individuals are washed up on to the shore.
Another dead redshank.
Another grey plover.
The walk was becoming depressing.
‘We found a dead guillemot.’
The Wash in winter is of outstanding international importance for many waders and wildfowl.
Peak numbers occur between December and the beginning of March, when continental birds in their thousands are forced to move westwards across the North Sea in a desperate attempt to escape harsh weather conditions.
Four rivers flow into the great bay, the Ouse, Nene, Welland and Witham.
The large expanse of mud flats and sand flats are rich in the invertebrate life upon which so many of the hungry birds depend: rag worms, tellins, layer spire shells, cockles and crabs.
Redshank are particularly vulnerable in cold weather.
If the mud flats freeze over, it is impossible for them to find sufficient food.
Wildfowlers would like to get redshanks back on to the list of birds which can be legally shot.
But so far the Government has resisted, deciding that this species is already under too much pressure.
Curlews, too, are still protected in spite of the shooters’ wishes.
The disturbance and fear men with guns cause spoils the tranquillity of wild lonely places for both birds and bird watchers.
And, as we were seeing heart-breakingly today, nature itself is enough of a challenge to birds.
The colder the temperature, the more fat reserves a bird needs to maintain body warmth.
As its energy is used up in trying to keep warm, so its need for food is greater.
But the frozen ground cuts off many birds, particularly waders, from their normal food supplies.
They fall back on reserves of muscle protein to balance the high rate of heat loss — and still cannot find sufficient food.
Thousands die.
We looked to see if BTO rings were present on the legs of the grey plovers, the redshanks, the guillemot and the kittiwake.
No; no rings.
Licensed ringers trap, ring and release birds in many countries.
Had our redshanks come to winter on the Wash from breeding grounds in the Pennines? or from Iceland?
Could our grey plovers really have flown all the way from Arctic Siberia?
Where had our gull and our auk spent the summer?
By now we were feeling pretty frozen ourselves, in spite of the fact that a pale sun had appeared, shimmering the mud flats and glinting the snow.
It was time to replenish our own fat reserves.
Hot soup?
That was what we needed.
At Freiston Shore there is a hostelry well known to bird watchers where they do a Root pub lunch…
An Abundance of Birds
Rutland Water, Leicestershire
Through one of the glass panes in Plover Hide I could see a twite: a plump little linnet-like bird, brown, streaky-breasted, with a bright yellow stubby bill.
And for once, I could feel I really deserved him
We were on Egleton Reserve, the lagoon area of the Rutland Water Nature Reserve, and we had spent a blustery March morning wielding bill hooks to create 3-foot long sticks from coppiced pussy willow branches.
The Warden had said, as he took a stick and pushed it firmly into its prepared hole, ‘Cut a piece off a tree and you've got another tree for free.‘
I found this astonishing bit of information difficult to swallow — but he was the expert; 40,000 fine upstanding saplings were sprouting on his nature reserve and many of these, he declared, had grown from stout twigs cut by past billhook-swinging volunteers.
Now and again I stopped to stretch my aching back.
It served as excuse for a quick survey of the choppy water below.
Mallard, teal, tufted duck, pochard, great crested grebe.
Possible golden eye?
Possible gad wall?
Possible pintail?
I would have to wait until later for a proper look.
As we worked, we heard field fare ‘chacking’ from a hawthorn hedgerow.
Devouring the last of the berries were redwing, too.
Hedge-hopping yellow hammers proved another diversion and a flock of blue ties flickered and contact-called, ‘psi-psi-psi’, from the willows down by the water's edge.
It was all very distracting.
Until the opening of the Kielder Reservoir, Rutland Water was the largest man-made stretch of water in the whole of Britain.
So large, that when plans to flood their lowland were first announced, the Rut landers protested, ‘But we do not wish our county to be just a towpath around a lake!’
This made all concerned feel very guilty.
It was decided by the authorities that the building of the dam across the valley was a ‘regrettable necessity’— but they determined to make as satisfactory a job of it as they could.
So, as villagers sadly began to dig up bluebell and primrose roots from the soon-to-be-flooded little woods of their pleasant countryside and to plant them elsewhere on safer ground, the Anglian Water Board asked Dame Sylvia Crowe, the landscape architect, to take on the challenge of turning the proposed 3,000-acre inland sea, with its 27-mile perimeter, into an ‘environmental asset’.
Contoured hills hide car parks tucked away in the hollows out of sight — for the cars of yachtsmen, fishermen, ramblers and bird watchers.
Raised knolls give picnickers panoramic views.
And the planting of native trees and   understorey shrubs, such as guelder rose, hazel, dogwood, spindle and blackthorn, has created new woodland, providing lush cover for birds.
Goldeneye
When water levels drop the shoreline remains green, for it is seeded with a special grass which can survive being submerged for weeks at a time.
Flood tolerant species of willow and alder on the reservoir margins carry the tree cover down into the water.
Little winding paths run through woodland and across sheep-grazed award.
And the dam is turf Ed on the land ward side to give it the appearance of a gently sloping field.
From the start, naturalists agreed that the western end of the reservoir, with its nine miles of shoreline along two arms, would make an excellent nature reserve.
Positioned well away from the planned recreational activities, it promised to attract an abundance of wildlife — and so it has turned out.
The Leicestershire and Rutland Trust for Nature Conservation were given overall responsibility for creating the reserve — and did not shirk the task.
A management agreement was signed with the Anglian Water Authority, some financial assistance and early help was given at the start of the project.
But now it was up to volunteers to tackle the necessary labouring jobs.
So here we were, a group of local members of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, and we had been ‘labouring voluntarily’ all morning.
Naturally, with no reserve of our own in the county, we are much interested in what goes on at Rutland Water.
Sufficient money was quickly raised to buy the materials necessary for the construction of Harrier Hide; a sponsored bird watch in competition with the Leicestershire and Rutland Ornithological Society and the Trust resulted in enough money for a new wader scrape; and work parties regularly turn up to take on any job that Tim Appleton, the Warden, asks of them.
‘Last time we came, back in February,’ reminisced a companion, ‘snow lay on the ground.
Tim had us clearing out overgrown scrub.
We built a huge bonfire and soon unfroze.’
Today, the result of our labours was several long rows of planted saplings which, in ten years' time, will have grown into a grove of pussy willows doing useful service as a screen for walkers.
The grove will attract, especially if regularly coppiced (as planned) robins, wrens, ties, dunnocks, black caps, redstarts, warblers…perhaps even nightingales?
At midday we made our way to Plover Hide for our promised reward: an afternoon's bird watching.
Specifically designed to make bird watching easier for the disabled, Plover Hide is close to the car park.
A ramp leads up to a wide sliding door.
Inside is comfortable seating and adequate space has been left for the positioning of wheelchairs.
Paned windows, instead of the more usual draughty gaps, make for warmer viewing.
Plover Hide is one of thirteen hides, all situated at sites regarded as particularly rewarding from a bird watcher's point-of-view.
(‘Tim won't be      satisfied until he's got wall-to-wall hides,’ one weary hide-constructing volunteer was heard to mutter.)
But it was worth all the hard work.
Fifteen thousand bird watchers visit annually and enjoy hides with a variety of views; there is a choice of woodland, herb-rich meadow, rank grassland, sheltered lagoons, reed bed and open water.
Great spotted woodpecker
There was plenty to see from our vantage point.
Although the first drops of water only officially began to trickle into the basin in 1975, Rutland Water is already famous for its wildfowl numbers.
And already it holds the record in Britain for the inland stretch of water with the highest number of bird species in winter.
Thousands of wildfowl wing their way across northern seas to the Wash, follow the windings of the Rivers Welland and Nene — and discover this wonderful expanse of welcoming water.
And there, at one end, is an undisturbed refuge planned especially for them.
The wader passage in spring and autumn is also outstanding; on several occasions nineteen species of wader have been recorded on the same day.
‘Building the three lagoons was an engineer's nightmare,’ Tim told us as we munched our sandwiches.
‘The instinct of engineers is to bulldoze and construct in straight parallels.
I wanted wiggly lines.’
He asked for — and got — zig-zagged inlets, undulating banks, jagged spits, curving creeks, irregularly shaped bays and shallow scrapes.
Scattered islands, with a variety of ‘toppings’, were constructed from surplus soil and waste.
Today flotillas of contented shovelers, tufted duck, gad wall and golden eye bobbed about outside the hide in their secluded sanctuary.
Gad wall numbers are particularly exciting.
Each autumn Rutland Water holds the biggest concentration of gad walls in Britain, over 30 per cent of the total population.
Cormorants wing-stretched on shingle banks.
Waders — redshank, snipe, dunlin — probed in the wet mud.
Gulls gathered at reed humps.
Teal and mallard dabbled behind wave-preventing barriers.
Wigeon grazed on the far shore.
Each year brings more exciting ‘firsts’ for the reserve; first wintering birds, first breeding pairs, first birds of passage.
On the occasions of my own visits I always manage to see something new when I visit Rutland Water: a preening water rail in full view below Lax Hill, four buoyant, saw-billed goosanders showing off their diving skills, short-eared owls roosting at dusk on the fence posts of the Hambleton Peninsula, a pair of displaying great crested grebes presenting mutual gifts of waterweed…
And today, most satisfying of all, for I felt that I and my bill hook had really earned him — the stubby-billed twite.
Kingfisher
Signs of Spring
Charnwood Forest, Leicestershire
We went to the hills to look for signs of spring.
It had been snowing and, although the snow melted quickly in the lowlands, up here on the heights there were still extensive patches.
So it was ideal tracking weather and prints abounded.
Tiny tell-tale marks showed where voles and mice had scampered through grass tunnels roofed with snow to reach the safety of their homes.
Small forepaw prints and long slipper-like hind prints: a rabbit had bunny-hopped in search of food.
And we could smell the strong pungent scent of a trotting fox as we trailed dog-like paw marks.
No sign of squirrels at ground level, not a print, not a glimpse of a bushy tail.
But when we looked up into the trees, we could see their dreys; untidy rounded twiggy ‘nests’ tucked into forks between branch and trunk.
We followed a path through the bare trees.
Each tree had its fine strip of snow where the sun had not yet reached; thin lines running vertically, white against the darkness of green-lichened bark; lightning-conductor-like clues as effective as a compass: north-east was the direction they faced.
Yellow gorse blossomed further on in the open, a cheerful show of colour.
Alders were handsome with last year's dark woody cones and this year's green catkins — still tight-closed with no sign yet of pollen.
And there were more catkins: fluffy golden tails on the hazel trees and furry silver tufts on pussy willow.
The first bright green leaves were unfolding in a hawthorn hedge beneath which a pair of blackbirds flirted and ‘chooked’.
A song thrush sang its repetitive phrases from the top of an oak tree.
Lower down, on the same tree, coal ties flickered in the branches, seemingly as happy upside down as right way up, constantly on the move, making it a challenge to spot that diagnostic blotch of white feathers on the nape.
We found a mossy stump with droppings on it.
Again we played detective.
Droppings are good clues.
Rabbit, we decided.
A sweet chestnut lay close by, its glossiness marred by decisive incisor scratch marks.
What had interrupted the meal?
Fox, again, most probably, said Doreen, our tracks-and-signs expert.
Those of us with sensitive noses caught the rank whiff.
Mallard and chick
Now we were in woodland territory.
In a fenced-off tree nursery had been planted young saplings: row an, hazel, sallow, oak, ash — all local, traditional broad leaves.
The ground was thick with the green of bluebell shoots.
Pushing their way up through the soil with force they pierced the fallen leaves.
We    stepped carefully.
In two months' time the slopes would be a vista of hazy blue.
Hazel catkins
Witches' broom
Bluebells are indicators of ancient woodland.
Since World War 11, over half of Britain's ancient woodland has been destroyed.
Fortunately, this particular bluebell patch is in the safe keeping of the Leicestershire and Rutland Trust for Nature Conservation.
We looked for further clues.
Someone found a hazel nut split neatly in half.
Were the markings on it caused by beak-blow? or tooth-nibble?
The characteristic gnawed groove and the hole in the top where long incisors had been inserted proved that there were squirrels about — said Doreen.
The repeated call notes of a mystery bird puzzled.
We scanned the trees and caught sight of the black cap of a great tie.
We had heard it ‘belling’ earlier; this was another of its reputed forty utterances.
The yellow hammer's song, a few minutes later, was a little-bit-of; bread-and-no-chees-ily recognisable.
Robins and blackbirds also sang spasmodically, welcoming the pale March sunshine.
A sulphur yellow butterfly, the early-year brimstone, flew along the line of the hedge.
Circling a frozen pond, we made our way uphill to rocky outcrops.
Through the bracken ran a well-used path and in the snow were distinctive paw marks.
Badger!
Our most exciting find yet.
We followed the tracks, the folk in front trying hard not to obliterate the prints (bear-like pads, five neat little toe marks, impressions of sharp claws) for those behind.
They led to a sett.
It was huge.
We could see at least twelve entrances to what must be a labyrinth of tunnels.
Some holes had dug out mounds of earth beside them, and heaped up piles of discarded hay and bracken.
In all probability there were young cubs below, born back in February, and their sleeping quarters must be kept warm and dry.
Soiled bedding is removed and fresh material is collected, by both boar and sow.
Held close to the chest, the bundles are dragged backwards down into the chamber for the babes (up to five in a litter) to snuggle up into.
Suckled for eight weeks, cubs would soon now be emerging, to romp and play above ground.
We looked for more badger clues.
Scrapings in the soil showed where earthworms and grubs had been searched out.
Well-marked tracks led in a number of directions, one straight towards a low gap in a stone wall.
The song of a chaff inch rang out loud and clear; a dunnock joined in; wheezy notes of green finch; exuberant shrilling of a diminutive wren; and a tree pipit took off from a boulder and ‘tseep-tseeped’ down in slow descent.
Bird song, remnants of snow, prints of small mammals, new-opening leaves, catkins, the first green shoots of bluebells, and badger cubs: all most welcome signs of spring .
chaffinch
APRIL
Heather and Bog and Rock…
Malham Tarn, Yorkshire
‘Once upon a time there was a little chimney-sweep, and his name was Tom…’
The opening line of The Water Babies is familiar to us all.
We remember how, very early in the morning, Tom came to sweep the chimneys of Hart hover Place, a great house ‘built at ninety different times, and in nineteen different styles’.
Mr Grimes led the way round to the back door and ‘the ash boy let them in, yawning horribly’; soon Tom was ‘in pitchy darkness, as much at home in a chimney as a mole is underground’.
The Harthover Place of the story is believed to be Malham Tarn House in the limestone country of Craven.
Charles Kingsley wrote of ‘the great grouse moors…heather and bog and rock, stretching away and up…’.
Across these moors today stride walkers of the Pennine Way, a route which passes close by Malham Tarn.
‘Harthover Place’ is now a Field Studies Council Centre and one April I  enroled for a ‘spring birds’weekend.
On arrival I surveyed (as everyone must do) the chimneys.
Not the same ones, surely, as those swept by poor Tom?
Behind the house rose High fold Scar; in front, the lawn slopes to the tarn.
We were early risers on the first morning.
In woodland we stood and listened to the vociferous dawn chorus.
It's the early bird watcher that catches the best bird song.
Were these the woods, I wondered, that Kingsley had in mind when he wrote of Tom's escape from Ellie's little white bedroom?
(‘Tom, of course, made for the woods.
He had never been in a wood in his life; but he was sharp enough to know that he might hide in a bush, or swarm up a tree…‘.)
The wood in Kingsley's time contained many foreign and coniferous species, introduced by an earlier, eighteenth-century owner.
Today there are plans to recreate and manage a ‘wilderness woodland’ of native trees and shrubs.
As elderly trees succumb, young saplings are being planted to take  their place: hazel, mountain ash, wych elm, oak, beech and the beautiful ‘bird-cherry with its tassels of snow’.
(Kingsley, again.)
Through the trees shimmered the 150-acre tarn.
We heard the growling call-note of great crested grebes.
In a sheltered bay three pairs patrolled the water; and very handsome they looked with their new spring feathers: black crests and chestnut tippets.
Tufted ducks bobbed, still in the small compact flocks of winter.
Black dome-shaped backs of coots.
A pair of golden eye and a pair of goosander.
We walked back up the track.
Tiny pink female flowers sprinkled the branches of a larch; soon soft green needle-leaves would appear.
A smart cock chaff inch was fiercely chasing a rival out of his patch.
Two blackbirds sang against each other across a territory boundary.
A courting robin offered his ‘intended’ a worm and she accepted with an excited quivering of wings.
And a cock pheasant flapped its wings vigorously, shook its bright red wattles, and squawked, ‘Kor ok , kor ok ’.
We ate a hearty breakfast and then set off for the moor.
(‘…there were rocks and stones lying about everywhere…as he went upwards, it grew more and more broken and hilly…‘.)
We could see on limestone crags the sooty marks left by Tom in his desperate bid to escape.
Black lichen?
All right!
Wheatears signalled their presence with a white flash of tail: spruce little summer migrants.
‘Pee- wit , pee- wit ’: tumbling, twisting lap wings.
One was already sitting on its nest, the white marks on the face and the white underbody visible as the bird crouched in the open on rabbit-nibbled grass.
Behind a grey stone wall lay a little pool.
Redshanks bathed splashily and a very smart dunlin stood on guard.
(‘Clear and cool, clear and cool, by laughing shallow and dreaming pool'.)
Beside small pools on upland moors is where dunlin come to breed.
On the road back to the tarn we passed a cluster of cottages.
Below meandered a little stream; the stream believed to be the source of Charles Kingsley's inspiration.
One day — so the story goes — whilst staying on a walking and fishing holiday with friends, he was asked by the village schoolmistress to mind a group of local children.
He took them for a stroll along the banks of the stream.
I wonder how good he was with children?
An ordained clergyman, he became a chaplain to Queen Victoria in 1859.
By 1863, the date of the publication of The Water Babies , he had been appointed Professor of Modern History at Cambridge.
He was interested in politics and wrote tracts.
Overlong stretches of moralising and politicising mar his fairy tale, written ‘to inspire love and reverence for nature’, and it sells more commonly today in an abridged version.
But perhaps he pointed out to those village children the caddis fly ‘on four fawn-coloured wings, with long legs and horns’; and the dragonfly with ‘eyes so large that they filled all its head, and shone like ten thousand diamonds’.
Maybe they saw ‘little water-trees, starwort and milfoil and crow foot’; and ‘green caterpillars which let themselves down from the boughs by silk ropes for no reason at all’; and ‘great spiders with crowns and crosses marked on their backs’.
‘A cock pheasant squawked.’
The little stream flows into Malham Tarn.
‘Tom lay down on the grass and looked into the clear, clear limestone water, with every pebble at the bottom bright and clean, while the little silver trout dashed about in fright at the sight of his black face; and he dipped his hand in and found it so cool, cool, cool; and he said, ‘I will be a fish; I will swim in the water; I must be clean, I must be clean’.’
We walked alongside the stream and then negotiated the board-walk which led us safely across a treacherous bog to the shores of the tarn.
Golden king cups were in flower.
A red grouse skimmed low over the heather.
We heard, like Tom, ‘the skylark saying his matins high up in the air’.
A flock of eight curlew rose and we were treated to a spectacular display flight of steep flapping rises, slow glides and bubbling trills.
We couldn't leave Malham country without seeing the Cove and we made a detour in the mini-bus.
‘Instead of soft turf and springy heather, he met great patches of flat limestone rock, just like ill-made pavements…’ wrote Kingsley.
Tom negotiated these ‘ill-made pavements’ and stood at the top of Malham Cove.
With church bells ringing in his tired head he looked down  and saw, 300 feet below, the woman in the red petticoat.
Down the curved cliff of the dried-up waterfall he climbed: ‘But, of course, he dirtied everything terribly as he went.
There has been a great black smudge all down the crag ever since…’.
We looked — and there was!
‘But,’ warned Kingsley (and these are his concluding words)‘remember always that this is all a fairy tale, and only fun and, therefore, you are not to believe a word of it, even if it is true.’
Dipper in the Wet
Wharfedale, North Yorkshire
‘The bird watcher should lose no chance of improving his ear,’ wrote E. M. Nicholson in 1931.
Even when the line on the barograph shows no sign of an upturn and forecasts a wet, cold, blustery day?
Clad in waterproofs and wellies, we walked alongside the fast-flowing River Wharfe.
Its steep slopes were wooded and, in spite of the rain, birds were singing.
April: time of amorous chasings, ritual courtship, suitors' squabbles and bird song at its most vibrant.
April is the best month to become familiar with the outpourings of resident birds, before the influx of summer migrants swells and complicates the chorus.
We stood on a bridge, looked down — and saw our first dipper of the day.
On a moss-covered rock dipped a portly little black and brown bird with an eye catching expanse of white on its breast.
(To find a dipper, look for a bobbing white shirt front.)
It slipped into the water, disappeared beneath the surface and, fifteen seconds later, bobbed up again and hopped back on to the rock.
A second little amphibious songster whirred across stream, calling, ‘Zurp, zurp, zurp.’
It landed on an alder tree root; in its slightly upturned chisel-beak was held a long-legged crane fly.
It dipped and dipped and flew under the bridge to feed its brood.
Dippers begin to sing and to stake out their linear territories as early as November; to display and pair in January; and to lay the first of two — or three — clutches of eggs before the end of March.
In spite of the rain trickling down our necks, our spirits lifted.
We had started the day in style.
The dipper is a typical bird of upland rivers and one species we had very much hoped to see.
We were to see three more pairs that day.
We crossed over the bridge and followed the wet and muddy path along the bank.
Trees, still leafless, offered little cover as yet; another advantage of bird watching in April.
The lack of foliage made it easier to focus, with binoculars, on individual songsters: chaff inch, blackbird, song thrush, mistle thrush, wren, dunnock, blue tie, great tie, coal tie, nuthatch and tree creeper.
‘This is my bit of Wharfed ale,’ each male sang, ‘and I intend to entice a wife and raise a family — so all you other blokes,keep out .’
‘A dipper with a white shirtfront.’
The mix of calls was confusing, but Edward Jackson talked us through.
A blackbird sang from a hazel tree with swinging yellow catkins; buds were just beginning to open into miniature bright green leaves.
‘The blackbird's song is varied, longer phrased, melodic, flute-like, often ending with a flourish.’
He pointed out a mistle thrush on the topmost branch of a very high tree.
‘Short, clipped phrases; a brief pause between each rounded, mellow sequence; limited in variety in comparison with the blackbird; far-carrying quality.‘
And a song thrush on a beech with long slender brown buds still tight closed: ‘Repetitive: repeated simple phrases, repeated single notes, bold and obtrusive.‘
I fished out the ‘soft cloth for binocular wiping’ from my pocket yet again.
The lenses of my binocs were rain-smeared and blurry, but the cloth — actually a clean handkerchief — was already wringing wet.
So I delved beneath my anorak and pulled out a corner of shirt.
Dry, thank goodness.
A hasty wipe and a sort of visibility was restored.
Just in time.
A flirting tail on the far shore promised excitement: grey back, pale yellow on breast, deeper yellow under tail, black line of folded wings.
It was a grey wag tail.
We could see by its black bib that it was a male; the female's throat is unmarked.
‘Zissick, zissick,’ it called and darted across the shingle after winged insects at the water's edge.
Another uplands river bird.
Wharfedale is a traditional site for nut hatches.
We soon saw — and heard them.
If nut hatches are present, they let you know.
We distinguished three calls: the territorial trill, ‘Dididididi’; a clear, ringing contact call, ‘Pui, pui, pui’: and another, faster, ‘Pi-pi-pi-pi-pi’.
‘The chestnut on the flanks is usually darker in the male,’ said knowledgeable Edward.
Spring flowers dotted the banks: pink blooms of butterbur, dainty white wood anemones, yellow colts foot.
Above us, tiny rounded ties sang high pitched, squeaky phrases, two-note chants, as they acrobat Ed up and over twigs, peering at the underneath of fat green sycamore buds for grubs.
We walked on, reaching the Strid, a narrow channel of deep foaming water which spectacularly churns and leaps its way between gritstone ledges worn into weird shapes.
Close by, a willow warbler flicked jauntily from one overhanging twig to the next.
Not a resident bird this time, but our first — and only — summer migrant of the day.
‘First of the year for me,’ said Edward.
The date was the 13th.
We stood listening for its soft, rippling warble, and were soon rewarded.
By now most of us had tucked our binoculars away inside anoraks out of the wet.
We had become bird listeners .
We listened for contact calls, threat calls, alarm calls, begging calls, display calls, soliciting calls.
The trees were thinning now.
Wild moor and gritstone crags lay ahead.
An oystercatcher piped.
We crossed another bridge and walked back along the opposite side: bitter-sweet robin notes; wheeze of green finch; ‘chook, chook’ of blackbird; ‘huit’call of chaff inch; trill of wren.
A pair of pied wag tails alighted on the path.
Two little black and white faces, two long bouncy tails, but the male's back is black and the female's, grey.
One more treat.
Across the river, standing out against a background of emerging green vegetation, was a large bird with marbled black and brown cryptic plumage and a long bill.
It was a woodcock, a bird rarely seen in the open.
We decided to end the day on this high.
We were all soaking wet and more than ready for the hot baths and good meal we knew would be waiting for us back at Malham Tarn.
Conditions had been miserable — and yet, as we climbed aboard the waiting mini-bus, we shared an exhilaration peculiar to bird watchers, and which cannot be explained.
Perhaps the same E. M. Nicholson once walked in the wet down Wharfed ale, listening, like us, to tuneful April songsters singing in the rain.
He wrote in his book,The Art of Birdwatching , ‘For those who practise it, bird watching is not only a sport and a science, but also something near a religion, and after all its externals have been inventoried, the essence remains — incommunicable.’
The Brambling
Clumber Park, Nottinghamshire
It was already mid-April.
Time to be looking for summer migrants.
We took a trip to Clumber.
Clumber Park is north of Nottingham in the area known as ‘The Dukeries’.
It was created by the enclosing of some 3,000 acres of Sherwood Forest in 1707.
‘For the use of Queen Anne,’ declared the Duke of Newcastle.
Timber was in high demand for building ships for the British Navy and many fine trees were felled.
But-the oaks of Clumber were saved.
The woodland of New stead Abbey and Thoresby Hall, two more ‘stately homes’, survived.
The Dukes halted the full scale destruction of the Forest, although only fragments remain today.
In Robin Hood's day, Sherwood Forest had occupied one-fifth of the whole area of Nottinghamshire.
Villagers were permitted to graze their pigs under its trees, but the grazing of sheep and goats was forbidden.
Bows and arrows were banned.
Only the King was allowed to hunt.
Punishments for killing the king's deer were severe.
‘Trespassers against the venison’ warranted heavy fines or imprisonment — or worse.
Accused men fled and joined the growing band of outlaws.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle records in verse the hunting enthusiasm of the Norman Conqueror: ‘He set apart a vast deer preserve and imposed laws concerning it.
Whoever slew a hart or hind was to be blinded.
He forbade the killing of boars/Even as the killing of harts.
For he loved the stags so dearly/As though he had been their father.
Hares also, he decreed should go unmolested.
The rich complained and the poor lamented.’
Today the ancient woodland of Clumber, now in the safe keeping of the National Trust, is still rich in bird life and the lake supports wildfowl.
It is a good place to listen for newly arriving summer migrants.
We stood beneath the trees — and heard our first chiffchaff of the year: ‘Chiff-chaff-chiff-chaff-chiff- chiff -chaff.‘
As we had hoped, swallows, house martins and sand martins zipped back and forth over the lake, fly-catching, or skimming low to sip, their beaks cutting a line across the still surface of the water.
Willow warblers sang meandering cadences from the trees and a vehement sedge warbler vocalised from a reed bed, letting us know that once again they had safely survived the perilous crossing of arid desert and squally sea.
Satisfied, I began to notice other birds, the all-the-year-round residents.
Nut hatches flicked over old leaves in search of insects.
A silver and tawny tree creeper spiralled up a tree trunk, probing for beetle larvae with its long thin bill; it dropped down to the roots of the next tree — and edged its way up  once more.
Jays strutted through a clearing, beak-prodding the ground for green shoots of acorns buried earlier.
The mechanical drumming of a lesser spotted woodpecker raining blows at a branch with its bill reverberated across the park; a strange territorial ‘song’.
Tits of several kinds flitted and called tantalisingly: great, blue, coal, marsh and long-tailed.
Blackbirds hopped — and paused, heads to one side, then cocked their tails and took off with much commotion to sing full-throatedly from the treetops.
Cream-buff willow/chiffs teased: now which species is it with the darker legs?
Fat sticky horse chestnut buds; coal-black ash buds with green flower clusters in pairs on the branches; reddish-brown oak buds splitting open to reveal tiny glossy yellow-green leaves: trees were coming to life again after the long winter
Only two months before, the woods were quiet, berries and nuts nearly all gone, seed stocks depleted, insect life sparse.
Hunger and the bitter cold would have reduced bird numbers and driven species to flock in the open fields.
Now food was plentiful again — and the woods full of song.
We walked along paths beside the lake.
Canada geese grazed, stretched their long necks, honked, and grazed again.
More birds: pied wag tail, wood pigeon, crow, dunnock, kestrel…
Over the footbridge, past Five Thorns Plantation, through Tank Wood and across the weir which splashes down into the River Poulter.
Great crested grebe, mallard, tufted duck, coot…
We reached Ash Hill Wood.
On the branch of a tall pine was a colourful small bird.
A splendid male brambling in handsome spring plumage, rich orange, white and glossy black.
But what was a brambling doing here?
Bramblings are not resident birds — or summer visitors.
Bramblings are winter immigrants, normally visiting Britain in rather small numbers each year — but occasionally irrupting in thousands if continental beech mast crops fail.
Seldom do they spend successive winters in the same place, but follow the beech mast supply, often in the company of chaffinches.
A splendid male brambling
The brambling in the pine tree was on its way back to its breeding grounds in birch woods or conifer forests — where insect populations peak during the short summer season in the far north of Europe.
Drab tips of feathers had abraded to expose the bright colours beneath: orange throat, orange chest, jet-black head, white wing bars, bold white rump patch.
It was time for this spectacularly handsome winter bird to be gone.
When Bitterns Broom
Leighton Moss, Lancashire
Spring is when the bittern booms.
To hear it we travelled to Leighton Moss, that wonderful reserve belonging to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds close to the shore of Morecambe Bay.
We went first to the Visitor Centre, an old long house barn built of locally quarried limestone and slate, to check up on ‘new arrivals’— summer migrants flying in.
Black cap, white throat and grasshopper warbler had been sighted.
Waders were still passing through: spotted redshank, whimbrel, bar-tailed godwit…
And a marsh harrier was ‘about’.
As members of the RSPB the reserve was ours for free; non-members were purchasing permits from ‘reception’ to gain admittance.
So off we set, full of hope, along the wooded path towards the hides.
Wood anemones and celandines studded the damp ground of hazel and alder carr; and clumps of king cups, a first bluebell and the tiny barren strawberry flower.
Graceful spikes of lords-and-ladies pushed up through the earth below white-blossomed blackthorn.
Willow warblers sang their delicate down-scale song-phrase and a chiffchaff joined in with its own persistent repetitive notes from the topmost branch of a silver birch.
We only had to wait for five minutes for the first boooooom…and a second…and a third.
A deep, slow, resonant bullish sound; remarkably far carrying.
(The bittern's scientific first name is Botaurus :bos = ox ,taurus = bull).
A hundred years ago, we could have journeyed the length and breadth of Britain to hear the booming of the bittern, but in vain; for the bittern, once common, and ‘esteemed a better dish than heron’, had become extinct.
The last recorded nest with eggs to be found was in Norfolk, in 1868.
The Rev C. A. Johns wrote six years earlier, in 1862, ‘Of late years, so unusual has the occurrence become of Bitterns breeding in this country, that the discovery of an egg in Norfolk has been thought worthy of being recorded in the transactions of the Linnean Society…
Stuffed specimens are, however, to be seen in most collections where its form and plumage may be studied…’
Land drainage was destroying bittern habitat, but perhaps ‘stuffed specimens’ and its desirability as an ‘esteemed dish’had also a little to do with the bird's disappearance?
But, happily, recolonisation of East Anglia from the continent began at the beginning of this century.
And in the 1940s male bitterns were heard booming once again at Leighton Moss.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has a genius for encouraging new species into its reserves, making them feel welcome.
Reed beds were extended, water levels regulated, tykes trimmed, pools excavated, scrub kept at bay and willows coppiced.
Bittern numbers fluctuate from year to year and a severe winter hits them hard.
The British population stands at under forty pairs; up to a dozen pairs breed at Leighton Moss.
We left the trees and walked now between high stands of phragmites and reedmace, pausing at a reed screen positioned to hide us from sight.
We peeped through the purpose-made hole on to a long tyke and waited hopefully…bearded reedling? water rail? bittern?
Perhaps an otter?
But it was a moor hen that stepped out of the reeds and into the water, flirting its white tail, dipping its head, pecking at the surface with its bright red beak.
From West Hide and from Grizedale Hide we looked through slit windows on to extensive pools.
A breeding colony of blackheaded gulls squabbled noisily on their chosen island.
Grey lag geese grazed at the grassy edge.
A coot sat fidgeting on a bulky nest construction, flicking stems out of the way, pushing a twig into position.
On a wooden ‘loafing platform’ sited in the middle of the water a mallard pair snoozed.
Through binoculars we recognised shoveler, teal, pochard and tufted duck, all of which breed in the pools.
And a shelduck flew in to splash-land.
Two of us decided to walk along the road which led to the public causeway and another, even larger, pool.
Close by are woods where, so we were told, there would be a chance of seeing red squirrels.
Retracing our steps, we passed the reed screen once more and I gave a cursory glance through the hole.
What I saw, I just couldn't believe!
At the far end a bittern stood — just as it does in all the books, just as it does in all those television nature films: in bizarre ‘bittern-stance’.
Its golden plumage barred and streaked with shades of brown and black, its neck extended, its thick, deep-yellow beak pointed skywards, the close-together eyes glassy bright, it stood there on green legs, a large stocky bird, richly coloured — and I knew that this was a once-in-a-lifetime moment.
I nudged my companion.
Then reached for my camera.
It was too far away for me to get an ‘Eric Hosking’ but at least I'd possess a ‘habitat shot’.
It stood there, motionless, and I was amazed at my luck; it is very rare indeed to see a bittern in the open like this, and in daytime.
A small party of bird watchers rounded a bend in the path fifty yards away and I beckoned them to hurry.
But before they could reach the screen, the bittern had stepped, heron-like, slow, deliberate, into the tyke, and across to the other side.
With its neck retracted, ‘shoulders’ hunched, it entered the  reedbed, then turned and, passing through the reeds, crossed again.
Deeper into the reed bed it went, its cryptic plumage merging with the long, thin, creamy-buff, feathery-topped reedstalks — and disappeared from view.
I remembered two previous springs when, at Minsmere and at Titchwell Marsh, I had enjoyed glimpses of a bittern in flight, briefly, above the reeds:owl-like on rounded wings, legs trailing.
At Cley Marshes, I've heard booming, but the bird tantalisingly remained hidden.
There were more highlights that lovely April day.
A singing black cap; a peachy-breasted whinchat; a very spruce wheat ear; and swallows and sand martins zipping over the water.
Reed warblers interspersed silvery, repetitive notes with chattering churr sin territorial song and a sedge warbler agitated vociferously from the willow carr.
And bittern booming followed us at intervals all day.
Evocative sounds of spring.
Kite Country
A Valley in Mid-Wales
We had come in search of raptors and we saw our first after only five minutes of walking.
That augured well for the day.
A second — and a third — appeared.
Buzzards.
With great rounded wings, spectacularly patterned pale and dark beneath, they circled effortlessly.
Then down swooped a sparrow hawk, smaller, more uniform, feathers of long tail closed.
As it disappeared into the overhanging sessile oak wood, a large and heavy corvine flew across, croaking fruitily.
A raven.
Not a rapt or, but another bird typical of wild Wales.
The sun shone gloriously, the sky was a brilliant blue, the valley in all its spring beauty lured us on.
Round another bend — and we were in luck.
It was a red kite that sailed above us now.
In these superb light conditions its deeply forked tail glowed a rich chestnut.
Bold white patches adorned the under-sides of its wings and the head appeared white also.
We stood there a long time watching, heads tipped back, neck muscles beginning to ache.
If only someone would invent a lubricating oil for bird watchers…
Many years before we had looked for red kites, on a spring camping holiday in the valley of the River Tywi.
At the Din as Reserve we followed the nature trail; a board walk steered us over the bossy bits.
Blossom on blackthorn and great banks of bluebells.
Wood warblers, chiffchaffs and black caps.
We picnicked by a pool teeming with tadpoles which the children caught in cupped hands, then released back again.
Each stone on the bank concealed an ant nursery.
We felt like gods as we surveyed the distraught insects' frantic efforts to remove precious eggs from sight.
We took pity and gently replaced their roofs.
Beetles of every imaginable hue scurried through the grass, mobile jewels.
Huge black slugs slid out of curling bracken, delighting the children who wanted to take them home for pets.
Goose-grass chasings and a barefoot splashing through a ford, shoes and socks in hand; the skimming and twittering of swallows as they hawked for gnats; grey wag tails flitting from stone to stone in the sparkling waters of the Tywi; a common sandpiper fluting from the far bank.
But no red kite.
‘Not a good year,’ said the Warden.
‘It's the new dam, see.
They don't like it,’ confided a farmer.
‘I'm so used to them, you know, don't notice them any more,’ laughed the milkman back at the camp site.
We left, defeated.
No red kite — until today.
‘The children caught tadpoles in cupped hands.’
‘The kite swept across the valley.‘
We watched as the kite swept across the valley, ascending so high that it was just a speck in the distance, and then swooping gracefully over the horizon, to appear again from behind the next hill.
The female could be incubating eggs in a stick-nest; built high in the tree, the same nest is often used year after year.
A ‘rubbish heap’ of a nest, scraps, grass, wool, rags, paper, string and sheep's wool — stuffed among the sticks.
Both birds help in the building; after, the female broods and the male hunts for food.
The red kite cruised out of sight.
It was time to take an interest in the wildlife at a lower level in this spectacular valley.
A common lizard struggled through long grass.
Bumble bees buzzed.
Pale  primroses grew on the banks, and mauve violets.
Polypody fern flourished in damp crevices…yellow celandines besides a stream…small tortoiseshell butterflies wafted past…
Delightful lambs dotted the fresh green of the valley.
Snowy-white and jet black lambs, they suckled vigorously with much ecstatic tail-wagging; bleated, chased each other up and down the slopes, got lost, and again bothered their patient, plodding mothers.
Nature Conservancy Regional Officers have been studying the red kite's food requirements for many years.
They examine abandoned nests for prey remains, dissect pellets and talk frequently to local shepherds.
Not one piece of evidence has ever come to light to suggest that red kites attack live sheep or lambs.
It is only car cases of the larger mammals that kites are interested in and help to remove.
‘A benign function,’ say the researchers.
Live prey includes small mammals, birds (mostly young jackdaws, crows, pigeons and gulls), earthworms and insects.
Caught after a spectacular downward stoop from a great height — or, alternatively, after beating low over the terrain to drop with a sudden pounce — the prey is eaten sometimes in flight, sometimes on the ground.
It has taken eighty years for the red kite to recover from near-extinction at the end of the last century when numbers were down to four pairs in a remote part of Wales.
Yet in medieval times it was an abundant bird, a useful scavenger in the streets of towns.
Later, in Victorian times, birds of prey were persecuted by game keepers, by taxidermists and by egg collectors.
Fortunately a small group of folk banded together determined to save the bird and the rescue operation began.
Nowadays there is widespread public sympathy.
People are prepared to donate money to pay for protection.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds organises a round-the-clock watch of nests at breeding times, using highly sophisticated electronic equipment.
Courts inflict heavy fines on egg thieves.
Present-day game keepers are tolerant and helpful.
Why, in spite of all these factors, has an increase in population taken so long to achieve?
The climate may be to blame, say the experts, continental kites, in warmer conditions, enjoy a higher rate of breeding success.
Nevertheless the future of the red kite looks secure, numbering around forty eight pairs in recent years.
Now we were approaching a steep ravine.
We scrambled up the track and found ourselves beside the inevitable little mountain railway.
When next the red kite appeared, it sailed below us, allowing us views from above of its long dark wings, streaky red body, red notched tail.
Two acrobatic ravens displayed over our heads.
Glossy blue-black, heavily built, they twisted and turned in unison, deep croaks echoing back from the walls of the ravine.
‘Buzzard,’ shouted someone, ‘flying from left to right.
‘Another kite on the horizon,’ called someone else.
We followed with our binocs the pointing fingers.
A ‘bird watcher's neck’ in the morning would be a small price to pay.
MAY
Dorset Weekend
Portland Bill
Any bird watcher worth the pinch of salt he always carries in his pocket to sprinkle on the bird's tail, yearns to be on some jutting peninsula at spring migration time.
The choice of the Leicestershire and Rutland Ornithological Society this time was Port land Bill, in Dorset.
We set off at 4.30am.
In the east the sky was streaked yellow and purple.
The first birds were waking; the dawn chorus began.
Kestrels hovered at regular intervals down our motorway route.
We ate our breakfast in a red-legged partridge patch.
By nine o'clock we had reached Port land's furthest point.
The peninsula projects a good five miles out into the Channel from the Dorset coastline.
It is the first spit of land visible to incoming birds after a considerable sea crossing.
The weather was cold, grey and misty.
Birds would be dropping down in relief in such ‘fall’ conditions.
They would be in no hurry to move on.
Whilst they rested and fed and waited for the skies to clear, we could enjoy their presence.
So it was.
In every bush fluttered tired passerines: wheat ears, chiffchaffs, white throats, whinchats, willow warblers and linnets.
Port land is almost an island, a great hump of limestone linked to the mainland by the shingle stretch of Chesil Beach.
Two-thirds of the hump is quite densely populated, scarred by quarries and dominated by dock land.
The remaining third includes the Bill.
It is part farmland.
But the slopes are grassy, and thickets of brambles, stands of alexander with dark, shiny green leaves, clumps of elder and the Japanese spindle, offer shelter to migrating birds.
They were still flying in.
We stood on the cliff top to welcome them, swallows and house martins, meadow pipits and skylarks.
High fences around Admiralty installations gave good views as the birds perched briefly on the wires, taking their bearings.
A corn bunting was singing halfway up a pylon, short bursts of jangling notes.
The weather was clearing, the mist dispersing, the sun began to peep out.
A whinchat paused on the path ahead with the lighthouse as background: a  handsome male in summer plumage, prominent eyestripe, apricot-coloured breast, pure white markings on tail and wing — so bright it looked against the brown mud surround.
A little owl, pretending to be just another stone on a heap of stones; we could so easily have missed him if he hadn't swivelled his head to peer in our direction at just the right moment.
From a dry stone wall inland, redstarts darted, like orange flames, tail feathers fanned and quivering.
They were catching insects, shuttling back and forth, storing energy for the next phase of their long journey to breeding grounds.
Looking along that wall, I not only had four redstarts in full view in my binoculars, but three cuckoos as well: it was that sort of a day.
The cuckoos were resting, half-hidden by brambles.
Long white-spotted tails and barred breasts identified them; then they ‘cuckoo'ed gently.
A little owl
A hundred yards away, a woolly-capped, bearded, anorak Ed giant was waving his telescope excitedly in the air.
People were hurrying, binoculars bouncing on chests.
They kept carefully to the paths and did not short-cut across the farmer's fields.
‘Golden oriole!’
There had been oriole rumours circulating earlier.
We had taken them with the aforementioned pinch of salt.
But here, unmistakably, it was.
In full golden view.
Thrush-sized, it perched on a bank.
Suddenly it flew — a streak of brilliant yellow.
Golden orioles in their nesting sites are elusive, impossible to see in the shimmering canopy of green-gold sunlit leaves.
But, once, I heard their song, a whistling with a magical, far-carrying clarinet quality: ‘Oooooo-weooo,’ Hammock-nests, lined with flowery grass heads, are slung high up out of sight across forked branches.
Now the secretive whistler with the woodwind song was revealed.
Exotic a on an open headland; a black and yellow bird with a poetical name on the windy top of Port land Bill in early May.
Radipole Lake, Weymouth
There must be very few bird reserves situated only a few minutes' walk from the centre of a town which turn out to be as rewarding as Radipole Lake, another RSPB reserve.
That evening, after dinner at our hotel, we walked along its reed-lined paths which lead past tykes and inter-connecting lagoons.
We could smell the salty tang of sea air less than a mile away, and we could hear the mewing of gulls.
The evening air was cool.
The reedbed  bird chorus was at its peak, a last clamorous burst before the light grew dim.
Reed and sedge warblers were the dominant songsters.
Warblings, chatterings, churrings; they sang unseen.
We identified the ‘chi-chi-chitty’ of the reed bunting and the ‘poking, poking’of a bearded reedling.
Tell-tale movements in the reeds betrayed bird passage.
Suddenly an astonishingly loud eruption of staccato notes exploded from willow scrub at the edge of the path.
Only to cease as abruptly as it had begun.
‘Cetti's,’ the word went round.
The spread of the Cetti's warbler across the south of England in recent years is well documented.
With such a distinctive song it can scarcely be missed.
It moved northward through France from the Mediterranean coast and was recorded for the first time in Britain at a site in Hampshire, in March 1961.
Breeding was confirmed ten years later in the Kent marshes, and it has been increasing in numbers and colonising more reed beds in the years since.
Thousands of migrating martins and swallows were settling to roost, with a great deal of twittering, in the reeds.
The song chorus died down.
A female mallard quacked sleepily and was silent.
Just one wide awake sedge warbler sang solo as stars began to twinkle in the darkening night sky.
Studland heath
Studland Heath is an area of heath land which stretches away towards Poole Harbour and the sea.
There were rumours that a pied-billed grebe had settled on ‘Little Sea’, a freshwater lagoon cut off from the coast by the gradual build-up of sand dunes.
On the Sunday of our Dorset weekend we decided to go in search.
The sun blazed down as we followed narrow paths through the ling.
Gorse was spectacular, a brilliant yellow.
Past silver birches and Scots pines we walked to reach the small hide at the edge of Little Sea.
But Little Sea was empty of bird life.
We waited hopefully.
The odd moorhen appeared; and a couple of mallards.
A roe deer came down into reeds opposite to munch at green stuff.
Once, even, a grebe swam across.
Try as we might, we could not persuade ourselves that its dabchick-bill was pied.
Less than a dozen pied-billed grebes have been recorded in Britain.
The birds migrate from South American wintering quarters to North American breeding grounds.
Very occasionally one ends up on the wrong side of the Atlantic.
It sounds altogether a very odd bird.
‘Listen for its slurred, gulping notes, increasing in speed and loudness,’ reads one report, ‘notes which are often drawn out into a long whistling finale.’
It has some curious habits.
It swims close to the bank and squats in the shallows where it makes ‘vigorous paddling movements’ with its feet to stir up small fish.
We were looking for a bird in brown and white breeding plumage.
In summer its bill is short and thick, bluish-white in colour and banded across the middle with black.
Distinctive white orbital rings circle its red eyes, and the throat is black.
More folk arrived at the hide and we relinquished our places.
No black striped bill had we seen, or slurring gulps heard.
But Dart ford warblers were next on the ‘list’.
Stud land Heath is one of the few localities where this rare and elusive bird builds its nest — in heather or gorse.
We kept to the paths, being specially careful where we put our feet; ground nesting species are at their most vulnerable in spring.
Dartford warbler numbers fluctuate dramatically.
Severe fires, drought, recent ploughing of the heath land edges, increasing throngs of holiday-makers (and careless birdwatchers?–are probably all detrimental factors.
In a hard winter the population plummets, for it is a non-migratory species, an insectivore, unable to supplement its diet with fruit and berries.
In Britain, at the very edge of its breeding range, it is living under less than optimum conditions.
Stone chats, perched on gorse twig song posts, ‘chack'ed at us.
‘To find Dart ford warblers, search in areas where stone chats are in evidence,’ say the old hands.
The weather was fine and bright.
‘In fine bright weather the Dart ford warbler is more inclined to show itself.’
But —‘The chances of seeing one without being shown by the Warden are nil,’ warns John Gooders in his book,Where to Watch Birds .
We soon gave up the hunt.
It was hot.
We were tired.
A sandy bank looked a good place for a snooze.
We stepped carefully around a patch of particularly scratchy heather — just as a small reptile emerged from beneath: a lizard, about eight inches long, patterned with blotches and white-centred rings which ran down its grass-green horny back and tail.
Our herpetologist identified it.
It was the rarest of all British lizards: a sand lizard.
‘A male.
And he's in his seldom seen breeding skin.’
After hibernating through the winter months, a male sand lizard wakes up and sheds his old brown skin for a new green one which the duller female finds attractive.
After mating, she lays eggs — sand lizards are the only British oviparous lizard.
The other two British lizard species, the slow worm and the common lizard, are viviparous — the young grow inside the mother and are born without egg shells.
Our sand lizard, resembling a green mini-monster from prehistoric times, scrambled over the twiggy heather.
His Latin name is Lacerta agilis but he wasn't particularly ‘agile’ that day.
Perhaps he was still sleepy, or had just indulged in a stultifying beetle meal.
We didn't attempt to touch him for a lizard can easily lose its tail at the defensive snapping point.
The tail would grow again — but the join would spoil its beauty.
Not only that; we would be breaking the law if we ‘interfered’ with him in any way; the sand lizard is considered rare enough to have been designated a ‘protected species’(Wildlife and Countryside Act, 1981).
Now he was lost from view.
Sand lizards spend most of their time in burrows underground; we had been very lucky.
Not many ticks had been added to our bird list, but we'd earned a very fine tick for our lizard list!
Red-Necked Phalarope
Cley Marshes, Norfolk
It was in May that I met her, on a return visit to Cley.
The Amazon of the bird world — the ultimate in hen's lib.
With the blessing of the Norfolk Naturalists' Trust and with special permits in our pockets (obtainable from the Visitors' Centre) we had walked along their famous bank from road to sea.
Channels and salt marsh, reed beds and pools, shingle and fore shore.
Sedge warblers sang exulting in the willow scrub.
From hides we watched skimming house martins, skulking moor hens, skidding coots, a hovering kestrel, soaring skylarks, mud-probing greenshanks and fast-pecking black bellied dunlins.
Bearded reedlings sallied forth obligingly from the reeds.
One graceful avocet, in positively dazzling black and white plumage, swept for rag worms with long, upward-curving bill.
Fishing terns hovered and flitted and splashed.
Showing off his cinnamon-red summer colours was a bar-tailed god wit, another ‘passage wader’ passing through.
A ringed plover looked trustingly up from her nest on the shingle, so close to the path, and did not stir as we filed quietly by.
Oystercatchers preened on an island.
A marsh harrier flapped slow-stately past.
Lap wings tumbled, twisted, plunged and shrilled, ‘Pee- wit ’.
And a bittern boomed.
It really did.
A deep, far-carrying, resonant booooooom.
In fact, the Cley marshes were alive with springtime sound; the bosun pipe's whistle of the oystercatcher, the ‘teu-hu-hu’ of the redshank, the high pitched, squeaky ‘seep-seep-seep’of the common sandpiper, the liquid yelping of the avocet, the harsh scolding of black-headed gulls, the screeching of terns.
It wasn't until the fourth hide was reached that I met that extraordinary bird, the red-necked phalarope.
I watched, entranced, through the hide opening as it bobbed like a cork below me; light and buoyant, swimming in gentle circles, spinning, pecking at surface morsels.
Only seven inches long, and exquisite.
Floating there, it could have been a bath toy duck, daintily hand-painted by some artistic genius, plaything of a princess, if it weren't for its air of fragility, and slim — needle-slim — bill.
Buoyant as a duck, slender as a sandpiper, small as a dunlin.
Snowy-white throat and belly, orange-red cheeks and collar, and the rest of the plumage a mosaic of slate-grey, blue and brown.
I didn't know about phalaropes at the time.
I was quite ignorant of their lifestyle and topsy-turvy habits.
I flipped through the pages of my field guide.
Red-necked phalarope.
Summer plumage.
‘That's odd,’ I thought.
‘They've got their symbols muddled up.
The female in these drawings looks brighter than the male.
Surely, if there is any differentiation at all between the sexes, the hen bird is always duller than the cock.‘
I confided my problem to my neighbour on the hide bench.
‘Not so,’ he whispered.
‘They're amazing birds, phalaropes.
Reversal of roles.
The female of the species is the brightest.’
It seems that, quite contrarily, it is she who courts the male, and he who rears the chicks.
‘Only other bird I know as dotty as that is…the dotterel,’ declared my hide companion.
Well, well, well!
Red-necked phalarope
Most waders share the egg-and-chick-minding duties.
Male and female avocet, dunlin, redshank, common sandpiper, curlew, turnstone, black-tailed god wit, golden plover, ringed plover and little ringed plover — each (according to the encyclopaedic Birds of the Western Pale arctic ) normally plays a more or less equal part in the incubation and brooding of the young.
The macho ruff is an exception.
In spring he dons his curious plumage: long ear tufts, and dramatic barred, streaked, blobbed or plain ruff-collar.
‘Lekking’ ruffs meet to display on arenas.
They show off shamefully to the females (reeves).
They ‘wing-tremble’ and ‘flutter-jump’and ‘strut-walk’and ‘bill-thrust’and raise their huge loose ruffs.
Full of self-importance, they take no part in parental duties.
The females cope alone.
It is quite the opposite with the red-necked phalarope.
The female entices  the male on to her territory with a wing-whirring display flight to advertise her presence.
Then she and her mate build a number of scrapes near shallow freshwater pools or streams in the wild open country of their northerly breeding grounds.
The female makes the final choice and lays her eggs in the shallow depression.
After which she goes off to join the other hens, leaving the male to incubate the eggs alone and to lead the chicks away from the scrape to a safe and secret hideaway.
Protectively he ‘mothers’ them.
Phalaropes are unconventional in other ways too.
They spend their time far out on warm seas once the short northern summer is over.
Expert swimmers, they only occasionally venture ashore on migratory passage.
Sometimes they get blown off course by exceptionally strong winds — to thrill bird watchers by their apparent ‘tameness’ and exquisite plumage; to spin on the spot in circles; and to dab at the water surface for invertebrate food.
Down flew a handsome drake, on to the muddy bank beneath the hide.
‘Mallard.
Splendid specimen,’ commented my chauvinist companion.
‘None of this sex role reversal nonsense.
Female duller.
And domesticated.
Male wears the trousers.
Shows who's boss.
As it should be…’
Songbird Census
Gibraltar Point, near Skegness, Lincolnshire
I filled the freezer with pizzas, pies and raspberry ripple ice-cream and caught the train to Skegness.
The family could quite well manage without me for two days.
On arrival at Gibraltar Point Field Station, I tracked down my single bedroom and, as one does, went immediately to the window and peered out.
Two bright goldfinches and one red-breasted linnet were just standing there.
My first reaction was to rush out and proclaim the news at the top of my voice.
Fortunately, as it turned out, shyness got the better of me and I stayed put.
Very fortunately, for goldfinches and linnets, I soon discovered, happened to be two of the reserve's commonest species and it would have been akin to rushing out to tell my neighbours back home that I had just seen a sparrow in the yard.
Gibraltar Point is a splendid nature reserve, managed by the Lincolnshire and South Humberside Trust.
It contains almost every type of habitat a discerning bird could wish for: a scrub full of buck thorn, sand dunes held secure with mar ram grass, salt marsh rich with colonising plants, lush woodland and pasture near old farm buildings, shingle spits and winding muddy creeks.
There is even a bird-enticing mere built especially for them, with islands, and high banks to keep out unwanted humans.
The field station consists of a modern Ann Exe built on to the old coast guard station.
As is the way of coast guard stations, it once had waves lapping at its doorstep.
But, over the last hundred years, acres of ‘accumulated land’ have built up and it is now a good trek from station to sea.
Year by year the reserve is increasing in size and more sand and silt is washed in.
One day the residents of Skegness may arrive with their buckets and spades and wheelbarrows to demand back their sand, but meanwhile the owners of Gibraltar Point are sitting pretty.
I joined other escaping mums — and dads and younger folk and older folk too.
Our tutor was to introduce us to ‘fieldwork’.
Fieldwork, Ted Smith explained, concerned looking for birds, and listening; recording and making notes.
Bullfinch
Looking for distinguishing marks — the upturned bill of the bar-tailed god wit, the chocolate brown head and white cheek with its black spot of the tree sparrow, the double white wing bar of the chaff inch, the square patch of white above the bullfinch's tail, the grey head and bandit mask of the jackdaw, the bold eyestripe of the sedge warbler.
And listening to songsters in a month when song is at its peak.
Bird song has always fascinated people.
It is a favourite subject for poets.
They speak of ‘mirth’, ‘melody’, ‘merriment’ and ‘madrigals’.
‘And ilk a bird sang of its love,’ wrote Burns.
‘My heart is like a singing bird,’ rhapsodised Rossetti.
‘We'd be as happy as the birds in spring,’ sighed Blake.
‘Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!’ commanded Wordsworth.
And Chaucer heard ‘the voice of angels in their harmony.’
But scientists think differently.
They speak of ‘vocal belligerence’, ‘defensive territorial activity’, ‘ritualistic aggression’ and ‘matrimonial advertisement’.
They analyse ‘frequency’, measure ‘intensity’, speculate on ‘motivation’, design ‘sound spectrums’ and discuss ‘seasonal variation’.
‘Vocal belligerence?'
We were given maps of the reserve and told how to census the songsters by marking the grid position of each singing bird.
I hid myself away in the long grass at the edge of the wood near Sykes Farm.
A white throat's scratchy effort…wren chittering…lesser white throat rattle…two cheerfully competing chaff inches…catchy phrases of a song thrush…silvery fluting of a blackbird…the complex pattern of dunnock notes…harsh chatter of magpie…
I noted the position of each male's song post on the map and speculated on territory.
A census taken in this way each year follows the fortunes of individual species; it is an indicator of population change, and perhaps of changes in the environment.
On Sunday I was up at 6am.
Ringed plovers pattered at the water's edge of a muddy creek and a whimbrel whistled as it flew overhead.
Little terns fished out at sea; I could hear their squabblings as I walked across the sand hills.
Small silver-white sanderling sped across the wet sand following the line of the waves, surface-snatching, ‘twinkling’ along the beach.
I followed a path to the hide by the mere.
Settling myself on the wooden bench I peered through the open slit.
What birds would be about?
On the smallest of the islands a shelduck couple cosily cuddled.
A party of skylarks were taking a breather from their incessant high-rise singing to indulge in an early-morning splashing.
I trained my binoculars on the reeds closest to the hide; an up-and-down bobbing movement had caught my eye.
It was a jack snipe, bobbing rhythmically on green legs in the shallow water.
A redshank swept its bill through soft patches of wet mud and breakfasted on tiny insects, shrimps and wriggling worms.
Grey herons contorted to strange shapes as they stretched long necks and peered into the shallows.
Two fox cubs romped playfully on the bank.
Best of all, a kingfisher, black against the red sun, alighted on a post at the far end.
Then it whirred the length of the mere to perch on a whitened branch below me.
There it posed, alert, head jerking; coral red legs; a metallic sheen to its feathers: bright blue and green, white and orange.
Suddenly it plunged into the water and, a swift streak, returned to its perch with a silver fish in its dagger-bill.
Casually it beat the fish into stillness on the branch and swallowed it in one gulp.
Three times it did this, then, satisfied, it flashed — electric blue — into the reeds and disappeared.
Sunday afternoon arrived far too soon.
We swopped experiences for the last time.
Tiny vivid-green hair streak butterflies in abundance.
An orange tip butterfly sighting — a ‘first’ for the reserve.
A grass snake swimming obligingly from island to bank in full view of watchers.
Striped snail shells lying shattered at a song thrush anvil.
A skylark's nest in a rabbit burrow with four tiny brown-blotched eggs.
But no-one could better my kingfisher.
Bird — and all that Jazz
Goyt, Derbyshire
We were high above Goyt Valley on a sombre millstone grit moor ‘which,’ said the guide book, ‘can be tackled by anyone sound in wind and limb.’
‘Go-back, go-back,’ something was bossing rather rudely.
I looked questioningly at my neighbour.
‘Red grouse,’ he said.
We gazed long and hard but could not spot the unwelcoming creature, our first true upland species.
Red grouse eat heather shoots.
This one was lying low in a heathery jungle.
‘Sure to see some later,’ said Dave.
Younger folk had grown impatient and were now signalling frantically a hundred yards ahead.
On a stone wall perched a black bird with a white bib: it was a ring ouzel, a bird of mountain and moor land.
A female appeared, brown; her bib (gorget) was buff.
So they were probably breeding.
We walked on, jumping over trickles of water, squelching through soggy bits, scrambling over dry stands of heather, bouncing off spongy peat, clambering around rocky outcrops.
A curlew flew over, its call a haunting lament: ‘Cor li,cor li’.
No moor land is complete without its curlew overhead.
Meadow pipits, commonest of upland birds, negotiated undulating flight paths over white tufts of cotton grass.
Ubiquitous skylarks sang madly in the blue above.
Swifts screeched, soared and swept after midges.
There was no need for anyone to consult his pocket field guide.
Someone always ‘knew’, the advantage of bird watching in a group.
I felt I had joined an Out-in-the-Open University crash course in bird identification.
We picnicked on the leeward side of a wall.
Curious gritstone ewes with speckled black faces came to watch, lambs frisking at their sides.
Our meal was constantly interrupted by sightings.
A pair of black-headed, white collared reed buntings preened on bracken fronds, their white-edged tails constantly flickering.
A whinchat perched, first atop a tussock —‘Tic, tic, tic, tu-tic’— then it flew up on to a boulder to continue its scolding.
Swallows skimmed low: ‘Tsit-tswit-tswit’.
Then a cuckoo flew over.
Shallow beats of thin pointed wings — fast and straight — small head, long spotty tail drooping: cuckoo jizz.
Someone recognised a tree pipit — by its jizz.
A tree pipit is another nondescript ‘little brown job’, almost indistinguishable from the meadow pipit except for its remarkable song flight.
At first it was just a dot in the valley below, perched on the topmost branch of a lightning-blasted conifer.
Suddenly it soared forty feet up into the air, singing as it accelerated, a clear, far-carrying song: ‘Tseep, tseep, tseep.’
We watched fascinated as it parachuted down in slow descent, tail fanned, wings tilted upwards.
‘See-er, see-er, see-er,’ it sang, descending leisurely back to an adjacent tree perch.
Without doubt, everyone agreed, this extraordinary display proved it to be a tree pipit.
Up it went again, and the whole performance was repeated.
A male wheat ear flicked its wings and white-rumped tail from a grey stone wall.
Its stance was upright, perky, bold: wheat ear jizz.
A kestrel hovered above the brow of the hill: very easy kestrel jizz!
Jizz?
The characteristic which singles out a species; its idiosyncratic style of flying, perching, feeding, ground-moving, preening, posturing which, once observed in the field, identifies it from the rest.
‘There's something about its jizz which makes me think it's a…’ is a very handy phrase when only a brief glimpse of the bird has been caught.
We walked on, past sessile oaks and bilberry patches, downhill until we reached the valley.
Across Goyt Bridge — a pretty little pack horse bridge which was moved from its position further down the valley, stone by stone, by enlightened planners intent on preventing it being ‘drowned’ when the two new reservoirs were built.
Silvery water swirled beneath and we spied grey wag tails on wet boulders in mid-stream.
Beautiful yellow and grey birds, they balanced skilfully, long slender tails never ceasing a delicate shivering.
There was no mistaking their jizz.
(‘It's a grey wag tail, that's what jizz.’)
We were entering woodland and, by the twittering and warbling from oak, ash and pine, were going to see more birds.
We stood in the shadows and waited patiently.
Redstarts flicked long chestnut tails and flashed white foreheads as they chased in and out of the branches.
We heard the high-pitched squeaks of a gold crest.
A green woodpecker's laughing yaffle call rang out.
Willow warblers, chiffchaffs, blue ties and wrens all appeared within sight as we stood there quietly.
A female blackbird flew by with a stick in her beak; she was nest building.
Time was passing and now we were approaching the reservoirs, Fernilee and Err wood.
People were everywhere, walking, fishing, boating, following nature trails past rhododendron bushes and azalea shrubs.
We queued for ice creams and it was time to go.
‘But you promised we'd see red grouse,’ wailed an insatiable lad.
‘Next time!’
It's good that there's always a next time for birds — and all that jizz.
Disappearing Headland
Spurn Head, North Humberside
When I read in my newspaper that Spurn Head could well tumble into the sea at any moment, given a sufficiently powerful gale, I felt I must visit the place quickly before it did so, before great waves breached its narrowness and destroyed it — yet again.
So I wrote to the Warden of Spurn Bird Observatory and booked myself in for a night.
Spurn is a long thin peninsula, jutting three-and-a-half miles out from the North Humberside mainland.
On one side is a sandy shore and the wide open sea; on the other, the mud flats of the Humber estuary.
In spring, the Head is used by migrants, the bulk of birds passing through in April and May.
An easterly wind can produce the unusual bird, an off-route ‘accidental’, an ‘over shooter’ or ‘drifter’.
Spurn Head has a reputation for rarities.
On arrival, I was welcomed and shown to my quarters in an ex-War Department bungalow.
(The Yorkshire Wildlife Trust bought the peninsula from the Ministry of Defence in 1959.)
‘Running hot water and flush loos,’ I noted with satisfaction.
I had experienced other bird observatories; some were less well-endowed with the amenities of civilised living.
I got out my sheet sleeping bag and slipped it between the regulation army blankets on the bed.
Then, before it grew dark, I decided on a quick sprint up to the Narrow Neck, the area most vulnerable in times of storm.
I saw tank traps and great banks of boulder clay where the road had been repaired in make-shift fashion after the last perilous night of violent north-easterlies.
The peninsula on that occasion had not been breached — quite.
But next time?
The long stretch of the spit curved ahead of me.
The tide was out and, to my right, vast acres of mud glistened in the light of the low sun, a rich feeding ground for waders.
To my left, was sand: sandy beaches and dunes.
Blue green mar ram grass, white daisies, scarlet pimpernel, pink storks bill, yellow birds foot trefoil, silver-veined blue-grey leaves of sea holly; flowers of the seashore speckled the dunes with colour.
But sea buck thorn dominated: the climax plant of Spurn.
It spread the length of the long spit, a thorny barrier and shelter for birds.
At the Point stood the black and white lighthouse and the coast guard station, silhouetted now, for dusk was falling fast and it had turned chilly.
I retraced my steps.
Two curlews flew over, calling plaintively, dark against a greying sky.
(top right) Swans on Ice;(right) A good cowslip year;(far right) Early purple orchid
‘A long thin peninsula.’
Later, after fry-ups in the communal kitchen, everyone gathered in the common room.
A driftwood fire blazed in the grate and we sat warming ourselves as the flames leapt.
Then the Warden arrived with the Observatory Log Book.
Filling in the log is an evening ritual at all bird observatories.
A census of birds sighted each day throughout the year, and kept up for a considerable number of years, is an invaluable source of information to all concerned with the monitoring of bird numbers.
‘Divers, grebes, fulmars, shear waters…
Cormorants, shags, herons, geese…
Ducks, buzzards, kestrels…’
The youngest visitor, aged about six and dressed ready for bed in pyjamas, helped his father to decipher the jottings in his field notebook and then reported earnestly on the day's tally.
‘You can always tell the linnets by their bouncy flight,’ he added.
It was obvious that he was a Jim Flegg in the making.
The bed was comfortable and I slept like a top.
For a short while.
It is the early bird watcher that catches the bird.
And even if one wanted to at a bird observatory, one would find it difficult to lie in.
Alarms ring, doors slam, taps run, boots reverberate…from four o'clock onwards.
Puffins on Bempton Cliff
I yawned my way back to the Narrow Neck.
The tide was high now and waders were feeding at the water's edge.
A turnstone in tortoiseshell plumage  flicked over stones and pecked smartly at exposed food items.
Three more turnstones scooped up sand, pushing with the tops of bills and leaving tiny dark streaks and spattered sand grains which showed where they had dug, excavating for sand hoppers.
Bar-tailed god wits probed deep, skewering with long bills.
Dunlin pecked rhythmically and fast, pattering over the mud.
A whimbrel sailed over, landed, and showed off its striped crown as it tackled a bivalve.
Twelve oystercatchers flew past in a straight follow-my-leader line, piping ecstatically.
It was a glorious sunny morning with very little wind.
I took a deep breath and smelt the sea.
A sea mist far out kept the lighthouse foghorn blaring.
And linnets (‘with bouncy flight’) were on the move, flying to the end of the Point.
I counted as they twittered past.
One hundred and twenty, I wrote down in my notebook.
More twittering as small parties of swallows skimmed over the buck thorn, twisting and weaving, blue-black streaks with fine tail streamers.
Someone else was already in possession of the sea-watching hut.
‘Sandwich terns,’ he called out as I passed.
Two white birds with long black shaggy caps, forked tails and black, yellow-tipped beaks zipped eastwards towards the rising sun.
A solitary swift flew over, followed by a trickle of house martins.
Then an immature gannet came into view away out at sea, a huge bird, still in mottled dark brown plumage.
I strolled on (binoculars always at the ready, afraid of what I might miss) as far as the Wire Dump Heligoland trap.
One day this whole area might be an island, a gradually disappearing island.
Every two hundred and fifty years throughout the known history of Spurn — and there are apparently records dating from 600AD onwards — the sea wins the battle.
The peninsula is breached and the Head vanishes.
Only to rebuild itself again, with sand washed from the boulder clays of Holderness, in the decades to follow.
Kings out to claim thrones landed here (Henry IV, Edward IV), ports, towns, monasteries, chapels, lighthouses, hermits have come and gone.
At least four Spurns were in existence before the present one.
‘Boots reverberate.’
Today, with the designation ‘moving headland’, Spurn Head is scheduled a Site of Special Scientific Interest, worthy of special treatment for its geophysical characteristics as well as for the diversity of its flora and fauna and its value to migratory birds.
In the middle of the nineteenth century when, according to calculations, destruction was again imminent, the canny Victorians strengthened defences.
They built timber groynes and constructed chalk banks and patched up breaches as they occurred.
Their work has withstood the storms of a hundred years and more.
The sea was temporarily thwarted.
Now I had reached the remains of one of those chalk banks built by Victorian engineers.
A whistling ‘Wheet, chack-chack,’ I heard.
‘Wheat ear,’ I wrote down in my little book.
Reed buntings, resident birds, chit tied away, spring time spruce and immaculate.
The white throats' singing was even louder, a monotonous scratchy sound.
Their small bodies quivered with the exertion.
What other birds breed on Spurn?
Meadow pipits and skylarks, redpolls and linnets.
Well-satisfied, and by now very hungry, I walked back to the observatory for breakfast.
Later that morning I was glad I had risen early.
Hordes of day trippers began to arrive in their cars.
A road runs the length of Spurn Head from the Observatory to the Point and soon the small beaches and dune slopes were filled with the bucket-and-spade brigade.
I gave up being a bird watcher and succumbed to the delicious trippery feel of sun on my back and sand on my front.
But time was running out.
The journey home had to be faced.
And it looked as if I was going to have to leave without that promised rarity.
‘You should have been here the day before yesterday…’ they'd said.
Two  days ago a red-spotted blue throat had thrilled.
I had arrived two days too late.
Thinking these thoughts, I approached the observatory complex.
Only to find that Barry Spence, the Warden, had sent out a search party for me.
A red-breasted flycatcher had been caught in the Garden Heligoland trap.
It was a little mouse-brown bird, a female.
The white patches on its tail, bristles at the broad base of its bill and big eyes with pale eye rings confirmed the diagnosis.
But no ‘red breast’; only the male is so adorned.
She had already been measured and weighed, and found smaller and lighter than the pied or spotted flycatchers.
Now she was ready for release.
With a tiny numbered ring on her leg, she flew off.
She was far to the west of her east European breeding grounds and only the  third spring red-breasted flycatcher record for Spurn.
I packed my rucksack, signed the visitors' book, left my list of sightings in the common room and said my farewells.
‘See you again soon, I hope,’ I said.
I'd like to return to Spurn whilst it is still there to return to — before the gales of winter win their battle and demolish it yet again.
Urban Reserve
Potteric Carr, near Doncaster Yorkshire
‘Did you see the harrier?
Flew over the viaduct, splendid view, hen harrier, male, grey,’ he bawled.
‘No,’ I yelled back, ‘missed it.
Saw the black tern though.’
Shouting was necessary, for it happened that a high-speed train was rushing by at just that moment on a main line to the east coast.
We were standing in the middle of an amazing nature reserve.
It had once been a ‘spaghetti-junction’ of railway lines, all converging on Don caster, a couple of miles distant.
Some of the branch lines had been closed down in the Beeching fifties.
Colliery lines and sidings have shut.
But trains still racket by frequently with ear-splitting effect.
Heavy lorries thunder along motorways to the south.
Pylons, slag heaps water towers, workshops, collieries sprawl messily outside the boundaries.
Smoke belches from factory complexes on the horizon.
Within the reserve, signals rear above silver birch groves, drains crisscross, embankments loom, the pumping station emits strange noises, a converted railway hut serves as a field station and a disused marshalling yard sprouts rose bay willow-herb.
Derelict railway lines are now covered with earth or ashes and grass-seeded, well disguised as useful paths to lead us through this extraordinary cheek-by-jowl-with-industry urban reserve.
As we walked along the track from the car park on that sparkling May morning, swifts skimmed low over our heads after swarming gnats, dainty white lady's smock swayed in the breeze, and a little owl stared solemnly and unblinkingly at us from the fork of an oak tree.
We had been met on arrival (a prior arrangement) by members of the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust.
‘It's a jigsaw puzzle of a reserve,’ we were told.
‘Since 1968 we've been doing our best to piece the fragments into a satisfying whole.
For six years we lived under the threat that the M18 could be driven straight through the centre.
Fortunately vigorous campaigning stayed the planners but, always, management will be an exercise in compromise.’
We divided into small groups.
Each followed a guide; mine knew the place thoroughly for he paid regular visits throughout the year.
‘There's always something new to see,’ he said, ‘and plenty of work to do.‘
He led us past the remains of the Young Eea, a copse of blackened and dead trees, planted some 150 years ago, but drowned when the land was inundated with water.
Leafless, twig less, they stood stark and straight — a petrified forest — on their island (‘eea’ meaning island).
‘The woodpeckers and tree creepers find good nesting holes in the rotting wood; starlings, ties and kestrels, too.’
We followed along the seeded track.
On our left, silver birches full of willow warbler song and redpoll twittering; to our right, willow scrub and a healthy stretch of reed bed.
Bearded ties visit, the bittern booms and, by the sound of it, reed warblers were present in abundance.
‘There's sedge warblers in there, too,’ said our guide.
We listened with renewed interest to the chorus.
‘We're pleased about the reed warblers: they're at the north-westerly edge of their breeding range here,’ he went on.
‘It always astonishes me — the silence of the reed beds once the young have hatched.
Singing stops as soon as there are youngsters to feed.’
We were beginning to understand why the farsighted Yorkshire Trust had been so keen to acquire Potteric Carr to add to their collection of nature reserves.
We were getting an idea of the richness of its segmented habitats, the potential of this city's edge sanctuary.
The history of the hundred hectares is as extraordinary as the place itself.
Until the eighteenth century, it was largely an impenetrable morass of bog and ten.
Several attempts were made at drainage but without success until the 1760s.
By the end of that century, engineers had converted a large part of the area to agricultural land.
Most of the original marshland flora and fauna disappeared, to be replaced by newly planted trees and hedges.
The Industrial Revolution saw the next dramatic change.
Don caster was soon the second largest railway centre in Britain and lines intersected in all directions.
Industry encroached, roads ribboned, and the previously attractive landscape became dreary wasteland as farmers abandoned the small cut-off parcels of arable land as no longer being worth the effort.
Potteric Carr was an eyesore.
It would have remained so to this day — but for the unforseen results of subsidence.
Seams from Rossington Colliery undermined the whole area between 1960 and 1967.
Ground caved in, pools formed, pastures flooded.
After two hundred years Potteric Carr was once again an area of extensive marsh with open water.
Back came the water violet.
Other marsh plants quickly colonised.
Aquatic invertebrates returned.
In flew the birds.
The Yorkshire Wildlife Trust was delighted, and secured the lease from a sympathetic British Rail.
Today we were reaping the benefit.
By now we had reached a delectable small pool hidden away in willow trees: Willow Pool.
We sat in a hide built from old telegraph poles and railway sleepers and looked out on to banks bright with primroses and cowslips.
Last year's reed mace and teasel stood tall, a natural ‘dried flower arrangement’ decoratively framing our hide-slit view.
A water vole swam vigorously across from a little island, its round face and bright eyes showing above the water.
A little grebe, chestnut-cheeked, suddenly dived — and reappeared again close to the furthest bank with a shimmering fish in its beak.
Two Canada geese and a pair of tufted duck drifted peacefully in this secret place.
‘That's the branch where the kingfisher alights,’ pointed out our voluntary warden, ‘and yonder, we've put up a nesting box.
Starlings, squirrels, kestrels  — they all use our nesting boxes.
But we're hoping for long-eared owls in this one.‘
We saw two long-eared owls later, fluffing out their feathers.
They sat upright and close against the trunk of a tree in a stand of mature woodland which had miraculously survived industrial upheavals.
Spring leaves were still new and shiny and satiny.
It was catkin time on willow, alder, oak, hazel and silver birch.
‘A water vole swam across.’
But first we had visited Decoy Marsh, the site of an early duck decoy built by seventeenth century Dutch engineers who fancied roast duck on their menu.
(The word ‘decoy’ derives from the Dutch eende , meaning ‘duck’, and kool meaning ‘cage’.
) A tunnel of netting stretched over semi-circular hoops narrowed down to a small catching area.
Captive ducks, or a dog, were used to lure the birds into the trap.
Catches were well documented at the time and proceeds from sales were distributed to the poor of Doncaster.
We walked along the top bank of a reclaimed tip where lap wing nest.
A startled whinchat sprang up and over and disappeared into a hawthorn hedge.
Black-headed gulls circled, spiralling skywards in a current of warm air.
A delicately graceful turtle dove fanned its tail and purred its soporific summer song —‘Rrroorrrrr, rrroorrrrrr’— from the top of an oak tree; a much persecuted bird, it had run the gauntlet of continental guns and arrived safely.
Gorse blossomed gold on magnesium limestone embankments and, with our hearts in our mouths, and the necessary British Rail Permit in our guide's pocket, we crossed the line.
A confusion of flowers, some lime loving, grow on the strange mix of ballast soils imported for embankment construction: St John's wort, mullein, ground ivy, wild strawberry, silver weed, yellow iris, horse radish, wild mint, purple loosestrife, yellow-wort, meadow cranes bill, evening primrose — and more.
We visited more hides, followed a winding stream, were shown the favourite skulking haunt of a water rail and listened (with no luck) for its ‘lilo-emptying’ squeal.
Finally we sat in the hide open to the general public and looked out over the wide expanse of water at Low Ellers.
In the shallows, ‘short-legged wader jobs’ paused on migratory passage: ringed plover and dunlin.
A heron stood motionless for long minutes before grandmother-footstepping its way: step — freeze — step — freeze — step — freeze stab !
Then flew away, slow-flapping wings, neck held in a curving S-shape.
On deeper water teal, mallard and great crested grebes bobbed and coots squawked and chased each other noisily.
Overhead, swallows and house martins hawked.
Our guide's enthusiasm seems to be shared by all concerned.
British Rail are helpful; the Water Authority with its moderate drainage scheme and its new pumping station has promised to keep wildlife in mind when regulating levels; the South Yorkshire County Council gives useful financial assistance; the Manpower Services Commission provides stalwart helpers.
There are plans afoot to extend scrapes and depollute drains.
More than 200 species of birds have been sighted on the reserve and over 80 species have bred.
The greatest ‘catch’ of all is the first recorded breeding in Britain of the little bittern.
And all this on the edge of a great industrial city!
We left inspired by the example of Potteric Carr.
Maybe, we wondered, there are derelict areas, or a few jigsaw puzzle pieces, on the edge of our own city, or within its boundaries which, with a little compromise and a lot of imagination…?
In the Shadow of Cooling Towers
Thorp Marsh, near Doncaster, Yorkshire
In the shadow of the gigantic cooling towers of Thorpe Marsh, North Eastern Region's 1000 MW Coal-fired Power Station, is an exciting area set aside for wildlife.
Thorpe Marsh Reserve was created when quick-witted local naturalists learned of the proposed building of embankments to enclose an extensive ash disposal area.
The soil for the embankments was to be dug out from ‘ecologically poor’ land close by.
The potential of such a large excavated area was obvious.
Design indented shorelines with sloping shelves and islands, fill it up with water, plant vegetation — and wait for the wildfowl to fly in to the resulting ‘dug out’ lake.
Consultations took place between the Central Electricity Generating Board, the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust and the South Yorkshire County Council and the proposed scheme for a lake was given the go-ahead.
We wrote to the Trust for a permit to visit.
When we arrived we sought out the ‘dug out’.
It still looked rather new.
But reed beds have been set and were beginning to spread, islands created from spoil already sprouted a healthy flora, and freshly planted trees and shrubs were doing well.
At the start of the previous winter, whooper swans — flying south from Siberia — found, as had been hoped, the new stretch of water.
It met with their approval, they landed, and stayed until the spring.
A most encouraging start.
We went into the hide which overlooked the lake.
Four great crested grebes, six mallards and five tufted ducks were feeding on the aquatic creatures which had already colonised the water.
Two cuckoos flew down to settle on the wire fence.
Five reed buntings preened at the pool's edge.
A charm of eight goldfinches hovered and pecked at parachuting thistle seeds and a yellow hammer perched close, wheezing its summer song.
We left the hide and went to explore the rest of the Power Station grounds.
An area of old meadows, spinneys, ancient hedgerows and a hidden-away pond forms the Reedholme Reserve which is also managed by the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust.
British Trust for Conservation Volunteers were at work in Reedholme, constructing a nature trail funded with money from the Queen's Silver jubilee Appeal Trust.
It was to be a nature trail with a difference, designed with the visually handicapped in mind.
There were to be listening posts with recorded messages, sturdy steps set into inclines, handrails at strategic points and gates adapted for guide dogs.
I walked partway along the trail, closing my eyes from time to time, imagining myself blind, unable to see.
I concentrated on smell and sound and taste.
It was a good cowslip year.
The creamy yellow flowers grew in profusion on the slopes of an old railway embankment.
On my hands and knees and with my eyes shut, I could smell their faint scent.
Hawthorn and oak had colonised the same embankment.
I picked a hawthorn leaf.
Young and tender, it tasted nutty, the ‘bread and cheese’ of country children.
All the time I was attempting to identify by ear bird noises in the spinney: a jay screeched raucously; ‘My toe hurts Betty,’ crooned a wood pigeon; a tiny wren ticked its loud emphatic alarm notes; and over and over a willow warbler trilled.
The frenzied excavations of a wooing mole gripped by spring fever were evident and, acting blind, I could feel how close together were positioned his little hills of excavated earth.
My fingers explored the rough crinkly texture of lichen, the fragile feel of flower petals, the coolness of young leaves and the soft springy sponginess of mosses.
I stopped being blind as my feet squelched over marshy ground where common spotted orchids grew to pick my way across medieval ridge-and-furrow pasture.
Black and white cows grazed so picturesquely that one expected at any moment an eighteenth-century milkmaid to come prancing out from behind a white-blossomed bush with her three-legged wooden milking stool.
On our way back we called in at the field centre, a converted ex-shunter's cabin.
Mounted bird wings, stuffed mammals, galls, acorns, nests, seed heads, fungi, grasses — all sorts of natural objects were on view, or ‘on feel’, for folk who can't see, but for whom tactile experience of different shapes and textures is a small compensation.
Schoolchildren had created a three dimensional map of the reserve with sensitive fingertips in mind.
Pre-recorded cassettes, designed to be used on the nature trail, can be loaned to groups, or bought at cost price.
Right from the start of the project, the advice of local visually handicapped people has been sought; it is their suggestions which have been taken up and used at Reedholme.
It was time to go.
We made our way to the car park.
Walking past trees and hedgerows we heard more bird song, blackbird, song thrush, robin.
And, backing this melodic chorus, we were aware of another noise — as we had been on and off throughout the day — the all-pervasive hum of the power station transformers.
Notable for nightingales
Monks Wood, Cambridgeshire
Monks Wood, the last remaining fragment of the great Ewingswode Forest, is owned and managed by the Nature Conservancy Council.
On request, the East Midlands Region Office of the NCC supplied us with permits to visit.
It was a damp Sunday.
The preceding week had seen days of heavy downpour and we came prepared for floods.
We parked the cars beside the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology's Experimental Station (Monks Wood is the most thoroughly researched wood in the country!) and changed into our wellingtons.
The song of a nightingale greeted us at the entrance to Hotel Glade.
To hear a nightingale sing was the main purpose of our visit.
Monks Wood is notable for its nightingales.
To experience singing quite so soon was the nicest sort of welcome.
‘We're loused out with nightingales this year,’ said the Warden, unromantically.
All morning, as we negotiated puddles in the wet clay soil, we were to hear the lovely sound.
Nightingales return to Monks Wood in mid-April each year and they sing, both by night and by day, until early June.
Always the song of the nightingale sends shivers down my spine — because of its amazing variety, its richness and power and sheer quality.
More bird song: willow warbler, wren, robin — all in the first few minutes.
We walked down the woodland ride, past clumps of early purple orchids, past a wild service tree, and past ditches in which grew the tall pendulous sedge, its attractive female flowers swaying in the breeze.
A furry white ermine moth clung to one of the spikes.
Above, the purring song of a turtle dove reverberated.
Another nightingale.
Its voice carried, but it sang unseen.
Nightingales appreciate an open tree canopy with plenty of dense undergrowth and thicket below to provide nesting sites and shelter.
Management policy on the reserve includes a regular coppicing-with-standards rotation, providing the songsters with the habitat they seek.
The practice of coppicing has a long history in Britain.
For centuries trees were cut at an early stage to encourage timber to grow from the stumps: ash, field maple, hazel, hornbeam.
The resulting straight thin poles were readily saleable.
But the practice fell into decline after World War I. When coppicing is reinstated in nature reserves where once they bred, the number of nightingales is likely to increase.
Many of the rides in Monks Wood are wide, measuring up to sixty feet across.
Wide rides are colonised by woodland edge flowers.
The well mown central track grades into taller herbs, into scrub and into high woodland.
Along the ride edges grow cowslip, cuckoo flower, greater stitchwort, wood spurge, wood violet, bugle, yellow archangel and wild strawberry.
Flowers attract butterflies — and Monks Wood is famous for its butterflies.
An orangetip settled on the mauve-white petals of lady's smock (or cuckoo flower).
It was a male orange tip with orange tips to the black-edged wings and a black centre spot.
It closed its wings momentarily and the delicate moss green mottling on the undersides showed.
A female soon flitted by.
No orange tips, but the same green dappling on under wings.
A green-veined white (male) fluttered down, landed briefly, realised its mistake — and flew off.
The two species live as adults for only 12–16 days; in this short time a mate must be found.
Eggs are laid and the caterpillar hatches out, to feed avidly on seed pods of hedge garlic, lady's smock, char lock or dame's violet for about 25 days.
Then it pupates and hibernates through the winter in the chrysalis state — unusually; most butterfly species hibernate as adults or, occasionally, as caterpillars.
In a shaft of sunlight a pair of speckled wood butterflies pirouetted, velvety brown and cream.
Up and down they flitted — one male defending its   territorial patch against the other — spiralling round and round, butterfly bickering.
The interloper gave in and flew off in dizzy flight, back down the ride.
The victor settled in the long grass, wings outspread to show the four pairs of conspicuous circle ‘eyes’, scenting the air to attract a female, and to warn off males.
‘A speckled wood basked in the sun.’
We followed a winding path past hawthorn, dogwood, spindle, guelder-rose, willow, wayfaring tree and dense thickets of blackthorn.
In a scalloped sun-trap glade carpeted with misty bluebells a black cap sang.
The yaffle call of the green woodpecker rang out and, in the distance, came the drumming sound of a lesser spotted woodpecker.
Woodpeckers take advantage of the old trees which are left purposely to rot to provide good holes for tree-nesting birds — for rotten wood harbours a bountiful supply of beetles.
Good management again!
Woodwalton Fen
From Monks Wood, we drove on to Wood Walton Fen, another National Nature Reserve, again managed by the Nature Conservancy Council.
Access is restricted to permit holders and we had booked in advance.
The warden looked worried.
‘I considered putting off your visit,’ he said, ‘the ten is awash after all that rain.’
It turned out that much of Wood Walton would be inaccessible to us that day.
We promised to stick to the ‘drier’ route which he outlined to us.
A snipe was drumming as, obeying instructions and on the lookout for floods, we walked the long bank of a high tyke wall.
Circling round, it climbed steeply, then dived with beating wings and fanned tail.
The  ‘thrumming’ noise is made by the vibrating of the two separated outermost tail feathers: ‘huhuhuhuhuhu’.
A snipe's drumming is one of the nicest of early year sounds.
Woodwalton Fen is a surviving fragment of reed swamp and open water, of woodland carr and wet heath which, at one time, covered a vast area of Cambridgeshire and Lincolnshire.
From the seventeenth century onwards, much of this land to the south of the Wash was drained and it has been farmed intensively ever since.
Wood Walton stands an oasis, surrounded by sunken arable land.
In 1910, the Hon Charles Rothschild purchased 138 hectares of this fenland fragment and declared it a nature reserve.
In the years to follow he purchased a further 70 hectares and asked the Society for the Promotion of Nature Reserves — now the renamed Royal Society for Nature Conservation — to take it into safe keeping.
To preserve Wood Walton as a wetland has been a constant challenge for the Nature Conservancy Council, which leased Wood Walton Fen from the RSNC in 1954.
The NCC is determined to maintain its distinctive scenery and very special flora and fauna for such wetlands, sadly, are always under threat.
We walked along the intersecting tyke walls and met a voluntary warden eager to talk to us about some of the work carried out on the reserve.
Dykes and channels must be kept clear to ensure a constant flow of water.
Invading   scrub is removed with heavy machinery and burnt.
Former open areas of reed and mixed ten vegetation are being steadily reclaimed.
Clay-cored banks have been constructed to form a waterproof perimeter which successfully isolates the reserve.
A sluice system, enabling water to be taken in from external drains and retained, has finally resolved the constant threat of ‘drying out’.
‘Water violets filled the dyke.’
Down dived a switch back snipe once more, ‘huhuhuhuhu’.
Striped plumage, dark head stripes, shining white undercarriage and ludicrously long beak.
‘Pale lilac flowers of water-violet.’
Now we could hear nightingales again, singing against each other in the woodland scrub.
Ankle deep in mud, we squelched across a meadow, stopping to admire the spread of water-violet which filled a tyke, whorls of pale lilac flowers encircling straight stems.
Other wetland flowers would open later in the year; the tall marsh sow thistle which bears yellow flowers, purple and yellow loosestrife, marsh orchid, water crow foot, hemp agrimony, meadow rue, and great banks of comfrey.
On an area of heath to the south, we found the scented bog myrtle and, on a newly constructed bank, grew the very rare ten violet.
Fen violet seed can lie dormant for long periods until conditions are right; disturbed peat caused by scrub clearance — or the trampling of cattle.
It is the excavating of earth for bank construction at Wood Walton that has resulted in the re-emergence of the tiny ten violet flowers.
In such a habitat is also found the great water dock, food plant of the reserve's most notable butterfly, the large copper.
Wood Walton's ‘speciality’, it became extinct in the nineteenth century, but was reintroduced from Holland in 1927 and can be seen on the wing in July.
We were watching a tree pipit in display flight when a sudden downpour took us by surprise and sent us scurrying, as fast as the bossy ground would allow, to the nearest hide.
It looked on to a pool, one of several small pools created by the removal of clay for the reserve's perimeter wall.
Rain sheeted down on gad wall, tufted duck, coot and mallard.
A cuckoo flew low over the reed bed, to be mobbed at once by two reed warblers.
She would probably wait patiently to seize her chance at egg laying, then steal in, for reed warblers are primary hosts to cuckoos in wetland habitat.
The warblers' own young are turfed out of the deeply cupped reed nest by the cuckoo chick soon after it hatches and the foster parents find themselves feeding an enormous monster with a huge red gape and insatiable appetite — a monster which will eventually grow to three times their size.
Rain forced us to curtail our visit.
A moor hen's nest floating away on a swollen tyke told a sad story.
But our last memory was of a nightingale pair, singing in competition in  territories perhaps too close for comfort.
As we approached they flew out, sparred for a brief moment, and then returned to song posts across the dyke-divide.
The lovely song had haunted us, but this was our only satisfactory nightingale sighting of the day.
For such a brief spell each year the bird is with us, its range in Britain restricted to lowlands south-east of a line from the Wash to the Severn estuary.
The breeding season is short, eleven weeks; the incubation period is thirteen days and the young fledge in less than two weeks.
Single-brooded, some nightingales start the flight south — to tropical Savannah, or thorny scrub — at the end of July.
Others follow in August.
So to catch the song those wonderful liquid notes and trills and ‘jug-jug-jugs’— before the few brief weeks are over, is an experience that never fails to thrill.
Fledgling cuckoo
JUNE
Birds of the heath
Suffolk Sandlings
We must have looked an odd bunch to any passing motorist catching us in his headlights.
Dense clouds of midges had forced us to turn up collars and to tuck trousers into socks.
As we crossed over the road we slapped fiercely with bracken fronds at the itchy swarms.
The night was sultry hot and there was thunder in the air.
We were on heath land beyond Minsmere, a relict of the Suffolk Sandlings.
So many people rush to Minsmere Reserve, the deservedly popular showpiece owned and managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds; they tot up the number of species seen on the delectable lagoons and marshes — and forget other habitats in the county which also shelter rather special birds.
So we had spent the day enjoying all that magic Minsmere has to offer — avocets and chicks, black-tailed god wits, marsh harriers soaring overhead, a heavy-flying purple heron, little terns…
And tonight we were defying the midges on a remaining fragment of the once extensive heathland.
It was an hour after sunset and already dark enough to pick out glow-worms in the bracken sparking brightly with a greenish light.
Over the sandy soil we walked, past Scots pines black against the night sky, past silver birch, gorse and heather and all the while we listened intently for night sounds.
Suddenly a high-pitched ‘tsiwick’ rang out.
In slow-flapping flight a bird    flew over the tree tops.
Again the abrupt call, followed by growling croaks: ‘kwark, kwark’.
It dropped back down into cover, a roding woodcock.
Heron
The woodcock is an anomaly: a woodland wader.
In many ways, it is more like an owl than a wader, with its rounded wings, nocturnal habits, and adaptations to a woodland way of life.
But its long bill, silhouetted against the darkening sky as it flew over, is wader-like — and so is its cryptic plumage.
These strange elusive birds indulge in extravagant display flights during the breeding season.
The roding male circles his territory at treetop level, patrolling boundaries with deliberation at dusk and giving the ritual eerie call.
It was a good start to our evening.
The wind was blowing cooler now.
The moon, at its full, was swathed in mist.
Out of the stillness, a lone nightingale began to sing.
We stood and listened.
Pure, clear, far-carrying.
Night time is the best time to hear the nightingale — when it sings alone.
Following a path eastwards through the heather, we came to the edge of the heath land, where silver birches had invaded the bracken.
And another sound: the strangely vibrating, deep churring, of a nightjar.
A long-tailed, hawk-like bird emerged from the trees, dusky shape in the gloom.
It wheeled silently over our heads, circled again, clapped its wings, and dropped back down into silver birches to resume its mechanical sonorous crooning, ‘Krrrrrrrrrr-oo, krrrrrrrrrr-oo’.
Weird, it sounded.
We stood there in the dark, imagining the bird crouched on a branch, turning its head from side to side, slurring from pitch to pitch.
A second night jar started up at a few yards distant.
Territories were close.
Both birds churred their rattle notes warningly at each other, their mates (most likely) on ground-nests below.
Shadowy shapes changed position, flying noiselessly, giving brief glimpses.
It was getting very late.
The moon shone brightly now.
The earlier mist had dispersed.
A small mammal — vole? mouse?— scurried across our path.
As we walked back down the track, the nightingale was still singing.
Breckland, Norfolk
The next day we went to Breckland to look for a bird that some people think of as ‘a bit of a bustard’.
The last great bustard disappeared from Britain early in the nineteenth century.
By 1840 not a single individual remained.
Unfortunately for a bustard, its flesh tastes good.
‘Like Welsh mutton’, according to one report.
Gourmets lured them to piles of turnips, then shot at them with duck-guns.
We shall probably never again be able to witness in the Break the spectacular ‘balloon’ display of the great bustard.
Two hundred years ago, early morning watchers in the sand dunes could have been rewarded by the sight of male bustards inflating their throat pouches into balloons, and extravagantly flaunting their plumages to a bizarre extent in their efforts to  attract a female; white under tail feathers and white under wings were raised high, forced forward, almost turned inside out— and fanned invitingly.
However, today we were seeking, not the long-gone bustard, but the nearest Breckland can offer to such a strange bird: the stone curlew.
The stone curlew was at one time classified in close proximity to the Otididae on the Systematic List of British Birds and declared to be an Otididae-oddity: a close relation of the bustard.
But later experts looked again at the ‘knees’(actually its ‘ankle’ tarsal joints) and at other parts of its anatomy.
In spite of its bustard-like habits and looks, they decided it must be a wader, a Norfolk plover, and a member of the Burhinidae family.
(‘Burhinidae’ means ‘thick knees’.)
that strange bird, the stone curlew.’
We left the car and, armed with NNT permits, headed for a hide belonging to the Norfolk Naturalists' Trust.
A sudden hubbub stopped us in our tracks.
Wheat ears clicked furiously.
Lap wings swooped and pee-witted madly.
Two red-legged partridges scurried by in a panic.
All was agitation.
A stoat had invaded the territory.
It sat up like a squirrel, its spruce brown back tinted chestnut in the sunlight, its belly cream-coloured.
Then it ran, dodging between sandy hillocks, black-tipped tail undulating behind as it attempted to escape the constant buzzing of irate birds.
It ran — stopped — ran.
Almost as if it were playing a game.
Frantic parents continued to hassle and swear and at last the stoat grew tired and bounded off into the cover of a pine tree windbreak.
The fuss and commotion died down.
A wheat ear, in celebration perhaps, flew up and then descended in a slow ‘butterfly’ display flight.
Lap wing chicks emerged from hiding, the fluffiest of tiny balls, speckled, with white collars and white fronts.
And all this time the rabbits had nibbled on, unperturbed — in spite of the fact that rabbits often provide the stoat with a third of its daily food requirements.
We continued to the hide and, through the slits, peered out on to a wilderness of sandy hills and hollows, sparse grass, scattered hawthorn bushes and wind-bent pines.
Like the great bustard, stone curlews are happiest in a semi-desert habitat and Breckland, on the Norfolk/Suffolk border, supplies 
But the bird is adapting.
It now nests beside the busy runways of the American fighter-bomber base at RAF Lakenheath, and resignedly lays its eggs amongst the corn, beet, pea and carrot crops growing in its traditional haunts.
Nests are found, too, in the wide rides of the new forests, and in young plantations where trees are not too tall.
The Suffolk and Norfolk Trusts are anxious to protect the remaining precious heath land, of such particular interest to naturalists; they already own a number of reserves and want to acquire more.
We wandered on, enjoying the flowers which grew on the arid soil: black meddick, heath bed straw, spring vetch, storks bill, red fescue, wild pansy, scarlet pimpernel.
Tufts of sand sedge, precisely spaced, pushed through the sandy soil from nodules on long underground roots.
Butterflies abounded: we saw small copper, green hair streak, grizzled skipper, orange tip, painted lady, common blue, speckled wood, small heath, wall brown and red admiral.
Now we were in forest.
Three bright redstarts darted in and out of piles of brush wood in a clearing.
A wood lark rose, spiralling from a fir.
It hung, fluttering its wings, hovering — and then wavered gently downwards, back into the trees.
‘Short tail,’ pronounced an expert, ‘diagnostic feature of the wood lark.’
We could not hear its lovely song for a vociferous skylark (with long tails was trilling directly overhead.
The day grew hotter.
Ominous thunder rolls threatened rain.
Now the clouds burst.
A short downpour drenched us, but it lasted only a few minutes.
The sun shone once more and our clothes steamed dry.
We were nearing a traditional red-backed shrike patch.
Gorse was ablaze with yellow blossom.
We looked for thorn-impaled insects, victims of the ‘butcher-bird’, but found none.
No shrike.
But stoat, butterflies, wood lark, redstart, wheat ear, lap wing and stone curlews — to remind us of the days when the great bustard roamed the wild sandy spaces of Break in droves.
Eagles of Arran
Isle Arran, Scotland
The Isle of Arran is easy to reach from the mainland in summer.
The car ferry runs several times a day.
Arran is the most southerly of the Inner Hebridean islands, 15 miles away from Ardrossan on the Ayrshire coast.
It is 10 miles across and 19 miles from north to south.
The coastal perimeter road is 56 miles long.
It is a splendid island with prolific bird life, abundant flowers, red deer silhouettes on the skyline, white crofts, stone circles, fine natural harbours and jagged mountain peaks.
On the shingle beach, where the burnet rose grows, ringed plovers incubate eggs in shallow scrapes.
Just offshore, red-breasted mergansers dive smoothly after fish.
Oystercatchers pipe relentlessly in showy fly pasts.
In an early-summer creche, small stripy shelducks are shepherded about the bay by earnest ‘aunties’.
The peaty brown moor land rises up into the hills and makes for rough walking.
Sheep paths lead through the bracken.
Bums tumble and splash.
White bog cotton-grass warns of wet patches.
Up in the hills are the gull colonies, herring gull and lesser black-backed, on the shores of inland windswept lochs.
The unwary climber is dive-bombed by irate parent birds as speckled chicks freeze to stillness behind clumps of raffia-like moor grass.
But the main purpose of our trip to Arran was to see the golden eagle.
Two pairs hold territory on the island.
But where?
We bought a copy of the weekly newspaper,The Arran Banner .
We read of rescue by helicopter of the Pladda Lighthouse Keeper, of an around-Arran sponsored walk, of the twenty-three goals scored against Southend United by the Lam lash football team.
Then, on page 7, we read, ‘John Rhead.
Hill birds all day trail.
Meet Lochranza Golf Car Park.
Great views of Golden Eagle on last week's trail.’
So at 10.30 the next morning we found ourselves waiting at Lochranza, the most northerly point of the island.
‘Fair Loch Ranza, the lone hamlet which her inland bay/And circling mountains sever from the world,’ wrote Sir Walter Scott.
John Rhead arrived and, after only a few minutes, we knew we had found a genuine birder.
A local man with eyes like a hawk's, a sound knowledge of the terrain and a fund of good ‘birdy’ stories, he inspired us with optimism.
If John Rhead couldn't find golden eagles for us, then no-one could.
He led us up a steep track until we were 1,000 feet above the long Lochranza inlet.
Grey seals basked on boulders in a flat calm in Scott's ‘inland bay’, close to the ruins of the historic castle.
Stands of yellow iris blossomed  on the black tidal silt of the shoreline.
Far out, white shoots of spray marked where gannets from Ails a Craig plummetted into the sea after fish.
We could see more islands, Bute, Jura, Great Cumbrae, Islay.
Then we turned our backs and walked into the hills.
Rabbits scurried at our approach.
Small moor land birds ‘clink'-ed their alarm.
Wheat ears, whinchats, stone chats — all share call notes akin to the clinking sound of pebbles, had we noticed? said John.
He pointed out a family group of ‘hoodies’.
Hooded crows are a northern form of the carrion crow.
Where hoodies and carrions meet — as they do on Arran — hybridisation occurs.
But, high in the hills, true hoodies are common with pale grey bodies, black heads, black tails and black wings.
Beneath a stunted row an tree the group was busily engaged, perhaps feasting on a rabbit carcase.
A glossy black raven flew by: ‘Diamond-shaped tail,’ said John.
Meadow pipits rose, singing, into the air, and ‘tseep-tseep'-ed down again in a slow parachute descent.
Suddenly our guide stopped.
‘There!’ he exclaimed triumphantly.
We followed his pointing finger.
A flock of gulls…and a great soaring bird with long broad wings.
Golden eagle!
It rose upwards and away from the harassing gulls, tilted, and swept strongly and fast across the sky.
Heavy head, long tail, rectangular wings.
It disappeared from sight behind the slope of the hill.
Then reappeared, gliding, soaring.
And a second eagle followed.
‘The eagle swept across the sky.’
John told us that he had devoted many hours the previous year in observation of the golden eagles of Arran, recording their every move.
First he had had to apply for permission (not easy to get) from the Nature Conservancy Council.
The golden eagle, at one time persecuted to near extinction by game keepers, is now a strictly protected bird.
Eagles start to breed in their fifth year.
They are a long-lived species and a pair will not lay eggs every year.
Mostly just one chick survives.
The first to hatch often kills its younger siblings soon after they emerge from the eggs: the ‘Cain and Abel syndrome’.
The eagles vanished from sight and we walked on.
‘Watch out for adders basking in the sun,’ warned John, ‘this track is known as ‘adders’path’.’
The bubbling notes of a female cuckoo rang out as, rounding a bend and finding ourselves with the sea again in view, we settled to picnic.
Above us, on a ledge, the conspicuous white breast feathers of a male peregrine caught John's eye.
He pointed it out to us.
It was not the falcon's nesting site, John wisely keeps all such eyries a closely guarded secret; Scotland has more than its fair share of egg stealers.
The bird took off.
With a burst of terrific speed it headed out to sea.
‘Watch,’ said John.
‘I think we might be going to see a kill — perhaps a pigeon.
Keep your binocs on him.’
Fast and furiously he flew.
We kept him in view until he was just a speck in the distance.
There, a second speck.
It was another peregrine: his mate?
We were not to see the famous ‘stoop’ dive on to prey after all.
The two falcons flew together and disappeared into cloud.
That wasn't the last of the day's raptors.
As we began our slithery descent to the shore, a kestrel hovered above the brow of the hill.
Below us, the pale grey shape of a quartering male hen harrier flew back and forth over reed beds until it spied prey — and on an instant dropped to the ground.
We weren't far away from the ruins of an old settlement, abandoned at the time of the dreadful Clearances by islanders who, driven by impossible conditions, bravely set out for the unknown territories of Canada to start their lives afresh.
We were walking downhill now and reached the shingle to head north for the Cock of Arran.
A buzzard hung in the wind, balancing on a current of air.
Over-eager bird watchers are tempted to ‘turn’ buzzards into eagles.
Size is often difficult to judge, but the rounded wings of the buzzard are so much shorter that once the sheer length of an eagle's wings has been experienced, it is impossible to mistake the two.
We scrambled over a great fall of rocks, and jumped over burns trickling into the sea.
Across the water the Mull of Kin tyre was shrouded in mist but on the Cock of Arran the sun still shone.
Beneath the cliff nestled primroses, ragged robin, pink thrift, sea camp ion, birds foot trefoil, yellow pimpernel, milkwort.
Two sandpipers landed lightly on a boulder and raised their wings high in a courtship gesture.
The cooing calls of eider ducks carried across the bay ‘Ooooooo-OO-oo, ooooooo-OO-oo.’
We continued full circle back to Lochranza.
Two more golden eagle sightings were ours on the way.
We had the expertise of our guide to thank.
John knew exactly where to bring us.
His long experience of bird watching in the hills of Arran had taught him the best vantage points.
But no bird can ever be guaranteed .
Luck , too, was with us that day.
Dean Watch
Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire
‘So what do you want to see?’ asked the Warden of Nags head RSPB
Reserve.
‘Redstarts, pied flycatchers, woodpeckers, wood warblers, nuthatches…’
‘Then you must make yourselves invisible,’ he said.
‘Follow the way marked paths, keep your distance from birds feeding their young-and skulk.’
The Forest of Dean, set between two rivers, the Wye and the Severn, is one of Britain's few remaining ancient forests.
The Forestry Commission owns the bulk of its 28,500 acres and manages several nature reserves jointly with bodies such as the Nature Conservancy Council, Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the Gloucestershire Trust for Nature Conservation.
Waymarked paths, planned with the help of the Ramblers' Association, are helpful innovations; coloured arrows painted on posts at junctions mark the trails.
On this day in early June, the foliage was so lush, and the birds at this crucial young-rearing stage so wary that, although we could hear birds all around us, not a glimpse of a feather would we see — unless we followed the Warden's advice, and skulked.
I crept off down a little path through curling bracken.
Pink foxgloves grew tall.
Bluebells were fading has-beens but yellow pimpernel, white stitchwort and the tiny flowers of blue milkwort brightened the grass of a small clearing.
With my back against the stout trunk of an oak tree I crouched still, hoping that my green anorak was blending nicely with the surround, and trying to ignore the gnats which promptly and itchily invaded my scalp.
Forest of Dean above the River Wye
Our locale was one of the best remaining stands of oak in the Forest.
In the sixteenth century the Spanish Armada, before its abortive attempt to invade Britain.
was ordered to destroy.
if nothing else.
the oak trees of the    Forest of Dean.
From the oak came the timber with which British ships were built.
Oak woodland is well known to be particularly rich in many species of bugs, thrips, aphids, beetles, gall wasps, leaf miners and moth caterpillars, all chomping away at leaves, twigs, buds or each other.
An oak tree, to a bird, must equal a fresh-food, self-service, take-away delicatessen.
The critical breeding season coincides with peak insect population.
Hatching of eggs synchronises with the annual ‘bloom’ of caterpillars.
Foliage gleaning birds pick insects off the leaves; bark-investigators probe with sharp beaks into cracks; ground-feeders scavenge for caterpillars which have dropped from trees in order to pupate.
A wren scrabbled in leaf litter a few yards away: tiny, rufous-brown, pert tailed.
Then it hopped into bramble cover and was lost from view.
It ‘tick'ed vigorously and, a moment later, burst into dramatic song.
Singing from several other species, hidden completely by the dense canopy of leaves, tantalised.
Robins, willow warblers, blackbirds, song thrushes, blue ties, great ties teased with their nearness — and invisibility.
Forty feet away was a nest box fixed to a tree trunk at a height of 8 feet above the ground.
I waited patiently, sitting very still, for the arrival of its occupant.
A delightful small black and white bird appeared: a male pied flycatcher.
He flew to a dead branch, paused for a moment, and then darted in through the hole of the nest box.
A moment later he emerged.
Through my binoculars I could see the white wing bars and the slightly bizarre face pattern: two small blobs of white — like false eyes — on his forehead.
Pied flycatchers have been the subject of study in the Forest of Dean ever since 1942 when the first eighty boxes were nailed into place.
More boxes are added each year and checked periodically.
Pied-fly's arrive at the end of April from tropical Africa and are on the move again in July; the short breeding season lasts about forty days.
Sociable little birds, they take readily to boxes in lieu of holes in trees.
‘The more boxes, the more pied flycatchers,’ conclude naturalists.
Pied-fly numbers have increased dramatically since nest box provision has become widespread practice in the sessile oak woods they prefer.
A brown and white female appeared with a crane fly in her beak.
She landed on a twig, took stock, and shot into the box — to feed her brood.
I crept back the few yards to the way marked path and walked on down the track.
Sessile oaks?
I inspected an over-hanging branch.
The leaves had distinct short stalks, a clue that it was a sessile oak.
But the acorns, when they appeared, would be un stalked (‘sessile’ =sitting).
Leaves of pedunculate oaks are generally unstalked; the acorns grow on stalks (peduncles).
But hybridisation between pedunculate and sessile oaks, the two oak species native to Britain, often occurs in areas where both are found.
Sessile oak woods are commonest on the poorer acid soils of the north and west and the characteristic openness and lack of shrub layer beneath the canopy proves attractive to a certain bird clientele, including the pied flycatchers.
‘T-t-t-trrrrrrrrr peu, peu, peu’.
Wood warbler song.
A single note lead-up to a shivering trill, followed by clear, far-carrying, falling whistles.
I climbed up on to a bank to see.
On the lower branch of a hazel tree, a greenish bird with a very white belly was singing vigorously.
Its sulphur-yellow throat was visibly pulsating with the effort.
Wood warblers are another typical bird of sessile oak woods.
A caterpillar dangled in front of me, hanging in mid-air by a silver thread attached to an oak tree twig.
It was so close that I could see the tiny ball of silk held between its front pair of legs and its jaws.
It jerked and looped and lurched energetically, finally landing upon an oak leaf.
It then snapped the thread, and the minute silver ball swung gently free.
Scrunch, scrunch; it began to eat the leaf.
I wandered on a little further, catching glimpses through the trees of a deep valley and hills beyond.
I met other bird watchers and we swopped sightings.
I was told to look out for a redstart at the next bend, its black face and chestnut tail showing for brief moments as it darted into the open, out and back, fly catching.
An adder had been seen; it slowly wound its way along the track before sensing intruders and slithering off into cover.
Obligingly it had allowed time for everyone to note its zig-zag back stripe ending with the V on its head.
Someone else had watched, in icky fascination, two large slugs in the process of a slimy mating; a complicated business, for each slug is both male and female, and both ooze away to lay eggs!
‘Listen for the hawfinch, ‘ptik’…and a garden warbler singing high in a beech tree where an opening in the trees overlooks the valley.’
And a cinnamon and blue nuthatch had been seen creeping up the trunk of a tree towards its mud-patched nesting hole, giving one lad a splendid chance to try out his new birthday present telescope.
All the same, ‘tantalising’ was the word I heard most often from bird watchers that day.
A cuckoo flew over, calling loudly, invisible above the canopy of leaves.
Just a glimpse did I get of a boldly patterned — red, black and white — great spotted woodpecker, and yet its drumming was constantly in my ears.
A jay appeared — momentary flash of azure blue wings — to screech and vanish.
Jackdaws flocked noisily at the back of the wood; only occasionally  did their silhouettes show black against the sky.
We kept our distance from nests and stuck close to paths, very conscious of the vulnerability of young birds and the urgent searchings for food of anxious parents.
By the end of the day each of us had our own small nest-egg of vivid memories to take home and treasure.
The Forest of Dean in June is both tantalising — and very rewarding.
Scenic Trail
Lake Vyrnwy, Powys
The scenic Lake Vyrnwy Nature Trail begins at the ornate Victorian dam and leads up through woodland, both deciduous and coniferous, into the heathery hills.
In the 1880s, the expanding population of Liverpool led to an increased demand for water.
It was decided to flood the glacial valley of Vyrnwy at the south-western end of the Berwyn Mountains.
With its steep sides, flat impermeable rock floor and narrow bottle-neck shape, it was an ideal site for a reservoir.
Villagers were moved to higher ground, the great barrage was built, and the flooding began.
Today a narrow road follows closely the eleven mile perimeter of inlets and bays.
Trees, planted in generous numbers, have grown and spread from the shoreline upwards into the hills.
There is little to show, apart from the dam, that the lake is man-made and not natural.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds obtained a twenty-one-year agreement with the Severn-Trent Water Authority which allows them to manage best for wildlife the 16,000 acres of the Vyrnwy Estate.
We parked in the car park and picked up copies of the RSPB-designed trail leaflet at the Visitor Centre, a converted stone chapel.
This chapel was built after the flooding, to serve the new village.
Now it is no longer used for worship, but acts as a useful starting point to the day's walking.
Should we do the short route 7 or the long 7 The long, of course!
We turned our backs on the reservoir and walked through sessile oak and birch woodland to ‘Stop One’.
Already we could hear the ‘tea -cher,tea -cher’ call of the great tie and the ‘pink-pink'ing of chaff inches.
Many of the nest boxes nailed to trunks of trees were occupied.
Of those positioned each year well over half are used, by blue ties, great ties, marsh ties, pied flycatchers, nut hatches, redstarts and tawny owls.
Detouring a little, we crossed over the alder-fringed river by footbridge.
A great spotted woodpecker was climbing, with little jerky-jump movements, its tail braced, up the trunk of a dead conifer.
Disdaining man-made boxes, it had excavated its own hole — into which it now disappeared.
Thirty yards on, a ‘little brown job’ sat very upright on a wire fence.
Then out — and back — it shuttled.
And again.
Typical behaviour of the spotted flycatcher — the sally forth, momentary hover, snatch at a fly and return.
We started to climb, accompanied by intermittent snatches of bird song: wood warbler, garden warbler and willow warbler.
But song is less evident in late June.
The courtship, territory-defending days have given way to busy days of food-seeking and brood-raising.
We left the trees behind and emerged into the open.
House martins and swallows skimmed low after flying insects; more pressurised parents with hungry youngsters to feed.
The sun shone down on the grassy slopes, accentuating petal colour: blue of germander speed well, pink of camp ion, mauve of tufted vetch and white of stitchwort.
Pig nut, a delicate umbellifer, was in flower; and yellow rattle and tormentil.
We were high on the hillslope now.
We turned to look back.
Below lay the reservoir, offset by the panorama of mountains.
A buzzard sailed over the high crags and bare peat moors of Craig y Gribin.
It was a picture postcard view and we settled on the grass to enjoy it — and to eat our sandwiches.
Family parties of long-tailed ties trilled and acrobat Ed in the willow scrub close by.
We counted the small, pink blobs with their ludicrously long tails.
Eleven.
The young ones were less strongly coloured and still had a downy look about them.
Then on we walked, over heather moor land now.
A wheat ear ‘chack'ed.
‘Weep, chack, chack’ it called: erect stance, black eye patch, corn-coloured breast, grey and black mantle.
It flicked its black tail with the heart-shaped white pattern.
(The name, ‘wheat ear’, is derived from its earlier name, ‘white-arse’!–Wheat ears are birds of hilly country, of short turf and boulders, of bracken, and of rabbit holes in which they can nest.
A yellow hammer sang from its perch in a patch of gorse and a grey wag tail flew over.
Meadow pipits flitted across the grass and skylarks chirruped.
Over 120 species of birds have been recorded on the reserve.
‘A wheatear ‘chack’ ed.’
Once more the scenery changed as we entered a plantation of larch, spruce and Douglas fir.
A thin squeaking betrayed the presence of two baby gold crests, precariously balanced on the branch of a larch.
A parent bird was feeding them on…daddy-long-legs?
With much wobbling, the tiny fledglings stretched their wings, fluffed their feathers and hopped in pretend flight.
‘Cher -tee,cher -tee,cher -tee’: there was a coal tie, too, in amongst the needles.
Circular clumps of elegant male fem grew from a stone bank beside the track.
Foxgloves had opened their mitten flowers.
We looked for squirrels red squirrel and grey squirrel — live happily side by side at Vyrnwy — but today they were deep in the forest.
Out into the sunshine again.
‘Peacock butterfly,’ said Jane.
It was sunning itself on the path.
Tatty and faded now, it had survived hibernation through the winter.
In a few weeks' time this year's peacocks, immaculately spruce, would emerge from pupae.
Next, a steep uphill slog.
‘Merits three rests at least,’ decided Alan.
Trees up here were young, in a recently planted mixed plantation.
Rose bay willow-herb, not yet in flower, had colonised the cinder track.
The finding of a huge wolf.
spider, tiny sparkling beetles and a glossy, bright striped bug, gave us excuse to pause and get our breath.
Three kestrels diverted with an acrobatic aerial display.
We reached ‘Stop Seven’, the final halt.
We had walked three miles, circling Craig Garth-bwlch.
From now on it was downhill all the way, with a marvellous view of Lake Vyrnwy and the possibility of finding goosander, dipper, grey wag tail, sandpiper and kingfisher on its shores and waters to entice us on.
‘Wing-Winnowing Lark…'
Helpston, Cambridgeshire
We went to Helpston, near Peterborough, to ‘see the skylark as he springs/ shake morning moisture from his wings/ and rise and sing to music proud/ as small as a bee beneath the cloud.’
Helpston is the village where John Clare was born in 1793 and the poet knew, from personal experience, at least 145 wild birds.
He recorded in prose and verse his observations.
‘The wild duck wherries to the distant flood…''Whizz goes the peewit o'er  the ploughman's team/ with many a whew and whirl and sudden scream…’ 'A sedge bird built its little benty nest/ close by the meadow-pool and wooden brig…’
The cottage next to the Bluebell Inn is Clare's birthplace.
‘My early home was paradise,’ he wrote in his diary.
‘There is nothing but poetry about the existence of childhood.’
His parents seemed to have given him every encouragement and his first poems were imitations of his father's songs.
He wrote that his mother's ‘hopeful ambition ran high of being able to make me a good scholar.’
John was perhaps fortunate in that his was a small family: mother, father, two children.
Most villagers were encumbered with the huge broods of the day and it was as much as worn parents could do to keep them warm and fed But John's parents had time to give.
They took an interest in his schooling John's father, a thresher, was the illegitimate son of a Scottish schoolmaster.
Clare's cottage
With ‘triumphant anxiety’, they looked on as the boy worked of an evening at his ‘sheep-hooks and tar bottles’(handwriting exercises) or struggled with ‘a knotty question in Numeration or Pounds shillings and Pence’.
He loved books, bought them when he could, and soon knew much of the writing of past and contemporary poets by heart.
His collection, consisting of 440 volumes, can be seen today in Northampton Public Library.
He began to write his own verse whilst still quite young, shyly at first, correcting again and again as his ‘second thoughts blushed over his first attempts’.
But gradually he gained confidence.
Meanwhile he had to keep himself.
He worked as labourer, plough boy, shepherd, gardener, lime-burner and hedge-planter.
‘I found the poetry in the fields and only wrote them down,’ he explained.
‘Birds bees trees and flowers all talk to me incessantly louder than the busy hum of men.’
John would not recognise the Helps ton cottage today.
Smartened up, it gleams with whitewash under a neat roof of thatch.
But sparrows still nest beneath the eaves.
Clare had a soft spot for the much-persecuted birds.
‘You're welcome here,’ he told them, and he wrote, ‘Fighting sparrows glad at heart/ chirp in the cottage eaves.’
We left the village and walked across the fields on ‘footpath's narrow way’ towards Hilly Wood.
The sky was full of lark song.
Clare wrote many lines in praise of the skylark.
‘Wing-winnowing lark with speckled breast…’ 'The lark with sudden impulse starts and sings/ and mid the smoking rain/ quivers her russet wings…’'Till mixing with the vapour's dun/ he's lost in valleys of the sun…’'Then hangs a dust spot in the sunny skies/ and drops and drops.’
He describes a skylark's nest which he found tucked away in a hoof print: ‘Behind a clod/ how snug the nest/ is in a horse's footing fixed/ of twitch and stubbles roughly dressed/ with roots and horsehair intermixed.’
A yellow hammer ‘fluttered in short fears’ a few yards in front of us.
Then flew up and settled on the girder of a pylon, showing off its ‘yellow breast and head of solid gold’.
In its beak was a large green caterpillar.
It must have a nest close by with, perhaps, ‘five eggs, pen scribbled o'er with ink/ their shells resembling writing scrolls’.
Black-headed gulls (‘cawdy-mawdies’) circled the fields as we walked: ‘White cawdy-mawdies slow swiver and sail.’
We reached Hilly Wood.
Wood pigeons, alarmed, fled with much commotion at our approach.
‘…through many boughs with cluttering noise/ till free from such restraints above their head/ they smacked their clapping wings.’
We could hear other birds too.
A wren sang exuberantly, with ‘short tail ever on the strut/ cocked gadding up above his back.
’ Chaff inches, which Clare called ‘pinks’, willow warblers (‘pettichaps’), great ties (‘blackcaps’) and blue ties (‘bluecaps’); we heard them all in song, and a blackbird too.
‘The      rich blackbird through his golden bill utters wild music.’
Gannet and young
Dragonflies
Back down the old Roman road we walked.
A cuckoo flew across.
‘And cuckoo, quivering upon narrow wing/ take sudden flitting from the neighbouring tree.’
Like John Clare we, too, heard its ‘full toned anthem with two simple notes’.
A mile's drive south in the car took us to all that remains of Clare's beloved heath land.
‘There is a wild and beautiful neglect…’
Emmonsailes Heath, now known as Ails worth Heath, shrank drastically during Clare's life time, the result of the Enclosure Act which was enforced in Helps ton in 1809.
Clare was sixteen.
He raged against the carving up of the land into ‘little parcels little minds to please’.
He wrote poems in protest, railing against the ‘never-weary plough’.
‘Enclosure like a Buonaparte let not a thing remain/ it levelled every bush and tree and levelled every hill/ and hung the moles for traitors — though the brook is running still/ it runs a naked stream cold and chill,’ he proclaimed vehemently.
The remnant of surviving heath land is owned by the Nature Conservancy Council.
Castor Hanglands Reserve is a superb woodland area for birds.
We followed a pleasant bridle path through trees and soon found ourselves listening to the sweet bubbling song of a black cap.
Clare was aware that black caps occasionally over winter, and that their song is sometimes mistaken for that of a nightingale.
‘With a rich and such an early song it sings’ when ‘sallow catkins once all downy white/ turn like the sunshine into golden light…yet on the hawthorn scarce a leaf appears.’
A pond had flooded our path in a ‘hazel-crowded glen’.
We negotiated with care.
Three tiny fluffy moor hen chicks, ‘a sooty brood’, cheeped loudly and paddled for shelter beneath a pile of brush wood.
‘Each leaves for water as it leaves the nest,’ Clare wrote of moorhen chicks.
A pied wag tail dabbled in the wet.
‘The standing pools were covered with a sort of hairy moss/ and the little nodding wag tail/ printed many paths across.‘
We emerged from the trees.
A hawk flew low, rusty red in the sun's glow, black band visible on its tails a kestrel.
Clare described the kestrel's hover as it hangs ‘in the sky on narrow pointed quivering wings’, and its plummet to earth: ‘The small hawk like a shot drops from the sky/ close to my feet for mice and creeping things.’
A climb over a stile — and a redstart sang its short phrases from the branch of an ash: ‘The fire-tail's ‘tweet-tut’ fretting call/ keeps up a teasing melody.’
When Clare's first book was published in 1820, he enjoyed a brief fame, including trips to London and contact with other writers.
But from then on his life, increasingly, consisted of frustrations and disappointments.
His financial position was often desperate.
His wife, Patsy, bore him eight ill-nourished, ailing children.
His editors meddled excessively with his work — and then didn't manage to sell it.
(‘If doctors were as fond of amputations  as editors are of altering and correcting the world would have nothing but cripples,’ he grumbled.)
In 1832, he moved away from his beloved Helps ton to a larger house in bleak North borough on the edge of the tens.
By 1837 he was an inmate of an asylum in Epping Forest.
Sad though his life was from then on until his death in 1864, his poems — many of them — remained joyful.
So often he begins a line with ‘I love…’ 'I love to see…’
I love to roam…’
The last poem to survive in manuscript form was a happy one: ‘Birds’ Nests'.
We drove from Castor Hanglands to Maxey and found the haunted path where Clare had walked ‘very fearful’ each week as a boy to collect flour from the mill.
A low-flying heron did its best to evoke atmosphere; ‘The old heron from the lonely lake/ starts slow and flaps his melancholy wings.’
And jackdaws in their ‘powdered wigs’ rose in a flock from fields of maize and sugar beet.
Back in Clare's village house martins skimmed, repairing cup-like nests glued close under the eaves of a farmhouse.
‘Round the pond the martins flit/ their snowy breasts  bedaubed with dirt/ while the mason ‘neath the slates/ each mortar-bearing bird awaits/ untaught by art each labouring spouse/ curious daubs his hanging house.’
Swifts rode high above the roof tops, screeching, swooping after summer gnats.
‘Swift goes the sooty swallow…swifter than skims the cloud-rack of the skies.’
Peeping over a garden wall, we saw a robin ‘watching worms the gardener's spade unbears’.
And, under the hedge, a dunnock: ‘The tame hedge-sparrow in its russet dress/ is half a robin for its gentle ways.’
Crows acrobated above a dead elm tree, ‘The crow will tumble up and down/ at first sign of spring/ and in old trees around the town/brush winter from its wing.’
On the village green stands a memorial to the poet.
Swallows ‘twittered gladly by’ as we paused to read the lines.
We stood by Clare's grave in the churchyard and flocks of starlings flew overhead, ‘blackening the evening sky’.
Each year in early July, the John Clare Society holds a festival in Helps ton to celebrate the poet's birthday.
An excellent Journal, published annually ‘to reflect the interest in, and approaches to, the life and work of the poet’ will be on sale at the Festival (free to members).
It was through the Society's occasional Newsletter that I came to hear about, and attend, a residential weekend course at Horn castle College of Adult Education in Lincolnshire.
Rodney Lines, editor of the Newsletter, and  Baron Wright taught me much that was new to me about a favourite poet.
And, at first opportunity, I went with a fellow Clare admirer to look for John Clare's birds.
The success of the day surprised us both.
And we shall see more birds if we visit again in winter when ‘The field fare chatters in the whistling thorn…’,
‘The wild swan hurries high and noises loud/ with white neck peering to the evening cloud,’ and ‘Coy bum barrels [long-tailed tits]twenty in a drove/ lit  down the hedgerows in the frozen plain/ and hang on little twigs and start again.‘
James Fisher, the eminent ornithologist, wrote, ‘John Clare was the finest poet of British minor naturalists, and the finest naturalist of all Britain's major poets.
He fell into some pitfalls…but the combination of keen observation with poetic skill, of accuracy with emotion, in his poems is unique in British verse.’
Gannets
Bempton Cliffs, Humberside
A three-mile stretch of the 400-foot high Bempton Cliffs at Flamborough Head is owned by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, bought with money raised by children of the Puffin Club (Penguin Books).
These are the highest chalk cliffs in the country and the site of the only mainland gannetry in Britain.
June is the best month for sea bird assignments.
Eggs are hatching, chicks emerging.
Outside the breeding season birds vacate the ledges to wander the oceans.
We parked the car at the end of Cliff Lane.
As we walked towards the white chalk cliffs, a cacophony of sound greeted us: gruntings, trumpetings, squaw kings, me wings, growlings.
Then the pungent smell hit us, rotting fish and seaweed.
We stood at the railed-off observation platform at Bartlet Nab and looked down on to a spectacular scene.
Rows of guillemots, densely packed, squatted on narrow sills.
Most faced inwards, backs against the wind, nodding, bowing, dozing, brooding, shuffling webbed feet.
The chalk is flinty nearer the top of the cliff and weathers easily to provide niches for sea birds.
Razor bills, less gregarious than guillemots, choose wider ledges on which to lay eggs, or retreat into narrow crevices.
Puffins buzzed below us with short wings whirring, zooming out to sea and back, to disappear into holes in the crumbling top layer of boulder clay.
Guillemots are chocolate brown and white.
Razor bills are black and white with deep, square bills.
Puffins are, of course, quite  unmistakable , small and rotund behind the incongruously large striped triangular bill, with bright orange legs and feet.
We walked on, through a kissing gate, to Nettletup.
On a guillemot ledge were two green eggs exposed to view.
Broad at one end, tapering at the other, the shape guarantees that, if knocked, a harmless spin, instead of a disastrous rolling over the edge of the ledge is the result.
‘A guillemot with specs on!’
Five bridled guillemots stood grouped    together.
The curious fine white lines around the eyes resemble spectacles.
A few ‘bridled’ birds are found in most colonies.
One bridled gilly held his head high and with effort painful to watch, gulped down a long sand eel, head first.
Auks are ‘site-faithful’, often returning to the same ledge and the same partner year after year.
‘Seabirds on a chalk cliff;
Along the top of the cliff we walked.
Fulmars planed below, stubby necked, stiff-winged: a short burst of flapping followed by a long glide.
They follow the line of the cliff edge closely and seem curious at the presence of humans.
At one nest site a pair displayed excitedly, preparing for a duty change.
The off-duty fulmar had returned to relieve his/ her partner for a spell from the shared task of egg incubation.
With wide open beaks both birds cackled —‘Kek-kek-kek-kek-kek-kek’— voices rising to an explosive crescendo.
Sitting close, they threw back their heads and swayed ecstatically, a performance that precedes each shuffle on — or off — the egg.
We crossed over a stile.
A cloud of small white gulls flew over our heads to land on the grass beyond: kittiwakes.
Energetically, they plucked at the grass, tearing up beakfuls.
Back they flew, beaks stuffed with this handy nesting material.
Kittiwake nests are extraordinary creations, hollowed cups of mud, grass and seaweed.
Plastered to tiny projections on the chalk face, the majority survive howling gales and tempestuous spray-lashings.
Tier upon tier of nests stud the chalk.
An estimated 50,000 pairs of kittiwakes breed at Bempton and thousands more breed elsewhere on Flamborough Head.
Many of these nests now contained, in the month of June, sitting birds keeping their unhatched eggs warm.
In other nests fluffy young flopped sleepily, or raised heads in hopeful anticipation of the next fishy meal.
‘Kitti-wa-a-a-ake, kitti-wa-a-a-ake.’
The plaintive calls echoed and re-echoed.
In and out of coves flitted the gulls, small and pretty, with softly rounded heads and neat yellow bills.
Triangular black (‘dipped in ink’) wing tips lack the white dot markings of larger gulls.
Out at sea flocks hovered and plunged for fish.
We climbed one more stile.
Three huge white birds flew low over the waves.
We had reached the famous gannetry.
On cliff ledges at ‘Jubilee Corner’ gannets sat in rows: white bodies, yellow ochre heads, glassy blue eyes, bluish-white dark-lined dagger bills.
‘Urrah, urrah, urrah’: their growling calls carried above the sound of the sea — and all those other bird noises.
Gannets were first recorded at Bempton in the 1920s and 1930s.
One, sometimes two, pairs were reported.
In the 1960s numbers began to increase, as they have increased in colonies elsewhere.
Now the population estimate is around 650 pairs.
We stayed all day, suffering short drenching showers of rain and drying out in the hot spells in between.
We climbed over more stiles and braved a herd of well-behaved bullocks.
The sea below was so clear that it was possible to  enjoy the underwater antics of swimming guillemots, even from such a height.
The summery sound of a corn bunting's ‘jangling keys’ song followed us across the fields as, at day's end, we finally made our way back to the car.
Grassholm Island, Pembrokeshire, Dyfed
It was inevitable that, as I had stood watching the gannets at Bempton, memories of a visit to Grassholm came flooding back.
We'd approached the remote, uninhabited Welsh island, twelve miles off the coast, in the Cubango .
The steep, rocky prominence resembled a snow-capped mountain, so startlingly white were the birds and their droppings on top.
‘Pooh, the stench!’ we protested.
Gannets circled out to meet us, black tipped wings with a six-foot span beat the air with stately strokes.
Hundreds sailed above our heads.
Splash!
Straight and swift they dived into the sea after fish, dropping like stones, torpedoing downwards.
Up shot bursts of spray.
The water was green and glassy calm.
One by one we clambered out of the boat and on to the slippery rocks of an inlet.
Kittiwake noise greeted us.
A small colony nested on the basalt rock face.
We scrambled to the top.
Gannets, gannets, gannets.
Thousands of the dazzling white birds were spaced across the summit in close proximity.
Male and female take turns to perch on the bulky drum-nest of seaweed, incubating the single stained white egg.
Hatched-out chicks, shapeless bundles of woolly white down, are fed regurgitated food from crops; small heads disappear into the gapes of parent birds.
There was much aggressive posturing, bowing, beating of half-open wings.
In comers landed clumsily and made their tricky way nest ward; outgoers waddled to the edge of the rock and plunged sea wards.
Some were immature birds in brown and black speckled plumage still.
The volume of noise was deafening.
We picnicked in a patch of golden samphire.
A loud burst of singing gave away the presence of the ubiquitous wren.
Dark rock pipits explored wet boulders.
A surprising chaff inch flew down to peck at our crumbs.
Thirty grey seals basked offshore.
A nesting cormorant glared at us with green eyes, its black feathers glossed with a purple sheen.
Two foggy-brown young hissed, and cowered nervously in their nest of dried seaweed.
The gannetry at Grassholm, with perhaps 22,000 pairs of birds, is an astonishing sight.
Boat trips to the island are infrequent, possible only in perfect weather conditions.
But the gannets of Bempton Cliffs are within easy reach of all.
JULY
Fledglings — and Flowers
Wasdale Head,.
Cumbria
Wasdale Head boasts the highest mountain, the deepest lake and the smallest (although it is one of several claimants) church in England.
The road to the Head winds from the coast, past Wastwater with its forbidding scree slopes, to come to a halt here, thwarted by the Scafell masses in all their stern grandeur.
Scafell, Scafell Pike, Great Gable, Yewbarrow, Kirkfell, Illgill Head: the place is a fellwalker's dream.
But I am not the most efficient of fell walkers; others may go up top to conquer the summits; I prefer to wander in the dales.
July, in the dales, is an excellent month for seeing ‘summer’ birds.
Young have fledged.
Families are flocking.
The juveniles, many speckled still with yellow gapes, are unafraid.
It is easy to stalk close, to enjoy their unashamed begging, their wing quivering and plaintive cheeping — and the frantic efforts of parents to satisfy insatiable appetites.
The young will not be pampered so for much longer but meanwhile, for the bird watcher, it is an entertaining time.
I found myself not only enjoying the birds, but the flowers as well.
It is our custom, as a family, to visit the Lake District in the peaceful, tourist-free month of October when campsites are uncrowded, autumnal colours of trees amaze — but flower presence is scant.
But for once we had chosen mid-summer — and wild flowers bloomed in profusion.
So I did not spend all my time peering upwards, searching the skies for those rumoured golden eagles.
The predominant flower colour was yellow.
Yellow tormentil dotted the grass.
Yellow pimpernel, dandelion, cat's ear, hawk bit, St John's wort and birdsfoot trefoil gilded the slopes.
Flowers — and fledglings.
Young wheat ears flitted across from the top of one drystone wall to another in front of me as I walked.
Out of the corner of my eye I thought I saw a white butterfly — but it was the white pattern on the tail of an adult, checking up on the brood.
‘Creamy honeysuckle.’
Two just-out-of-the-nest meadow pipits sat on a gate post.
A parent bird flew down with caterpillar in beak.
It must have been a very juicy caterpillar for, after satisfying the hunger of one offspring, several minutes were spent in fastidious beak-cleaning on a convenient patch of crinkly lichen.
Hare bells — and sheets of yellow buttercups.
Three young swallows, palely coloured yet, perched precariously on a telegraph wire, wobbling, teetering, losing their grip, clutching again frantically.
They could not have been long fledged; the white on their bellies still had a downy look.
Handsome, glossy blue-black, red-throated, white breasted, fork-tailed adult swallows dipped and twisted and soared, snatching winged insects from the sky and passing the insect ‘packets’ to their wire clinging young.
Sometimes the youngsters flew a few feet up into the air to take the offering — to return immediately to the safety of the wire.
A redpoll flock in a stand of willows, ruby-red foreheads glowing in the sunlight…young willow warblers calling softly, ‘oo-ee, oo-ee’…midge-collecting martins…sky-scything swifts…meadow pipits, skylarks: there was no shortage of birds.
A common sandpiper bobbed on a boulder on the hillside, quietly piping, a muted whistle.
As I neared it changed to a shrill triple ‘peep-peep-peep’.
Heather, foxgloves, water forget-me-not…
Now I had reached the Was dale Head Hotel.
I crossed over the little pack horse bridge.
Challenging the fast-flowing stream, a black and white dipper ‘swam’ against the current, half-submerged as it snapped up aquatic delicacies.
Then it flew to a boulder, blinked its white eyelids, bobbed and curtsied, and whirred upstream.
On the other side of the stream, against a background of creamy honeysuckle, a spotted flycatcher perched very upright, awaiting the unwary fly.
I walked on, following the windings of the splashing tumbling Mosedale Beck.
Meadow turned to marsh.
It was decidedly wet underfoot.
I was glad of my stout walking boots as I squelched through bossy bits.
Stretches of white silky-plumed bog cotton-grass and orange-yellow bog asphodel warned me to be wary.
I reached the desolate head of the valley (few flowers here) and decided to attempt a crossing to the other side of the beck so that I could return by the path descending from Black Sail Pass.
Clambering over rocks and following narrow sheep trails — which tended to peter out disconcertingly in the thick bracken — it took me a long time to find a possible beck-traversing spot.
With nervous steps, I crossed from one  slippery wet boulder to the next whilst the water swirled and gurgled beneath.
I was nearly there — when I slipped!
A wobbling of the stepping stone, a panicky leap — and I landed sprawling on a soft, spongy blanket of sphagnum moss: to find the fingers of my right hand touching a small plant — which I instantly recognised as the common sundew.
‘It was a common sundew.
I forgot my wetness, my dripping jeans, the soggy waterlogged ground.
The sun dew is a freak of a plant, a carnivore, which absorbs the protein in the bodies of its living victims.
Round, spoon-shaped, reddish-green leaves in a rosette formation glistened .
Tiny globular drops of a clear fluid tipped fine, red ‘leaf-tentacles’.
From the centre of the rosette sprang a single five-inch stalk with a small spike of closed white flowers at its end.
Growing in acid soil singularly poor in nutrients, it is remarkably adapted to obtain essential nitrogen from small invertebrates.
‘Miracula naturae’, they called sun dew plants in the eighteenth century, and miracles of nature they certainly are.
I could see no creepy-crawly ensnared in the hairs of the Mosedale specimen.
And squeamishness prevented me looking for a tiny insect to place on a sticky dewdrop leaf.
But Dr A. W. Roth, a physician of Bremen, had no such qualms.
He was the first person, so far as we know, to record the fact that the tentacles of the common sundew are capable of movement.
In 1799 he wrote, ‘With a pair of tweezers I placed an ant upon the middle of the leaf of Drosera rotundifolia but so as not to disturb the plant.
The ant  endeavoured to escape, but was held fast by the clammy juice at the points of the hairs, which was drawn out by its feet into fine threads.
In some minutes the short hairs on the disc of the leaf began to bend, then the long hairs, and laid themselves on the insect.
After a while the leaf began to bend, and in some hours the end of the leaf was so bent inwards as to touch the base.
The ant died in fifteen minutes, which was before all the hairs had bent upon themselves.’
(The Carnivorous Plants by Francis Ernest Lloyd, published by Dover.)
The rare great sun dew and the rarer still oblong-leaved sun dew, the common butterwort and the three species of bladderwort, can also be found in the wet places of the Lake District.
All are carnivorous, insect-trapping plants: miracles of nature.
Shearwatering
Skokholm Island, Pembrokeshire, Dyfed
To ring Manx shear waters, you need a lonely island, permission from the British Trust for Ornithology, a BTO permit and a good supply of BTO rings, a powerful torch, spare batteries, like-minded companions — and a plentiful supply of shearwaters.
Wait for a moon less summer night, or a night with a mere sliver of a new moon, and listen.
If there are Manx shear waters present on your chosen island, you will most certainly soon hear them.
The noise of homecoming  shear waters beggars description: strangled gurglings, croupy gas pings, weird cacklings, raucous howlings; shear water bedlam is indescribable.
In July and August, parents have chicks to feed.
They fish at sea, following the shoals, and return to their burrows through the hours of darkness to regurgitate a fishy soup for waiting young.
Shearwaters are less vociferous on nights of the full moon and fewer return to the island — so, on a suitably black night, wrap up in warm clothes, shine your torch and head along the path which leads through scratchy heather, hummocks of thrift, and knee-high bracken, to the tussocky bumps of a cliff-top colony.
Thump!
Thump!
Thump!
That's the nocturnal Manx shear waters landing all around you, home again after many hours far out on the ocean.
They must beware the huge beaks of the great black-backed gulls; turned-inside-out corpses and picked-clean bones on gull loafing grounds each morning tell a sad story.
Max shearwater
Direct the torch and you'll find a bird.
Black and white below, pigeon-size, smallish head, dark beady eyes, long wings tucked to sides.
The thin hooked bill, with its external nostrils in tubes on the upper mandible, remind you that shear waters are members of the strange ‘tube-nose’ petrel family.
At first the bird will be dazzled by the beam.
Then it shuffles awkwardly on its belly towards its hole.
Stoop quickly.
Pick the bird up gently.
But watch out for that stabbing bill.
Swiftly slip the numbered ring on to one of its legs.
Adjust the thin metal strip with your special pliers.
How far back the legs are set; ideal for swimming, but an explanation for its clumsiness on land.
Now your bird is a numbered individual and, with luck, one day you may learn more of its history.
Release your bird.
There is a hungry chick somewhere below waiting for food, a blue-grey powder-puff of a chick.
Thump!
Thump!
Shear waters are landing on all sides, filling the air with their strange cackling, gasping, whooping cries — and an oily musky smell.
Earlier in the evening you saw them floating patiently on the pink-tinged water offshore.
In great pre-dusk ‘rafts’ they waited for the sun to set; or flew back and forth, veering from side to side.
Showing first black, then white, they tip and bank and glide, close to the water, shearing the waves with long narrow wings.
The chick in the burrow below will now be guzzling the partly pre-digested fish food regurgitated by its newly ringed parent.
For fifty days (an exceptionally long incubation period) it remained in the egg.
Parents, on duty in turn, kept the egg warm and brooded the tiny chick for the first few days after hatching.
Then it stays in the burrow alone, visited only at feeding times, for nearly two months.
Fed on a diet of oily fish, it grows enormously fat.
Towards the end of September the adult birds begin their long migratory journey south across the Atlantic where they will winter in the tropical seas of South America.
The young shear water finds itself deserted.
After a few days of wing stretching and flapping outside the burrow, it makes the perilous trip to the edge of the cliff.
Flapping, scrambling over the rocks, it blunders its way to the sea.
Then…?
This is where our ringing comes in.
Clumsy on land Manx shear waters may be, but they are elegant fliers and first-class navigators.
One newly fledged youngster was found in Brazilian waters only seventeen days after leaving the nest.
Take a bird from its burrow in the breeding season and transport it to Boston, USA; release it — and it could be home in twelve days, given clear skies.
Three thousand miles back home.
You don't believe it?
You must, it's been done, the numbered ring sufficient proof.
The young bird will wander the ocean and probably not return to breed for five years.
It will then excavate a burrow, or take over a rabbit hole (ousting the occupant if necessary).
Once it has chosen a mate, it will probably remain loyal to mate and to burrow for the rest of its life — and one ringed Manx shear water is known to have lived for at least twenty-nine years.
Thump!
Thump!
Thump!
More birds, more shufflings, more rings to slip over the pink-grey legs with their webbed feet.
Now it is past midnight.
The eerie chorus shows no signs of abating.
Sea noises fill the air.
An oily fish smell fills your nostrils.
There are stirrings over in the lesser black-backed colony, the lighthouse monotonously flashes its warning signals, Pauline's hot soup awaits you back at base — and you all agree: there is nothing quite like shear water ringing.
Note: there is no longer a ringing station on Skokholm.
Seabird Sanctuary
Skomer Island, Pembrokeshire, Dyfed
We kept ourselves awake by playing poker dice by candlelight in the tiny kitchen.
We had come to see the Manx shear waters.
Thousands breed on Skomer and the island is honeycombed with burrows.
It was a long time since I had helped to ring shear waters on Skokholm, another of the Pembrokeshire islands, and I wanted my children to see — and hear — the strange petrels.
Everything at first had gone according to plan.
I put a call through to the West Wales Naturalists' Trust Office in Haverfordwest.
‘Is it possible to spend a night on Skomer Island?’
Oh yes, I was told, providing we didn't mind tucking ourselves away in a converted cow shed.
And using an Elsan.
And fetching water from the well a hundred yards away.
And boiling the water before drinking it.
And becoming members of the Trust.
And managing without electricity and plumbing.
And taking enough food to last for several days in case the boat was held up by gales.
And using sheet sleeping bags.
We didn't mind — and we booked.
We left Martin's Haven, near Marloes, on the morning of 4 July in the red painted Arklow .
A very tame herring gull perched on the rail throughout most of the crossing.
Sea weedy coves, jagged spurs, narrow inlets and stacked rocks came excitingly into view.
‘Poor things,’ I thought, looking around at the other passengers and feeling superior.
‘Mere day trippers, they are.
Not island visitors like us.’
I looked smugly at my heavy rucksack with its bedding, iron rations, matches, camera, thick woolly, good torch, spare batteries, toothbrush, towel and soap.
My binoculars I wore round my neck at the ready for all those puffins, razor bills and guillemots I expected to see on the way over.
And did.
We landed on the quay of the three-mile-long island and were greeted by the Warden.
He briefed us, and asked us to keep to the paths of the ‘visitors’ trail'.
Tramping feet are a great threat to the vulnerable eggs and chicks of the central plateau.
For several hours we explored the island, two humps of rock, spectacularly eroded, joined by a narrow ridge.
The cliff top turf was bright with thrift and sea camp ion.
Many flowers of the heath grow on the central plateau.
And there are marsh plants in the bossy bits and beside the little streams.
It was a strange feeling when four o'clock arrived and the day trippers departed.
As I had suspected, we were the only folk rash enough to have booked into a cow shed for the night.
Our quarters consisted of a row of cells, sparsely furnished, but clean.
Some contained a single bed, others were twin-bedded.
My daughter and I moved   into one and my son commandeered another.
I was secretly glad to be sharing.
The building was surrounded by spooky ruins, the remains of an ancient farm.
The staff house was a mile away, on the Neck.
‘I can't wait to see shear waters again,’ I said brightly to the Warden when he came to check that we understood about Calor gas, to remind us to boil the drinking water and to tell us the exact procedure of what to do if we fell down a cliff.
‘Remains of an ancient farm.’
‘Shearwaters?’ he repeated lugubriously.
‘Won't be many about tonight.
Full moon, you know.
Inhibits them.’
(Oh dear, I had not thought to check the lunar date; how could I have been so silly?)
‘Still, you might just be lucky,’ he added.
Then he headed for home.
We were on our own.
We spent the evening at the Wick, looking anxiously at the fine, cloud free sky; the moon had yet to rise and we willed a few obliging clouds to appear to block its light.
We didn't spend all our time looking anxiously.
The Wick is far too entrancing a place for that.
It is a sheer basalt rock cliff on which thousands of razor bills, guillemots, kittiwakes, shags and fulmars nest.
Puffins zoomed around, skimming the cliff top, wheeling in great circles.
Stalling, orange feet spread, they land with gentle thuds beside their holes.
Picturesque in the pink thrift, gaudy striped bills crammed criss-cross with tiny silver sand eels, they pause, then disappear into burrows.
My son's  camera scarcely ceased its clicking.
Comical rolling walk, pattering wing flapping run, upright stance, growling call: ‘Kaa-arr-arrr’— we could have watched them happily for hours.
But there were other birds too.
The dark rock of the Wick was splashed with kittiwake droppings — streaks of whitewash — from countless cup-nests.
Fulmars planed by on rigid wings.
Guillemots and razor bills whirred rapidly out to sea, surface-dived for fish, and whirred back again to feed hungry chicks.
We stayed until the sky turned to pink and the sun dropped below the horizon.
Before it grew any darker, we followed a little path to the well, a deep gap between boulders, and filled our kettle with water from the spring.
Then we boiled it dutifully and heated our tins on the Calor gas stove in the kitchen.
We squatted in the grassy compound and ate sausages and beans straight from their containers — to save washing up.
We threw grape nuts to the pigeons, and shooed the hens out of our bedrooms.
Then we lit the candles and read the Visitors' Book through from 1960 onwards.
Julian Huxley!
Ronald Lockley!
Tony Soper!
Wow!
How could we sign our own modest names after that high-powered lot?
By midnight we were all yawning hard and so I made some strong coffee to wake us up.
Then we fetched our torches and, abandoning the cosiness of the kitchen, staggered out into the night.
We stood on the grassy (wretchedly moonlit) path and listened hard.
Plenty of gulls still kicking up a shindy.
There was a strange sort of hissing in the bracken to the west which I couldn't put a name to.
The odd oystercatcher piped and a curlew called sleepily.
Lap wings rose, flapped, peewitted plaintively and re-settled.
But that was all.
‘We'll walk towards North Haven,’ I said.
(I bet Tony Soper never gets the date wrong.)
‘Masses of shear water burrows in that direction.’
A moment later we saw…glow-worms!
Tiny green balls of light phosphorescing at us from the dark of the bracken.
Perfectly round luminous glimmerings.
Dozens of them, on all sides.
We shone our torches here, there and everywhere.
It is the female beetle (not ‘worm’) that lights up, to attract the male.
Having no wings she can only crawl, so she stays put and ‘glows’ hopefully.
When not lit up she is unlovely, flat and grub like.
But on summer nights she lifts her ‘tail’ and on the underside of her abdomen are two tiny oblong patches of bright green florescent Lucifer in with reflectors of minute crystals.
With these she signals, and a winged male makes all speed.
There are not many places left in Britain where glow-worm illuminations can still be enjoyed.
Insecticides have wiped out most mainland colonies.
(Snails should give thanks.
Glow-worm young have a nasty habit of devouring snails — alive.)
We had wandered far from the old farm buildings.
By now it was past one o'clock.
Were the glow-worms sufficient compensation for the non-appearance of shear waters?
And then we heard them coming in: gas pings, crowings, croonings, cacklings.
The sky had darkened, clouds had gathered, and birds were returning, flying in belatedly to feed their chicks.
We stood quietly, waiting.
A thump close by gave me my chance.
I shone my torch and caught a shear water in the beam.
We delayed it for only a moment or two, remembering the fluffy chick waiting below for its supper of regurgitated fish.
But my children were as amazed at this strange petrel with its eerie call as I had hoped they would be.
Happily tired, we then crawled off to bed.
And before I even had time to wonder if Tony So per himself had slept between these very army blankets, I was asleep.
‘Picturesque puffins.’
Choughs on a Cliff
North Pembrokeshire, Dyfed
The 168 glorious miles of the Pembrokeshire Coastal Path are tramped throughout the summer by ‘backpackers’.
With set faces, straining muscles, blistered heels, pedometers swinging from trouser belts, pockets bulging with maps and Kendal mint cake, and strict time schedules which must be kept to at all costs, they force themselves on, come gale, come deluge, come dehydrating heat wave.
From our rented cottage on the north Pembrokeshire coast, not many yards from the cliff and the coastal path, we could see them; their youth hostel destination was at the end of our lane.
Backpacking is not for me.
I don't care for Big Walks.
I prefer Small Potters.
The clash of ginger on pink as a small skipper butterfly lands on petals of camp ion; gorse pods popping in the hot sun; small striped snails creeping out on to the wet path after a cloud burst; soldier beetles gathered on the white umbels of wild carrot: these sights and sounds I can enjoy at my pottering leisure — whilst the hordes of laden hikers tramp by with stern faces and never a glance to left or right.
The Pembrokeshire Coastal Path was opened officially in May, 1970, after many years of tricky negotiations.
It follows the cliff edge closely for most of its miles, from Am Roth in the south to St Dogmaels in the north.
Perhaps even more than most long-distance paths it deserves to be pottered.
The cliffs near our cottage, we discovered on the first day of that holiday, were wild and forbidding: of ancient, dark volcanic rock.
Grey-wigged jackdaws with bright glinting eyes tumbled at the cliff edge.
‘Jack, jack,’ they call incessantly.
But we were hoping for a much rarer black bird…
Offshore, fished arctic terns.
They flit, skim, twist, squeal and squabble.
With white plumage gleaming, terns hover, tails fanned, slim red beaks pointing down towards the water.
Silver fish sighted, they brake; down they flash with closed wings.
Upwards flies the spray as they slice the water and plunge beneath its surface.
On the cliff top, marsh orchids, pink and lush, clustered in damp hollows.
Grasshoppers churred in the long grass.
A handsome male stone chat surveyed the scene from its bracken perch.
We picnicked one day on a small secluded beach and, after, lay sunbathing on the hot sand.
Screeching of terns, mewing of gulls — and the agitated twittering of sand martins.
In and out of holes in the soft cliff face they darted: forked tails, sandy brown backs with a brown band dividing white throat and white belly.
Over the marsh stretching beyond the shingle bank at the top of the beach they hawked, snatching winged insects to carry back to their hungry young.
The marsh was colourful with flowers; creamy-white meadowsweet, pink marsh woundwort, purple loosestrife.
May flies and caddis flies were on the wing.
Emerging damsel flies, a brilliant metallic green or electric blue, crept up long stalks to dry out.
‘Backpackers with set faces.’
Gnats swarmed above the marsh and the sand martins, twittering constantly, flew back and forth.
They are opportunist birds, not wholly dependent on natural sites, but ready to take over man-made embankments.
Quarry walls, drainage cuts, spoil heaps, road works, railway sidings…are sometimes colonised before the workmen at these sites (who mostly view the small birds with tolerance) have even packed up and left.
Such embankments are often transitory structures, but sand martins, among the first of our summer migrants to return, are adept at seeking out the new season's workings.
The lane near our cottage led only to a farm, the youth hostel poised on the edge of the cliff and a monument to a Welsh poet, put there by his friends.
In this quiet lane there was an extravagance of wild flowers, a riot of colour.
I was reminded of John Barrett's eulogy in his book The Pembrokeshire Coastal Path (HMSO, 1974).
‘Take almost any patch for exhibition at the Chelsea Flower Show and the rock garden medal would be yours!’
Sheltered from the wind by high stone banks, flowers grew in profusion in the lane.
Tall foxgloves indicated an acid soil, as did wild thyme, sheep's sorrel, bell heather, tormentil and heath bed straw.
A few very late bluebells surprised; thrift and Queen Anne's lace were fading fast.
The leaves of herb Robert were changing already to an autumnal red.
But wall pennywort was a fresh green, and fresh too were the tiny pink and white flowers of English stonecrop.
Red admirals fluttered by — and there were other butterflies.
Meadow browns, common blues and small coppers sipped appreciatively at nectar from creamy honeysuckle, white bramble and red clover.
Speckled woods basked in the sun.
Ostentatious day-flying moths, the scarlet and black six-spot burnets buzzed with whirring wings from yellow birds foot trefoil to blue sheep bit to mauve tufted vetch.
We watched the emergence of one moth; it crept out from its pale yellow papery cocoon, and clung to the stem of grass to which the cocoon had been fixed with silken threads.
Above, in a blossom-burdened elder tree, redpolls called.
The small flock of eight flitted before me along the hedgerow, drawing my attention to a white post in a bed of slender St John's wort and wood sage.
It was discreetly positioned and bore the letters ‘NR’ painted on with white paint: NR for ‘Nature Reserve’.
So our flowery lane was not our own secret discovery after all.
Its worth is appreciated.
An arrangement between the West Wales Naturalists' Trust and the Highway Authorities had ensured that the vegetation would be treated with the respect it deserves.
No spraying, of course, and only circumspect cutting back at the most appropriate time.
The post was a challenge.
Every flower must be identified!
No problem.
Proper potterers never travel anywhere without a botanising field guide in their rucksacks.
Out came mine.
Lady's bed straw, bell heather, meadow vetchling, silver weed, eye bright, rest harrow, hop trefoil, cut-leaved cranes bill, rock sea spurry, crow garlic…
That lane was a delight.
On another day we climbed up the hill behind the cottage, a craggy natural fortress where Iron Age remains of habitation can still be seen, to look back from two hundred feet up.
The coastline stretched away, hazy in the hot sunshine.
In small fields, hay makers worked, perspiring with the heat.
Deep fruity croaking — and a raven circled the fortress.
‘Kronk, kronk.’
We were   again reminded of those other black birds we'd hoped to find: choughs.
Choughs are known to breed on Pembrokeshire cliffs in lonely caves and fissures, and on offshore islands.
We scrambled back down the hill, avoiding gorse patches, surprising a wheatear.
Bell heather
A signpost pointed ahead to where the road rejoined the Coastal Path.
We reached the edge of the cliff and flopped down on to the soft turf.
Below, in a steep dark inlet, grey seals would pup in the autumn in the tiny inaccessible cove.
The ‘tseep-tseep’ of a rock pipit echoed as it flew to a seaweed-strewn ledge.
‘Chee-ow.’
That was no jackdaw's call — although for just a moment I had taken it to be.
I looked around.
Again came the ringing call.
Five choughs, crow-size, glossy-black, hopped on the grass of a slope just below the edge of the cliff, digging curved beaks into the soil, ant-searching.
Bill colour suggested a family party.
The bills of the two adults were a brilliant red, matching their bright legs.
Pale orange was the colour of the young birds' bills.
Wall pennywort
We sat very still.
‘Chee-ow, chee-ow.’
There are only a few coastal areas in Britain today still frequented by this attractive member of the corvine family.
And it is the patient potterer, listening attentively for that twanging ‘cheeow, chee-ow’ call, who is most likely to come across these secret retreats.