

Introduction
As its title indicates, this book is intended to provide an introduction to the main topics currently discussed under the rather unclear heading of ‘epistemology’ or theory of knowledge.
Epistemology is the study of knowledge and the justification of belief.
Central questions to which epistemologists try to provide answers include ‘Which beliefs are justified and which are not?’,
‘What, if anything, can we know?’,
‘What is the difference between knowing and having a true belief?’,
‘What is the relation between seeing and knowing?’.
Questions like these are at the heart of epistemology, but of course the subject spreads, like all philosophical enquiry, and its boundaries are fuzzy.
The book is intended for undergraduates in their second or third year of a philosophy degree, but this need not necessarily deter readers with other backgrounds; e.g., my father claims to be able to understand it, though perhaps he would not thank me for the suggestion that he is representative.
Although the book is an introduction, I have seen no reason to conceal my own opinions; which anyway are not particularly idiosyncratic.
I think it an advantage to a student to have something to react against, but this has not led me to struggle to reach firm conclusions on every topic.
Some of the material used here has appeared in print before, and I am grateful to the editors of the American Philosophical Quarterly and of Analysis for permission to reprint it.
The approach which I take to the subject is one concerned almost exclusively with the Anglo-American tradition, though Hegel is allowed into the last chapter, at the end of which I give some references to sample writings in the continental tradition, especially critical theory.
The tradition within which I work contains a choice between two approaches to the questions of epistemology.
The first, associated with Descartes, starts by considering the challenge of scepticism, the claim that knowledge is impossible; and hopes in  answering this challenge to be driven to expose the nature of what it is to know, from which the possibility of knowing will follow.
The second, which I associate with Grice (1961), holds that Descartes distorted philosophy into an unhealthy obsession with a non-existent person called ‘the sceptic’.
Instead we should investigate the nature of knowledge (if knowledge has a nature) and of justification directly, and hope by our results in this area to provide a conclusion, one way or the other, about the possibility of knowledge.
On this second approach, the refutation of scepticism is not the intention, and need not be the result, of a successful epistemology.
Of these two approaches I have adopted the first, formally at least, since my first chapter is concerned with scepticism, and there are constant if sporadic references to one form of sceptical argument throughout the book.
My reason or excuse for this is that interest in scepticism has revived.
The topic returns to the forefront of attention in the final chapter, in which I discuss the very possibility of the enterprise I have been engaged in for the previous fourteen.
The book falls into three parts, the first on knowledge, the second on justification, the third on forms of knowledge.
There are various complaints one could make about this division, most of which are justified.
One is that scepticism is not restricted to doubt about the possibility of knowledge; most interesting sceptical arguments, as I suggest in chapter 1, involve an equal doubt about the possibility of justified belief.
So the chapter on scepticism which occurs in part I has an equal right to be in part II.
Another complaint is that it is not clear that all the matters discussed in part III, perception, memory, induction and a priori knowledge,are forms of knowledge.
Some have been held to be sources of knowledge.
Knowledge, we might say, is derived from what is given in perception; what perception provides is not itself knowledge, but becomes knowledge after some transformation.
Induction, on the other hand, seems more like a form of inference than a form of knowledge.
Many writers escape these difficulties by offering chapters on objects of knowledge: the external world, the past, the future, the necessary, other minds and so on.
But this approach seems to me to contain difficulties of its own, not the least being that each object of knowledge is knowable in more than one of the different ways.
So I have spoken instead of forms of knowledge, and allowed the various possible objects of knowledge to surface where they will.
The topic of other minds, for instance, occurs exceptionally in chapter 5.
After the introductory chapter on scepticism, the first part  contains a chapter on the nature of knowledge and its relation to true justified belief, and another concentrating on one particular theory.
The former can do no more than skim the surface of an area which has recently been very heavily mined; the latter is included because I think that this theory, though recent, is more than a passing fashion and contains some insights into the nature of knowledge.
I examine in part II the comparative merits of two approaches to the nature of justification, foundationalism and coherentism.
In chapters 4 and 5 I expose defects in the crudest form of foundationalism, and in chapters 6 and 7 I argue that we have a more general reason to avoid any sort of foundationalism, a reason derived from considerations in the theory of meaning.
This obviously raises questions about philosophical priority; is the theory of meaning able to be prior to epistemology and to provide a court of appeal for epistemological debate?
But quite apart from that, these two chapters are perhaps more difficult than their surroundings, and I recommend that they be omitted from a first reading.
If you move straight from chapter 5 to chapter 8 you will get a stark contrast between two theories of justification, and all you need to know for the moment is that I take the intervening chapters to provide a reason against any form of foundationalism.
The final two chapters, 14 and 15, are to some extent dependent upon what is said in chapters 6 and 7.
So I suggest that they also be omitted from a first reading, leaving chapters 1–5 and 8–13 inclusive.
The third part is dominated by two chapters on perception, which perhaps constitute the centre of the book.
This topic seems to me both the most important and the most difficult in epistemology.
Each chapter ends with a short addendum entitled ‘Further Reading’, which comprises two sections.
(There are also references in the body of the text, some of which are picked up at the end of the chapter.)
The difference between these two sections is that the former is supposed to show you where you should start pursuing the main themes of the chapter.
The latter provides references to background reading, allows me to talk around the area concerned, and offers bibliographical suggestions on every topic that arises in the chapter so that you have some idea where to go next if you want to pursue any particular aspect.
Items mentioned in the first section are at roughly the same level of difficulty as the chapter they accompany.
Items in the second section may be harder.
All references are by the author-date system (e.g., ‘Grice, 1961’) and are collected in the References at the end of the book.
Finally, the index is intended to remedy one defect of the book, which is that topics, theories and approaches recur at different places as we go along.
For instance, anti-realism is discussed in chapter 1 and recurs in chapter 9; anti-realist approaches to perception are discussed in chapters 10 and 11, to memory in chapter 12 and to induction in chapter 13.
This can be confusing; it would have been nice if each topic could have been dealt with in one place only.
If you are confused about what has happened or curious to know what will happen to a topic, consult the index; if I have got it right, the index will tell you the story.
I have permitted myself throughout the useful abbreviation ‘iff’ for ‘if and only if’.
Part I
KNOWLEDGE
1
Scepticism
1.1 SOME DISTINCTIONS
Scepticism in its most interesting form always depends on an argument; the better the argument, the stronger the scepticism it generates.
Since it depends on an argument, it must be able to be expressed as a conclusion.
The sceptical conclusion is that knowledge is impossible.
No one does know, because no one can know.
There is a contrast between the sceptic who offers an argument which has this as its conclusion and two other sorts of sceptic.
The first is the person who responds to every assertion with the question ‘How do you know that?’ and then, whatever is offered, merely repeats the question until answers dry up.
This repeated question is very successful in reducing others to furious but impotent silence, but there is very little to be learnt from it as it stands until we know what lies behind it.
There are of course interesting possibilities here, for instance the following propositions:
No one knows that p unless he can say how he knows that p .
The attempt to answer the question ‘How do you know that p ?’ by simply reasserting that p cannot be successful.
It begs the question.
A sceptic who peddles the question without being willing to make an appeal to propositions such as these is not presenting an interesting philosophical position.
Once the appeal is made, however, we are back with a scepticism that depends on an argument.
It is worth pointing out in this connection that the two propositions above are dubious.
The second, for instance, amounts to an assertion that one cannot answer the question ‘How do you know that you are in pain?’ by simply saying ‘Because I am in pain'.
Someone who gives this answer clearly takes it that in some cases it works, and we must not beg the question against him.
The second contrasting sceptic offers not so much an argument or a question but rather an attitude.
This sceptic is a hard-nosed person who claims that most people allow themselves to be persuaded by what is really rather weak evidence, but that he needs more than that to convince him .
This sceptic claims to have higher evidential standards than the rest of us; he stigmatizes others as gullible or as too easily persuaded.
His position develops into scepticism proper (i.e. the view that knowledge is impossible rather than merely rarer than one thinks) when the standards are set so high that they cannot be fulfilled.
But in order to become philosophically interesting (rather than simply an intellectual freak) he must do more than assert that higher standards of evidence are better.
He must have some argument that the normal standards are inappropriate in some way.
And that argument must be justified by appeal to our standards as well as his.
There is then the danger of incoherence; is it consistent to provide an argument justified by normal standards of evidence, to the effect that those standards are inappropriate?
The conclusion is that with which we started; scepticism in its most interesting form always depends on an argument.
In the next section we shall consider three sceptical arguments which are strong enough to be worth taking seriously.
First we need to look at some distinctions between types of sceptical argument.
The first and least important distinction is between local and global sceptical arguments.
Local scepticism maintains that, even if knowledge is possible elsewhere, it is for special reasons not available in this or that selected area.
Favourite areas for local scepticism are ethics, religion and the future.
We can know how things are in front of our noses, maybe, but it is not possible to know that an altruistic act is morally good, nor that God exists, nor that you will have eggs for breakfast tomorrow.
Obviously local scepticism hopes to feed on special features of the areas it is concerned with.
But my experience is that it is very hard to keep one's local scepticism local.
A local ethical scepticism, for instance, tends very quickly to spread out and become a general scepticism about the unobserved or about the possibility of scientific knowledge.
The problem is to find a convincing argument for local ethical scepticism which has no expansionist tendencies.
If local scepticism tends to collapse into global scepticism, this may be an advantage, since global sceptical arguments are generally more convincing and effective than their local counterparts.
And the same is true of the second distinction I want to draw.
Some sceptical arguments attack the notion of knowledge directly but leave  other related notions, crucially that of justified belief, untouched.
Thus I might argue that to know you must be certain, but that one can never be really certain and hence one can never really know.
Ignoring for the moment the force of the word ‘really’ in this argument, we can still feel confident that even if we give up talking of knowledge, granting that a necessary condition for knowing is unfulfilled, we can happily continue to talk about justified belief, distinguishing some beliefs as justified or as more justified than others and others as less justified or even completely unjustified.
None of this talk of justification is threatened by the present sceptical argument.
We may feel that the argument exposes idiosyncrasies in the concept of knowledge but that we can get by very well both for practical and philosophical purposes with the surviving notion of justified belief.
A stronger form of sceptical argument would, however, threaten both notions at once and claim that any defect in the notion of knowledge is equally present in that of justified belief.
Such stronger forms are available, as we shall see, and they are always more interesting than their weaker counterparts.
The claim that none of our beliefs about the future are ever justified is more important and more interesting than the claim that although our belief that the sun will rise tomorrow is quite probably both true and justified, we cannot really be said to know that the sun will rise tomorrow.
The third distinction is even more important.
We can distinguish sceptical arguments which, although they attempt to deprive us of knowledge (or even of justified belief) still allow that we understand the propositions whose truth we are no longer allowed to know, from those which claim that the reason why we don't know their truth is that we cannot understand them.
An obvious instance would be the contrast between the suggestion that although we understand the proposition that God exists, we could have no evidence that it is true, and the suggestion that the proposition is incomprehensible to us, and hence a fortiori we can neither know it to be true nor be justified in believing it.
Of course the distinction drawn above only remains if we assume that it is possible for us to understand a proposition which we would or could never be justified in believing or could never come to know to be true.
On a theory of understanding which linked what we can understand with what we could come to recognise as true, the distinction collapses and all the relevant sceptical arguments will be of the strongest type; that is, will claim that we do not even understand the propositions we claim to know.
It might seem that an argument to the effect that we don't understand the propositions we claim to know must be local rather than global.
For a global argument would claim that we understand nothing, which is ridiculous first because we clearly do understand something and second because crucially we understand (and are expected to understand) the sceptical argument itself.
1.2 THREE SCEPTICAL ARGUMENTS
Brains in Vats
You do not know that you are not a brain, suspended in a vat full of liquid in a laboratory, and wired to a computer which is feeding you your current experiences under the control of some ingenious technician/scientist (benevolent or malevolent according to taste).
For if you were such a brain, then, provided that the scientist is successful, nothing in your experience could possibly reveal that you were; for your experience is ex hypothesi identical with that of something which is not a brain in a vat.
Since you have only your own experience to appeal to, and that experience is the same in either situation, nothing can reveal to you which situation is the actual one.
Is it possible, however, that though you do not know that you are not a brain in a vat you still know many other things, perhaps more important?
Unfortunately if you do not know this there is not much else that you can know either, it seems.
Suppose that you claim to know that you are sitting reading a book.
You presumably also know that if you are sitting reading, you are not a brain in a vat.
We can surely conclude that if you know that you are sitting reading, you know that you are not a brain in a vat, and hence (by simple modus tollens ) that since you don't know that you are not a brain in a vat (agreed above) you don't know that you are sitting reading.
The principle on which this argument relies can be formalized as the principle of closure under known entailment:
This principal asserts that if a knows that p and that p implies q , a also knows that q ; we always know to be true any propositions we know to be the consequences of a proposition we know.
(It is a standard practice to express principles of this sort in logical notation, but  for our purposes each logical formula will be followed by its English equivalent, as here.
It is worth working through the logical notation, however, for ease of reference later.
PC /k is a closure principle because it says that a move from something known to something known to be implied by it does not take us outside the closed area of knowledge.)
The principle, then, given that a does not know that q , and that a does know that p implies q , allows us to infer that a does not know that p .
It seems therefore to show, more generally, that since you don't know that you are not a brain in a vat you cannot know any proposition p of which you know that if p were true, you would not be a brain in a vat.
And there are similar slightly different arguments, for instance Descartes' version which takes q = you are dreaming and argues that since you don't know that you are not dreaming you don't know any proposition p of which you know that if p were true you would not be dreaming (see the first Meditation in Descartes, 1955).
How should we map this argument using the distinctions of 1.1?
It is not entirely global; it admits that knowledge is possible, e.g. that you can know that p → q , and indeed uses this fact as a lever.
In fact its grip is restricted entirely to those propositions whose truth would mean that you were not a brain in a vat.
It is however a strong argument in the sense that it aims to attack the notion of justified belief in just those areas where it attacks the notion of knowledge.
This has not been shown yet, but it can be shown by running a complete analogue of the argument.
All we need is to show that your belief that you are not a brain in a vat cannot be justified since nothing in your experience can count as evidence for that proposition, and then appeal to an analogue of : which holds that if a is justified in believing that p and that p implies q ,a is justified in believing that q .
seems just as convincing as , if not more so.
However the argument does nothing to suggest that you do not understand the proposition that you are sitting reading a book.
You are still allowed to understand it even if you can neither know it nor be justified in believing it.
The argument only turns into an argument about understanding if we take a special view about understanding, as mentioned earlier.
The Argument from Error
You have sometimes made mistakes even in areas where you felt most confident; simple mistakes in arithmetic, for example.
But nothing you can point to in your present situation tells you that this situation is not one in which you are mistaken.
For all you can tell, it is relevantly similar to situations in which you have made mistakes.
Since you clearly did not know then, how can you say that you know now?
For all you can tell, the new situation is no better than the old.
This argument relies on an epistemological version of the principle of universalizability familiar in ethical theory (cf.
Hare, 1963, pp. 7 –16).
A judgement that an action is morally good is universalizable in the sense that by making such a judgement one commits oneself to holding that any relevantly similar action is morally good.
When a new and relevantly similar action occurs, one must either call it good or take back one's judgement that the first one was good.
What makes a new action relevantly similar to an old one?
An action is relevantly similar if it too has the properties which constituted one's reasons for the judgement in the first case.
Being relevantly similar is not the same, then, as being completely indistinguishable.
There is at least this restriction on the properties that count here, that they must be properties whose presence or absence can be registered by the person making the judgement.
A difference between the two actions which that person is unable to recognize cannot justify a difference in judgement.
The principle of universalizability tells us, then, that in the absence of an available difference we must make the same judgement again.
There must be something we can pick out if a difference in judgement is to be justified.
There may perhaps be properties which are evidence-transcendent, by which we mean that it is always possible that they be absent even though we have the best possible evidence of their presence.
Goodness is such a property, perhaps; and this is why the principle of universalizability has teeth in ethics.
We cannot suppose that one action is good and another not good unless we can pick out a further relevant difference between them.
The argument from error exposes the consequences of this approach for epistemology.
Suppose that I claimed yesterday to know that it would rain in the afternoon, on the normal grounds (weather forecast, gathering clouds, etc.), but that it turns out that I was wrong.
At the time of my claim the fact that it was not going to rain was evidence-transcendent, as all claims about the future  must be.
And this means that if on the same grounds I claim today to know that it will rain in the afternoon, I must continue to assert that I knew yesterday that it would rain that afternoon (in the teeth of the evidence).
If, on the other hand, I abandon my claim to have known yesterday, I cannot make the claim to know today.
For the only fact which would justify such a difference in claim is one which is not available to me; facts about the afternoon's weather are evidence-transcendent in the morning.
Hence my acceptance that yesterday I did not know prevents me from claiming knowledge today.
We can run through the argument again from the point of view of an outside observer.
There is the possibility that though I myself would not be justified in making different claims, another person might perhaps be justified in saying that yesterday I did not know, while today I do.
This might be so after today's rain, for instance, when the facts about the rain have ceased to be evidence-transcendent to all.
Although I couldn't tell the difference at the time, I was in fact wrong yesterday and right today, and this is sufficient to ground a difference in the outside observer's description of me as knowing today but not knowing yesterday.
But it is easy to see what the sceptic will say at this point, quite apart from the implied oddity that there is a claim which I could not be justified in making but which another can be justified in making for me.
For what is being suggested is that I knew today and not yesterday, despite the fact that there was no difference between the two days that I could tell at the time.
But this shows that today, for all I knew, it was not going to rain, and how can we allow that I know that it will rain when for all I know it won't?
The conclusion seems to be that if I recognize that I have once wrongly claimed to know that p, then I cannot ever claim to know that p unless I can show a relevant difference between the two cases.
And no one else can say of me that I know in one case and not in the other, because for all I know I am wrong both times.
So far, however, we have restricted the argument unnecessarily to cases where I have in fact made mistakes in the past.
But we do not need to rely on actual mistakes in the past.
For our purposes, possible mistakes will do just as well.
This can be seen in the ethical case.
An imaginary example can be so described that I am willing to say that the action it recounts is good.
And that judgement of mine is as much universalizable, as binding on my future judgements about relevantly similar cases, as if the example had been real rather than merely imaginary.
Similarly, an imaginary case in which I  would claim to know that p , but where p is false, will succeed in preventing me from claiming to know that p in a new case which is not relevantly (i.e., discernibly to me) different.
So imaginary cases are as effective in the argument as actual ones.
It was of course a hallmark of our first sceptical argument that it started from an imaginary case in which you are a brain in a vat which is not discernibly different from your present case.
So the argument we have now reached seems to be a complex defence of the first part of that first sceptical argument.
It seems to show that the imaginary case in which you are a brain in a vat being fed the experiences of reading a book is perfectly effective in showing that you do not know that you are reading a book.
The difference between the two arguments seems to be in the route they pursue thereafter.
The first uses PC /k to show that you don't know anything of which you know that if it were true you would not be a brain in a vat.
The second argues more generally that since we have made mistakes, or would make them in  imaginary similar circumstances, we do not know now.
How strong is the scepticism which the argument from error would create if successful?
If, as I shall argue in 4.2, there is no separable area in which we make no mistakes, then the argument from error will be global rather than local.
But it is not immediately obvious how to write a similar argument against the notion of justified belief.
We cannot argue straightforwardly that a false belief cannot be justified.
So unless we can say, as we said above for knowledge, that you cannot claim your belief is justified unless you can tell the difference between cases where such beliefs are true and cases where they are false, it will be impossible to conclude that your true belief here is unjustified.
Perhaps, however, we can make this claim by appeal to the initial moves of the argument that you are not justified in believing that you are not a brain in a vat.
There we claimed that if nothing in your experience could count as evidence that you were not a brain in a vat, your belief that you are not a brain in a vat cannot be called justified.
The belief is unjustified because nothing that you can point to suggests that you are rather than are not a brain in a vat.
And equally in our new case we can say that your belief is unjustified because nothing you can point to suggests that this is a case where your belief is true rather than one of the (admittedly rarer but still) indistinguishable (to you) cases where it is false.
If this move is sound, our second sceptical argument attacks the notion of justified belief at least as much as the first argument does; in fact even more, because it is more global.
We must allow, too, that this argument as it stands leaves our understanding untouched.
As before, unless we have a theory of understanding which links the possibility of understanding with the availability of justified belief, or of knowledge, our understanding survives the loss of justified belief.
Such a theory might claim, for instance, that to understand a proposition is to be able to tell the difference between circumstances in which one would be justified in believing it and those in which one would not.
There are such theories; more on them below.
The Justification of Arguments from Experience
Do we have any knowledge of events which we have not experienced or are not now experiencing?
We normally suppose that our experience is a reliable guide to the nature of those parts of the world which we are not observing, and that in favourable cases it gives us knowledge.
Thus I can know what is in the bottom drawer of my desk, or what I shall eat for breakfast tomorrow, by some form of inductive inference from what I have observed or am now observing.
David Hume (1711–76), the Scottish historian and philosopher, raised in a special way the question of whether this is really so (Hume, 1955, ch. 4.2).
He argued that I cannot know that my diary is in the (closed) bottom drawer of my desk unless I have reason to believe that my experience makes that proposition probable; we can suppose, perhaps, that my relevant experience is that I remember having put the diary there five minutes ago and that I do not remember having touched the drawer since, together with my general knowledge of the consistent behaviour of the experienced world.
But I only have reason to believe that my experience makes that proposition probable if I have reason to believe quite generally that events which I have not observed are similar to events which I have observed.
And Hume's point is that it is impossible to have any reason for that last belief.
For that belief is not analytically or necessarily true; no contradiction is implied by supposing it false.
And I cannot suppose that experience itself has given me reason to believe that the unobserved will resemble the observed, since the appeal to experience begs the question asked; it argues not to but from the crucial belief that our experience is a reliable guide, or that the unobserved will resemble the observed.
Therefore I can have no reason to believe that my experience is a reliable guide, and hence have no reason for any belief about events beyond my experience and so cannot have knowledge of them.
It is worth stressing that Hume's argument does not attempt to  derive a sceptical conclusion from the fact that I might be wrong (as in a way the first argument does) nor from the fact that I have been wrong (as the second argument does).
Instead, he maintains that our general belief that experience is a reliable guide cannot be justified, since all promising justifications assume what is at issue by supposing that experience can reveal that our experience is a reliable guide.
There is an obvious weakness in this attempt to use an argument from experience to justify all arguments from experience.
The scepticism which Hume's argument creates is not global, since it concerns only our knowledge of the unobserved.
The argument clearly attacks the notion of justified belief as well as that of knowledge in that restricted area, since it maintains that we have no reason in what is observed for any beliefs about the unobserved.
It leaves the notion of understanding untouched; Hume seems to agree that we understand propositions about unobserved objects, although he does argue on independent grounds that they are mostly false.
1.3 A SHORT WAY WITH THE SCEPTIC
None of the three arguments mentioned above is of the strongest type, since none attacks our notion of understanding.
There are local sceptical arguments of this strongest type, as we shall see in chapter 5 (our knowledge of other minds); and in our discussion of our knowledge of the past and of the future (chapters 10 and 11) we shall have to bear in mind arguments that it is impossible to conceive of an event as other than present, i.e. as being in the past or in the future.
But we might suppose it impossible to provide an effective global argument of this type.
It is not just that we clearly do understand something ; rather we know in advance that it is only by understanding the sceptic's argument as we are clearly expected to, that we could be led to believe that we understand nothing.
And even if we don't understand the argument, we surely understand the conclusion; and so the conclusion must be false.
This short way with the global argument can be copied with any global sceptical argument, whether it attacks knowledge alone or justified belief as well.
Thus we might say that the sceptic implicitly claims to know his conclusion that knowledge is impossible, or that he claims that his premises justify his belief that justified belief is impossible.
The former suggestion seems unconvincing, but the latter  is quite effective.
What is the point of arguing that justified belief is impossible, for if you were right there could be no reasons for your conclusion?
These defences against the sceptic attempt to avoid detailed examination of the arguments put forward and focus instead merely on the conclusion.
They do this in one of two ways.
Either they dispute the sceptic's right to assert the conclusion, or to assert it as a conclusion; or they suggest directly that the conclusion cannot be true, and that hence they are excused from considering any suggested reason for believing it.
Instances of the first sort have already been mentioned.
An instance of the second sort could be derived from the claim that to understand this or any proposition is to know under which conditions it is true and under which it is false.
If the sceptic's conclusion were true we could not have such knowledge; so if the conclusion were true we would not be able to understand it.
It is impossible for us to understand the conclusion, then, without realizing that it is false.
It is clear, I think, that this argument would, if successful, turn the argument against a global scepticism about understanding into an argument against a weaker but still global scepticism about knowledge.
Since we do understand what the sceptic is saying, we must have the sort of knowledge required for that understanding.
In my opinion the sceptic should be entirely unworried by such arguments.
He should insist that they provide no justification whatever for an unwillingness to consider his arguments seriously for what they are.
To take the weakest case first; even if the sceptic were unwise enough to admit that any assertion involves a claim to knowledge and that he is asserting his conclusion that knowledge is impossible, he can still maintain his position.
He takes himself to have true premises and a valid inference to a true conclusion; the premises might include the proposition that in the past he has made mistakes.
He may admit (unwisely again) that in using that proposition as a premise he is implicitly claiming to know it to be true.
But he insists that it follows from it and others of the same kind that knowledge is impossible.
His argument then can be rewritten as follows: if I know this — and this is a central case of the sort of thing I know if I know anything — then I know that knowledge is impossible, and so if I know anything I know nothing.
This argument can be seen in two ways.
Either it is an instance of a proof by reductio ad absurdum , in which we assume something true in order to prove it false; or it is a way of exposing a paradox within the concept of knowledge, for the sceptic can surely insist  that if a central concept such as that of knowledge can be used to take us validly from true premises to a false or impossible conclusion, something is wrong with the concept; there is probably some internal tension which should be exposed rather than swept under the carpet.
An answer which merely consists in pointing out the falsehood or impossibility of the conclusion must, therefore, be missing the point.
1.4 ANOTHER REPLY
One common reply to the first two sceptical arguments is to say that we have no reason to worry ourselves about them.
Since it is admitted, or rather insisted, that as far as you are concerned there could be no difference between the hypothesis that you are currently sitting reading and the hypothesis that you are a brain in a vat being fed the experiences of one sitting reading, then it cannot matter to you which is really true and which is false.
Nothing of any genuine interest or importance can depend on whether you are a brain in a vat or not.
This reply comes in a stronger and a weaker form, but in either form it has clearly got some point.
It maintains that what the sceptic takes to be his strength is in fact his weakness.
The sceptic insists that there is a difference between the two hypotheses, but that it is evidence-transcendent, i.e. that it is a difference which you cannot tell; and he concludes from this that you don't know which situation you are really in.
The reply admits that the difference is evidence-transcendent, and uses that fact against the sceptic.
But that fact can be used in two ways.
The weaker way is to say simply that although there is a radical and obvious difference between the two hypotheses, it is not one which could make any difference to you, and so that you can be exempted from paying any attention to it.
This is rather like an attitude one might take to the philosophical discussions about whether we have free will or not.
One might attempt to reject that entire discussion on the grounds that whether we have free will or not can make no difference to the way we live our lives.
We act and will continue to act as if we have free will, whether our actions are determined or not.
There seems to me to be something very wrong-headed about this move, both in the areas of free will and of scepticism.
But we need not pause to examine its defects, since there is a stronger and more interesting move with which it may be confused.
The sceptic says that there is a difference between the two hypotheses but that you cannot tell it since it is evidence-transcendent.
Our weaker move admitted this, but the stronger move denies it.
The stronger position denies the existence of evidence-transcendent truth and evidence-transcendent differences, and so denies the sceptic the contrast he needs between his two hypotheses.
If the difference suggested is one which could make no difference to us, then it is empty and does not exist.
The weaker move, then, says that there is a difference which does not matter.
The stronger move says that there is no difference to matter.
We could call the former a realist position; the realist believes that there are evidence-transcendent truths, truths whose obtaining lies beyond our powers of recognition.
The stronger move could be called anti-realist ; it denies the existence of evidence-transcendent truth and holds that differences which we are in principle incapable of recognizing do not exist.
Anti-realism of this sort does not arise gratuitously, nor is it intended initially as a method of countering scepticism.
But its general thrust is clear.
The realist and the sceptic think of the world as one on which we have at best a tentative grasp.
There are many facts about the remote past and the remote future which we shall have no means ever of recognizing or verifying.
And it is always possible that unknown to us the present world differs radically from the way it appears to us.
The anti-realist does not believe in the existence of this further ‘real’ world which lies behind the world that we know and which may come apart from our world in ways which of course we could not recognize if they occurred.
For him our world, the recognizable world, is the only world.
So for the anti-realist the enterprise of epistemology is easier, since the objects of knowledge are brought closer to us; and there is no yawning gap between evidence and truth, since there can be no evidence-transcendent properties.
For the question whether a property is present here can never be different from or lie beyond the question whether we have the best possible evidence that it is present.
Anti-realism is the theory of understanding which has been mentioned at various points in this chapter.
(Its name and recent development are owed to Michael Dummett.)
The anti-realist holds that our understanding of the sentences in our language must have been acquired in situations which we learnt to take as warranting the use of those sentences; situations in which those sentences are to count as true.
It follows from this that if there is no such thing as justified belief, there is no such thing as understanding.
For to  understand a sentence is to be able to pick out situations which justify us in believing that sentence to be true.
It might seem, then, that the anti-realist is in a peculiarly weak position.
Every sceptical argument against the possibility of justified belief is an argument of the strongest form, and leaves us devoid even of the understanding we thought we had of our own language.
But in fact the reverse is true.
The sceptical arguments which would have this effect all require a move which the anti-realist would disallow, and hence never reach the annihilating conclusion.
They all require us to make sense of the realist thought that it is always possible that, unknown to us, the world differs radically from the way it appears to us, and argue from this that we cannot know that the world really is the way it appears to us.
But the anti-realist rejects this as impossible.
For him, the sense of a sentence is determined by the sorts of situation we count in favour of the sentence being true, in such a way that the sentence with that sense (i.e. as we understand it) cannot be false if the sort of situation we count as making it true occurs.
So anti-realism offers a perspective from which not only is there no possibility of a global scepticism about understanding, but also (and for the same reasons) there is no room for a global scepticism about justified belief either.
The trouble here is that the implausibility of the truth of scepticism is about as great as the implausibility of the truth of anti-realism.
To see this, we need to see how much anti-realism requires us to give up and how strong our realist intuitions are.
One area which seems to demand a realist approach is that of other minds, which will be discussed in chapter 5.
Our realist intuition here is that the sensations and thoughts of others, which do occur, are hidden from us.
We observe their behaviour, of course, but the question whether they are actually experiencing sensations as we suppose is, for us, evidence-transcendent.
It is always possible that despite all the behaviour there are actually no sensations going on there at all, or at least different ones from those we imagine.
So there is a real question whether or not there are sensations which are not ours, but it is evidence-transcendent.
Another is that of the past.
Whatever we may think of the future, we think of the past as having been in its time as determinate as the present now is.
But we suppose that there are many propositions about the past whose truth is for us evidence-transcendent.
Despite our lack of grip on these truths, we do take there to be a transcendent fact of the matter at stake, one that lies now beyond  all possibilities of being recognized by us.
And this attitude about the past is a realist attitude.
These two areas will be considered in greater detail in later chapters.
The point of our discussion of them so far is that the attempt to rebut scepticism by constructing an anti-realist alternative to the realism espoused by the sceptic is not going to be easy, even if it is possible.
If there are some areas where anti-realism is comparatively easy to accept, well and good.
But so long as there remain others where realism seems compelling, in those the sceptic's challenge bites.
We may be unable to buy our way generally out of scepticism in the anti-realist market; the cost would be too high.
1.5 A BETTER RESPONSE
If no short way with the sceptic is possible, we have no alternative but to get involved directly with the arguments presented.
Where might we look for help in a critical offensive?
One hope might be that a satisfactory account of what knowledge is would have the effect of exposing errors in the sceptic's reasoning.
And I shall be considering an account which claims to do this in chapter 3.
Meanwhile we should perhaps consider what state we would be in, were we to agree that the sceptic's argument is effective.
It has sometimes been suggested that epistemology could survive the loss of the concept of knowledge, because all the important epistemological questions can equally profitably be rephrased using instead the concept of justified belief.
Thus instead of asking whether we ever know what will happen in the future, we ask in which if any circumstances our beliefs about the future are justified.
And the problem of other minds (ch. 5) can be presented as the problem of how, if at all, my observation of the behaviour of human bodies justifies my belief that those bodies are people; little extra is gained by asking whether and how I know that they are people.
The difficulty with this suggestion is that all the sceptical arguments presented, and indeed any interesting sceptical argument, seem to be directed as much against the notion of justified belief as against that of knowledge.
And this means that the easy compromise position is unavailable.
It really does seem to matter for epistemology that we find some reply to the sceptic.
FURTHER READING
Descartes' dreaming argument is in the first of his Meditations ; use the Haldane and Ross edition (Descartes, 1955) or any reputable alternative.
Hume's questions about induction are raised in his Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding , section 4, part 2 (Hume, 1955; or any reputable alternative).
Stroud (1984, ch. 1) offers a very readable account of Cartesian (i.e., Descartes') scepticism.
The argument about brains in vats is given in Nozick (1981, pp. 167 — 71).
His account will be examined further in ch. 3.
Stroud (1968) gives a helpful account of the anti-sceptical move considered in 1.3, commonly called transcendental.
He links it to verificationism (the ‘verification principle’), an earlier form of anti-realism.
Dummett, architect of anti-realism as successor to verificationism, offers the most introductory account I know in Dummett (1978, ch. 10) but if you are new to this area you would do better to wait until you have read ch. 9 of the present book before attempting it.
2
Knowledge
2.1 THE TRADITIONAL ACCOUNT
The standard account of knowledge, around which all recent work has been done, defines knowledge as justified true belief; it holds that a knows that p if and only if
1
p
2
a believes that p ,
3
a 's belief that p is justified.
Because there are three parts to this definition it is called the tripartite definition or the tripartite account; it defines propositional knowledge, knowledge that p ; it does not define knowledge by acquaintance as in ‘a knows James’ nor knowledge-how, e.g. knowledge how to ride a bicycle, unless these can be shown to reduce to knowledge-that.
The tripartite definition has obvious attractions.
The first clause, that if a knows that p then p is true (which can be read as ), is normally seen as stipulative.
The second clause, that if a knows that p then a believes that p (we can read this as , seems minimal, and the third, that if a knows that p then his belief that p is justified , is there in order to prevent any lucky guess from counting as knowledge if the guesser is sufficiently confident to believe his own guess.
It is worth noticing, however, a consequence of this justification of clause 3; this is that a belief is not generally considered to be justified by the mere fact that it is true, for otherwise clause 3 would be unnecessary.
If I decide on the toss of a coin which investment will provide the greatest yield, and fortunately turn out to be right, we suppose that my choice is vindicated by the outcome perhaps, but not justified by it; I had no real justification for making the choice I did.
(Alternatively we  could distinguish between two forms of justification, justification before the event and justification after it, and run the tripartite definition in terms of the former; but then the question would be whether these really are two forms of the same thing.)
What are the problems for the tripartite definition?
One might think that clause 2 is insufficient: to believe that p is not so strong as to be certain that p , and to know one must be certain, not just believe.
The best reason for wanting some account of certainty in our analysis of knowledge is that people are rightly hesitant to claim knowledge when they are less than certain.
This hesitation seems to be due to something about what knowledge is, and there is no obvious way to explain it if knowledge is as the tripartite conception claims it to be.
Thus although it is commonly suggested that the notion of certainty is relevant to the analysis of claims to knowledge, but not to the analysis of knowledge itself (e.g., in Woozley, 1953), this leaves us with no method of explaining why certainty should be required before one can claim knowledge when it is not required for knowledge itself, i.e., for the existence of what one is claiming.
Since we are going to discover other reasons for rejecting the tripartite definition, we have no reason to pursue this point here.
The moral to be drawn is that if we are to give an account of knowledge which does not include a requirement of certainty, our account should make room for the notion of certainty somewhere; if it sees certainty as a requirement for a knowledge claim it needs to be able to explain in its own terms why that should be so.
But why should we be reluctant simply to change clause 2 to ‘a is certain that p ’?
The answer is that we are prepared, in circumstances that are not particularly unusual, to allow that someone does in fact have knowledge when that person is so far from certain that he would not claim the knowledge himself.
The classic example offered is that of the diffident schoolboy, who has learnt the dates of, say, the English kings the previous night but who is so alarmed by his hectoring schoolteacher that he becomes completely unsure that the answers that suggest themselves to him under questioning are in fact the right ones.
Supposing, however, that those answers are correct, would we not allow that he knows them, even though he himself might not make that claim?
And surely our reasons for allowing this are close to those suggested by the tripartite definition; he has the right answer, and not by luck.
There is a weakness in this appeal to the diffident schoolboy, which concerns clause 2 again.
To the extent that the schoolboy is less than certain of the answers that occur to him, can we allow that he still believes them?
If we are not careful, use of this example to defuse the pretensions of a certainty condition will result in our losing the belief condition we were trying to defend.
2.2 GETTIER COUNTER-EXAMPLES
Henry is watching the television on a June afternoon.
It is Wimbledon men's finals day, and the television shows McEnroe beating Connors; the score is two sets to none and match point to McEnroe in the third.
McEnroe wins the point.
Henry believes justifiably that
1 I have just seen McEnroe win this year's Wimbledon final.
and reasonably infers that
2 McEnroe is this year's Wimbledon champion.
Actually, however, the cameras at Wimbledon have ceased to function, and the television is showing a recording of last year's match.
But while it does so McEnroe is in the process of repeating last year's slaughter.
So Henry's belief 2 is true, and surely he is justified in believing 2.
But we would hardly allow that Henry knows 2.
This sort of counter-example to the tripartite account of knowledge is known as a Gettier counter-example, after E. L. Gettier (1963).
(I owe this particular example to Brian Garrett.)
Gettier argued that they show the tripartite account to be insufficient; it is possible for someone not to know even when all the three clauses are satisfied.
Gettier here is not quarrelling with any of the three clauses.
He allows that they are individually necessary, and argues only that they need supplementing.
It is worth formalising the situation, for reasons which will emerge later.
Reading 1 as p and 2 as q , we have:
So a Gettier counter-example is one in which a has a justified but  false belief by inference from which he justifiably believes something which happens to be true, and so arrives at a justified true belief which is not knowledge.
What response should be made to these infamous but slightly irritating counter-examples?
There seem to be three possible routes:
1
find some means to show that the counter-examples do not work;
2
accept the counter-examples and search for a supplement to the tripartite analysis which excludes them;
3
accept the counter-examples and alter the tripartite analysis to suit rather than adding anything to it.
The remainder of this section is concerned with the first route.
On what principles of inference do these counter-examples rely?
Gettier himself exposes two.
For the examples to work, it must be possible for a false belief still to be justified; and a justified belief must justify any belief which it implies (or is justifiably believed to imply).
This last is just the principle of closure PC j mentioned above in the discussion of scepticism (1.2).
So if we could show PC j false this would have the double effect of undermining the Gettier counter-examples and (part at least of) the first sceptical argument.
It might be possible, however, to construct new variants on the Gettier theme which do not rely on inference or on an inference of this sort, as we shall see in the next section, and if so no complaints about PC j or other principles will be very effective.
One thing we cannot do is to reject Gettier counter-examples as contrived and artificial.
They are perfectly effective in their own terms.
But we might reasonably wonder what point there is in racking our brains to find an acceptable definition of ‘a knows that p ’.
Is this more than a mere technical exercise?
What, if anything, should disconcert us if we cannot come up with a trouble-free definition?
Many of the innumerable papers written in response to Gettier give the impression that responding to Gettier is a kind of private philosophical game, which is of no interest except to the players.
And hasn't Wittgenstein shown us anyway that a concept can be perfectly healthy without being definable, arguing that there need be no element common to all instances of a property (e.g. instances of knowledge) other than that they are instances (e.g. that they are knowledge)?
(Cf.
Wittgenstein, 1969b, pp. 17–18, and 1953, 66 — 7.)
So what on earth could depend on our success or failure to discover necessary and sufficient conditions for knowledge?
In many ways I sympathize with the general tenor of this complaint, as may quickly become apparent.
What sustains me in the search for a response to Gettier is the feeling that it may be possible to find an account of what knowledge is which will have a substantial effect on what we are to say about justification in later parts of this book.
This could happen in either or both of two ways.
We might find an account of what knowledge is which would suffice to undermine crucial sceptical moves, and hence confirm the possibility that some of our beliefs are justified; the account to which I give tentative support in chapter 3 has pretensions in this direction.
Or we might hope to define justification in terms of knowledge.
For instance, we might suppose that a belief is justified iff in certain circumstances (to be spelled out) it would be knowledge.
(Jennifer Hornsby gave me this idea.)
In the meantime we must consider some accounts of knowledge which seem less fruitful.
2.3 RESPONSES TO GETTIER
I rather obviously avoided, so far as I could, offering even the most tentative diagnosis of the defect in the tripartite analysis which Gettier exposed.
This is because the different responses to Gettier all stem from different diagnoses of the way in which the tripartite analysis is lacking; once we know what is missing, it should be quite a simple matter to add it.
The Presence of Relevant Falsehood
The most obvious diagnosis is simply that the initial belief that p , from which the true justified belief that q is inferred, is false.
So we might add to the tripartite analysis the fourth condition that nothing can be known which is inferred from a false belief, or from a group of beliefs of which one is false.
This simple suggestion has two defects.
First, variants on the Gettier theme can be written in which, though there is falsehood, there is no inference.
Suppose that I believe that there is a sheep in the next field because of what I see.
I am not inferring from what I see that there is a sheep in the field; I take myself simply to see that there is one.
The animal I see is a large furry dog, but my belief is not false, because there is a sheep there too, unknown to me, hidden by the hedge.
Here we might admit that my belief is true and justified but refuse to grant that I know there to be a sheep in the field.
(This example comes from Chisholm, 1977, p. 105.)
A reply might be that surely I am inferring that I see a sheep in  the field from my knowledge of my own present sensory states.
This reply raises large issues; but chapter 5 contains a lengthy argument that if there is any non-inferential knowledge, some of it concerns things other than our sensory states — so why not sheep, for instance?
The second defect is that the suggestion is too strong and is likely to make it impossible for any of us to know anything at all.
As we shall see, this is a danger with a number of responses to Gettier.
In the present case, we all of us suffer from numerous false beliefs which have some role in our inferential processes, and so on this suggestion none of our present true justified beliefs would count as knowledge.
To eliminate these defects we must remove the reference to inference and tighten up the relation specified between the false beliefs and the true justified ones which are not to count as knowledge.
Thus we could simply require an absence of relevant falsehood.
This would get round the example of the sheep in the field because I presumably believe (falsely) that the animal I can see is a sheep even though this belief is not used in inference.
But as a suggestion it seems rather to name the difficulty than to solve it: which false beliefs are to be counted as relevant?
An answer might be that a false belief that p is relevant in the required sense if, had the believer believed instead that –p  , his belief that q would cease to have been justified.
Not all false beliefs are relevant in this sense.
Some will be so distant or insignificant that whether one believes them or their opposite would have no effect on what one believes here.
For instance, among the beliefs in virtue of which I claim to know that Napoleon was a great soldier there may be one which is false, but which is so insignificant that my justification for believing that Napoleon was a great soldier would survive my changing my mind on that particular point.
Such a false belief would not be relevant in our present sense.
But the new account faces difficulties, which can best be illustrated by an example.
Suppose that I expect a colleague to give me a lift home this evening, but that her car has a flat battery; this won't stop us, however, because a friend's car is parked conveniently near with some jump leads which we can use to get her car to start.
I now believe that she will give me a lift this evening, and this belief is justified.
Do I know that she will give me a lift?
The requirement that there be no relevant false beliefs suggests plausibly that whether I know depends on what other beliefs I have.
But this suggestion raises difficulties.
If, for instance, I merely believe 
1
she will give me a lift home this evening,
I may be allowed to know this, but if I believe both 1 and
2
her car battery is not flat,
I may not, since I have a relevant false belief.
But if, as well as believing 1 and 2, I happen also to believe
3
there is a friend's car conveniently near with jump leads,
then this apparently gratuitous belief makes it the case again that I know that I will be given a lift.
For if I had believed the opposite of 2, my belief 1 would not be justified unless I also believe something like 3.
It seems then that our present suggestion has the effect that whether I have knowledge will depend commonly on which other apparently gratuitous beliefs I may have.
There is something unsatisfactory about this, and more work needs to be done to defend the account against complaints of this sort.
Defeasibility
A slightly different approach diagnoses the Gettier counter-examples as arising because there are some truths which would have destroyed the believer's justification had he believed them (cf.
Lehrer and Paxson, 1969; Swain, 1974).
Thus, for instance, suppose that Henry had believed that he was watching a recording of last year's final, as he was; in that case, his justification for his belief that p and thus by PC /j for his belief that q would have been destroyed.
The suggestion then is that a fourth clause be added requiring that there be no other truth such that Henry's believing it would have destroyed his justification for believing that q .
This is the defeasibility suggestion; we require for knowledge that the justification be indefeasible, i.e. that the addition of further truths should not defeat it.
This will not imply that a false belief will never be justified, since the suggestion is that although some beliefs are defeasibly justified, we require indefeasible justification for knowledge.
However, it is in danger of rendering the first condition for knowledge  redundant.
It looks as if a false belief could never be indefeasibly justified since there would always be some truth (even if only the negation of the false belief) whose addition would destroy the justification.
But perhaps this is a strength in the theory rather than a weakness, since the new quadripartite analysis will have a  coherence that was previously lacking; it provides an explanation in the fourth clause of what was before included by mere stipulation, that knowledge requires truth.
The defeasibility suggestion could be said to provide an extension of the earlier requirement that there be no relevant falsehoods; we now look beyond those propositions actually believed by the believer to propositions which would have an effect if they were believed.
But this extension is no real advantage.
The sort of difficulty facing the notion of defeasibility can again best be illustrated by an example.
Thus, perhaps, I believe that my children are at present playing in the garden at home, and I have good reasons for this belief.
However, unknown to me, a neighbour rang up after I left home this morning to invite the children round for the morning.
And if I had known this my justification for believing that they are playing at home would be defeated, because I also believe that they normally accept such invitations.
However, my wife has become concerned about the health of one of them and refused the invitation.
Do I know that my children are playing in the garden at home?
If your intuition is that I do, you must reject the defeasibility criterion as formulated at present.
If it is that I do not, on the grounds that had I heard about the invitation my justification would have been defeated, you have a duty to give some account of why the (unknown to me) truth that my wife has refused the invitation does not somehow redress the balance.
Either way the defeasibility proposal needs to be altered.
The problem seems to lie, as it lay for the requirement that there be no relevant falsehood, in the way in which new true beliefs can be added piecemeal and overturn the existing justification, while there remain yet further truths waiting in the background to overturn the overturning.
First we want to ask anyway whether there isn't likely always to be some truth which, if it alone were added and all others excluded, would defeat my justification.
Even if this won't always happen, it will certainly happen often enough for the range of my knowledge to be considerably reduced, and this itself is some sort of an objection.
Second, we need to find a way to counter the way in which the piecemeal addition of further truths seems to switch me into knowledge and out again.
We might achieve the second task by altering our account of defeasibility so that instead of talking about some one other truth (which caused the problem of piecemeal addition) we talk about all truths whatever.
Thus we could require as our fourth condition that our justification would remain even when every truth is added to  our belief set, all at once.
This new notion of defeasibility seems to allow (probably) that I now know that my children are playing in the garden, because the second added truth negates the defeating powers of the first.
But there remain problems for this new notion of defeasibility.
First, in talking of adding all truths at once we seem to have moved firmly into the realm of fiction.
Indeed, do we have any suitable conception of ‘all the truths’?
Second, it seems on this criterion that we shall never have more than the slenderest of reasons to believe that we know something; for in believing this we are believing that when all the truths are in, our justification will remain, and it looks as if much more is required to support that belief than is required to support an ordinary claim to know.
Reliability
A different approach diverts our attention away from the relation between the proposition claimed as knowledge and other false beliefs which should have been true or other truths which should have been believed.
It is sometimes suggested that a justified true belief can be knowledge when it derives from a reliable method (see Goldman, 1976; Armstrong, 1973, ch. 13; Swain, 1981).
In the Gettier example, Henry does know that the Wimbledon final is being played that afternoon; this justified true belief derives from the reliable method of reading the newspapers, which are normally right about this sort of thing.
However, his belief that q clearly derives from a method that is less than reliable.
It would have led him badly astray here, had McEnroe suffered an unexpected lapse and succumbed to the efforts of Connors for once.
The reliability approach can be made more elaborate; in some ways it is closely related to the causal approach considered next, because we are clearly owed an account of what reliability is, and a causal answer is tempting (see, e.g., Goldman, 1979).
However, we can already see difficulties for any variation on this approach.
It is in danger either of making knowledge impossible or of walking straight into one of our sceptical arguments.
We may mean by ‘reliable’ that a suitable method, if properly followed, is perfectly reliable and never leads to a false belief.
But, quite apart from the general difficulty of distinguishing between a defect in the method and a defect in the manner in which the method has been applied, it seems improbable that there are any perfectly reliable methods of acquiring beliefs.
Man is fallible, and his fallibility is shown not just in the manner in which the methods are used but in the belief-gathering methods available to him.
Hence  if knowledge requires an infallible or perfectly reliable method, it is impossible.
But if we retreat from the notion of perfect reliability and require only that the method be generally reliable, we invite sceptical arguments of our second type.
How is it that a method which has failed elsewhere in relevantly similar circumstances suffices to yield knowledge this time?
If we had any hope that our eventual account of knowledge would help us to reject the sceptical arguments, this particular account seems to make matters worse rather than better.
Of course this won't show that the account is wrong.
It may be that the correct account of knowledge does unfortunately give the sceptic the opening he is looking for.
But we should not accept that this is how things are until we are convinced that there is no other account of knowledge which offers the sceptic less leverage.
We can still hope for one which makes life harder rather than easier for him.
A final retreat would be to require only that the method be reliable this time.
This has the effect of diverting our attention away from previous cases where the method has failed and hence of escaping the sceptical argument which takes its start from those cases.
But we might reasonably doubt whether the requirement that the method be reliable this time amounts to any genuine addition to the tripartite account.
If reliability is defined in terms of the production of truth, it adds nothing to the first condition once we restrict our attention to the particular case.
If it is defined in terms of justification, it adds nothing to the third.
And no other accounts seem very inviting.
(It may be, however, that the causal theory amounts to a notion of justification in the particular case; see 2.4)
Conclusive Reasons
A different approach diagnoses Henry's failing in the Gettier case as due to the fact that his reasons were less than conclusive.
If we require for knowledge that the justified true belief be based on conclusive reasons, all the Gettier cases, and indeed any case in which the believer is right by accident, fall to the ground.
All the work in this approach must go into a persuasive account of what it is for reasons to be conclusive.
One suggestion would be that where beliefs A — M constitute conclusive reasons for belief N, A-M could not be true if N is false.
This will exclude the counter-examples, but it will also make knowledge a rare phenomenon at best.
Empirical knowledge, anyway, looks impossible now; in the empirical realm, our reasons are never conclusive in this sense.
A weaker account, owed to F. Dretske (1971), suggests that someone's reasons A — M for a belief N are conclusive iff A — M would not be true if N is false.
This is weaker because to say that A — M would not be true if N is false is not to say that they could not be true if N is false, as the stronger account demands.
It is so weak as not really to provide a genuine sense of ‘conclusive’, but this doesn't really matter.
This weaker account seems to me promising in its general approach, and the theory I shall be supporting in the next chapter is distinctly similar.
But it differs in not talking about reasons; and this is a virtue because it does seem possible that there should be justified belief without reasons.
My belief that I am in pain may be justified, perhaps, but I can hardly be said to base it on reasons, conclusive or otherwise.
I don't base it on reasons at all.
The Causal Theory
A. I. Goldman proposes a causal supplement to the tripartite definition (Goldman, 1967).
An initial diagnosis of the Gettier counter-examples may be that it is just luck that Henry's justified belief is true.
This diagnosis cannot itself provide a suitable answer.
We cannot merely stipulate that there be no luck involved, because we all of us rely on luck to some extent.
For instance, the fact that our reliable belief-gathering method provides here a true belief rather than a false one, as it sometimes does, will be just luck as far as we are concerned.
And of course the fact that luck is always involved somewhere gives the sceptic a toehold too.
But the diagnosis can suggest a better answer.
Goldman's suggestion is that what made the belief true in the Gettier case is not what caused Henry to believe it.
So he proposes, as a fourth condition for knowledge that p , that the fact that p should cause a 's belief that p .
This excludes the Gettier cases because in them it is coincidental that the belief is true.
We want a link between belief and truth to prevent this happening, and a causal link looks promising.
Attractive though this approach is, it faces difficulties.
The first is that we may find it hard to suppose that facts can cause anything; surely they are too inert to affect the way the world goes, even where that world is the merely mental world of beliefs.
What, after all, are facts?
One's first idea is that facts are similar to, if not identical with, true propositions (which would explain why there are no false facts).
But can true propositions cause anything?
Surely facts (or true propositions) reflect the world rather than affect it.
The prevalent analyses of causation seem justifiably only to allow events  and possibly agents as causes.
Second, there is a problem about knowledge of the future; Goldman's suggestion seems to require that here either we have an instance of backward causation (the future causing the past) or that knowledge of the future is impossible since causes cannot succeed their effects.
Third, there is the problem of universal knowledge, or more generally of knowledge by inference.
My belief that all men are mortal is caused, but not by the fact that all men are mortal; if any facts cause it, they are the facts that this man, that man, etc., have died.
And these men are not caused to die by the fact that all men die (which would restore the causal analysis, with an intermediary cause); rather, all men die because those men do (among others).
How then can the causal analysis show that I know that all men die?
There are answers to some of these criticisms, of course.
We are more used to talking about facts as causes than the first criticism allows.
The fact that philosophers have not yet persuaded themselves that they understand the idea that facts can be causes should not cause us to rule out all appeal to fact-causation as philosophically unsound.
(The preceding sentence is a case in point.)
The second criticism, too, might be answered by complicating the theory by allowing facts to be known in cases where fact and belief are different effects of a common cause.
The third criticism, however, seems more intractable.
The admission that facts can be causes will not much improve our willingness to suppose that universal facts can cause universal beliefs.
There are promising aspects about the causal theory, and the theory which I shall support can in fact be seen as a generalization from it.
2.4 CONCLUDING REMARKS
The various proposals considered in the previous section were presented as if they were additions to the tripartite analysis, it being admitted that Gettier had shown that analysis to be insufficient.
But we can find among them at least one which can be seen as a direct defence of the tripartite analysis.
Any proposal which amounts to a new theory of justification may succeed in showing that in the Gettier cases the relevant true beliefs were not justified at all.
And we could take the causal theory in this way.
The causal theory could be telling us that a belief is only justified when caused (directly or indirectly) by the facts.
It would then be adopting route 1, as  distinguished in 2.2.
(Some versions of the reliability proposal could also be seen in this light.)
Moving this way, then, we would be starting from a causal theory of justification; the causal theory of knowledge would simply be one of its consequences.
A possible way of arguing against a causal theory of justification would be to claim that we have no guarantee that there is only one way in which beliefs come to be justified, and in particular no real reason for supposing that any acceptable way must somehow be causal, so that all justified beliefs that p must be caused by relevant facts.
Surely we don't want to rule out in advance the possibility that some moral beliefs, say, are justified, doing so just because we don't want to admit the existence of moral facts (if we don't).
And we might still be doubtful of the existence of causally effective mathematical facts, without wishing to say that no mathematical beliefs can therefore be justified.
More importantly, however, the suggested causal account of justification is false because it denies the possibility that a false belief be justified.
A false belief that p has no fact that p to cause it.
This objection can only be evaded by finding a different account of the justification of false beliefs from that which is offered for true ones.
But that cannot be right.
Justification must be the same for true as for false beliefs, if only because we can ask and decide whether a belief is justified (e.g. a belief about the future) before we decide whether it is true or false.
This criticism leaves open the possibility of a different sort of causal theory, on the lines suggested at the end of 2.2.
With a causal theory of knowledge and the thesis that a belief is justified  if if true it would be knowledge, we can give a causal account of justification which is not vulnerable to the existence of false justified beliefs.
FURTHER READING
Central papers in the area are Gettier (1963), Dretske (1971), Goldman (1967) and Swain (1974).
Perhaps the earliest discussion (and rejection) of the tripartite definition is in Plato's Theaetetus (Plato, 1973, 201c-210d).
The enormous industry recently generated by perceived defects in the tripartite account is painstakingly analysed in Shope (1983), with copious references.
There are of course many approaches and variants on approaches to the Gettier problem which I have not discussed, including Shope's own.
Most of the papers referred to in the present chapter are collected in Pappas and Swain (1978), which also contains an analytical introduction to the area.
Prichard (1967) gives an interestingly different account of the relations between knowledge, belief, certainty and truth.
An important question which we have not discussed is whether knowledge implies belief.
For this, cf.
Ring (1977).
The papers by Gettier, Prichard and Woozley are collected in Phillips Griffiths (1967).
3
The Conditional Theory of Knowledge
3.1 THE THEORY
This theory, which we owe mainly to Robert Nozick, takes its start as others do: from the defects which Gettier exposed in the tripartite analysis.
Nozick suggests that the reason why we take the justified true beliefs in those examples not to have been known is that a would have believed them even if they had been false.
The reason why Henry's belief that McEnroe is this year's champion was too lucky or too luckily true to count as knowledge is that his route to this lucky truth was such that even if it had been false, he would still have ended up believing it.
Nozick takes it therefore that for a to know that p we require that a would not have believed that p if p had been false.
This gives us, so far, the standard two conditions:
1
p
2
a believes that p ,
with
3
if p were not true,a would not believe that p .
But Nozick argues that although this account may cope with the examples Gettier offers, there are other similar examples which would escape what we have so far.
There are two ways in which it can be a coincidence that a 's belief is true, and both need to be ruled out.
The first is that if it were false,a would still believe it; we have dealt with this already by the addition of clause 3.
The second is that there may be slightly different circumstances in which it remains true, but a no longer believes it.
Many examples are  coincidental (lucky) in both senses.
Suppose that I believe that there is a police car in the road outside because I can hear a police siren.
There is in fact such a car outside, but the siren I hear is on my son's hi-fi in the next room.
I do not know that there is a police car outside, for two reasons.
First, I would still have had the belief even if the car had not been there.
Second, I would not have believed the car was there if my son's hi-fi had been silent, even though the car itself remained outside.
We rule out this second way in which a true belief may be too luckily true to count as knowledge by adding a fourth clause to the initial three:
4 if, in changed circumstances,p were still true,a would still believe that p .
These four conditions, comprising the conditional theory of knowledge, can be symbolised as follows:
1
p
2
3
4
where the box-arrow is used to symbolise the subjunctive conditional construction in English ‘If it were the case that…, it would be the case that…
‘. The theory which they comprise is an attempt to articulate the feeling that, for a belief to be knowledge, it must be peculiarly sensitive to the truth of the proposition believed; it must track the truth (Nozick's term) in the sense that if the proposition were in changed circumstances still true, it would still be believed, and if it were not true, it would not.
In the case of the police car, my belief fails to track the truth in both ways, and so is not knowledge.
3.2 SOME COMMENTS
(a) The requirement that the belief that p should track the truth of p is a requirement that the first two clauses of the theory should be related in a certain way.
This is similar to the way in which the causal theory worked, but in that case the relation required was specifically a causal relation.
The conditional theory is less demanding, and hence escapes some of the difficulties which the causal  theory faced.
But it includes the causal theory as a special case, since we might think that if the fact that p does cause a 's belief that p , then the two subjunctive conditionals will be true (but not vice versa).
So the conditional theory is a generalisation of the causal theory.
While the causal theory suggests that there is only one way in which justified true beliefs can get to be knowledge (by being caused by the facts), the conditional theory is willing to countenance any way, causal or not, which preserves the truth of the two subjunctive conditionals.
In fact the conditional theory adopts some of the best points of several of the theories found wanting in the previous chapter.
For instance, it is close to Dretske's version of the ‘conclusive reasons’ approach.
(b) We considered whether the causal theory of knowledge either rested on or made available a causal theory of justification.
So we should ask the same questions of the conditional theory.
Can we offer a conditional definition of , thus:
This would be to hold that a justified belief is one which tracks the truth.
But the same sort of difficulty arises.
A false belief may nevertheless be justified.
If so, is consistent with .
But  & p ) is inconsistent with  a false belief does not track the truth.
Hence the conditional definition of justification fails.
Such a theory would have been attractive, however.
For someone who takes his belief that p to be justified is surely close to taking it that his belief tracks the truth of p .
We can, if we want, restore the possibility of a conditional theory of justification by a move like the one made in 2.4.
The suggestion there was that we derive the account of justification from that of knowledge, thus:a is justified in believing p iff in certain circumstances a would know that p .
As an illustration, we can offer this instance of that approach:
Here the crucial phrase ‘in certain circumstances’ is read in the simplest possible way, as ‘if p were true’.
If a theory like this were available, we would have reintroduced in a roundabout way the possibility of a conditional theory of justification.
(c) Another point which I take to be in favour of the theory is that  it begins to make some theoretical sense of the intuitive feeling that what was wrong in the Gettier cases was that there was too much luck around.
The theory gives an account of what it is for a belief to be luckily true, as follows: the extent to which a 's belief is luckily true is the extent to which even if it had been false,a would still have believed it, or if it were in changed circumstances still true, he would still believe it.
The importance of this account will emerge in the next section.
(d) The theory does seem to have some resources with which to explain the link between certainty and knowledge.
Someone who claims that he knows that p is claiming that if p were not true, he would not believe it and if p were true he would believe it.
But this claim is precisely one which he would not make if he were not certain that p .
What the diffident schoolboy has lost is the confidence that his beliefs are tracking the truth; he takes it that, although he does believe that p , it is at least as probable that he is wrong as that he is right.
The theory therefore analyses the certainty required for a knowledge claim as the belief that the two subjunctive conditionals are satisfied.
It uses this analysis to explain the otherwise puzzling fact that the diffident schoolboy does know but cannot claim to know.
3.3 THE PRINCIPLE OF CLOSURE AND THE FIRST SCEPTICAL ARGUMENT
The conditional theory of knowledge can show that you do not know that you are not a brain in a vat.
For a necessary condition for such knowledge, 3 (that if it were not true that you are not a brain in a vat, you would not believe that you are not a brain in a vat) fails.
We can simplify this conditional as follows: if you were a brain in a vat, you would not believe that you are not a brain in a vat.
This is false because if you were a brain in a vat (being fed your current experiences), you would still believe that you are not a brain in a vat.
Therefore, if the conditional theory of knowledge is on the right lines, you do not know that you are not a brain in a vat.
A necessary condition for such knowledge is not satisfied.
Despite this, Nozick's account can be used to show that you do know that you are currently sitting reading a philosophy book (please sit down first).
For the four conditions are all satisfied.
It is true that you are sitting etc., you believe that you are sitting etc., if you were not sitting etc. you would not believe that you are, and  if you were sitting etc. you would believe that you are.
The account also shows, in similar fashion, that you know that if you are sitting reading a philosophy book, you are not a brain a vat.
And so it emerges that on the conditional theory of knowledge it is possible to know that p and to know that p implies q without knowing that q .
But doesn't this conclusion directly breach the principle of closure ?
It does; but Nozick is able to show more generally that on his account that principle fails, and (which is perhaps more important) to explain its failure.
The explanation relies on the broad sweep, but not the details, of a theory about the conditions under which subjunctive conditionals such as 3 and 4 are true.
The theory uses the notion of a possible world in order to give its account of truth conditions for subjunctive conditionals.
A possible world is to be thought of as a complete way in which the world might have been.
The thought that the world might have been different in a certain respect is taken to be the thought that there is a possible world which does differ from the actual world in that respect (and probably others too).
Possible worlds vary in their degree of resemblance to the actual world.
Some are close to our world, others much more remote.
But it may not be possible to order worlds according to their closeness to the actual world, for two reasons.
First, the notions of closeness, resemblance and similarity are too imprecise to support the sort of precise comparative judgement which such an ordering would require.
Second, for any possible world we can reasonably expect to be able to find another which resembles the actual world to the same degree.
For both these reasons we need to think not in terms of individual possible worlds but of groups of possible worlds, all worlds in a group being equally close to or distant from the actual one.
If there is even a vague or sketchy ordering, it will be an ordering of groups of equally similar worlds rather than of individual worlds.
Nozick gives an initial account of truth-conditions for a subjunctive conditional  as follows:
true in the actual world iff  true throughout a range of groups of worlds reasonably close to the actual world.
(This is not the final theory but a first approximation.)
Although this theory is expressed formally it can easily be given intuitive support.
Suppose that we want to know the circumstances which would justify assertion of the subjunctive conditional ‘If  Mrs Thatcher had waited longer, she would have lost the election’.
What we do is to picture the current situation altered to the extent that Mrs Thatcher delays the election.
Other things will have to be altered as well, of course , for the date of the election is not an isolated fact (there are no isolated facts, which is why there cannot be a world similar to ours in every respect except one).
We will have also to change all those things which would not have happened if the election had been delayed, e.g. Mrs Thatcher's age at election time.
Then, holding everything else constant so far as we can, we form a judgement about what will most probably happen.
If we take it that a Conservative defeat is most probable, we assert the subjunctive conditional.
If not, not.
The formal theory implements this informal approach by saying that we consider the nearest groups of worlds in which the antecedent p is true and ask whether in those worlds q is true also.
If q is probable given p , then p & g is more likely than  and therefore in the nearest worlds where p is true,q will also be true.
There will of course be some remoter worlds where we have , but they do not matter.
For we are deciding what would (most probably) happen, not what might (within the bounds of possibility) happen.
This distinction between what would happen and what might happen is crucial for what follows.
To take David Lewis' example (D. Lewis 1973), ‘if kangaroos had no tails, they would topple over’; it is of course always true that they might not topple over — they might be given crutches by a grateful and tourist-conscious government.
But this doesn't affect the fact that they would topple over, for in worlds most similar to ours tailless kangaroos do topple over and are not given crutches.
Nozick's account can now be used in two ways.
First, it can reinforce our intuitions that you know that you are sitting reading etc., that you know that if you are sitting reading etc. you are not a brain in a vat, and that you do not know that you are not a brain in a vat.
With the conditional theory of knowledge, and the above explication of clauses 3 and 4, you can be said to know that you are sitting reading because (3) in the nearest worlds in which you are not sitting reading you do not believe that you are, and (4) in the nearest worlds in which you are sitting reading you do believe that you are.
However, you do not know that you are not a brain in a vat because it is not the case that (3) in the nearest worlds in which you are a brain in a vat you believe that you are a brain in a vat.
I emphasise again that it is only the nearest worlds in which the  antecedent is true that count.
It is admittedly possible, for instance, that you should believe you are sitting reading when in fact you are not.
But such a world is vastly more remote from the actual world than is a world in which, when you are sitting reading, you believe that you are.
We are interested not in what might be the case (of course anything is possible) but in what would be the case, and the theory captures that interest by focusing only on the nearest relevant worlds.
The theory also provides a direct disproof of the principle of closure.
This can be done in two ways, either by giving a description of a world for which the principle fails  and proving formally that the description is consistent, or informally by appeal to a counterexample.
We already have such an example: the case where a = you,p = you are sitting reading, and q = you are not a brain in a vat.
But this example is contentious.
It needs support from an explanation, in terms of the conditional theory, of how there can be such counter-examples.
This can now be done.
An important preliminary task is to distinguish the principle of closure, which is false, from the following much more reliable instance of modus ponens :
So long as these two principles are kept apart, it should be easy to see why the principle of closure fails.
The reason lies in the subjunctive conditionals and the possible worlds held relevant to the assessment of those conditionals as true or false.
The worlds relevant to assessing the left-hand side of the principle of closure are the nearest group in which p is true, the nearest group in which p is false, the nearest group in which  is true (which may be distinct) and the nearest group in which  is false.
The worlds relevant to assessing the right-hand side of the principle of closure are the nearest group in which q is true, and the nearest group in which q is false, i.e. completely different sets of worlds one of which may be, as in our actual example, far more remote from our world than are any of the first four groups.
Hence it is hardly probable that a group of remarks about the first four groups could place any restriction on the nature of the two later groups, and thus there is a lot of room for an invalidating counter-example to the principle of closure.
The more distant one of those later groups is, the more likely we are to be able to construct a counter-example; as is revealed in our own example where  = you are a brain in a vat;
By way of final illustration, we can apply Nozick's refutation to Descartes' sceptical argument about dreaming, and hence perhaps do better than Descartes did on the last page of the Meditations .
Here a = you,p = you are sitting reading,q = you are not in bed dreaming that you are sitting reading.
Can we have , and ?
Yes.
K aq is false because in the nearest group of worlds in which q is false (you are in bed dreaming etc.) you still believe that q is true.
K ap is true because in the nearest worlds in which you are sitting reading you believe that you are sitting reading, and the nearest worlds in which you are not sitting reading are either worlds in which you are standing/kneeling/lying reading or worlds in which you are sitting knitting/watching TV, etc., but not worlds in which you happen to be asleep dreaming that you are sitting reading.
Hence you can know that you are sitting reading even though you do not know that you are not asleep in bed, dreaming that you are sitting reading.
3.4 HAS NOZICK REFUTED THE SCEPTIC?
One purpose of the preceding section was to show that an interest in the strengths and weaknesses of the tripartite condition can yield genuine philosophical profit.
The conditional theory is attractive in its own right as a promising account of knowledge which escapes Gettier-type objections.
And it has the secondary virtue that it destroys a prevalent type of sceptical move, and does so in a way that explains the attraction of that move.
According to Nozick, however, all sceptical arguments rely on the principle of closure and the invalidation of that principle serves therefore as a general response to scepticism (Nozick, 1981, p. 204).
But apart from the general implausibility of this suggestion, there is surely one sceptical argument which he cannot reject in this way.
This is the argument from error (1.2).
The argument is that we or others have made mistakes in the past or would make them in circumstances which, so far as we can tell, are not relevantly different from our present circumstances.
We cannot therefore, admitting that we or they did not know before, insist that we do know now, since that would be to make different claims in circumstances that show no relevant difference.
This argument turned out to be the one that forced us to admit in the first place that we do not know that we are not brains in vats.
Nozick needs this conclusion to generate the sceptical problem that  he is attempting to dissolve.
For his sceptic argues that the consequent K aq of PC k is here false, and hence, via the admitted truth that , that K ap is false.
Nozick wants to unroll this sceptical argument while admitting its first move, and it is the argument from error that forces that admission.
So it is only if he admits the strength of the argument from error that he can think he is getting anywhere by refuting PC k .
Nozick might claim that his conditional theory also proves the same point, that we don't know we are not brains in vats.
And he is right; our belief here would not track the truth.
But if we had no independent reason for accepting this conclusion, such as the argument from error provides, we would take it as a point against his theory that it shows we don't know the most central and obvious things such as that we are not brains in vats, that there is a material world or that the world began more than five minutes ago.
So he cannot cast off the argument from error and rely entirely on the conditional theory to show that K aq is here false.
Second, there is something right about an argument which holds, as does the argument from error, that for the very same sort of reason that you don't know you are not a brain in a vat, you don't know, e.g., that The Times will be published tomorrow, nor whether you are sitting reading.
Surely it is implausible to suppose, taking Russell's example, that I do know what I did yesterday but I don't know that the world did not begin five minutes ago replete with archaeological and other traces (Russell, 1921, p. 159).
Nozick wants to show us that we can suppose this; but I am not sure that I really want to (or ought to want to).
The argument from error has here a plausible consistency, while the point which Nozick takes to be his strength begins to look like a weakness.
(This remark could be promoted to form the basis of a general argument against the conditional theory of knowledge.)
Third, the argument from error cannot be attacked for relying on PC k .
This is not because PC k is valid, particularly.
Even if it were valid, I can see no reason for supposing that the argument relies upon it.
Nozick anyway could not hold that it does, because his position relies on the independent proof it provides that you don't know you are not a brain in a vat.
Without that proof, we would hold it against the conditional theory that it cannot even show that we know that we are not brains in a vat.
With it, Nozick can and does find independent support for his theory; he wants to say that the theory gets things right here.
But if the argument from error does rely on PC k , which on his theory is invalid, he lacks  that independent support and with it a considerable degree of plausibility.
And I do not know of any other argument, not relying on PC k , which Nozick could use to show that we do not know we are not brains in a vat without showing that we do not know most other things either.
Fourth, the argument cannot be rejected on the similar grounds that it argues directly from the fact that you might be wrong to the conclusion that you do not know.
Such an argument would be invalid, as Nozick can show.
But the argument does not proceed directly in this fallacious way, but indirectly via the principle of universalizability.
3.5 INTERNALISM AND EXTERNALISM
So far we have it that Nozick's account of knowledge succeeds in defusing one sceptical argument but not another.
Is this a conclusion which Nozick must simply accept, abandoning his claim to total success and pointing merely to the admitted partial success?
There remains a complaint which Nozick could and probably would make.
He could say that his conception of knowledge is an externalist conception, while our sceptical argument from error is an internalist one.
If externalism is a sound stance, then the argument from error is irrelevant; for it does no more than elaborate on a defective (though traditional) approach to epistemology or if it does more, it succeeds only in showing how that defective approach must lead to scepticism.
What is meant by an ‘externalist’ and an ‘internalist’conception here?
The answer to this question can best be given by example.
The causal theory of knowledge, which defines a knows that p as equivalent to
1
p is true
2
a believes that p 
3
a 's belief 2 is justified
4
a 's belief 2 is caused by the fact that p is true
is an externalist conception, because condition 4 is one which a might be entirely incapable of recognizing or pointing to when asked whether he does know that p.
The externalist says, in this case, that so long as condition 4 does in fact hold, whether a is able to point it out or even to understand it or not,a does know that p (given  conditions 1- 3, of course).
The internalist would claim that for the causal clause to turn justified true belief into knowledge, it must not only be true but be believed by a to be true.
Thus the internalist would add:
5 a believes 4.
There are arguments in favour of externalism and arguments in favour of internalism.
The externalist can point out how difficult it is going to be for the internalist to provide a satisfying account of knowledge.
Surely, he might say, if we are to add clause 5 we should also add
6
a 's belief 5 is justified, and then presumably
7
a 's belief 5 is caused by the fact that 5 is true.
But we have surely now generated an infinite regress, which will mean that internalism is doomed to scepticism.
What is more, the regress does not depend on the causal element of the example used.
We could create the same regress by starting from the traditional tripartite conception and adding, on internalist grounds,
4
a believes 3 and then presumably requiring
5
a 's belief 4 is justified and then
6
a believes 5
and so on.
The internalist can respond by pointing out how great our natural intuition is to favour the internalist conception.
Suppose that we work with the causal example; it is required for knowledge that the fourth clause be true, but not that a have any inkling that the fourth clause be true.
Doesn't this show that, for all a knows, he doesn't know that p?
And how can he know that p when for all he knows he doesn't?
In my opinion neither of these arguments is effective in destroying its opponent.
The first merely points out the difficulties with  scepticism; the internalist would accept this and say that these difficulties have to be faced and not ignored.
The second seems to amount more to a statement of the internalist position than an independent argument against externalism.
In fact I doubt that there can be a conclusive argument in favour of either of these approaches; the approaches are so different that there is a danger that any argument will simply beg the question.
Now Nozick's position is intended to be externalist (Nozick, 1981, pp. 265 — 8 and 280 — 3).
Conditions 3 and 4 are obvious evidence of externalism, and there is no suggestion that we need to add anything like
5 
As an externalist, would he not be justified in simply dismissing the argument from error as an irrelevant expression of internalism?
I do not think so, for two reasons.
First, again, Nozick relies on the argument, internalist or not, to provide the independent support for something which would otherwise look like a counter-intuitive consequence of his theory.
Second, in taking the argument to be necessary Nozick tacitly accepts that his theory is not as purely externalist as it might initially appear, and hence he cannot claim immunity from an attack merely on the grounds that it is internalist.
We will return to the contrast between internalists and externalists in 9.3, and examine it in greater detail.
Meanwhile, where has our discussion of the conditional theory left us?
We still have no answer to the sceptical argument from error.
We have mentioned, but not adopted, two positions which show promise in this respect: externalism and anti-realism.
But those who find these positions unattractive will have to look further if they want to say that there are such things as knowledge or justified belief.
The argument from error will recur as a persistent threat.
I shall venture my own response to it in the final chapter.
FURTHER READING
The conditional theory and its consequences for scepticism are expounded in Nozick (1981) pt 2, especially pp. 172–8 and 197–227.
Stroud (1984, ch. 2) considers a similar argument against the sceptic's attempt to generalize from the fact that we do not know we are not brains in a vat.
He continues the discussion in his ch. 7.
Counter-examples to the conditional theory are given in Garrett (1983); Gordon (1984) attempts an answer.
Shope (1984) offers more than counterexamples.
D. Lewis (1973) gives a pioneering account of truth-conditions for subjunctive conditionals (which he calls ‘counterfactuals’) in terms of possible worlds.
I discuss an important difference between Nozick and D. Lewis in Dancy (1984b).
References to the internalism/externalism debate are given at the end of ch. 9.
Part II JUSTIFICATION
4
Foundationalism
4.1 CLASSICAL FOUNDATIONALISM
Perhaps the most influential position in epistemology is the one I shall call classical foundationalism.
Discussion of justification, of what it is for a belief to be justified, begins with this theory; other theories will be described in terms of their relation to or divergence from this one.
It offers a compelling picture of what the aims of epistemology are; in short it amounts to a definition of the epistemological enterprise.
The classical foundationalist divides our beliefs into two groups: those which need support from others and those which can support others and need no support themselves.
The latter constitute our epistemological foundations, the former the superstructure built on those foundations.
This distinction between foundations and superstructure, between basic and non-basic beliefs, is a structural one.
But classical foundationalism gives the distinction content by adding that our basic beliefs are beliefs which concern the nature of our own sensory states, our own immediate experience.
Such beliefs are able to stand on their own feet, without support from others.
Other beliefs need support, and hence must get it from our beliefs about our sensory states.
Classical foundationalism thus gives expression to the central tenet of empiricism, the view that all our knowledge is derived from our experience.
It does this by insisting that a belief which is not about our own sensory states (immediate experience) must, if it is to be justified, be justified by appeal to beliefs which are about our own sensory states.
How is it that beliefs about our present sensory states need no support from others, while all other beliefs require such support?
The answer comes from the third element of classical foundationalism; this is that our beliefs about our present sensory states are infallible.
It is because of this that they can play the role ascribed to them in this form of empiricism; beliefs about our present sensory states can be our basis — can stand on their own two feet and support the rest — because they are infallible.
We can now see what epistemology is, according to classical foundationalism.
It is a research programme which sets out to show how it is that our beliefs about an external world, about science, about a past and a future, about other minds, etc., can be justified on a base which is restricted to infallible beliefs about our sensory states.
It is suggested that if we can do this, the demands of epistemology are satisfied.
If not, we relapse into scepticism.
In this chapter and the next we shall examine classical foundationalism in some detail, and find reason to reject almost every part of it.
But first we should turn to investigate the motives and arguments which lead or have led philosophers in this direction.
We have already seen that classical foundationalism is an expression of empiricism.
But there are other expressions of empiricism, as we shall see.
Why should we opt for this one?
Probability and Certainty
C. I. Lewis, the most eminent classical foundationalist of this century, held that ‘unless something is certain, nothing else is even probable’(see C. I. Lewis, 1952).
This view can be best understood by approaching it from a (very slight) knowledge of the probability calculus.
In this calculus, probability is always assessed relative to evidence.
We do not ask what the absolute probability of a hypothesis h (written  would be.
Instead we ask about h 's conditional probability given evidence e (written .
The probability of h given e is expressed as correlations generally are, on a scale from 0 to 1.
If  = 0, then given e ,h is certainly false.
If  = 1, then given e ,h is certainly true.
If  = .5, then it is as probable that h is true, given e , as that it is false, since  in the calculus.
The main point is that in assessing the probability of h given e we do not question e ; we assume temporarily that e is certain, and we ignore the chance of e not being true.
But e itself has a probability relative to further evidence e n , and so on indefinitely.
And unless we can find in the end a proposition or set of evidence en which has somehow in its own right the probability 1, all these probabilities will have nothing to rest on.
We need to find something certain which can function as the unquestioned evidence by appeal  to which the probabilities of other things are to be assessed.
In this argument it is suggested that a proposition with probability 1 is certain .
But certainty and infallibility are not identical, and we are trying to explain a theory which takes its basic beliefs to be infallible.
The move from one to the other is easy, however.
If a proposition, being certain, has a probability of 1, then there is no chance that a belief in that proposition will be false; so the belief will be infallible.
There is an oddity in the argument, which starts by insisting that we speak only of probability relative to evidence, and ends by talking of a proposition having a probability of 1 in its own right.
Probability theorists escape this oddity by defining absolute probability in terms of relative probability: they say that the absolute probability of h = the probability of h relative to a tautology.
. Whether this manoeuvre is more than a technical device is dubious.
The Regress Argument
All agree that some of our beliefs are justified by their relation to other beliefs.
Standardly that relation is thought of as inferential; one belief is inferred from another or others.
Thus my belief that striking the match will light it is justified inferentially.
I have inferred it (not consciously, of course) from other beliefs, probably beliefs about similar occasions in the past.
The regress argument is an argument that as well as the inferentially justified beliefs, there must be some beliefs which are justified non-inferentially.
The general thrust can be seen intuitively by supposing that inference is basically a matter of moving from premises to conclusion along an acceptable path.
If the premises are unjustified, there will be no justification for the conclusion at least, not by this inference.
We can suppose, then, that only justified beliefs can justify others; and it is this thought which generates the regress.
Suppose that all justification is inferential.
When we justify belief A by appeal to beliefs B and C, we have not yet shown A to be justified.
We have only shown that it is justified if B and C are.
Justification by inference is conditional justification only; A's justification is conditional upon the justification of B and C. But if all inferential justification is conditional in this sense, then nothing can be shown to be actually, non-conditionally justified.
For each belief whose justification we attempt there will always be a further belief upon whose justification that of the first depends, and since this regress is infinite no belief will ever be more than conditionally justified.
The only way round this conclusion is to suppose that instead of the chain of justification stretching away to infinity, it turns round on its tail and joins up with itself at some point, forming a circle.
But this will not mend matters, for it will still be the case that the justification of all members of the loop is conditional.
The loop will never succeed in removing the conditionality.
The regress argument therefore drives us to suppose that there must be some justification which is non-inferential if we are to avoid the sceptical consequence of admitting that no beliefs are ever actually justified.
And the claim that there are two forms of justification, inferential and non-inferential, is the core of any form of foundationalism in the theory of justification.
There is a variety of possible responses to the regress argument, apart from straight capitulation.
A central one will be suggested in 9.1.
Meanwhile we should ask if the regress is as damaging as it might seem.
Not all infinite regresses are vicious.
Some are virtuous , i.e. we can live with them and do not have to find some way to stop them.
For instance, the regress generated by the remark that there is a point between every pair of points may be virtuous, even when we take it to concern points in time rather than in space.
Equally we might accept the temporal regress caused by supposing that for each moment in time there is a moment that precedes it, or the causal regress derived from the propositions that every event has a separate cause and that every cause is an event.
We might even accept the regress caused by the suggestion that when we believe that p we believe that p is probable (the regress comes by taking q = ‘p is probable’).
Can we not then simply accept that justification continues ad infinitum ?
I think that the regress of justification, once it has been allowed to start in the way I have outlined, is vicious in the sense that it will show that no belief is ever actually justified.
There is a bad reason for thinking this, which involves taking the regress as temporal;before I can justify A, I have to justify B and C, and so on ad infinitum , and thus I can never get started.
But I do not take the regress argument to be concerned with temporal relations between acts of justification.
A better approach merely underlines what was said above, that the regress shows that if all justification is inferential, no belief is ever more than conditionally justified.
If knowledge requires more than conditional justification, as it seems to, then the only way to escape the sceptical thrust of the regress argument is to conclude with the foundationalist that some beliefs are justified non-inferentially.
If we are to avoid this foundationalist conclusion we shall have  to show that the regress argument is fallacious.
I shall give later (in 9.1) a non-foundationalist answer to it.
At present I only wish to draw attention to a possible ambiguity in a crucial move.
The sentence ‘We have only shown that A is justified if B and C are’ could mean, as was pretended above, that we have shown A's justification to be conditional on that of B and C; but it could also mean that if B and C are in fact justified, we have shown that A is, i.e. that the success of our demonstration is conditional, not the justification we have demonstrated.
The argument as I have presented it seems to require the first reading of this crucial sentence; on the second reading we get, not a regress of justification, but a demonstration of justification which is only successful in certain conditions.
Our regress argument differs from Lewis' argument about probability and certainty, despite the great structural similarities (they are both regress arguments, really).
The difference between them is that the first regress can only be stopped by certain (= infallible) beliefs, while the second insists merely on the existence of beliefs which are non-inferentially justified.
Infallibility and Justification
The two previous arguments are brought together as a joint argument for classical foundationalism by the claim that any infallible belief would be non-inferentially justified.
An infallible belief would be justified but would not derive its justification from any relation in which it stood to other beliefs; it would not need any support from elsewhere.
For surely a belief whose chances of being false are nil is unimpeachable.
Nothing could reduce its probability, and hence there could be no reasons for supposing it false.
So if there are any infallible beliefs we have no need to worry about the threatened regress of justification.
Infallibility in the base will stop the regress.
We shall see in 4.3 that even if all infallible beliefs are non-inferentially justified, the reverse is not true; this is what opens the door for foundationalisms other than the classical variety.
One can abandon the view that we have any infallible beliefs and find other ways of supposing that some beliefs are non-inferentially justified.
But we cannot just announce that this is the case, e.g. with our beliefs about our sensory states.
We have to produce some account of how it is that a belief can achieve this status and play this special role.
Classical foundationalism says, plausibly, that our beliefs about our sensory states can do this because they are infallible.
In the next section I offer an argument that this cannot be right, and if the  argument is sound we shall have to find some other way of showing how any of our beliefs can be non-inferentially justified and thus can stand on their own feet.
4.2 PROBLEMS FOR CLASSICAL FOUNDATIONALISM
One of the main reasons for wanting one's own basic beliefs to be infallible is that this would guarantee that they are all true.
But is there any real purpose in seeking this guarantee?
The principles of inference by which we are to move from basic to non-basic beliefs are fallible, in the sense that they take us sometimes from true beliefs to false ones.
(Remember Russell's chicken (Russell, 1959, p. 35), whose true beliefs about the regularity with which it had been fed so far led it into a false belief about the security of its future.)
If there is this source of contamination necessarily present in the procedure, why should we insist that the input to the procedure be completely sterile, i.e. devoid of any taint of falsehood?
But the main objection to classical foundationalism is that there are no infallible beliefs.
The fallibilist holds, correctly in my opinion, that we are nowhere entirely immune from the possibility of error.
Are our beliefs about our present sensory states infallible?
Champions of infallibility tend to concede that there is room for a mistake in the description of one's sensory states (see Ayer, 1950).
I might mistakenly describe my sensory state as being an experience of pink (things look pink to me here) when in fact it is an experience of orange.
But this is dismissed as a merely verbal error.
Of course I can be mistaken about the meanings of the words I use, but this will not show that I have any mistaken beliefs about my present sensory states.
On the contrary, I must know how things look to me: my only error lies in choosing the wrong words to describe it.
The description I use may be false, but I, the describer, am in this case infallible.
My beliefs — the things I use words to express, with more or less success — must be true.
Similarly, we may say that merely verbal errors can be corrected in standard ways.
You can show me or remind me of the difference between orange and pink, perhaps by showing me a colour chart.
When I have grasped this (the difference, not the colour chart), I can apply it to my present experience in order to see whether the experience is one of pink or of orange.
But in order to do this I must be aware of the nature of the experience already, before I  compare it with others in order to get the right words to describe it.
I don't change my beliefs about how things look, only about how to describe them.
Third, although some comparison between my present experience and others is necessary for me to know what words to use in description, and although such comparison, especially in the case where the objects compared are a past and a present experience, is fallible (since memory is fallible), still the comparison is not what I am trying to express when I try to express my beliefs about my present experience alone.
For my experience would have been this way no matter how other experiences might or might not have been.
So the fallibility of the comparison does not extend to show the fallibility of the belief expressed; it only shows the fallibility of the expression of belief.
Finally, if a comparison is possible at all, this can only be because ultimately we have non-comparative knowledge of the two things compared.
We compare them in order to see not what each is like but in what respects they are like each other.
What reply should the fallibilist make to this argument?
First, what is the content of such an infallible belief?
It cannot really be that the way things are looking to me now is pink, since I could be wrong about whether that way is pink or not.
What is more plausibly infallible is a belief that things look that way now to me.
But what does such a belief amount to?
What content does it have?
It isn't an internal and somehow non-verbal description of how things look; it doesn't say which way they look.
All such a belief amounts to is a gesture towards something; and a very strange sort of gesture too, for gestures are normally only comprehensible as public acts with publicly observable objects, while here the gesture is a private act with a private object.
If gestures draw one's attention to something, can we see ourselves as somehow drawing our own attention to how things look to us?
The infallibilist may insist that I cannot be wrong in believing that the way things look to me is pink, though I can be wrong in supposing that‘pink’ is the word to use to describe the way things look.
This is the ‘merely verbal error’ move.
But it seems to misuse the notion of an error which is merely verbal.
There are several sorts of such errors (a study of the life of Warden Spooner is instructive here, though one can be pardoned the suspicion that some of his errors were deliberate).
But the case where, choosing my words carefully with full consciousness of what I am doing, I deliberately pronounce on the nature of my present sensory state is not one of  them.
Here if I am wrong, my error is substantial, for in being wrong about whether ‘pink’ is the word to describe my present experience I am wrong about what pink is and hence about whether my experience is of pink rather than of orange.
Here then the error is both verbal and substantial.
If the content of a putatively infallible belief is merely that things are looking that way to me now, there is clearly less room for error than if I were to risk the belief that that way is pink.
The less the content, the less the risk, and greater the chance of infallibility.
It seems probable, then, that a belief can only be genuinely infallible if it has no content at all.
This is the strong fallibilist conclusion.
But even if this conclusion is not justified, we can say that infallible beliefs must have vanishingly small content.
And the point of this is that the infallible beliefs are intended, within the programme of classical foundationalism, to act as those by appeal to which all others are to be justified.
They are the basic beliefs which ground all others, our epistemological foundations.
And to perform this role they need to have sufficient content to be used rather as premises in inferences.
With the reduction in content required to keep them infallible, it seems unlikely that any interesting beliefs about the past, the future, the unobserved or even the present material surroundings could ever be justified by appeal to the basic.
Our basic beliefs must have sufficient content to support the superstructure in which we are really interested, and no belief with that amount of content is going to be infallible.
This diagnosis of the infallibilist's errors can be confirmed by considering briefly the arguments of Chisholm, a leading contemporary foundationalist.
Chisholm distinguishes between comparative and non-comparative uses of the phrase ‘appears white’(Chisholm, 1977, pp. 30 — 3).
In the comparative use, ‘X appears white’ is short for ‘X appears the way in which white things normally appear’.
But in the non-comparative use, which is found in the sentence ‘white things normally appear white’, things are different.
The latter sentence would be tautologous if we expanded ‘appear white’ in it as for the comparative use.
But it is not tautologous, and hence there must be another non-comparative use of the phrase ‘appears white’— a use in which we make a genuine attempt to describe, without comparison, the way in which white things generally appear.
And Chisholm claims that in the non-comparative use, appear-statements express what is ‘directly evident’.
A directly evident proposition is one, in Chisholm's terminology, which is either identical with or entailed by a true contingent proposition which is  all but certain.
(A contingent proposition is one which might or might not be true, and might or might not be false.)
A belief in a directly evident proposition is not quite the same as an infallible belief, but they share the characteristic with which we are here concerned, that all of them are true.
Chisholm considers various objections to his thesis that there is a non-comparative use of ‘appears white’ which expresses what is directly evident (and therefore true).
Some of his remarks have been echoed in the arguments for infallibilism given above.
The last objection he considers runs as follows (Chisholm, 1977, p. 33):
(a) in saying ‘Something appears white’ you are making certain assumptions about language; you are assuming, for example, that the word ‘white’, or the phrase ‘appears white’, is being used in the way in which you have used it on other occasions, or in the way in which other people have used it.
Therefore (b) when you say ‘this appears white’, you are saying something not only about your present experience, but also about all of these other occasions.
But (c) what you are saying about these other occasions is not directly evident.
And therefore (d)‘this is [sic — should be ‘appears’: JD]white' does not express what is directly evident.
Chisholm comments correctly that in this argument the error is the step from (a) to (b).
I agree that this step is invalid.
(b) should be (b 1 ): ‘When you say ‘This appears white’, what you say cannot be true unless certain propositions about experiences other than your present ones are true.
’ This creates a much stronger argument, but what interests me here is Chisholm's reason for holding that (b) does not follow from (a).
He says:
We must distinguish the belief that a speaker has about the words he is using from the belief that he is using those words to express.
A Frenchman [may believe that]‘potatoes’ is English for apples…; from the fact that he has a mistaken belief about ‘potatoes’and ‘apples’it does not follow that he has a mistaken belief about potatoes and apples.
It is clear here that Chisholm is following the traditional line that all apparent error in beliefs about our sensory states is verbal error, and that verbal error is to be distinguished from substantial error.
This confirms our original diagnosis of the infallibilist's mistaken move.
Chisholm does make that move, and provides no new reason for believing in infallibility.
4.3 FOUNDATIONALISM WITHOUT INFALLIBILITY
In the absence of infallibility, the programme of classical foundationalism collapses.
But we saw no reasons to suppose this to be the only, nor necessarily the best form of foundationalism.
What weaker versions are possible?
The first characteristic foundationalist thesis embodies the response to the regress argument:
F 1 : There are two forms of justification, inferential and non-inferential.
But there is a further thesis involved in acceptance of the regress argument:
F 2 : Basic beliefs are never justified, even in part, by appeal to non-basic beliefs.
F2 rules out the suggestion that the non-inferential justification of basic beliefs is only partial, and needs supplementing by appeal to other beliefs.
This suggestion might tempt those who notice that although we do normally accept without query a person's description of his own sensory states, we sometimes object by saying, for instance, ‘Surely that traffic light doesn't look orange to you.
It's the top light, and the top lights are always red’.
If non-basic beliefs such as these can reduce the justification of basic beliefs, they can presumably also increase it, and in this case there would be the possibility that although our beliefs about our sensory states are always partially justified just because of their subject matter, they are never completely or satisfactorily justified unless there is confirming or at the least a lack of disconfirming evidence at the non-basic level.
But this idea is not available to anybody convinced by the regress argument.
Foundationalists suppose that there are two sorts of justification, and that the inferentially justified beliefs are justified by appeal to the non-inferentially justified ones.
If we go on to admit that the latter are partially justified by appeal to the former, we reintroduce the circle of conditional justification whose sceptical consequence was that nothing was ever actually justified.
Foundationalists must keep the direction of justification all one-way, from the non-basic to the basic, or else renounce any use of the regress argument.
So the only sort of foundationalist who could retain F 1 without F 2 would be one who accepted F 1 for other reasons than those provided by the regress argument.
We might hold that our beliefs about our sensory states are always justified to some degree just because of their subject matter (non-inferentially, therefore), whereas most other beliefs are justified inferentially if at all; one could suppose this in an attempt to make sense of the empiricist idea that our beliefs about our present experience have a stability which other beliefs lack, in virtue of which they are able to justify those other beliefs and thus meet the empiricist demand (vaguely expressed here) that all our knowledge be grounded in our experience.
This new sort of foundationalist, who will be considered further in chapter 6, could escape the demands of F 2 , but only at the cost of abandoning the foundationalists' favourite weapon, the regress argument.
Any foundationalist has a duty to make sense of the possibility that there be non-inferentially justified beliefs.
What might these be like?
The formal requirements of the regress argument would be satisfied if there were beliefs of any of the three following types:
1
beliefs which are justified by something other than beliefs;
2
beliefs which justify themselves;
3
beliefs which need no justification.
It would be harsh to rule 3 out just because the argument demands that only justified beliefs can justify others; if we can give a reasonable sense to the notion of a belief standing on its own feet, as it were, rather than on those of others, we could easily see 3 as a special case of 2.
We should think of 1 — 3 as formal properties; beliefs with these properties would stop the regress, but any such formal property needs to be grounded in a more substantial ‘epistemic’ property.
Infallibility is such a property, as was remarked earlier.
The classical foundationalist supposed perhaps that infallible beliefs would be of type 2.
In the absence of infallibility, what similar moves are available?
C. I. Lewis used to claim that basic beliefs were ‘certain' or ‘incorrigible’(Lewis, 1952 and 1946, ch. 7); it is not always clear whether he thought of these as the same as being infallible or not.
In similar vein others (Descartes, perhaps) have held that they are or could be ‘indubitable’.
We could define incorrigibility and indubitability thus:
A belief is incorrigible if and only if no one could ever be in a position to correct it.
A belief is indubitable if and only if no one could ever have a reason to doubt it.
Is either of these two properties able to provide us with a slightly weaker but still attractive form of classical foundationalism?
In my view, once we have admitted that our beliefs about our sensory states are not infallible and may be false, incorrigibility would be a vice rather than a virtue.
The thought of some basic beliefs being incorrigibly false is too horrific to countenance.
Equally, we could ask how a fallible belief could be indubitable.
For the basic beliefs stand in inferential relationship with more interesting beliefs about public objects, and these beliefs are certainly dubitable; there is always a possibility that someone should have a reason to doubt them.
But, if so, it is hard to see how the dubitability of the non-basic beliefs which they support would not rub off onto the basic ones which support them; surely falsehood in a non-basic belief would be a reason to doubt the basic beliefs which support it, once we have admitted that basic beliefs can be false.
So neither incorrigibility nor indubitability can provide us with an alternative form of foundationalism.
But other possible forms remain.
We could suggest that there could be beliefs of type 1 if there were beliefs which were justified by appeal to the facts and that a belief could be so justified if it was caused by the facts.
Austin mooted the idea that on occasion what justifies my belief that there is a pig before me is just the pig (Austin, 1962, pp. 115- 16).
But this idea is not easily generalizable unless we suppose that the justification is achieved less by appeal to the pig than by appeal to the fact that there is a pig before me; the fact, in this instance, causes the belief.
This move should call to mind some remarks made in 2.4 about the causal theory of knowledge.
We accepted there the idea that facts can be causes; the difficulty there that universal facts cannot cause universal beliefs doesn't matter here, because universal beliefs are unlikely to be basic.
Another possible version of foundationalism holds that there are some beliefs which are given us as ‘data’, and which are fully justified unless something arises to defeat their justification (cf. the use of defeasibility in 2.3).
We could call this a ‘defeasible’ or ‘prima facie’justification; it is weaker than that provided by indubitability, because it countenances the possibility that there be reasons against  a basic belief.
But it still accepts both F 1 and F 2 .
A final version has already been mooted.
Weaker than the last, it holds that beliefs given us as ‘data’ are never fully justified merely for that reason, but that all such beliefs are already partially justified, quite apart from any further support they may receive from other beliefs.
Without that further support, however, their justification is insufficient.
This is the foundationalism which accepts F 1 but not F 2 .
These different versions of foundationalism remain unharmed by the absence of infallibility.
In the next chapter we turn to consider a different problem for foundationalism, which may have more damaging effects.
FURTHER READING
C. I. Lewis (1952) and Ayer (1950) defend forms of infallibilism.
Alston (1976) gives a good account of the regress argument, as does Armstrong (1973, ch. 11).
Firth (1964) maps weaker forms of foundationalism from the point of view of its rival, coherentism.
The notion of infallibility used in this chapter needs careful attention.
Alston (1971) analyses the differences between infallibility, incorrigibility, indubitability etc.
C. I. Lewis (1952) is a response to Reichenbach (1952) and Goodman (1952), both of whom argue against his view that unless something is certain nothing is even probable.
Most of the above, with many other important papers on topics discussed in this chapter, are reprinted in Chisholm and Swartz (1973).
The foundationalism of Chisholm (1977) explicitly relies on the regress argument at pp. 16–20.
The attack on Ayer in Austin (1962) is still well worth reading, especially ch. 10.
Sellars (1963, ch. 5) is an extremely influential attack on the ‘myth of the given’ embodied in classical foundationalism.
This paper is difficult but rewards study.
5
Foundationalism and Other Minds
5.1 BASIC BELIEFS AND ONE'S OWN SENSORY STATES
In the last chapter classical foundationalism was presented as a response to three demands; those of two regress arguments and those of empiricism.
The double response consists in the claims that there are infallible basic beliefs, and that those beliefs concern the nature of one's own sensory states.
In 4.2 I gave reasons for doubting the existence or if not the existence the usefulness of infallible beliefs.
Now I want to examine the other half of the story.
There is a strong tradition in philosophy which holds that we start from knowledge of our own sensory states and build up from there.
Descartes never questioned his beliefs about how things seemed to him at the time; he asked instead how he could know other things, such as the existence of God or of a material world.
John Locke perhaps set the classic pattern.
He held that a person is directly aware only of the nature of his or her own ideas; everything else is known indirectly if at all.
And this approach has been standard in epistemology since.
We know the nature of our own sensory states, perhaps, but how can we build from there to gain knowledge of a past, a future, or the sensory states of others?
A questionable aspect of this approach which does seem genuinely Cartesian is the suggestion that epistemology is concerned with the individual.
There is no interest here in stressing the growth of knowledge through the generations, and our rich inheritance from earlier investigators.
Instead, each of us is thought of as starting more or less from scratch and the philosophical questions are how we can come from such a state, via our awareness of the passing show of sensory experience, to the sophisticated knowledge which we all have as members of a modern society.
In this chapter I shall give reasons for rejecting this approach, or if not for rejecting it then for supposing that the questions it raises can never be answered and so that it leads directly to scepticism.
There is in fact a sceptical tendency in foundationalism of this sort, just because it leads us to see as problematic everything other than our knowledge of our own sensory states; it acknowledges the danger that we might be unable to construct the superstructure which the foundations are intended to carry.
5.2 THE PROBLEM OF OTHER MINDS
One such area where ignorance threatens is the area of other minds.
Each of us knows the nature of his or her own sensory states; but can we know the nature of the sensory states of others, or even that there are any other minds to have the sensory states which are not ours?
Calling the problem ‘The Problem of Other Minds’ of course enshrines the foundationalist approach; our knowledge of ourselves is secure, while that of outsiders is problematic.
(In the same way the traditional name for another problem, ‘Our Knowledge of an External World’, enshrines a certain sort of epistemological approach, without which there might not be a problem, or at least not that problem.
The approach may create the problem rather than solve it.)
But for the moment we shall go along with this way of looking at things.
It will not last.
There is no doubt that on the traditional approach we are going to have difficulty in countering the arguments for scepticism about other minds.
The argument from error can be used to show that we know of cases where others have successfully concealed their states of mind, or pretended to be in a state of mind other than their own (these possibilities are not really distinct).
What then tells us that this new case is not another such?
Now there is nothing wrong with this argument as it stands, but it is weak; it assumes that there are other minds than our own, and argues only that we may be mistaken about their states, thinking someone to be happy when she is really sad, etc.
To use the argument from error without that assumption we would have to point to cases when we mistakenly took there to be another mind present.
There may perhaps now be such cases, with the development of increasingly sophisticated technology, and machines which answer back or play chess too well.
But it is normally an appeal to possible rather than to actual cases that is used to generate scepticism about the existence of minds other than our own.
Mightn't it be the case that those other bodies with which we seem to have personal relations of friendship, dislike etc., actually have no mental states at all; that there is no internal life, but only the external behaviour?
A world in which the behaviour of others was the same, but the mental life blank or absent, would be, to us, indistinguishable from our present world.
How then do we know that there are other minds?
For all we can tell, there are none.
5.3 THE ARGUMENT FROM ANALOGY
The argument from analogy with which we shall be concerned here admits that it is possible that the objects we call persons are, other than ourselves, mindless automata, but claims that we none the less have sufficient reason for supposing this not to be the case.
There is more evidence that they are not mindless automata than that they are.
The classic statement of the argument is found in J. S. Mill.
He writes (1867, pp. 237–8):
I am conscious in myself of a series of facts connected by an uniform sequence, of which the beginning is modifications of my body, the middle is feelings, the end is outward demeanour.
In the case of other human beings I have the evidence of my senses for the first and last links of the series, but not for the intermediate link.
I find, however, that the sequence between the first and last is as regular and constant in those other cases as it is in mine.
In my own case I know that the first link produces the last through the intermediate link, and could not produce it without.
Experience, therefore, obliges me to conclude that there must be an intermediate link; which must either be the same in others as in myself, or a different one;…by supposing the link to be of the same nature…
I conform to the legitimate rules of experimental enquiry.
We could start by complaining that this argument, as an inductive argument, is very weak, since of necessity it argues from a single instance.
But this criticism is not really to the point.
By the nature of the case, the hypothesis that other apparent persons enjoy feelings which are like ours but which are necessarily unobservable by us is not one that we could have any evidence against.
If Mill's argument succeeds in showing that there is even only a little evidence  in its favour, there will be more evidence in favour than against; and we should therefore accept the hypothesis.
The difficulties for the argument derive from two assumptions which it makes,(a) about separability and (b) about understanding.
It accepts without demur (a) the separation of the mental (unobservable)from the behavioural (observable) on which the sceptical argument trades.
The sceptic suggests that the two are only contingently related, i.e. that it is quite possible for there to be the one without the other, and that in fact for all we know this is how things are.
The argument from analogy concedes the first half of this but denies the second, claiming that we have at least some evidence to the contrary.
In conceding the first half, it shows why an argument from analogy is necessary.
It is necessary because we cannot see the mental and the behavioural as related in a non-contingent way.
If there were, for instance, a conceptual link between mental state and behaviour such that we could not conceive of the behaviour being present without the (or some) mental state, the argument from analogy would be unnecessary.
The argument also assumes (b) that I can understand what it is for others to have mental states .
And it gives a rudimentary account of how I can do this.
I learn from my own resources what pain is, in the best and the only possible way; that is, by feeling it.
But the concept of pain which I have acquired in this way is such as to be applicable to others, by simply supposing that they have a sensation which is like the one I have (Mill: ‘by supposing the link to be of the same nature’).
The main criticism of the argument from analogy is that these two assumptions are inconsistent.
This criticism is due to Wittgenstein; Malcolm (1958) expounds.
If there is no non-contingent link between behaviour and mental state (that is, if we accept (a)), we shall never be able to show (b) to be true, and hence we shall be at the mercy of a local scepticism of the very strongest form (cf. 1.1).
So if the argument from analogy is necessary, by (a), it is doomed to failure with respect to(b).
If however we can show (b), we can only do so by denying (a), and making the argument from analogy unnecessary.
All this is programmatic until we have shown what the crucial sceptical argument is.
It must be different from those mentioned already, since they show no reason for doubting our ability to understand propositions about other minds.
So far we have assumed that we understand the suggestion that there are minds other than our own, and asked merely how much evidence we have in its favour.
The argument we are now to consider tries to show that this assumption (characteristic of a weak scepticism) is false.
5.4 CAN YOU UNDERSTAND PROPOSITIONS ABOUT MINDS OTHER THAN YOUR OWN?
Why does the separation of the mental from the physical make it impossible to show that we understand what it is for there to be other minds than our own, given the separation of the mental from the physical?
The argument from analogy supposes that you can construct from your own case a concept of pains which can be felt by others rather than by you.
But is it so easy to conceive of a pain which is not hurting you?
You have to start from a pain of yours and conceive of there being something like this which hurts but which does not hurt you, and also that there could be something which is like you but not you for such pains to hurt.
Both of these ideas are very dubious.
How can you conceive of something as painful, as hurting, without conceiving of it as hurting you?
Surely, in conceiving of something that hurts, you necessarily conceive of it as painful to you.
Your conception of pains which are not yours is not a conception of something which is like your pain, since it hurts, but which is not one of yours.
Equally, how easy is it for you to conceive of another subject of experience, one who is not you?
If you cannot do it by constructing the notion of pains which are not yours, you cannot do it any other way.
For you cannot subtract from the conception of your pain that part of it which is you, the subject, and substitute the notion of another subject (something like you but not you) while supposing that the remainder (the painfulness) stays unchanged.
Any pain you can conceive of as hurting in just the same way as yours hurt must be conceived of as hurting you.
This sceptical argument is crucial.
It shows that it is no use simply announcing that you can conceive of another's pain on the grounds that you can suppose that what he has is the same as what you have.
This easy remark (see (b) above) begs the question against the relevant argument.
Nor is it any use to insist that you can conceive of what it is like for a knee which is not yours to be hurting.
A pain conceived of as being in another body is not yet conceived of as hurting another person.
And in fact, if the argument above is sound, to conceive of a knee other than yours hurting in the way in which yours hurts is to conceive of it as hurting you.
We might admit, then, so far as that goes, that you can conceive of its hurting you in someone else's knee (a new sense of ‘His knee is hurting me’) but you cannot conceive of its hurting anyone else there.
The sceptical argument therefore claims that you cannot make sense of the idea of a subject of experience other than yourself.
You cannot conceive of experiences which are not yours (generalising now from the simple example of pain) and you cannot achieve in any other way a conception of a subject of those experiences who is not you.
It drives us directly from foundationalism (for it was in foundationalist terms that the argument was formulated) to the most interesting form of solipsism , the view that you must take yourself to be the only subject of experience — in fact the subject of experience — since you can have no conception of another such.
Why does this show that the argument from analogy, by making assumption (a), cannot account for (b), our understanding of statements about others?
It does this because it shows how if we start from our own case alone, and concentrate entirely upon a conception of mental states which is independent of behaviour, we cannot move from our conception of ourselves as subjects of experience to a conception of other subjects.
The concept of a mental state in which the argument trades, and on which the sceptical argument relies, is too restrictive to make the move possible.
The proper conclusion from all this is not that scepticism, indeed solipsism, is inevitable, but that the terms in which the sceptical argument was presented, assumption (a), must be rejected.
But in rejecting that assumption we render the argument from analogy redundant.
How then are we to find a conception of mental states other than that on which the sceptical argument trades?
One such conception is behaviourism , which provides a conceptual link between behaviour and mental states by saying that the mental state of my being in pain in my knee just is the behavioural state of my wincing and holding my knee, taking greater care of it and so on.
Or there are weaker forms of behaviourism which attempt to make allowances for concealed mental states; for instance, one might hold that my being in pain in my knee is for me to be disposed to behave in a certain way, whether I actually do so or not.
To conceal the pain, I have to repress my desire (disposition) to wince, hold my knee, etc.
The obvious difficulty with behaviouristic accounts of mental states is that, although in a way they do provide what was wanted, i.e. an account of mental states in which they are non-contingently related to behaviour, still they appear to ignore everything that is characteristically mental.
In the case of pain they ignore the way pain feels , for instance.
This may not be all there is to the concept of pain, but it is certainly part of it.
Even if we are able to show  that it is not possible for there to be people who feel as we do but have no disposition to behave as we do, or vice versa, the behaviourist way of doing this seems too extreme.
We are looking for a compromise position between behaviourism, which identified mental states with some function of behaviour, and the approach common to the sceptical argument and the argument from analogy, which separates them too much.
Successful compromises are rare in philosophy, because often they share the defects of both extremes with the virtues of neither.
We must hope none the less that one can be found here.
The criticism of the argument from analogy which I gave above is due to Wittgenstein.
Its conclusion is that we can only hope to show that we understand propositions about the mental states of others if we take there to be a non-contingent relation between mental states and behaviour, and thus remove the possibility that the two should come apart.
Wittgenstein's own method of achieving this is expressed using his much-disputed notion of a criterion .
Here is a tentative account of that notion:
A is a criterion for B  if the truth/occurrence of A is necessarily good but defeasible evidence for the truth of B, and in the absence of contrary indications sufficient evidence.
Hence in favourable cases the truth/occurrence of A perfectly justifies the belief/assertion of B.
and
To know this is part of competence with the concept of B; part of what it is to know the meaning of ‘B’.
This notion of a criterion could be used to show the argument from analogy to be unnecessary.
For, using it, we can say that anyone who understands the concept of pain knows that certain sorts of behaviour are criteria for pain-ascription.
It is not possible, therefore, for there to be beings who behave just as we do but lack mental states such as pain.
For in cases where there are no contrary indications such behaviour counts as conclusive evidence that the behaver is in pain.
It is possible, of course, for someone to pretend to be in pain or to act pain.
In many such cases the evidence created by the satisfaction of the criteria is defeated by other evidence; for example, we see him wincing and holding his stomach, but we know that he has done this at this point in the play every evening this week, and hence we are not justified in believing here what similar evidence of the same sort would perfectly justify elsewhere.
But the  crucial point about pretence or acting is that these are activities for which there are criteria too.
They need a background and this may not be available.
If in battle I see an explosion and my comrade, having lost half a leg, is doubled up in agony, there is no possibility that he is acting or pretending.
Thus Wittgenstein's notion of a criterion seems to provide the sort of compromise we are looking for.
It is, however, extremely idiosyncratic, quite apart from scholarly doubts as to its exact formulation.
We don't need to take Wittgenstein's way out here; or at least, we don't need to yet.
All we have at the moment is that there must be some non-contingent link between mental state and behaviour if we are to understand talk about other minds.
In the absence of such a link we seem to be committed to solipsism.
5.5 THE PRIVATE LANGUAGE ARGUMENT: RULE-FOLLOWING
Solipsism is not a tenable position; in fact it suffers from multiple incoherence.
This is one of the conclusions of a family of arguments in Wittgenstein known collectively as the private language argument.
The solipsist is in the position of claiming that he has a language in which he describes his present and past experiences, and perhaps speculates about the future.
But this is a private language; no one else could learn it, because the experiences by appeal to which the terms in it get their meaning are private to the speaker.
Wittgenstein argues effectively that such a private language is impossible.
The solipsist cannot have even that limited knowledge of his own experiences.
The interpretation of the private language argument is highly contentious.
I shall begin with an account due, in the main, to Saul Kripke (Kripke, 1981).
How does the solipsist acquire his language?
He claims to learn from his own case what, for example, pain is.
He experiences a sensation of a certain sort, and decides to apply the word ‘pain’ to every sensation like the first (every sensation of the same sort).
Given that he remembers correctly what the original sensation was like, he has developed a concept of pain which will tell him, of each new sensation, whether to call it pain or not.
The thrust of the private language argument is that the solipsist cannot even get started in this way.
Nothing that he can do in the way of concentrating on the original sensation and uttering the word ‘pain’ will succeed in endowing that word with a meaning.
For a  word to have a meaning is for there to be rules for its use: rules in virtue of which the application of the word can count as correct in some cases and incorrect in others.
It is in virtue of such rules that we can make sense of the idea that we are objectively correct to call the new sensation a pain.
Because a rule has actually been set up, there is something which the solipsist could misapply.
He could think he was following the rule, when he was in fact not doing so; the new sensation could seem to resemble the original one, when it does not resemble it in fact.
If there is to be objectivity here, we cannot have it that ‘everything that seems right is right’.
How, then, does concentrating on the original sensation enable the solipsist to create a rule in virtue of which it can be objectively true that the new sensation is a pain?
It doesn't.
Kripke's interpretation of the private language argument holds that a negative answer to the last question is a consequence of more general considerations about rules and objectivity.
Let us move away from the special case of solipsism and sensation terms, and consider a case which may seem simpler (actually it is the hardest case in which to make the point plausible).
The example used is that of a mathematical rule; the rule for + 2.
We suppose that if you know the rule for +2, you know, for any number n , the number which is n + 2.
The rule creates a series; 0, 2, 4, 6…and at each step in the series there is an objectively correct answer as to how to go on.
The question is what there is about what we learnt when we learnt the rule for + 2 which makes the continuation 20,002, 20,004, 20,006 objectively correct, and 20,004, 20,008, 20,012 objectively incorrect.
What could we point to if someone chose the latter continuation, to show that he was wrong?
We suppose that this person takes it that the rule he learnt demands this continuation rather than the one we favour (which is of course the right one).
What makes us right and him wrong?
There seems to be nothing in the early stages of the series which could support one continuation against the other.
For there is a formula which generates the ‘deviant’ continuation from the same early stages; since both series start in the same way, we cannot appeal to the way in which one starts in order to justify our preference for its way of going on.
We might suggest that in conceiving the rule for + 2, we somehow already conceived all the instances, and this is what makes it the case that the ‘correct’ interpretation is correct.
But this suggestion is very unconvincing.
Even if by chance we happened to conceive of just these members of the series, it is surely not in virtue of that  fact that they count as correct continuations.
And anyway, what about all the other equally correct continuations which never crossed our mind until we came to them?
In a similar spirit, we might say that in conceiving the rule, we simply conceived that we should add 2 every time.
But this ploy fails, partly because such a conception fails to tell us what is to count as ‘adding 2’, and partly because it relies upon a smooth interpretation of ‘every’; but we could ask about ‘every’ the same questions as we are asking about' + 2', for there is always the possibility that someone should after a while begin to use ‘every’as we would use ‘every other’, maintaining that he was the only one in step.
The last possibility seems to be that our original conception of the rule amounted to the creation of a disposition to carry on the series in one way rather than another.
But what fact is there in virtue of which the disposition then created was a disposition now to go on one way rather than another?
The content of my original disposition seems to be determined by the way I now find myself driven to go on, rather than vice versa.
We seem now to have exhausted all possible answers to our question.
Should we then conclude that the apparently arbitrary scepticism which underlies the question in fact has no answer, and that there is no objectively right way of following the rule?
This would fly in the face of our intense conviction that 20,002, 20,004, 20,006 is the right way and all others are just wrong.
But this seems to be one of those cases where thinking cannot make it so.
Luckily there remains one possibility which our search has overlooked.
For we concentrated entirely on resources internal to the individual rule-follower, on things which a solipsist could point to.
Kripke therefore sees the conclusion of the argument to be that if we are to find a ground for our belief that there is an objectively correct method of continuing the series, we must look beyond the individual to the community of rule-followers.
Eventually the ground of objectivity lies not in the past, in the nature of early members of the series or in our early grasp of the rule, but in the present behaviour of our linguistic or mathematical community.
What makes our continuation of the series correct is that the community agrees on it.
What makes the deviant interpretation incorrect is that it would be the only one in step, for in this case correctness just is being in step with the others.
It is easy to see why Kripke's interpretation is called ‘the community interpretation’.
These thoughts about rule-following in the mathematical case can be generalised to provide the argument against solipsism that we  are looking for.
The solipsist admits no community to ground his belief that it is objectively true that this new sensation is a pain.
But this means to say that he has no rule that takes him one way rather than another in a new case.
As far as rules go, he can say whatever comes into his head and it will be as correct as anything else.
But in that case his words lose their meaning and become empty.
If it doesn't matter what you say, you would be better silent.
It is impossible, therefore, for there to be a private language of the sort which the solipsist needs.
All possible languages are necessarily public, since they have no meaning unless they are used by a community.
5.6 ANOTHER INTERPRETATION
The community interpretation of the private language argument sees it as a direct consequence of Wittgenstein's thoughts about rules, rule-following and objectivity.
Towards the end of his discussion of rule-following, Wittgenstein says (Wittgenstein, 1953, 202):
And to think one is obeying a rule is not to obey a rule.
Hence it is not possible to obey a rule ‘privately’: otherwise thinking one was obeying a rule would be the same thing as obeying it.
And Kripke takes this early statement to be a brief foretaste of the private language argument proper, which seems officially to begin some 40 sections later.
But there is an alternative interpretation, owed to Baker and Hacker, which sees the relationship between the rule-following considerations and the private language argument rather differently (Baker and Hacker, 1984).
On their account, the thrust of the rule-following considerations is that rule-following is a practice, a custom or a way of behaving.
To follow a rule, e.g. the rule for use of the word ‘pain’(the rule embodied in the concept of pain), is not to check, as it were within oneself, on whether this new sensation resembles the original one and, if it does, to think of it as a pain.
Obeying a rule is a matter of public behaviour, not the operation of a private mechanism.
Thus it is important that the section quoted above actually begins: ‘And hence also ‘obeying a rule’ is a practice.
And to think one is obeying a rule…
‘. But if rule-following is a practice, which must be public only in the sense of being a way of behaving rather than in the sense of being regulated by a community, how are we to derive from that thought the conclusion that the  solipsist's private language is impossible?
For why should it not be a practice which could be operated alone, apart from any community?
And, equally, what answer can Wittgenstein give on this interpretation to Kripke's questions about objectivity?
Surely those were good questions which need answering, and to abandon the community interpretation deprives us of the only possible answer.
The first of these objections to the Baker — Hacker interpretation can be answered by saying that although the practice which constitutes knowing and following the rule for pain could be operated away from any community (on a desert island) if it could be set up, the problem is not in the operation but in the institution of the practice.
The solipsist, that is to say, cannot get the practice started in the way in which he pretends, by concentrating on the nature of the original sensation and inventing a word to refer to this sensation and to others like it.
We have seen some argument to this conclusion already in discussing the community interpretation.
This is not surprising because both interpretations agree on this starting point, that the original sensation cannot serve to ground the practice (create the relevant concept).
But more argument is needed now, to the extent that Kripke's version depended too heavily on his account of the relation between thoughts about rule-following and the private language argument.
Luckily Wittgenstein's text bristles with such arguments.
The problem is not to find them, but to select and order them comprehensibly.
First, he points out that the process of ostensive definition, whereby the solipsist attempts to give a meaning to the term ‘pain’ by pointing (mentally) to a sensation, is one which only works when we already have a background of conceptual knowledge, and cannot be used to construct such knowledge from a blank sheet.
Suppose that I point at a chair and say ‘By ‘chair’ I mean that ’, nothing in what I have done creates the desired meaning for the word ‘chair’unless I can further characterise what it is about the object I am pointing to that I am taking as relevant; for example, I might say ‘that sort of furniture’, and this would improve matters, but I have to have the concept of furniture first.
Equally with a sensation, saying ‘by ‘pain’ I mean that ’will only achieve the desired effect if we have some means of separating characteristics which are to be relevant from those which are not.
In virtue of what are the duration, intensity, location, cause and ownership of the sensation to be deemed irrelevant?
In general, then, ostensive definition relies upon the previous existence of conceptual knowledge, and cannot  be the first source of such knowledge.
And this means that there can never be such a thing as the sort of pure private ostensive definition that the solipsist (amongst others) is relying on.
Second, let us suppose that we do need a formulatable rule for the word ‘pain’, which contains explicit reference to the initial sensation, as in ‘pain = sensation like this’.
The rule is supposed to be something we can use in order to check whether the new sensation is also a pain.
But if we are tempted to call it ‘pain’, what is the content of the suggested check on this temptation, the check which we operate in order to see whether it is justified?
Wittgenstein suggests that all we can do is to look again to see if we are really tempted to call it pain.
But this is no independent check: it is rather like buying a second copy of the same newspaper in order to check on whether the first was telling the truth.
Our temptation to call the new sensation ‘pain’ just is the temptation to think of it as similar to the original one.
We cannot check this independently by re-examining the original one, not because we cannot re-examine the original one but because everything we can do in the way of a re-examination is just doing again what we have already done in thinking of the new sensation as relevantly similar to the old one.
This is not the point that the only checks we can make on what we are tempted to say are fallible checks.
If there were a check, one need not require it to be an infallible one; the fact that we might always be wrong about how the original sensation was (a sort of memory scepticism) is not a part of the argument at all.
The argument is not that the check is fallible, for if it were we might still hope that enough memories could be got to prop each other up, as Ayer suggests (Ayer, 1954).
The point is rather that the so-called independent check is a mere repetition of the procedure which it is supposed to be checking.
This conclusion should not be affected by any view we take about whether the use of memory constitutes a re-examination of the original sensation or a mere inspection of how that sensation now seems to us to have been.
Whichever of these two (not very clear) alternatives we adopt (see 12. 2 — 3), the point remains that whatever memory does provide is not a separable check on our taking it that the new sensation resembles the old.
All that memory can provide contributes already to our feeling that in calling this sensation ‘pain’ we are going on in the same way, following the rule.
And hence we cannot check on whether we are following the rule by recalling the original sensation.
Finally, Wittgenstein makes the point that if the language is ever  to be used for communication, the terms in it cannot get their meanings from objects private to one user of the language.
He compares the suggested scenario with a group of people who have boxes; in each box there is something (or nothing in some, perhaps) and each calls what is in his box his ‘beetle’.
If the term ‘beetle’ gets its meaning from what is in the box, it cannot be used for communication with others, who being ignorant of that beetle's nature will not be able to understand the term.
If the term has a meaning independent of the nature of the object, then it can be used for communication (perhaps it means ‘whatever is in the box’) but the private object in the box drops out of consideration as irrelevant — an idle cog.
This last argument seems to be of little use against the solipsist, who is not interested in communication with others.
There may however be a way of adapting it to say that the solipsist will be unable to use the term ‘beetle’ to communicate with his later self (in a diary, perhaps), since what gives the term its meaning to him now cannot be what was then in the box (an object to which he now has no access) but what he now thinks was in the box.
It seems, then, that the private language argument can live a life independent of Kripke's interpretation of the rule-following considerations.
Instead of saying that in the absence of a community there can be no rules, we say that what is wrong with the solipsist's rules is that they cannot be set up in the way he pretends, by using a private experience as a sample.
And this point is independent of the number of private language users there are.
If,per impossibile , the language could be set up, it could be operated in the absence of a community to regulate it.
What is wrong with the solipsist's language is not that there is no community to control it; Robinson Crusoe can talk to himself and keep a diary on his desert island.
But his language is not the solipsist's; it is not set up by ostension of private sensations which serve as samples.
What, however, about the second objection to the Baker — Hacker interpretation, that they cannot answer Kripke's sceptical questions about objectivity?
Here they take an intransigent line, denying that Wittgenstein was at all impressed by such questions.
His main aim with scepticism is to reject its assumptions, not to answer them, and in this case the assumption is that we need any ground for the objectivity of our rule-following practices.
Nothing supports such practices.
Sceptical doubts about objectivity make good sense within a practice; there are objectively correct answers to questions how to go on, and if challenged in a particular case, we can support our  choice by appeal to the rule ('Why did you write 20,002?’ 'Because you told me to go on adding 2').
But questions about the objective consistency of a practice, asked as it were from outside that practice, make no sense.
(What justifies me in writing 20,002 after 20,000 when I am adding 2?
Nothing justifies that; this is what we call ‘adding 2’).
And the sceptical questions which Kripke takes as central are all external questions of this sort.
They involve separating the rule from its instances and asking what justifies us in taking the instances to be instances of that rule.
But if you take the instances away from the rule in this way there is no rule left to ask this question about.
The instances are the practice and the practice is the rule; a rule is ‘internally related’ to its instances, and the sceptic's attempts to plant a gap between them simply betray a misconception of what it is to follow a rule.
There is more to Wittgenstein's attitude here than a straightforward refusal to play the philosophical game.
His position is that we should think of rules as practices, as ways of behaving, and not suppose that to support this way of behaving there must be some internal interpretation of the rule which tells the rule-followers how to work the rule.
For if we suppose this we shall fall into an infinite regress; we shall find ourselves looking for a further interpretation.
Rule-following as a practice must therefore be able to carry on without anything to support it, and we must attempt to wean ourselves away from the feeling of vertigo which is engendered by our recognition of the lack of support.
And similarly we must not allow ourselves to look for something below that practice on which we can ground the feeling that the practice is going on in an objectively correct way.
Objectivity is a part of the practice, not something that grounds or supports the practice from beneath.
Objectivity is that element of the practice which involves checking, reassessing, abandoning old positions, complaining about others, etc.
But nothing else is needed in the way of a ground to make these activities somehow justifiable.
5.7 COMMON CONCLUSIONS
Given the differences between the two interpretation of Wittgenstein's argument, we should stress their similarities.
First, they agree that the concept of ‘pain’ which has served as our example throughout this discussion is not special in any relevant way.
We might feel tempted to say that Wittgenstein's account may  be true of sensations; but that there is no such thing as a sensation of blue, and so there is no reason why a private linguist could not start by naming the way things look to him before moving on to the more difficult talk of the way things actually are.
But both interpretations would see this attempt at escape as misguided.
There is no relevant difference between sensations and other possible ‘contents of awareness’.
This can be checked by looking back through the arguments.
Nothing was said there which relied on any special characteristic of pain.
And of course we have seen that Wittgenstein wanted to show it impossible that there should be beings who behave like us but have no sensations or different sorts of experiences from ours.
And he wanted to make similar remarks about our initial belief that though we use the same language and agree on the words with which to describe the colours of the objects around us, still we might for all we know see the objects completely differently; an object that causes in me what I call a sensation of red may cause in you what I would call a sensation of blue, though we can never know this since we will continue to agree on what to say and on how to act in our differently coloured environments (we will all stop at a red traffic light, for instance).
According to Wittgenstein, this initial belief is as incoherent as the solipsist's claim to be able to set up a private language, since it relies upon too great a gap between our behaviour (including linguistic behaviour) and internal mental life.
Second, they agree on the conclusion that the solipsist's charade of concentrating on an experience and pronouncing a word, no matter how fervently, cannot succeed in establishing a rule which the solipsist can follow in a new case.
It is not that the nature of the sensation can create a rule; the rule creates a nature for the sensation, by enabling us to conceive of ways in which this sensation might resemble others.
Until we have such a conception we cannot describe the original sensation to ourselves; it is just a useless this , for the concept of the sensation has no content until the rules have been set up.
This conclusion is similar to the criticism of classical foundationalism which was made in chapter 4.
There we said that the foundationalist's beliefs about his sensory states, to be infallible, would have to have vanishingly small content; in fact, to amount to no more than an incomprehensible gesture.
This similarity between the two prongs of the attack on classical foundationalism looks pleasing.
It is worth reminding ourselves, therefore, that Wittgenstein's criticism of solipsism is intended to be aimed as much at the classic  empiricist programme espoused by the classical foundationalist.
This point can be made in two ways.
First, Wittgenstein sees this sort of foundationalist as a form of sceptic, who admits the difficulty of showing that we are ever justified in believing that other persons exist.
But he sees this foundationalist as a weak-kneed sceptic, who ought in consistency to go further; who ought, in fact, to doubt whether he understands the proposition that other minds exist, and so ought to be a solipsist.
Criticisms of solipsism should therefore count as criticisms of the weak-kneed scepticism embodied in foundationalism.
Suppose, however, that we resisted Wittgenstein's attempt to push us from weak-kneed scepticism to solipsism; we find the relevant argument (see 5.4) unconvincing, perhaps.
Wittgenstein's point can still be made in another way.
For the classical foundationalist programme of starting from one's own case and moving outwards suffers from all the radical defects which face the solipsist's attempt to set up a language in which to describe the experiences which form his subject matter.
Neither the foundationalist nor the solipsist can make the first move.
Their approach is undermined by their mistaken belief that we know what experiential words ('pain', ‘looks red’) mean by direct acquaintance with the things they stand for.
5.8 PROSPECTS FOR FOUNDATIONALISM
We saw in 4.3 that there are foundationalist theories other than the classical variety.
How do they fare if we accept Wittgenstein's arguments?
Foundationalism takes it that there are two types of justification: inferential and non-inferential.
This tenet is untouched by the private language argument.
This asymmetry involved in the distinction between two types of justification only becomes dangerous when one supposes that all basic (non-inferentially justified) beliefs concern the nature of the believer's present sensory states.
As far as the private language argument is concerned, foundationalism is still possible as long as it avoids the traditional view that epistemology is the enterprise of starting from one's own case and building on that.
It need not come as a surprise to learn that Wittgenstein is in his own way a foundationalist.
He writes (Wittgenstein, 1969a, 136):
when Moore says he knows such and such [for instance that he has two hands: JD]he is really enumerating a lot of empirical propositions which we affirm without special testing; propositions, that is, which have a peculiar logical role in the system of our empirical propositions.
and this view that some propositions (beliefs) play a special role in our belief set is symptomatically foundationalist.
Wittgenstein is not an ordinary foundationalist.
The beliefs which, he suggests, play this special role for us now include the belief that I have two hands, that men do not fly to the moon, that the sun is not a hole in the sky, that the earth has existed during the last century and that our hands do not disappear when we are not paying attention to them.
He agrees that we can ask what justifies these beliefs; but to do so would mean that we no longer treated them as having this special status.
The special status they have is not one which needs grounding or justification.
It is just that we do treat them as propositions which need no justification but which can justify others.
We don't ask or even think of asking what justifies them.
If Wittgenstein can still be a foundationalist after the arguments of this chapter, it is clear that the ultimate prospects for foundationalism are not yet decided.
I shall offer in chapter 7 a reason for rejecting all forms of foundationalism.
FURTHER READING
Wittgenstein (1953, 143–242) on rule-following, and 243ff., on private languages.
Hacker (1972, chs 7–10) gives a fuller account of Wittgenstein's position.
Kripke (1982) is an expanded version of Kripke (1981), including a chapter on Wittgenstein and other minds.
Baker and Hacker (1984) explicitly attack Kripke's interpretation.
Extreme behaviourism is normally associated with B. F. Skinner.
For one of the less contemptuous discussions of Skinner's behavourism, see Dennett (1978, ch. 5).
Ryle (1949) is another attempt to find a way between extreme behaviourism and the mental/physical separation.
Space has sadly precluded any discussion of Wittgenstein's positive views on epistemology, for which see Wittgenstein (1969a).
Much more could  be made of Wittgenstein's contribution here.
The notion of a criterion is discussed in Albritton (1959); a new approach to the role of criteria is McDowell (1982), to which Wright (1984) responds.
6
Empiricist Theories of Meaning
6.1 THE RELEVANCE OF THEORIES OF MEANING TO EPISTEMOLOGY
There is an intimate connection between epistemology and theory of meaning which has shown its head already in previous chapters.
In chapter 1, for instance, we considered the effect which different theories of understanding might have on certain sceptical arguments; and a theory of understanding is only a theory of meaning under another name.
Equally, anti-realism as a response to the sceptic relies on the view that we cannot understand propositions whose meaning is such that they express (or purport to express) evidence-transcendent facts.
And we saw in 1.2 and again in 5.4 that the strongest sceptical arguments attack understanding as well as knowledge.
Finally, in chapter 5 a theory of meaning was used to discredit a certain programme in epistemology.
It is worth taking time to see exactly how this came about.
Wittgenstein's criticism of solipsism, or of foundationalism with stronger knees, was that the solipsist cannot, despite his pretensions, develop a language.
This criticism depends on a view about what competence with a concept is, a view about what it is to know the meaning of a word, about what it is to know the rules for the application of that word, rules that take you from one instance to the next.
Wittgenstein argued that the solipsist cannot develop rules in the way required, and hence cannot construct a language; and we conclude from this that a certain programme in epistemology is not going to be available.
So in a way the basic error underlying classical foundationalism is an error in the theory of meaning.
We know that there are other forms of foundationalism than the classical one.
Can we now discern a theory of meaning which, if correct, would force us towards some form of foundationalism?
If we can, there might be two ways in which this would help.
First, we might use it to persuade ourselves that the errors Wittgenstein found in classical foundationalism don't really infect all forms of foundationalism.
Second, we might see something right about that theory of meaning or something wrong about it, and use this to determine our attitude to foundationalism in general; thus we might avoid the need to consider all the different varieties one by one.
This is what my strategy will eventually be.
I shall argue that the attractions of foundationalism, whatever they may be, do not derive from the theory of meaning which underlies it; in fact, the most acceptable form of theory of meaning is noticeably lacking in the features characteristic of foundationalism, and supports instead an alternative epistemology, coherentism.
6.2 LOGICAL EMPIRICISM AND THE EVIDENCE OF ONE'S SENSES
I suggested in 4.3 that foundationalism should be defined by its response to the regress argument:
F 1 : There are two forms of justification, inferential and non-inferential.
But there is another characteristic strand to foundationalism, that of empiricism.
Foundationalism, viewed quite generally (though here we must exclude Wittgenstein), can be seen as the expression of the empiricist thought that verification and justification, telling whether something is true and backing up one's claims about what is true, must rely eventually upon the evidence of one's senses; not in the first instance, maybe, but at the end of the day.
What else could we appeal to, to tell us whether something is true, than the evidence of our senses?
This is a good sound empiricist question.
So the evidence of our senses is what we start from when we need to construct a justification for our beliefs, on this approach.
The crucial point now is that the evidence of one's senses is not just what we appeal to in justification and verification.
It is also what we start from in learning a language.
Here again we can ask what else we could possibly start from other than what is given, that is to say the evidence of our senses.
So this notion of the evidence of one's senses is held by empiricists to be basic in epistemology, and also to be basic in the theory of meaning.
An empiricist theory of meaning will be one which enshrines this dependence of  all language-learning, and thus of all meaningful language, on the evidence of one's senses.
Led by the thought that the evidence of our senses is basic both in epistemology and in the theory of meaning, positivists such as Ayer proposed as a theory of meaning what they called the verification principle of empirical significance (see Ayer, 1946, and Schlick, 1936):
VP: a statement has empirical meaning iff its truth would make a difference to the evidence of our senses, which, since a statement is verifiable, on this approach, iff its truth would make a difference to the evidence of our senses, is equivalent to: VP 1 : a statement has empirical meaning iff it is verifiable.
And from this account of empirical meaning there naturally arises an account of what it is for someone to understand a statement, or to know its meaning:
UP:a knows the meaning of p iff a knows how to verify p .
This could be expanded to read:
UP 1 a knows the meaning of p iff a knows what difference  the truth of p would make to the evidence of a 's senses.
And from this we naturally derive an account of what the meaning of a particular statement S is:
MP: the meaning of S is the difference that the truth of S would make to the evidence of one's senses.
This was sometimes, not perhaps very helpfully, read as:
MP 1 : the meaning of S is its method of verification.
All three of these principles, as can be seen, are acceptably empiricist.
Indeed, VP 1 was and is the core of the position known as logical empiricism, or logical positivism.
What is meant by the word ‘verify’ in these principles?
A distinction  is traditionally drawn between strong and weak verification (see Ayer, 1946, p. 9).
Strong verification is conclusive verification; a statement is conclusively verifiable if, once we have the best possible evidence for it, there remains no possibility that the statement be false.
Weak verification is less than conclusive.
A weakly verifiable statement is not itself strongly verifiable, but is confirmable or disconfirmable by appeal to other statements which are conclusively verifiable; that is, strongly verifiable statements can count as evidence for or against it.
This distinction can help us to give the best version of logical empiricism.
We could insist that ‘verifiable’ in VP 1 means ‘strongly verifiable’.
But this would rule out so many of our statements as insignificant that it would be self-defeating.
On the other hand empiricists are not normally tempted to suppose that there are no strongly verifiable statements at all.
Rather, they take it that statements which simply report the evidence of one's senses, whatever that may be, can be conclusively verified when one's senses do in fact produce that evidence.
It seems then that the most plausible form of logical empiricism holds that statements can be divided into two classes, those that are strongly verifiable and those that are not strongly verifiable themselves but are confirmable and disconfirmable by appeal to the strongly verifiable ones.
One can see here how close the relation is between logical empiricism and foundationalism.
The foundationalist claim that there are two sorts of justification, inferential and non-inferential, is mirrored by the claim of logical empiricism that all significant statements are either strongly or weakly verifiable.
Which statements are conclusively verifiable, or in other words which statements report the evidence of one's senses?
Which statements are ‘observation statements’ to use Ayer's term, and which report states of affairs beyond those which can, strictly speaking, be observed?
Logical empiricists differ on this question, just as foundationalists differ on the nature of basic beliefs.
Ayer, for instance, takes the classical line that observation statements are those which describe the nature of our present sensory states.
But this position is not obligatory; which is just as well since I take the arguments of chapters 4 and 5 to have refuted it.
Quine on the other hand takes the evidence of one's senses to concern not what is internal to the observer but what is external to him, that is to say the presence of certain (public) stimuli (Quine, 1975a, p. 73).
An observation statement is one made in response to certain stimuli and strongly verifiable by appeal to the occurrence of such stimuli.
So the notion of an observation statement, which reports nothing but the evidence of one's senses, is in dispute among logical empiricists.
What is not in dispute is the distinction between strong and weak verification and its relevance to the theory of meaning.
Quine's version of logical empiricism would support a version of foundationalism not vulnerable to the arguments of chapter 5, since for him the observation statements basic to justification, verification and language-learning do not concern the nature of one's own sensory states.
6.3 THREE VERIFICATIONIST THEORIES
What exactly is the relation between observation statements and the others, which form the vast majority?
We have suggested that the latter are confirmable or disconfirmable by appeal to the former; but how are the two related so that such confirmation can take place?
We have to give an account of this which is consistent with the verification principle.
In fact, this means that our answer will amount to an account of what it is for a non-observation statement to be significant, and what it is that makes one such statement mean something different from what another one means.
We shall consider three answers to the question, which form a sort of spectrum.
Phenomenalism
Phenomenalism, as a theory of the meaning of non-observation statements, held originally that such statements are equivalent in meaning to a (probably very long) list of statements about what would be observed under different circumstances, all linked by conjunction.
For instance, what it is for there to be a red rose in this darkened room is for it to be the case that if I were to turn the light on, I would make a certain observation, and if I were then to move to another place, I would make an observation rather different, and if you were to come in, you would observe such and such, and so on .
This theory had enormous attractions both in metaphysics and in epistemology.
For phenomenalists such as Ayer tended to take it that observation statements report the nature of the observer's sensory states.
And if this is so we get the delightful result that instead of there being at least two radically different sorts of things in the world, sensory states and material objects, there is only one sort of thing, sensory states, and all putatively other sorts of thing are reducible to complexes of actual and possible things of the first  sort.
This is the metaphysical advantage of phenomenalism.
The epistemological attraction is, of course, that knowledge of the ‘external’ world of material objects is genuinely possible.
Such objects do not lie beyond our grasp, as the sceptic might suggest; for we can hope that every member of the set of statements about what would be observed should be conclusively verified, and in such a case there would remain no further possibility that the material object statement should be false.
Phenomenalism of this sort, then, would be a form of anti-realism (see 1.4).
If we could precisely specify and conclusively verify every member of the set of observation statements which together make up the meaning of a non-observation statement, that non-observation statement would, in accordance with the verification principle, have its own determinate meaning and in certain circumstances be determinately true or determinately false.
This situation would be the phenomenalist's ideal; all such non-observation statements would be strongly verifiable, and sceptical doubts about them shown to be impossible.
But things are not like this, for two reasons.
First, it seems possible that in most cases the conditional statements about what would be observed in certain circumstances cannot all be verified, because there will be cases where if you verify one you lose the chance of verifying another.
If only some can be verified, the non-observation statement will be no more than weakly verifiable.
Second, it is not clear that conditional statements are strongly verified simply by showing that both antecedent and consequent are true.
You can read English and you are reading this book, but it is not true that if you can read English you are reading this book.
So if the meaning of a non-observation statement is given by a set of statements about what would be observed if…, it is unlikely that they will be strongly verifiable.
(They might still be strongly falsifiable.)
This means, of course, that the advantages against the sceptic are not so dramatic as was claimed.
But something would still have been gained, for we would not be claiming to know on the basis of experience the nature of a world which is independent of experience.
Phenomenalism narrows the gap between the world we experience and our experience of it.
I have expressed phenomenalism so far as if all phenomenalists agree that observation statements report the nature of the reporter's own sensory states.
But such a phenomenalism is only one form of reductionism.
We might instead hold that observation statements report the nature of the immediately surrounding world, and define  all other statements in terms of these (taking them as conditional upon the location of the observer).
This would be a similarly reductionist theory, compatible with the demands of empiricism and the verification principle, but it would not perhaps have all the metaphysical and epistemological attractions of the traditional theory.
A crucial problem for phenomenalism of either sort is that few philosophers have attempted, and none have remotely succeeded, in showing what such a reduction would look like in detail.
As soon as it was tried, the theory was shown unworkable.
Quite apart from any other difficulties, it seemed implausible to suppose that a statement about a red rose in the dark did have exactly these or those consequences for possible observation.
So, as well as being probably infinite in length, the list of conditional observation statements was probably rather vague in content.
As Ayer said, ‘what is required to verify a statement about a material thing is never the occurrence of precisely this or precisely that sense-content, but only the occurrence of one or other of the sense-contents that fall within a fairly indefinite range’(Ayer, 1946, p. 12).
And with this admission, phenomenalism loses one of its advantages.
For to the extent that the range concerned is vague, to that extent non-observation statements have an indeterminate meaning and the range of circumstances under which they are determinately true or determinately false is greatly reduced, perhaps to nothing.
This really meant the abandonment of the original reductive theory, since it could no longer be claimed that a non-observation statement was exactly equivalent in meaning to any collection of observation statements, however complex and conditional that collection might be.
Carnap's Relaxation
Rudolf Carnap was perhaps the only philosopher to attempt a full-scale reduction of non-observation statements to explicitly laid out complexes of observation statements.
His attempts failed, and he came to the conclusion that the best that could be achieved was to specify, so far as one could, which observation statements were implied by which non-observation statements (see the preface to Carnap, 1967, and Quine, 1969, p. 77).
This would never yield anything like a reduction of one to the other, but Carnap supposes that it still allowed us to claim that the concept of a material object could be reduced to ‘autopsychological concepts’, those which concern the nature of one's own sensory states.
But if all we can do, in our attempts to specify the meaning of a non-observation statement, is to state some implications of that  statement at the observational level, it seems that there will always be some aspects of that statement's meaning which will escape us and remain unspecified.
But this merely increases the sense in which the meaning of a non-observation statement is indeterminate.
It gives a good sense to the idea that a weakly verifiable statement can only be confirmed or disconfirmed, and never conclusively verified.
But it leaves us admitting that if we ever want to say that such a statement is determinately true, we must admit that there are facts in virtue of which it is true but which lie beyond the possibility of verification.
The verificationist who is unwilling to admit the possibility of such facts (in this he is a consistent anti-realist) must therefore say that such a statement, though perhaps it may be determinately false when one of its consequences is observed to be false, still cannot achieve determinate truth.
Quine
Quine's position is more radical.
He argues that we cannot hope even to specify observation sentences which are consequences of given non-observation sentences.
There are three distinct inputs to Quine's eventual position here.
The first is Quine's thesis that theory is underdetermined by data (evidence).
No matter how much evidence we may have, there will always be different theories which explain and assimilate the data equally well.
For instance, it is compatible with the results of all actual and possible measurements to hold either that the universe is of a fixed size or that it is expanding at a constant rate.
No theory, then, is ever entailed by the data.
Different theories can have the same observational consequences.
The second is the claim that non-observation sentences face the tribunal of experience not singly but in groups.
Quine says that this thesis is owed to Pierre Duhem; we can call it Duhem's thesis (Quine, 1969, p. 80).
Duhem is suggesting that individual non-observation sentences cannot be conclusively verified or conclusively falsified by observation, by the evidence of our senses.
The reason is that such sentences do not somehow occur alone, in limbo; they occur as part of a more general theory.
And because of this we have a choice where to alter the theory when things go wrong at the observational level.
There will always be more than one way of doing this; we are never forced by recalcitrant experiences to alter just this non-observation sentence.
Equally, individual non-observation sentences are never confirmed by experience.
Experience can confirm theories, and thereby confirm the sentences of which the theories  are constructed, but it cannot confirm those sentences singly and directly.
No matter how well experience goes, it is only able to confirm a non-observation sentence in the light of the theory that surrounds it; alter the theory, and the non-observation sentence might not be confirmed by experience at all.
These two inputs are separate.
The second says that individual non-observation sentences cannot be verified or falsified on their own.
The first says that the things which can be verified, theories, can never be conclusively verified.
(They can of course be conclusively falsified.)
The third input we have already seen.
It is the empiricist theory of meaning MP:
MP: the meaning of S is the difference that the truth of S would make to the evidence of one's senses.
Quine says of this theory that ‘one has no choice but to be an empiricist so far as one's theory of linguistic meaning is concerned’(Quine, 1969, p. 81).
Quine uses these three inputs to argue against the notion of individual non-observation sentences having a separate meaning all their own.
By MP, in specifying the observational consequences of S we are specifying the meaning of S. But, by Duhem's thesis, no individual non-observation sentence has its own observational consequences.
For if it had, then when those consequences failed we would know exactly where to revise.
But we always do have such a choice and hence no sentence has observational consequences all its own.
And this means, by MP, that no non-observational sentence has a meaning all its own; for there is no such thing as the difference its truth would make to observation.
The meaning of a given sentence, so far as it has one, is not some determinate characteristic which it carries around with it.
Since meaning is a matter of observational consequences, and such consequences belong to theories and not to sentences, Quine's conclusion becomes inevitable: meaning belongs to theories rather than to sentences.
And since one partial theory can be played off against another in the same way that sentences can, we have eventually to hold, with Quine, that ‘the unit of empirical significance is the whole of science’.
This conclusion can be re-expressed in two ways, both of which will be needed for future discussions.
Quine holds, against Carnap, that a non-observation sentence does not have its own observational  consequences (Quine, 1953, pp. 40–1).
This shows that there is nothing which the sentence means, taken all by itself.
To the extent that we can say what it means, our answer is dependent upon the nature of the remainder of the theory surrounding the sentence.
There is no determinate object, then, which we can call the meaning of this sentence.
So at the non-observational level, sentential meaning is indeterminate.
There are no facts of the matter about what individual sentences mean.
This is the thesis of the indeterminacy of sentential meaning .
So far as non-observation sentences are concerned, Quine's theory of meaning can be called holistic .
Atomism, opposed to holism, holds that each sentence has its own meaning, which it can carry about with it from theory to theory.
Holism is the view that the meanings of sentences are interdependent, so that what one means depends upon the meanings of others, and can be changed by a change elsewhere.
Meaning is something born primarily not by the parts but by the whole theory, since the whole theory is the only thing that has its own observational consequences.
Nothing other than the whole theory is conclusively falsified by untoward experience.
Quine uses the perspective we have now reached to argue, further, that no sentence in our theory is completely immune from revision (Quine, 1953, pp. 41- 3).
We can see the whole theory as a sphere, with observation sentences on the periphery and non-observation sentences in the interior, starting from comparatively mundane sentences about material objects, moving through more theoretical sentences to laws of physical science and finally, at the centre, the laws of logic.
If there is a disturbance at the periphery we already know some observation sentences which we have to revise, and we must also make a revision in the interior, for our original theory has been proved false.
Our normal response is to look for a comparatively minor adjustment near the periphery; if we cannot see the cake when we expected to we would normally suppose, perhaps, that someone has eaten it, rather than that cakes now have a tendency to dematerialize.
We do this because such an adjustment leaves the general structure of our theory untouched.
Sentences nearer the centre are more resistant to revision, then, than are sentences further out.
The laws of logic, lying at the centre, are the most resistant of all.
We would need extraordinary circumstances to arise before we abandoned laws like the Law of Non-Contradiction.
But no sentence is completely immune to revision.
Laws of logic, even,can be revised in response to empirical investigation.
It may be that the  simplest change in the theory, given awkward observations, would be a general structural change at the very centre rather than a whole series of alterations further out.
For instance, Heisenberg's indeterminacy principle has been held to be a reason to reject the Law of Excluded Middle.
This conclusion is the final nail in the coffin of the notion of sentential meaning.
Given that notion, we might hold that most sentences, when true, are made true by a combination of what they mean and how the world is.
We need to know more than what they mean to know whether they are true.
Such sentences are traditionally called ‘synthetic’.
But there might also be, and were traditionally held to be, sentences that are true solely because of what they mean.
These ‘analytic’ sentences can be recognized as true by someone who knows nothing other than their meaning.
And such analytic sentences would be unrevisable.
There is no possibility that they become false, unless their meaning changes.
Quine's position has the consequence that there are no such analytic sentences.
The sense in which we can talk of the meaning of an individual sentence is not determinate enough to make it possible that a sentence be unrevisably true in virtue of that meaning.
There are no analytic truths.
Overall, then, Quine argues that the empiricist theory of meaning MP, together with Duhem's thesis and that of the underdetermination of theory by data, has the effect of collapsing the notion of sentential meaning which it was supposed to explain.
But this is not an argument against MP.
Empiricists must accept MP.
The situation is saved by the holistic claim that the unit of empirical significance is the whole of science.
FURTHER READING
Quine's classic paper ‘Epistemology naturalised’ is in Quine (1969, pp. 69- 90).
Quine's doubts about analyticity are first voiced in his ‘Two dogmas of empiricism’, essay 2 in Quine (1953).
Quine's arguments are discussed in Putnam (1975, essay 2).
Ayer (1946), introduction to the second edition and ch. 1, was a brash but influential statement of logical positivism as an expression of extreme empiricism.
Quine (1975a) is ‘a summary statement of my attitude towards our knowledge of nature’.
Follesdal (1975) is a helpful account of Quine's epistemology and its relation to his theory of meaning, by an aficionado .
Berlin (1939) is a good example of the sort of response generated by Ayer (1946).
Ayer (1969, pp. 240- 3) gives a fuller expression of phenomenalism.
C. I. Lewis (1946, ch. 8) also argues the phenomenalist case.
Chisholm (1948) criticises phenomenalism as a theory of meaning.
7
Holism and Indeterminacy
7.1 THE INDETERMINACY OF TRANSLATION
Sentential meaning is indeterminate, according to Quine.
There are no facts of the matter about what an individual sentence means.
It seems to follow that just as the notion of the meaning of a single sentence is indeterminate, so the notion of two sentences having the same meaning is indeterminate.
Translation is the enterprise of finding, for one sentence, another with the same meaning.
Translation then is indeterminate.
This does not mean merely that correctness of translation is undetermined by all the possible data.
Of course our data are always incomplete; they never determine one translation as conclusively right and all competitors as conclusively wrong.
So we might think that the correctness of translation is always evidence-transcendent.
There is a fact of the matter here.
One is right and the others wrong, although we may never be in a position to tell which.
This is not Quine's conclusion.
What could there be, after all, in virtue of which one of the translations is right and others wrong?
The only possible answer is the meaning of the original sentence.
But that meaning is not determinate enough to be able to adjudicate between rival translations, so as to make it the case that at most one is right (though we may never be able to tell which).
What is more, this does not mean that translation is impossible.
We might hold that the meaning of a given sentence is so rich and particular that it could never be captured by another sentence in a different language.
All translations, on this approach, would be at best approximations.
But Quine's point here is that there is nothing determinate in the meaning of the original sentence for the translations to approximate to.
Instead of insisting on the possibility that there be no adequate translation, we should recognize what  indeterminacy really means; the different indistinguishably good translations are all as good as translations can hope to be.
They represent what correct translation is.
So we see that instead of there being no correct translations, there will always be more than one.
Two different sentences in one language can both be correct translations of a single sentence in another.
One could try to reject this conclusion on the grounds that for many French sentences there does seem to be a determinately right translation into English.
Quine would accept that this is so, but hold that it is only so because in this familiar case there is an agreed general scheme for French — English translation.
With such a scheme and within it, there is determinacy of translation.
But the choice of a scheme is indeterminate.
There will always be more than one equally good candidate.
Quine takes his start not from the familiar case but from what he calls radical translation (see Quine, 1960, ch. 2).
This is an enterprise, supposedly conducted by a field linguist, of writing a ‘translation manual’ for a completely unknown language, with no help from bilingual speakers, previously prepared dictionaries or agreed general schemes.
(A translation manual is a sort of dictionary that matches sentence with sentence rather than word with word.)
The radical translator is faced with the task of writing such a manual on whatever evidence he can glean; roughly, on the evidence of sentences uttered or assented to by the ‘natives’ and the circumstances of those utterances and assents.
He tries to establish a relation between the two, the question being ‘In which observable circumstances will the natives assent to ‘p ’?.
Translation here must be indeterminate because no amount of evidence will guarantee that the translation we offer will be uniquely correct.
We can eventually be sure that it is correct enough, but never that there is no other equally correct but different translation.
The argument so far has been that since meaning is indeterminate at the non-observational level, translation must be too.
We shall find reason for disquiet about this argument.
In 7.4 I offer arguments which attempt to establish the indeterminacy of translation directly.
The indeterminacy of meaning would then follow from the indeterminacy of translation, rather than vice versa.
Meanwhile we turn to consider an area in which Quine is not willing to assert indeterminacy, that of observation sentences.
7.2 QUINE AS A FOUNDATIONALIST
We have seen already that verificationism, the adoption of VP 1 , is a natural expression of foundationalism.
We saw the foundationalist distinction between inferentially and non-inferentially justified beliefs mirrored in the verificationist distinction between strongly and weakly verifiable statements.
The foundationalist here insists on an asymmetry ; he has a two-tier theory, holding that there are two sorts of justification.
Non-basic beliefs are justified in terms of the basic and the basic are justified in some other way; the asymmetry lies in the fact that justification is all one way, from non-basic to basic.
Verificationism replicates this asymmetry in the theory of meaning.
Quine offers us a theory rich in asymmetries of the same sort.
Despite his generally holistic approach to questions of meaning and questions of justification at the non-observational level, he insists on the sort of asymmetry between observational and non-observational that is characteristic of the foundationalist.
These asymmetries revolve, as one would expect, around the notion of an observation sentence.
This notion, according to Quine (1969, pp. 88–9), is
fundamental in two connections…
Its relation…to our knowledge of what is true is very much the traditional one: observation sentences are the repository of evidence for scientific hypotheses.
Its relation to meaning is fundamental too, since observation sentences are the ones we are in a position to learn to understand first, both as children and as field linguists…
They afford the only entry to a language.
Quine's epistemology here is a consequence of his theory of meaning and translation.
The field linguist, engaged in radical translation, asks himself under what conditions the natives would assent to a given occasion sentence S, and under what conditions they would dissent.
With most sentences, particularly non-observational sentences, no clear answer will emerge because the natives will not all behave in the same way in the same conditions.
We might explain this by saying that whether the natives will assent or dissent to S will depend normally not only on their present situation but also on the other beliefs which they bring to that situation.
But this would itself be merely an instance of the general fact that with most sentences it is possible for two people to understand them but  disagree about their truth.
There are sentences, however, which are immune to this sort of problem.
These are sentences such that everyone who understands them will agree on their truth value no matter what the circumstances.
We can in this special case hope to specify meaning completely in terms of assent/dissent conditions.
And this means that for such sentences meaning is determinate and translation is determinate; we can hope to find a sentence in another language with exactly matching assent conditions.
And if translation is determinate, meaning here must be atomistic rather than holistic.
Each sentence must have a meaning all its own, if that meaning is able to be exactly copied by a sentence in another language.
Sentences of this sort are the observation sentences.
It is not just that, as it happens, some sentences are of this special sort.
If that was all there was to it, we could be pardoned some uneasiness; we might feel that we haven't been shown much reason for supposing that there are any sentences such that all who understand them will agree on their truth-value no matter what the circumstances.
Remember that, for Quine, observation sentences do not report private events such as the occurrence of a sensation.
They report the occurrence of certain sensory stimuli, and the stimuli are here thought of as publicly available; the same stimuli can occur to more than one person.
(Saying that two sentences can have matching assent/dissent conditions is the same as saying that they can be stimulus-synonymous.)
Are there any such sentences?
Quine offers as examples of single-word sentences ‘Red’, ‘Rabbit’ and ‘The tide is out’, though he says that taken with maximum strictness only the first of these would qualify (Quine, 1960, p. 44).
We can imagine that there might be some argument about this.
What persuades Quine, however, is not that his examples are so convincing but that he knows that there must be some examples, and these look like the best candidates.
How does he know that this is how things must be?
The answer lies in a sentence quoted above: ‘observation sentences are the ones we are in a position to learn to understand first, both as children and as field linguists’.
It is clearly possible to learn a language from scratch, since we have all done it.
But if holism is true and the meaning of each sentence depends on the meanings of others, how did we do it?
There seems to be nowhere where we could start, no sentence whose meaning is, as it were, self-contained enough to be learnable as a first step towards learning the rest.
But there must be some place to start, something which the learner, whether child or linguist, can get under his belt and use as a firm datum by which to test  hypotheses about what further sentences might mean.
Our holism must be tempered, then, by respect for the needs of the language-learner.
We must be atomists somewhere in the theory of meaning, for otherwise we shall make language-learning (of the radical sort) impossible.
It is in the contrast between holism at the non-observational level and atomism at the level of observation that Quine is revealed as a foundationalist.
The asymmetries are there for all to see.
Observation sentences, where meaning is firm and translation possible, afford the only entry to a language; this is the semantical asymmetry.
Observation sentences can be individually verified and our acceptance of them justified one by one, and constitute the evidence on which the non-observational, that is to say the whole of science, must rest; this is the epistemological asymmetry.
For Quine there are data and there is theory, and whatever desirable internal characteristics the theory may have, its justification is achieved, if at all, in the way our verificationalist semantics taught us that it should be; that is , by appeal to the difference that the truth of the theory should make to possible experience and by direct (strong) verification of whether experience does in fact go the way the theory says it should.
Quine's position then shows the characteristic features of foundationalism.
7.3 ATOMISM AND HOLISM
Quine's atomism at the observational level is grounded in his adherence to verificationism, as an expression of empiricism in the theory of meaning.
And he takes this to show that it is impossible for good empiricists to avoid going along with him.
‘The sort of meaning that is basic to translation, and to the learning of one's language, is necessarily empirical meaning and nothing more…
Surely one has no choice but to be an empiricist as far as one's theory of linguistic meaning is concerned’(Quine, 1969, p. 81).
And this thought furnishes a crucial argument in favour of foundationalism and its asymmetries.
This is that empiricism leads to verificationism, and verificationism embodies the foundationalist asymmetries.
Therefore one cannot be an empiricist without being a foundationalist.
I do not think that this conclusion is correct.
Against it, I shall argue first that what Quine means by verificationism is not the only empirical theory of meaning, and second that a theory which abandons atomism at the observational level in favour of a more complete  holism would be generally preferable both for empiricists and for others.
We start with the three principles laid out in 6.2; VP, UP and MP.
I said there that UP and MP followed ‘naturally’ from VP, but this was not the whole truth.
VP is about what it is for a sentence to be significant rather than meaningless, while MP is about what it is for a sentence to have one meaning rather than another.
We should hope that a theory of the first sort would help us with questions of the second sort, but we could not, I think, require in advance that this be so.
For surely it is compatible with VP, as expressed, that two sentences should have the same observational consequences but differ in meaning.
But this situation is exactly ruled out by MP.
It is clear then that MP goes significantly further than VP; it may follow naturally but it does not follow ‘logically’.
The trouble lies in the move from VP to UP.
VP leaves it still as an open possibility that some sentences have more to their meaning than just the effect their truth would have on the evidence of our senses.
And if there are any such sentences, UP will be false as it stands.
There would be sentences whose observational consequences we know but of whose other contribution (whatever that may be) we are ignorant.
But if we abandon UP as it stands, we have no means of deriving MP.
A truer and weaker version of UP, UP 2 :a knows the meaning of p → a knows the difference the truth of p would make to the evidence of a 's senses, does not allow us to assert the sort of identity enshrined in MP, because it no longer contains the biconditional ‘iff’.
If this is so, Quine is wrong to say that one cannot be an empiricist in one's theory of meaning unless one accepts his brand of verificationism, centred on MP.
He derives from MP his holism in the theory of meaning, but insists that we cannot account for language learning as an empirical activity, unless we allow that some sentences have a determinate meaning and are therefore independently (strongly) verifiable.
The attack on Quine therefore has two prongs, the rejection of MP and an attempt to show that we do not need to be atomists in order to account for the possibility of language learning.
The first has already been achieved; Quine is wrong to link empiricism with MP.
If VP is sufficient for the empiricist, MP is not necessary.
Why is it not possible to suppose that the initial data from which we start to learn the language are less than solid, and that they stand  to be revised, reassessed and maybe abandoned in the light of what happens later?
Surely all that is required for us to make a start is that there should be sentences whose meaning is more nearly confined to what is immediately available to us, not that there be sentences whose meaning can be completely given in terms of their assent conditions.
All that is needed, then, is a difference in degree, not in type.
It is true enough that one could not start one's language learning from the laws of physics and logic; much is needed before we can even begin to understand these.
But this does not show that the sentences from which we can start must differ in type from those, only that their degree of observationality must be much greater.
If there is always an element of the meaning of our sentences which is non-observational, then observation alone will not reveal the whole meaning.
But this only shows that we will not learn the whole meaning at once, at the beginning.
It does not show that we cannot start, but only that our initial moves will need to be reassessed later.
We do not need, then, to embrace the semantic asymmetry in order to give an account of language learning.
And in that case the epistemological asymmetry which depends on it falls to the ground.
We can, if we wish, adopt a more complete holism which includes observation sentences, without failing to meet the demands of empiricism.
It remains then to show that this is the right course for us to take.