

CHAPTER THREE
A Night
She came back to it all a few nights later.
Therese, so uncurious, so immersed in the moment, set it off.
In that voice of hers, that warm low voice, she said, ‘I know you must be feeling sad so often, that was a bad thing your grandmother dying so soon.’
Flavia's reaction was, Oh God, she knows too.
And it did not happen here, not at St-Jean, it happened a hundred miles away and more, across the border, at Alassio, in another country, in my country, one of my countries.
She found herself answering quite reasonably, ‘It was bad for…for Constanza.’
She was not unaware that Therese disapproved of the use of her mother's Christian name—the French had it all straight, about the family, about death, and how to talk about it; and they did talk: familiar with death.
‘They parted in anger.
The last time they saw each other.’
Flavia herself had an impulse to talk—now, to Therese, to this Frenchwoman, this new, this alien friend she liked immensely.
‘The last time they met on the face of this earth.’
Therese stroked her hair.
‘They had been against one another for a long time.
That day it all came out.
Constanza tried to follow her out of the hotel—as she was very very upset, my grandmother—but Constanza was too late.
You could say that she died of…moral shock.
But then, she had wanted to before.
Mena told us.
Our maid, her maid really.
She was with Anna for forty years.
It is sad, sad, sad for Mena.
She loved her so.
I must tell you how it began: Mena got to Rome when she was young—her people were very poor—someone had promised  her work but there wasn't any.
Then a woman in the street—the Via Monserato, between the Tiber and the Farnese Square, they talked about it so much, Mena and my grandmother, when I was little, I think they talked about it every day:Il Quartiere Papale , it does have a magnificent sound, hasn't it? and so much of it a slum; the rich live above on the piani nobili , the ground floors and cellars are rented out to artisans; my mother, who was brought up in those streets, says to know them you must have breathed the air in the evenings when the wine-shops are full and they are lighting charcoal braziers on the pavements; she says I will go one day, but I think I know already—well, a woman in Mena's street who sold salad greens knew the cook who worked for Anna and the prince round the corner and Mena was given things to do in the kitchen.
One day Anna came down,Eccellenza as they call her there, and saw Mena.
Mena says Anna liked her face.
Don't think that Mena is pretty, she's a tiny woman: shrivelled.
Perhaps she wasn't then, it was before I was born, even before Constanza was born, when they were still happy.
Mena's everyday face is just stubborn, you could call it proud—she's a countrywoman from a good province as they say—but Anna took to it, she did take to people—her infatuations Constanza says—she took to my father when he was a very young man and he wasn't so good-looking either.
Nothing like the prince, her own husband, who was so bel uomo .
‘With Mena it lasted.
Anna taught her and made her her own maid and they lived together ever after.
She had her own room in the palazzo on the same floor as Anna's which wasn't at all the usual thing then: In I892.
Not that the Roman aristocracy didn't look after the people who worked for them—though people nowadays don't like it when you say so—servants didn't sleep the way they did in Tsarist Russia or at Versailles before the revolution, but it still didn't seem good enough to Anna—I told you she was American? —so Mena always had a nice room of her own; later on too, at Brown's Hotel.
Brown's in Dover Street, they went there straight after it went wrong, my grandmother and my mother and Mena.
I know Brown's, I stayed there myself.
‘I never saw the palazzo.
I have never been to Rome.
That's all part of the story.
I've seen them at Pisa and Florence, they're only large houses really, rather grand all the same, so much stone and ceiling, hard to keep warm in the winters.
Anna put in heating, it was almost the first thing she did.
The prince always let her spend her money in any way she liked.
She spent a good deal on the house; well, it was his house, she kept it up for him, even afterwards.
That was one of the things we did not know.
She kept up the palazzo for twenty years—two decades.
Imagine that.
And she never saw it again…alive.
Mena knew it all and how Anna loved that place.
As for Constanza, she says she left it, she left it behind and that is that.
If she had stayed, all would have been different; it wasn't in her stars to stay.
She does talk like that.
Not that she believes in anything, religion and so on—and nor do I of course, though I was brought up a little as a Catholic—but she goes by omens,auguri .
Romans do.
Mena didn't mind leaving either.
She didn't mind anything as long as she was following the Signora principessa.
Goodness when I think of the moving they must have done, the trunks they must have packed.
And when they were travelling it was Anna who looked after Mena, you know, ordering in languages for her in the wagon-restaurant.
She spoilt her, people said.
It was Anna's way.
She spoilt my father, too.
‘When he came to see them, Anna and my mother, the first time in London, 1914, the war had just begun, Anna had some rather good Sauternes on the table.
She told me, she never saw a man so pleased by a glass of wine.
He never forgot it.
She spoilt me too, when I was little, and Constanza had everything when she was young.
Only she doesn't care much for things or what she eats, what she wants are people, action.
Mr James says that she is unbribable.
It's a thing to be.
I shall be in my work, I hope.
‘Well, Mena had the best of it—Anna was good to her.
‘Never a harsh word, in all those years,’ that's what Mena told us, ‘how many can say that of themselves?’
We can't, Constanza says.
‘I don't mean that Anna didn't go on the way she did in front of Mena, but it wasn't directed at Mena and she knew it; she only minded her being unhappy.
When Anna raved in front of me, I did mind.
I used to sit under the table and pretend not to hear.
When I was older I often left the room.
It made me feel horrible: unkind and strong.
Mena always stayed it out.
Oh,she was good to Anna.
She got up at night to look at her asleep, to see that she lacked nothing.
That was how she found her…that night at Alassio.’
When Flavia spoke of all of this, it was also night.
They were in bed, Therese and she, and they did not know how late it was.
It was only their second week and Flavia, a little puzzled, a little awed, at times, was at ease now with the alien friend, the tender and exciting alien she was beginning to love a little.
Things were going well.
Flavia was working; the long days in the tower were intact, only in the evening she set out for the house on the other bay; the difficult hour at the cafe was cut, even writing became bearable.
Often she stayed the night.
Not inevitably.
Therese had implied other claims.
Benevolently, she exercised a check, kept a light hand on their relationship.
That night there had been much wine at dinner and Flavia, though far from drunk, felt warmed, free.
As long as she could remember she had heard — servant's gossip; visitors' cluckings; her grandmother denouncing the past; Mena explaining away; Mr James rationally doling it out; Constanza's open dissections.
She had heard; she had not thought.
Her mind had been occupied with things like the freezing point of soda water or the melting point of cheese; later on it became the non-revolutionary redistribution of the means of production and the alternate vote.
She had not thought, perhaps she had felt?
For now she found that it was there, an entity—not quite picture, not quite story—demanding sense and shape: expression.
This rather reserved child, this self-styled future utopian essayist, found herself rattling on about unhappiness and happiness, found herself possessed by a desire to comprehend and convey what had happened, was happening, to a handful of people near her.
The windows were open and the sky was dark.
Lying on Therese's shoulder, staring into near darkness, speaking to the dark ceiling, she went on.
‘Anna was Mena's life.
Yes, we counted; we are the family, she looked after us too.
Now it's no longer the same—for her, it's all over; she's worn herself out and she's through with us, we remind her too much of her.
She wants to go back to her own people with her savings and what we have given her and cut a bit of a figure.
It was because I felt this that I…interfered.
Can you see now?
‘Mr James?
Anna certainly wasn't his life.
We don't know what that was.
One didn't ask.
He liked to tell one that he was a dilettante, ‘I've never written a line for publication nor put brush to water-colour, in short I never did a stroke of work, except for those few years teaching at Harvard, and I must admit that I enjoyed every moment of them—in retrospect.’
That was a set-piece.
I believe he was a real bachelor with a ravishing mistress tucked away.
He always had plenty of time for us.
He was very fond of Anna, though she often maddened him.
He knew her as a girl when she first came to Rome.
She was so pretty then, he says, and full of hope and plans.
She had a way of never doubting other people or herself, it was headstrong, he says, and naive and infuriating, but it was also touching and one let her have her way.
Losing her like this must be a blow to him.
She wasn't his life: she was his youth; Constanza says they had  the same kind of public behaviour and as one gets older it counts.
It's begun to count with her and she's still young.
Your generation.
I don't know what I shall have to share with mine when I get older?
The members of it I knew had all sorts of behaviour, public and private.
Resort children.
It had more to do with their nationalities than their ages.
I could tell you a lot about resort children.
I used to get a pretty good idea of what was to come just from the way they shook hands with a grown-up.
They are all living on somewhere in the world.
This very minute.
Hard to take in.
‘Anna and Mr James didn't meet at a resort, their families were connected, vaguely.
Her father was a lawyer who wrote, he was quite an eminent man, of great intelligence; erudite.
That's where Constanza's got it from, her mind; and her conscience, her touch of New England conscience as Mr James says.
The Italian side were mostly ninnies.
He—my maternal grandfather—made a stand against war, all war; he wasn't very popular and retired early from public life.
A bit like Michel, Michel Devaux.
‘Mr James only got to know Anna well in Italy.
In the I880's—two Americans living in the country of their choice.
That's where Anna's story began.
Only that for him, being a man, it was a matter of choosing.
One fine day he decided to take an apartment in Rome.
Anna had to get there by marriage
‘He did explain that to us quite often, when she had fallen in love with Europe and the prince proposed, she saw herself in Rome; the Eternal City, it was always that to her.
He, Rico, the young man she met on Lake Garda, was the means to an end.
‘That, Mr James says, was her first mistake.
Her not seeing it as what it was.
She would not allow herself to see it.
It had to be a love match.
Life had to be what she believed it ought to be; she had no sense of reality.
It never crossed her mind—that was the bad part of the mistake—that for the prince as well the marriage could not be an end  in itself.
She knew that the prince was not well off, he never made any bones about it.
It was obvious to everybody in Rome that he had to marry money.
He had his widowed mother living with him and two sisters who had to get husbands; both Mr James and Constanza say that it would have been considered an almost monstrous act of selfishness if the prince had insisted on marrying one of the Montecativi or Roccarosa girls for their beaux yeux .
‘That didn't mean the prince wasn't pleased to get Anna.
He would have turned down millions if the woman had been ugly or ill-bred or disagreeable He liked Anna; he thought she was charming and a credit to himself, and he meant to look after her.
But the point that Anna failed to grasp was that without the money it would never have occurred to him to marry her.
‘Anna didn't have millions.
At least she didn't think so; she used to scold Constanza for saying they were rich, when of course they were for Italy.
She spent a good deal—she always did that.
Her trustees kept writing to her, she never paid any attention.
They kept writing to her about retrenchment till her dying day.
She didn't spend very much on herself, she spent on houses, and during those early years she entertained—people lived differently, you know, dinner-parties for English visitors, musical parties, charity affairs; and she spent a lot on other people, on her new family and the poor.
It was natural for her to give people things; making them comfortable, she called it.
Oh, always in the material sense.
‘She never brought it up.
Curious thing—she who held on to so many grievances, never spoke twice about the money she kept pouring out on all of us.
Constanza never had a penny of her own, we were Anna's dependants you might say, well, we never felt it, she never made us feel it.
It is curious.
‘As I told you, Anna adored her new Italian life.
They adored her—that did count.
There was the prince's mother, mamina, the old principessa she was called to tell her apart from Anna.
Mr James remembers her well, she was a sweet woman, all good nature, not a thought in her head, who asked for nothing but to love and cherish (her husband had been spectacularly unfaithful to her, even for Rome—it runs in that family).
And then there were Constanza's aunts, the prince's sisters.
Well, Anna transformed their lives.
They had been sitting at home (unheated, before Anna put in the plumbing and the armchairs) with cousins and priests coming to black coffee now and then while the prince was out on his horse or at the club.
Suddenly there was Anna doing a hundred things a day: the house wide open, parties and picnics and streams of presents.
It wasn't only that.
They loved her.
You must see it—there was all that freedom, so new, so different from what had been dinned into them before.
‘And for them it was exotic.
One must realize that they didn't travel.
The women not at all.
The prince had come over to London to be married—from the house of Anna's sister who was settled there—he hated every minute of it.
He carried on about crossing the Channel for years.
It was diabolical, he said.
I think he was just very sea-sick.
But it stuck in his mind that getting to England was something perilous and rare like rounding the Horn, it must have had something to do with his allowing himself to get so wholly cut off from Constanza later on.
‘But I mustn't confuse you.
In those early years the horrors of travel merely reminded him what a long, long way Anna was from her own country, and he used to say that they owed it to her to make up for it.
‘Poor woman—let her have her head.’
‘Anna wasn't really pining for America one bit.
She did care about American democracy, that was one of her great ideals, she looked forward to the ultimate conversion of Europe.
The prince used to tease her about her efforts to get people taught to read and write; it became a household  joke, Constanza joining with her father, though she herself was much taken by Fabian Socialism as a girl.
The big difference between her mother and herself, she says, was that she, Constanza, was a realist.
The Romans are realists.
It's the one thing Constanza had always been proud of (although she is a total internationalist of course).
Being a Roman.
Oh I can understand it.
It is something.
I am one quarter Roman myself, you know.
I often tell myself, but I can't quite feel it.
One quarter Roman, one-quarter American, one half English.
Only modern Rome, anyway; Constanza won't admit that when I point it out.
Romans like her believe in an unbroken line to the Antonines.
‘Where was I?
The prince teasing Anna.
You see, it appears that they got on well enough.
She rather patronized him, but he was impervious to that; it amused him—he was not unsubtle, Mr James says, but didn't bother to show it—he was amused by her American independence which served him just as well as Italian docility.
They each came and went as they pleased.
For her it was art and her circle of friends and admirers.
I should have explained that she was an intelligent woman.
She was well educated; she had the good memory we all got from her, and she really did get to know about pictures and architecture, more than most dilettantes.
At least my father thought so.
The prince himself was not a stupid man, basically, according to Mr James, but he had let his mind go and he didn't care.
He was equable and a pessimist and very gay in everyday life.
He was quite determined to let sleeping dogs lie.
That meant ideas, understanding people, searching for motives; he didn't want to change the world as Anna did and Constanza in her early years.
He was an all-change-is-for-the-worse man.
‘Anna didn't have to go to her museums alone, there were plenty of young men and older men hanging about.
Anna was quite a flirt in those days, Mr James insists on that, it is quite the hardest part to imagine.
She always seemed to loathe it so…what flirtation leads to.
That was what she  used to rant about, Men.
She didn't hold with going to bed with one's friends.
‘You see, she, didn't even hold with going to bed with a husband.
That's perhaps why things began to go to pieces when the boy was born.
But that was years later.
She didn't appear to mind the first time.
Constanza.
She talked of her duty to give the house an heir.
Constanza wasn't an heir, she was a girl.
That didn't seem to matter either.
‘It's time I began telling you about Constanza.
Chronologically.
She was born when they had been married a few years.
She always says it's easy to remember her age as she was twenty-one in 1914.
She was married in that year, too.
To Simon, to my father.
And divorced before the end of it.
The war, not the year.
But I said chronologically .
Rome in the I890's then.
Yes, Constanza was born in the nineteenth century.
‘From the start she was something quite exceptional, they all say that.
They never saw a child who could read and ride so early.
I mean ride,not write.
Horses.
Constanza was mad about horses during her first twenty years.
She had complete physical courage.
I have not.
She says it is only because she knows when it's not in her stars to be killed in a ditch.
And there were her looks.
Well, you've seen her.
She is beautiful.
Simon used to tell people she was a Giorgione toned down by Gainsborough; there is something lighter than pure Italian.
She says she had a perfect childhood, an almost miraculous childhood.
It might so easily have turned otherwise.
Without Anna for her mother she would have been brought up like an Italian girl of the time, like her aunts.
Anna believed in children being free, she trusted them, and she saw to it that Constanza got a proper education.
At home.
But by the most brilliant people; even Mr James took a hand.
Constanza loved to learn then; like me.
‘Apart from the education she was allowed to run wild.
She played with the children in their street when they had the time which wasn't often and with diplomatic children, a  cosmopolitan lot, like mine, only that Constanza was gang-leader.
She was wild.
In spring she was sent to their country place with mamina and some nice English tutor and they stayed all summer.
That was Castelfonte.
The house was so run down that even Anna couldn't afford to do anything about it and she never liked it much.
The prince came often, he and Constanza loved the place.
She lived out of doors and often went to work in the fields with the contadini .
‘She says she looked up to her mother, her father was her own flesh and blood, they understood each other, they were allies.
In no particular cause, just for the fun of it, the bond of it, like baiting Anna about democracy.
It was all good-natured, Anna made no scenes then that one knew of.
There were no demands on Constanza, real demands, grown-up demands.
She was aware, she must have been aware, she says, of the deep affection her father bore her, but alas she took it for granted.
‘The prince was affectionate by nature, he was devoted to his mother and to a  major-domo of his parents’ days, a man called Socrate, and there was one horse, Archimede, he could never do enough for, but his love was for Constanza, Castelfonte and the Marchesa Giulia.
Constanza doesn't know in which order the other two came but she knows now that she was first.
He didn't show it when he let her go.
‘When they had that first trouble, Anna finding out about the prince and carrying on as if it were the end of the world, Constanza must have been about five or six; she doesn't even remember; Mena does, every minute of it.
It was she who took up the trays Anna wouldn't touch when she kept to her room and had sent for her trunks.
The prince was shaking and the women in the house, the old principessa and his sisters were blaming him, you see they all thought that Anna was going to take Constanza away with her to America.
Well, in the nick of time they realized that all that Anna was wailing about was some French floozy the prince wasn't even particularly attached to (a crony of Anna's, a  censorious old toad who lived in hotels and got everything half wrong, had spilt the beans to her).
So the women got Anna to open her door and the prince was pushed forward and asked her pardon and promised never to see the French girl again and they had a great drama and Anna consented to be reconciled.
‘Even so they had to send her half round the world.
The prince scraped up the money they had set aside to repair the roof again and Anna went off to India with some English acquaintances and stayed with the viceroy and came back with a ruby.
That stone has had a curious history.
With us; I've no idea what it did in India.
In the family rubies mean luck.
I really do believe that without it we wouldn't have got here, without that silly ring I should not be here with you now, Therese, now this moment.
‘Of course it had nothing to do with the ruby itself, the real cause was their all being so insanely superstitious.
When Anna brought it home—some thirty years ago it must be—the prince put it in his pocket.
It was unset then, just the stone.
It was his protector, his charm, you know, he touched it, turned it over in his pocket when he saw an omen.
‘After Anna's return the good years went on.
Constanza says she was sure that her mother was happy.
She could be that; even later on.
She always would have liked to have let herself be happy.
It was probably after the old principessa died that Anna became…unsettled.
There wasn't much scope actually in Rome for Anna; they never let her achieve anything.
Nothing changed.
Women don't vote even in your country, they told her.
And she couldn't do anything about Castelfonte, she couldn't even get them to attempt making it profitable—she never understood about the land, that wasn't in her blood.
‘Then one day she found that she was going to have another baby; she was so wretched that she tried to keep it secret at first.
Constanza was getting on for fourteen and  everybody had forgotten about an heir.
Even the prince wasn't particularly pleased, he said that times had changed, there wasn't going to be a place any more for the likes of him (he detested United Italy).
They had Constanza.
Let her make some splendid new beginning, let her start a new line (in all but name).
‘Anna did get better once the boy was there.
(It turned out to be one: Giorgio.)
She rather spoilt him now and again; but when it showed that he wasn't intelligent like Constanza she didn't like it.
He has turned out badly, my young uncle, a delinquent practically.
Mindless, glib, conceited, all out for number one.
‘And now I really must come to what happened, to what…put a stop to it all.
It's hard to tell it as it must have been, it was so unexpected.
Out of a clear sky, or so it seemed to them.
You might say that this thing had been brewing up for a long time, that the threat was there; they hadn't seen it.
‘Anna and the prince had been married, well, if not for twenty years, not much short of it.
Constanza was growing up and knew it.
She was giving herself another two years, then it would have had to start for her, the conventions and the frills.
She was not looking forward to her coming out as an Italian girl, but she was determined not to let herself get married early.
First she wanted to learn and see, she wanted to wait for a man who did things and was something on his own.
Oh, she liked boys then,she liked boys of her own age, she had love affairs quite early.
At Castelfonte.
With neighbours’ sons.
They knew that she wasn't going to marry any of them, she wasn't going to marry an Italian like her aunts' husbands.
Her mind was open as long as the man had great quality; she saw him as an explorer possibly, or an English statesman.
…She told herself she was going to wait—as long as it took — then choose.
‘You see, if there was one thing they felt sure of it was time: time in front of them.
They were a family living in Rome for better or for worse, that wouldn't change any more than  the world would change.
The world before 1910.
I often think of it.
My grandfather saying that everything was going downhill, my grandmother talking of progress, but neither expecting it for that year or the next, they didn't dream of real change, not in their lifetime nor their children's.
‘One morning someone tipped the truth to Anna.
The old story, the old truth, the facts.
He wasn't a Roman; the Romans didn't talk, didn't go tale-bearing.
An American told her, a young man, one of Constanza's tutors.
He had taken it that Anna knew like everyone else, he was half in love with her and wanted to show his allegiance.
He said something unconsidered, Anna pounced on it.
When he realized what he had done he panicked and she had it all out of him.
The Marchesa Giulia.
‘Thirty years of it.
…The prince going to see her every day.
…A love of his youth begun long before the marriage.
Rome looking on them as a devoted couple.
‘She learnt it all—the Marchese himself tied by his own attachment to a married woman married to a man who loved an opera singer: perspectives of liaisons, sensualities,combinazioni , everybody having their place in the chain.
Everybody, not Anna.
She turned white as paper—the young man fled.
‘When the prince saw her standing in his door, he would not take it up.
For him it was an ordinary morning.
He said, ‘Oh, Anna, what is it now ?’
She asked him if it was true—the long lie?
He didn't bother to deny it.
Mr James said afterwards that this was the worst mistake he made.
They might have been saved if Rico had met tragedy with drama.
That morning the prince felt merely tired and repelled.
It was the wrong day.
‘He made use of what Mr James calls the great masculine resource: leaving the house.
He went off to a shoot.
He stayed away two days.
It was fatal.
‘When he came back Anna refused to see him.
She had locked her door.
Mena was helpless.
On the other side of that  door was Anna, alone.
She had driven herself into doing what would hurt most; she had decided to take Constanza from her father.
For herself it meant leaving Rome.
On their way to the station she would not throw her coin into the Trevi Fountain.
‘She had planned it all.
The Church permitting no divorce, the way open to her was separation.
She had sent for lawyers.
They had made her realize that even with proved adultery it would be a long and uncertain fight before she would be allowed to take away both children as the Italian courts would be reluctant to let the prince's son be brought up outside his own country.
Anna cut it all short, She offered a compromise.
She gave up Giorgio in return for custody of the girl.
The lawyers fell for it.
They called her generous.
‘The prince's entourage did their best to stop her, the sisters, the brother-in-laws, his own lawyer, the priests.
The prince himself was ready now to shake her out of it—he was fond of her, even then, always was; breaking up a family seemed inconceivable to him, a form of hell, a madness.
Anna remained frozen.
She sent him a message saying she would never see him again as long as she lived.
(That came true.)
‘The others hatched plans for him, like abducting Constanza and hiding her in the depth of Calabria.
The prince turned it down.
When all had failed they decided to send for Constanza herself—it was the autumn and she was still at Castelfonte.
She was nearly sixteen; if she refused to go and told her mother so herself, Anna, they reckoned, would not be able to go through with it.
Constanza was tough and had a will of her own like Anna.
They asked the prince what his daughter would choose to do.
He knew.
When I asked her, now, twenty years after, ‘Whom would you have chosen to stay with, Constanza?’
She answered, ‘If I had been told the true facts, my father, there could have been no doubt about that.’
The prince never asked her.
‘They couldn't persuade him.
He wouldn't let them tell  her.
He forbade it: he would not have the child put in that position.
It was Anna who sent for her finally.
Constanza found the house in gloom and confusion.
The prince appeared briefly.
They were alone.
Your mother has been difficult again, he told her, best for her and you to travel for some time—Papa, where are we going? —The tickets are for England.
Be good to her, look after her, bring yourselves back to us soon.
‘That was all.
An hour later they left.
‘That was how the prince behaved.
And Constanza never knew it.
‘And then they were in London, the three of them.
Anna kept to the hotel room; she had told Constanza something unspeakable had happened, Never question me.
To Mena she said that her life was over.
I have seen her like that myself.
How we dreaded it!
We used to duck and wait.
I can see now that she was really very unhappy, terribly unhappy.
I think she must have longed to be coaxed out of it.
We didn't help her much.
Mena did in her way, it wasn't enough, she needed an educated person to put her case to—everybody ought to be allowed to put their case—we didn't even try to hear hers, we only heard the tone.
There she was, pacing, pacing, like something locked in.
We hated it.
I often hated her .
I couldn't bear her judgements, I didn't agree, I don't agree, with her values.
But, Therese, she was so unhappy, unhappy…
‘Perhaps she wasn't so wrong when she felt cheated and outraged and alone?
Perhaps what happened to her was really bad?
But jealousy is wrong?is bad?
Perhaps it's real too and makes people suffer?
 Oh Therese, is it?
Must it be?’
Flavia fell silent.
She reached for a sip of water.
Much of what she had been telling had been brought out raggedly  at first, there had been hesitations, intervals, while she was trying to see, groping for a piece in the jig-saw; and then it all seemed to come to her, she only had to keep speaking.
She had long given up the tussle with French and lapsed into straight English (which Therese, damn it, was supposed to understand).
During the last minutes she had been talking with extreme rapidity in a light high voice.
More calmly, she went on, ‘And what about Constanza?
Now we come to the ironical side of it all.
‘She had never been out of Italy before—now there she was without as much as a full day's notice at Brown's Hotel looking on top hats and umbrellas out of a window that worked like a guillotine.
Well, they had hardly brought her up a tea-tray (with the most delicious things to eat) when she was told that there was someone downstairs to see her: it turned out that most of the young men, her one-time tutors, were dons now or curators or secretaries to cabinet ministers and apparently asking for nothing better than to take her about, and there were Anna's English friends, all those people who had dined or wintered at the palazzo.
Anna refused to see them but let Constanza meet their boys and girls and go down to their houses in the country.
From that minute she was in a whirl.
She began to hunt, she says, she loved it.
She loved everything, her new-found friends and her new friends, the intellectual ones and the sporting ones and the jokes they made and that kind of life in England and everybody being so accomplished and gay.
It all came at the right time, she said, at exactly the right time.
‘Her mother still didn't tell her the reason for leaving home: she implored Constanza not to ask and made Mena promise not to talk.
Constanza did ask, Anna simply repeated, Something too dreadful to speak about.
And when she kept on asking, When shall I see papa?
Anna never said, Not before you are twenty-one; she didn't tell her about the legal arrangements she had made.
She said that if Constanza went it would break her heart.
‘Constanza says that she felt so much for her mother, even if she did not understand then what it meant to her to be cut off from Italy, from Rome.
She couldn't bear things like Anna refusing to keep house or giving any pleasure to herself.
She felt that it was up to her now to protect her mother: Mama, do come to the House of Commons with me.
Mama, won't you give a luncheon for my friends?
‘They lived like that for about two years.
Then Constanza made another leap.
She had become grown-up and again she was lucky.
She was able to slip into a place in an adult society.
She didn't have to go through the debutante stage.
She was able to manage it because Anna fancied herself as having renounced the world and because of their rather special position in England as accepted outsiders not subject to the letter of the rules.
Before her marriage Anna had been taken up as one of the handful of pet Americans and now, although they did not know exactly what had happened, everybody in London sided with her.
The kind of friends she had were loyal by definition, and they liked her, in their eyes she was a woman who could do no wrong (she was only separated, mind, not divorced), they were ready to do any thing for her and when she would not let them they did it for the girl.
They liked the girl, too.
‘That's not beside the point.
‘Anna wasn't rich for England, far from it.
Mr James says the yardstick was the multiplicity of houses in full running order.
Two isn't multiplicity and Castelfonte never was in running order, and now they were living in hotels.
So (for all her personal extravagance) the principessa was regarded exactly as she regarded herself, just decently well off.
‘Constanza belonged more than Anna.
A matter of language.
What with those tutors, hers is English English, her friends’ English; she did the same things and made the same jokes and had the qualities they admired—the post-Edwardians, the young new Georgians of her set, her sets—dash, courage, brilliance, intellectual freedom.
And there were her looks, nobody could forget them, nobody except  herself; she never did a thing about them, as women do these days, she never gave a damn: as my father used to say, she wears her beauty lightly.
Oh, she was an insider in London, she belonged.
At the same time she was a foreigner, a foreigner with privileges, a rare bird—catch Constanza not having the best of both worlds.
‘It was the time when so much began, the new writing, painting, the ballet coming to London.
…She had two years, in the centre of it.
Everything was right—the place, the time, her own age, the excitement in the air and the capacity to feel it.
Many of her friends were in politics or belonged to political families, it was the era of the Liberal reforms and that was what fired her most: she went to dinner-parties where she sat next to men who were going to make a speech that night and there were weeks when she went to the House every day, it was what she had always wanted, it was history, it was important, immensely important and she was seeing it, seeing it happen and that was important to her.
‘There is little of that left now, she says.
I hope she is not right.
Possibly, she says, there will be other years like those—for other people.
And that is sad, too.
‘She had love affairs.
Less pastoral ones.
(No more afternoons in the mulberry groves of Castelfonte with boys like Donatellos.)
It was young men now, older than herself; she liked them tough and full of talent; she was not ambitious directly but found that life with the obscure is less interesting.
And she was careful not to be found out; her recklessness, she says was only apparent: she always thought of Anna.
Only fools—she says, she thought then—overpay.
‘Then it was 1914.
First of all she came of age, as I said, in the spring of that year.
She had known the truth for some time by then more or less, and the legal position, but had  never quite managed to have it out with her mother.
Anna had recovered to the extent of running a house again—a furnished one in Regent's Park—and of going out a little.
She had good days and bad.
‘There had been one flare-up.
According to the agreement Giorgio, Anna's little boy, spent a couple of months each year with his mother and they used to send him over with a nurse-maid and a courier.
He was due again and suddenly they heard that the prince himself was bringing him.
Mena says that Anna was convinced that he was coming to fetch her , and Mena swears that she was ready to go back.
Perhaps he only meant to see Constanza, at any rate the lawyers messed it up.
Next thing they got through the grapevine was that the journey was off.
‘It was then that Anna started on the sleeping stuff, taking too much, erratically—a sort of Russian roulette.
Mena coped with it.
‘There is one other thing that makes it all so odd, so difficult to understand.
This.
When Anna was first told about it in Rome by that ass of a young man, when she learnt about the old truth, the long lie, she cried out it was a bolt from a clear sky shattering her life.
But was it?
After she was found dead and there were so-many questions and Mena told so much, she said to Constanza—oh, I can give you the very words, I shall never forget them—Mena said, ‘One day many many years ago, when the old principessa was still alive, she opened a door and saw them, the prince and the Marchesa Giulia, in the long room at Castelfonte.’
Anna shut the door again, she did not know that Mena had followed her, and walked round the house and came in by the terrace, a smile on her face.
What do you make of it?
What can you make of it?
‘As I was saying, Constanza was twenty-one.
The day after she went to Anna.
‘Right or wrong, I must go now and see my father.’
Anna's answer was, If you go to him the  instant you are free, what will the world say?
That really shocked Constanza.
That one sentence, it made her see something about her mother.
She also remembers her own answer (we do seem to have words to remember), ‘The world, mama, will say what you tell it; it always has.’
She felt hostile enough to be able to press going to Rome that week.
Then: bathos—Giorgio, yes, the little horror was with them once more, got the mumps.
Quarantine.
By the time that was over Constanza was in a fatalistic mood, she agreed to wait until the autumn.
Reluctantly, but then she still loved Anna, although she had begun to judge her.
Only it was the autumn of 1914.
‘The war drew them together again.
To Constanza it was an end, an end then and there—the sole fact that it happened, that people consented to it happening, men sent out, actually going out to hurt and kill,systematically destroy one another 's homes and lives and loved ones, the folly of it, the beastliness, the pain ; the strange mad illusion that any of this, under any aspect, any theology, any ideal, could be right—the staggering, inconceivable, immediate, ultimate, concrete wrongness of it all.
How they felt it!
How right they were!
‘They all did war work.
One can always try to do something for individuals.
Anna became very active and efficient running charities and committees; Constanza took a shift at a canteen, and after Italy was in the war she got a job in a ministry, real work, and she did it; for what it was worth.
She always does—without much faith in what she is doing, like those anti-fascist chores she used to take on until recently (I shouldn't talk about that really).
Whenever she turns her hand to something, she says, it is trivial.
‘Funny thing happened about money during the war.
Anna decided that she must not profit by it in any way and consulted Constanza—she always did: You are my chief heir and it will affect you—Constanza told her to go ahead.
So Anna bullied the trustees into changing her investments, she made them get rid of large blocks of French loan and Russian railways and go into something pacific and domestic instead like American soap companies.
Later on she forgot all about it.
But you realize the result?
We are living on it.
‘In that same first year of the war, Constanza met Simon, my father.
He turned up at a party one night having just managed to get back from Italy where he'd been supposed to be studying and it came out that he'd been to Rome, too, and had actually met her father and knew their story—better than she did—and had sat at the feet of the Marchesa Giulia.
He took them all off and that made Constanza laugh at once, but she didn't have much time for him, she was in love with someone else and he had enlisted.
However, Simon came to call at Regent's Park, he had the perfect excuse.
The prince had asked him to take over a small present; Simon had stuck it in a pocket and thought no more about it, only when he saw Constanza he decided to deliver it in person.
She unwrapped it and it was the prince's ruby, set for her in a ring.
The prince sent it to her with his love, just like that.
Well, it shook her.
And it made her look at Simon again, he was the messenger, he was a link, it had to mean something.
One cannot understand Constanza's actions without taking into account that side.
She still did not have much use for him personally; he, too, was twenty-one, they were exactly the same age take a week or so, and very sure of himself, too sure, even for her taste.
He was what Anna called an impertinent young man.
‘Only this time she didn't.
Anna adored Simon from the word go.
‘They clicked, as they say.
She found him charming and stimulating and good company.
She was charming to him.
On that first visit he told her quite a bit about himself.
Younger son, very much so; brothers Army, one already out in France; chilly place in Northumberland; little money to  go round; parents chilly too, as well as proud and stiff.
No cosy warm Italian family life for him, he told Anna, school, university, crammers, lodgings, his happiest time had been a couple of years recovering from pneumonia with an uncle, the British padre, on the Ligurian coast.
The future?
To be free.
To have an interesting life.
To have the good things.
How?
First of all turn one's back on the bloody war, then qualify for some career.
One of his main interests was Italian art, but he rather felt he'd like to keep that for himself, not muck it up with money and degrees.
He supposed he had better start reading for the Bar, quick and easy.
‘Was it?’
‘Oh, yes, certainly for me.’
One thing he did want was money, enough of it, and pretty soon: ‘Without money you miss most of the pleasures and lose most of the time, and don't let's pretend otherwise.’
His people kept him monstrously short—’ I can't wait till they discover the debts I've made; though as a matter of fact I can wait, it would be wiser too.’
‘On his second visit he told her that she was like the favourite aunt he had never had, or better still—Americans make such wonderful parents, will you not adopt me, please?
She did.
He lived at Regent's Park.
Constanza was out most of the time but when she dropped in to change, there they were, rattling Italian to each other, poring over Anna's art books—’ Bet you've never been inside Sant'Agnese in Oscurità?’
‘But I have, dear boy, and I know the tomb you mean though it is not by Taddeo Duodecimo as attributed.’
Anna prided herself on setting a good table; now, in wartime London, she put her mind to it: great lasagne pies, Virginia ham, as well as all the best fish, game and vegetables her friends in the country sent her.
There was always a supply of the two things Simon liked to consume at all hours, fresh fruit and very good brandy.
And of course every wine he would name.
Speak to my wine merchant, dear boy, he ought to have some of that left.
She was so animated again, it was a joy to Constanza.
‘Then her own young man was at the front.
It was total anguish, she told me, not for herself, but for him .
She thought that he might get killed.
She didn't exactly pray, she kept up some kind of attention, a vigil, the whole time; she never dared let up.
Simon was a help to her, keeping the surface going, making the hours pass when she was not on duty at her canteen.
They walked in the park, it was winter then, endlessly.
He discovered that as a girl she had had a passion for Stendhal, so had he, and they talked about Julien Sorel and Tolstoi and Rimbaud.
‘One day her young man was home, invalided out of the war with nothing really bad.
Constanza found him uncouth and a bore—that was one of the things being with Simon did to one—she broke it off and went to parties again.
With Simon now.
‘Her mother looked happy, and for a while all was good.
Then she was in love with Simon.
She says she has never again felt so close to anyone, he was like an accomplice and brother.
So she judged him—she always felt impelled to judge Simon, measure him—he was a grabber, but then he had never had anything so far, and also he had daring and enjoyed himself so much, so very much, he loved the suppers and the singing.
So all was still well; they were happy (in spite of the war).
Only Mr James worried, he was afraid of what was brewing.
‘Simon played a trick.
One day Anna came in, all emotional, but beaming this time.
Wonderful news!
What the devil?
Your engagement of course!
Simon has told me he asked you and you have given him hope.
‘Constanza was furious.
Anna became agitated, Don't tell me it isn't true!
He has asked you?
As a matter of fact he had, Constanza giving him short shrift.
Simon hasn't a bean, she told her mother, besides I am much too young.
Anna turned all American, What can be nicer than a young couple with their way to make, and what was she for?
That didn't appease Constanza.
But you love him?
Anna wailed.
‘She did, worse luck.
She didn't approve of him.
That was one impediment.
It may sound priggish, but she says it's unwise to go against one's nature, its fundamental requirements, she knew that she could only make a go of it, a real go—and that was what she wanted—with some very extraordinary kind of man, and she hadn't met him yet.
It occurs to me: Oh good God, was she a romantic, too, in her own way?
No more of a realist than Anna?
Surely she was clear-sighted?
And isn't that what counts?
‘Well, she didn't admire Simon—the way she admires Michel now; I can see how much she does, that's why I am so for it.
And he is admirable.
The austere ideal, the man who acts out his principles and endures what is—can you imagine Michel Devaux saying as my father so often did, I've only got one life and so much time, I can't afford to stand back?
Yet, Simon was right for himself?
What would he have had if he'd played the stoic?
Who can tell?
How can one tell?
‘After the trick of the engagement Constanza wanted to break it off then and there whatever her own feelings.
They rushed out into Regent's Park—out of earshot—and Simon told her, yes of course he was forcing her hand, it was blackmail: he did love her so, she was the right one for him and he'd take her tomorrow on five hundred pounds,if someone would lend them to him, and he did rather fancy himself as a married man at twenty-one.
‘On my mother's money?’
‘That's my bit of luck—the trust fund thrown in as well as your extraordinary mama.
Darling, sweet Constanza, let's do it, let's do it now, we are going to have a jolly life you and I, let's cock a snook at the world and the mess it's in.’
‘Yet if she insisted he would wait, he would wait for her, if he must.
You presumptuous monkey, she told him, there's nothing to wait for, I'm not going to marry you.
‘Yes, you will.’
‘Oh,caro why cannot we go on as we are?’
‘For a time she tried to do exactly that.
Anna—of course—didn't know that they were having an affair, so now there were awkwardnesses, unfunny lies.
And Anna was getting restive, dazzled as she was by the new prospect.
Constanza saw it all too well: Anna above all needed a future and here it was, a son-in-law whom she could help to make his way in the world.
It was a frightful time, people were dying and dying—how could one hang on, she asked herself, to one's private plan for a life?
She loved Simon; too much to set out with him in that way—two pawns in a combinazione , a deal, even if partly his own.
She loved her mother more.
She was married before the spring.
‘Simon made a hash of telling his parents—he did hate them so—he went to Northumberland and come back rocking with laughter, Do you know what they are taking you for, my sweet?
You and my darling principessa?
Adventuresses.
Scheming foreigners.
Papists!
That's the worst for them; they're cutting off my pittance if I ever see you again.
‘Dearest boy,’ said Anna, ‘you must allow me to let you depend on me.’
‘Simon went to get himself some shirts made.
May I order a whole dozen, Anna?
‘Mr James was angry (for him) and almost interfered.
Constanza agreed with much of what he had to say; but he did not know of any way of not letting down Anna either.
‘There might have been a religious question.
Simon was not unwilling to turn R.C. just to annoy his people.
Constanza shelved it by promising to take him to Rome after the war for some slap-up ceremony; meanwhile they made do before a registrar.
‘They settled down—rather well- in that house in Regent's Park.
Simon stayed at home working for the Bar Examination, he passed the first part quite soon just as he had predicted.
Then I was expected, that was rather a nuisance.
They had something to worry about then: conscription.
Constanza would have liked Simon to have been  a  conscientious objector.
Simon said goodness knew he did object to being blown to pieces: but, No.
In the end one had to do as one's friends did.
When I'm old I want to sit and drink my wine with them in peace (poor Simon).
So he went and got himself a commission before conscription became law.
‘He was away training when I was born.
Anna had me baptized by a Catholic priest.
Constanza didn't protest, she had become a…subdued agnostic.
Simon said it was a splendid idea, that, on top of my being a girl, would guarantee his people's keeping their paws off me.
(They have ignored my existence to this very day.)
The name they gave me was the old principessa's, the prince's mother, the kind one.
‘Then Simon was in France (an infantry officer in the trenches!).
Anna was brave.
She had changed, what she wanted then was victory and America to come in.
Constanza told me how alone she felt between her mother and that baby; only her friends were a support, some of them, too, turning against the war.
Simon away was the first young man all over again, a hundred times worse.
Simon was so alive.
Her existence was suspense, and prayer, this time it was prayer.
For Simon's life.
(His second brother was killed at Verdun.
They had that news.)
In 1916 Simon was wounded; one leg was smashed by a grenade.
(He walked with a limp ever after.)
But he was home, honourably out of the war, everybody saying how well he had done.
When they rushed to his hospital dragging hampers, he was practically levitating with relief.
‘He was given a job in Whitehall.
There too he did well.
In fact he was quite brilliant and promoted almost at once.
Approval stimulated him and he began to work extremely hard.
He began to get interested in politics, too; Anna had something to do with that at first.
Men who had found him unsufferable a year or two ago began to see his abilities or his charm.
They still said that he talked much too big, but  they did stop treating him as a scruffy nonentity.
He was offered constituencies; it was taken for granted that he would stand for Parliament in the first post-war elections.
‘Anna blossomed.
Constanza was not sure.
He was earning a decent salary and had been made welcome in the Liberal Party.
Now she was worrying about motives.
To his face.
’’ You despise me, don't you?’he said.
‘I thought I was marrying a fellow immoralist; scratch her and it's a New England Governess.’
'’ I think I almost prefer you still grabbing at peaches and silk shirts.’
'’ My poor girl, there's nothing sacred about politics.’
'’ Perhaps because of people like you.’
'’ Oh, you do despise me!’
‘There was more.
Something that she had expected even less than ambition.
Jealousy.
The Yellow Monster.
Simon worked late at his office then went on to places meeting people whom he ought to know, next morning he'd say to her, You were awfully late last night where have you been?
Whom did you dance with?
She told him.
Twice?
What for ?
‘It put her back up.
It was so against her own code.
She warned him.
’’ Well, what do I know?’
(Simon was drinking quite heavily then, even Mr James said she ought to have had allowed for that.)
‘What about all those other chaps before the war?
During the war for all I know?
How can I trust you an inch?’
‘Constanza wouldn't stand for an answer.
Simon apologized.
Next week he started again.
‘You don't love me.
You're a true American wife: husbands come last.’
‘Mr James spoke to her.
Simon's had a harder war than you realize, he's still under a strain.
My doctor tells me that leg of his must still be hurting like the devil.
’’ But why jealousy ?
Goodness knows he has no grounds.’
'’ He may like you to tell him that.’
'’ He ought to know.’
'’ Dear girl, can't you see that Simon isn't as sure of himself as he likes to appear?
He wants you to admire him.’
'’ But I do.
I love being with him.
I admire his talents; I'm not sure that I trust the uses he will put them to.’
'’ Yes, you do doubt him.’
'’ That absurd obsession with infidelity.
He's carrying on like mama.’
'’ And you, my dear?
Aren't you being the intransigent wife?’
'’ Oh, no,’she said.
‘I hope not.
It's only that I cannot stand possessiveness, it diminishes people.’
‘Then Mr James sighed.
‘People are what they are.’
‘Now I must come to this quickly.
For me it is the saddest part.
It changed everything,again .
In the last year of the war there was a girl who had a job in Simon's office.
I won't tell you who she is because the name is a household word.
Constanza and Simon used to call her Miss Mouse because she was so meek and mild and everything Simon did was perfect.
The name was their joke because she didn't look mousey at all, she was a great flashy beauty—there was some Latin blood there too, just what Simon liked—a mouse in tiger skin.
She fell in love with Simon.
Constanza gave him an example of how she thought one should behave, never a murmur or fuss.
Miss Mouse's father controlled a string of newspapers; he is very rich.
Miss Mouse decided that she must have Simon.
‘That marriage, too, was founded on blackmail.
Simon was made aware that he might find himself obliged to stand down as a Parliamentary candidate if he failed to make an honest woman out of the Press Lord's daughter.
If he did, he would have a newspaper empire backing him.
And the money—it was going to be the multiplicity all right, another kind of existence altogether, power, great possessions.
…He said it might be fascinating.
‘The pressures, Mr James told me, and the prizes were considerable.
It was a strange time, with the end of the war in sight, people feeling suspended, nothing appearing very permanent or real.
Simon was convinced, or persuaded himself, that he'd been ill used by Constanza, that their marriage had been a mistake, a youthful mistake, the kind of thing one did in a war.
‘He casually suggested a divorce.
Perhaps he expected some protest from Constanza, a declaration, perhaps he hoped for it.
Constanza did not help him, or only in her way.
She lived up to what she believed in.
‘If you want to,caro , certainly.’
She just took it.
Nobody saw the blow it was.
Such a blow.
‘It wasn't even easy.
Simon couldn't afford to let himself be divorced; Constanza did some extremely quixotic things and they managed to fix it so that she appeared to be the guilty party.
They plotted it together and they were nice to one another during the whole of that time and when it was all over and the lawyers were serving papers, their parting was quite unbearable.
Simon wept and wouldn't walk out of the house.
But that moment passed.
‘Anna?
Well may you ask!
That was the dreadful side.
The present and the future wiped out for her there was no recovery.
Simon was merciful, he told her himself and he gave her time.
Constanza saw his face as he came out of her room.
‘What did he tell her (abetted by Constanza)?
I don't know exactly.
A rigmarole he made up.
No word of the Press Lord's daughter or remarriage—one thing at a time.
It was full of holes but at least Anna wasn't obliged to see them.
She never understood nor accepted, but her feeling for Simon had not been destroyed.
During the months they were waiting for the divorce he came to see her nearly every day.
They remained friends to the last.
‘It was her relation with Constanza that was strained.
That, too, never recovered.
‘Nobody else was convinced by the official version of Simon's divorce.
He blamed Constanza.
He couldn't bear people taking her side; he turned his back on her entirely.
They never met again.
‘It had been arranged that my mother should have me.
‘What about Flavia?
Between Mary (Miss Mouse) and Northumberland there will be no place for her.
The bambina hardly knows me, let's give her, too, a start on a clean slate.
If she grows up bright and interesting we can renew our acquaintance,a discrezione .
Meanwhile you keep her, Mena'll look after her.’
Constanza said, I will look after her, what next?
‘It is true—I didn't know him.
I can imagine him so very clearly, from his photographs, his words, but I do not remember him myself —I should have, I was two years old—it's strange that I cannot remember seeing him bending over my cot, as they say he did, glass of brandy-and-soda in hand.
‘When the actual case came on the judge said some harsh things about the wife.
The father was a busy man, he said, engaged in work of national importance, in the child's best interest he would give the custody to the defendant's mother.
So Anna became my legal guardian.
I don't know how much actual difference it did make.
For Constanza it created a sort of void—no real responsibility; and it tied us all together in new ways.
‘As it happened, the war ended a few days after the divorce.
Constanza went to Rome as soon as the trains were running.
There were no friends; she found her mother's circle dispersed, her father a middle-aged man.
She had been away too long, in another country.
‘When she came back to England at the end of the winter, Anna with Mena and me had moved again into Brown's.
Constanza took a small flat of her own.
In the winter that followed we all had a house together and Giorgio came to stay, and the winter after that Anna took me to Switzerland while Constanza travelled with someone in Spain.
And that's the beginning of the life I remember.
It went on like that, the three of us never quite living together, never wholly apart.
I often missed Constanza, but not being with them both at the same time was easier.
My grandmother was very good to me.
To her, I was Simon's girl.
When she read about his new marriage she said, The yellow press have caught him, poor boy.
She sent him a wedding present.
‘There was often something about Simon in the papers, not only in the tabloids, in The Times .
His election to Parliament.
His maiden speech.
His prospects.
You see, his cousin, too, had been killed in the war, the only son of the West Country branch of the family.
Then Simon had said that his eldest brother was lucky, winner takes all.
He didn't as it turned out.
He died after the Armistice, dysentry in Egypt.
So Simon was now an only son, an eldest son, and he stood to inherit in Somerset as well.
A great house.
(There was supposed to be a Mantegna.)
‘We travelled a good deal.
When Mussolini took over in Italy, Anna decided that it was her duty to make her protest on Italian soil as an Italian citizen (a not too vulnerable one for the time being, but she tried her best).
So she allowed herself to return at last.
Rome, of course, remained forbidden ground.
We lived at Fiesole for a while, then Livorno, Lake Como, Florence again.
I was not sent to school.
Anna had me educated at home as she herself had been and Constanza.
I'm afraid it was scrappier in my case—no continuity.
We shall see whether I've learnt enough when I go up for those exams.
‘That's upon us now,upon me.
The time I know has gone so fast.
Am I skipping?
I'm not trying to tell my life story, I haven't got one yet (perhaps it began last week?)
I'm trying to tell Anna's.
I suppose I want to explain—I almost said, find out—about her dying.
Her story is complete now, isn't it?
It's unchangeable.
‘There are one or two more things I must talk about.
Come to think of it, not much happened to Anna from the time Simon left us till she died—fifteen years or nearly.
Well, her son grew up and not into much; but she had expected that, she had discounted him (when she chose Simon?).
Giorgio popped up now and again, with girl trouble, with money trouble, in a new car.
He joined the Fascist party.
Anna coped with him all right, Giorgio never seemed to cause her any real pain; her tirades, which used to be against the prince, were about Constanza who had ruined our lives by losing Simon.
You see, she expected so much, always had, and now she was expecting some miracle to come to her through her daughter.
Constanza, living from day to day, refusing to make plans, was letting her down again.
‘One cannot tell about Anna without Constanza coming into it.
And the other way round—during her whole life so far everything that happened to her mother went to shape what happened to herself.
Perhaps it is like that in many lives?
To that extent?
‘I said I had come to the time I knew myself.
It's curious, I feel I have less to tell about it: I know what it was like, it was daily life; it doesn't stand out, make a tale, like the things they told of the past.
‘Constanza always kept her flat in London.
London was her base, her friends were there.
As you know she hasn't married again.
She turned them all down, that was Anna's refrain, no one was good enough.
‘Right enough, mama.
Oughtn't it to be something nice and lawful this time?
The kind of marriage my father recognizes when he sees it?
It's his turn, poor man.
Can you produce a choice of eligible Catholic Agnostics for me?’
I think she half meant it, though what she really felt was that this time she was going to wait.
‘One year, I was still quite little, we were in Italy, in a small place on the lakes.
Constanza came up the path from the steamer holding the post, Anna was standing on the terrace waiting, Constanza cried out, ‘Simon is dead!’
Anna threw up her arms and they vanished into the house.
Constanza was stricken.
(She even sent away her young man of the time who was staying at another hotel.)
She told me that there was nothing to be said for death, nothing in mitigation: it was extinction, the end.
Anna wouldn't speak of it at all for some time; later we heard about Simon's will—he left her various things, his art library for instance(it's a wonderful one) —and it gave her some kind of peace.
‘It happened in Somerset, in that house.
Simon's uncle had taken him under his wing, so Simon and his wife, Mary, half lived there.
Simon was drinking like a fish; he wasn't getting on with Mary at all; he was working too much, and they said he was worried as he was about to switch Parties.
That night there had been a dinner for some of his London friends, they sat up late and there was a kind of wager, they went out into the park, it was a chilly night, and Simon in his evening clothes jumped into the water-piece.
Afterwards Mary came to him aghast, ‘Do change your clothes, darling, I beg you.’
He turned on her, ‘Who are you to order me about?’
He just sat on dripping, calling for more brandy.
Next morning he ran a temperature but insisted on getting up.
It became double pneumonia.
He died three days later in a nursing home.
He wasn't much older than thirty.
‘I must tell about the curious will he left.
Simon hadn't inherited yet; the house was entailed of course and as there was no direct male heir (my being what I am) it looked as if it were going to some cousin overseas, only later it became known that Mary had had a posthumous son: he's still a minor—here's another member of my family whom I haven't met, I seem to have an assortment.
‘Well, what Simon could or thought he could dispose of were the pictures.
He'd been collecting, you know, Italian  painting.
Oh,en grand .
Every time he bought one you saw it in the papers.
A Tintoretto, a Titian.
Mr Simon Herbert acquired a Veronese, exchanged his Bellini.
…It used to amuse Constanza.
How he must adore it, she said.
If he'd stayed with us, he'd never have got further than etchings.
For the money came from his new father-in-law.
Prestige: Simon had told him that he would bequeath the pictures to the nation.
Even so, Mr James insists, it's the first Mantegna that counts.
Without that coming to Simon he doubted if the Press Lord would have forked out.
When Simon's will was opened they found that he had left the pictures to me.
Not just for life, for good.
He even advised me to sell them—I would find the legacy a great help in getting an interesting life.
Until I came of age he wanted the pictures to be in his ex-wife's custody.
‘She will look after them and at them.’
‘The lawyers wrote that my father's new family would contest.
Both Anna and Constanza let go at once.
Naturally.
So the pictures went to the nation after all.
I've seen them.
They're in a room of their own called the Simon Herbert and Lord X Bequest.
‘There was an aftermath.
One day an enormous crate arrived at Constanza's doorstep.
A letter explained that it was the pictures Simon had owned before his second marriage and which by rights belonged now to his daughter.
It was puzzling.
When Simon first turned up he didn't have anything at all.
They undid the crate and there was a live Douanier Rousseau, one of his huge bright beast and jungle pieces pouncing upon the room.
There was a second picture, a Juan Gris, very fine.
Who had paid for them?
Why?
It was a mystery.
‘Constanza put them on her walls.
She did look at them.
She loves them.
They are literally the only possessions she has in the world: those two pictures, and the ring, her father's ring.
She doesn't even have a wristwatch.
All this brings me to our getting here, to St-Jean.
I'm coming to that now.
‘I told you that Constanza regarded London as her base, her home if you like.
Lately she had begun to feel that things were changing, or that she was changing.
Her friends were settled, politics infinitely depressing, she came to the decision to make some break; it was time for her to go.
Go where?
Not to live in fascist Italy (it was still all right for her to spend a month or two, with her British passport, with her mother and me and carry messages over the border for the underground).
She had no plan, except to move—navigare ; the price of the future, she said, was to burn one's boats.
‘She gave up her flat.
That was last summer.
A day or two before she was due to move she ran into a man she had known as a rather mysterious friend of Simon's who used to turn up on leave now and again during the war.
It was he actually whom Simon had asked to be the co-respondent—bogus co-respondent—when they were concocting their divorce, it was about him that the judge had scolded her and given me to Anna.
Nobody had ever heard of him again.
Constanza's friend's said he was a myth.
Now there he was.
He had a new name, a new identity, in fact he was Lewis Crane, you know, the art critic.
He is also a kind of consultant that's less well-known, he's supposed to run the art market—lives like a tycoon, but he really loves painting.
Simon taught him.
He told Constanza that.
During the first days they talked of no one else: this man had loved my father.
He told her things she had not known about him—good things, acts of generosity—it came out that it was he who had got Simon on to my pictures, the Douanier and the Gris; he had practically given them to him.
That gave her a turn.
‘Then Lewis Crane asked her to marry him.
She said no, of course; he persisted.
For the second time in her life, she says, he had appeared out of the blue as it were and too charge.
After she had left England, a few weeks later in Milan, she accepted him.
He had to be in Amsterdam next week, he told her, and Rio in November, so they decided to get married in Brussels in the last week of October.
Constanza said she would have to tell her mother first, and me.
‘Anna and I were at Alassio.
We had been there some time.
The regime is tightening and she had been warned that they might no longer put up with her outspokenness and propaganda; her friends thought that she would be safer somewhere close to the French border, but she was taking against the place.
The Ligurian Riviera wasn't Italy to her; she felt in exile once more; the move had been a failure.
‘Constanza asked me to meet her and Lewis at Genoa.
I must say I was rather excited to meet him.
I have read his books.
He is a big man.
Not big as a bear, big as a cat.
Not my idea of an intellectual, or a businessman; to me he's like a merchant in a fairy tale.
I asked him if he had a fur-lined coat, he said as a matter of fact he had.
Constanza seemed all right, and I could see that he thought the world of her.
He said that at moments I reminded him of Simon.
I promised to see that Constanza would get to Brussels on time, and he promised to take me behind the scenes of the art world.
‘So I went back to Alassio and at the end of the month Constanza came to pick me up and to tell her mother.
We were going to travel together as far as Paris, I was to go on to Calais.
You see, I had been doing something about my own future, too.
Mr James helped me.
He found a tutor in London who was going to coach me for University Entrance.
I was to live in his house; Anna had said yes.
She also said that I was leaving her.
She wanted me to say, Please come to London with me.
She might not have come, but I didn't want to say it.
Some days were…difficult.
I longed to be off, I wanted to be gone before anything could prevent it.
Then Constanza arrived.
‘There was a frightful scene.
About Lewis.
I could have  heard even though closed doors—I stopped my ears.
But I heard her cry out, I heard the tone.
‘Next morning I asked, ‘Mummy, we are still going?
You to Brussels, I to London?’
‘We are.
What next?’
But Constanza was tense and cold.
‘I had hoped it would please her,’ she kept saying.
‘I so hoped she'd be pleased.’
Our train went after luncheon; Anna didn't come down.
‘We sat in the train, my mother and I, waiting to get into France.
That slow train with all the stops, full of militiamen and police as so few Italians are allowed to go abroad.
I wonder how long it will be before we take that train again?
I guessed that Constanza was acting courier.
(For the last time.
She, too, has since been warned.)
As we were standing still at the frontier—you know, nonchalant, nervous, not showing it—the compartment door opens and who should walk in?
My uncle Giorgio.
He was all ciao ciao and kissy cheeks; she practically said, Bird-of Ill Omen where have you sprung from what do you want?
He had missed us at Alassio and followed the train in his car, he had something to speak to her about.
I left them, I walked down the platform making faces at the blackshirts.
When Giorgio had skipped I went back and thought no more about it.
Ten minutes later we were in France—the relief.
At Nice we were to change trains: as we're getting up Constanza notices that she hasn't got her ruby, her ring.
Naturally she doesn't want to get off before having looked for it properly.
There's no time.
We stay and the train moves on.
The conductor arrives and the head conductor, there's a search, no sign of the ring.
They write a report.
All the time the train is carrying us slowly but surely up the French coast.
Constanza is handling it lightly, but I know how shaken she must be by losing the ring.
It's getting later and later.
We all share a kind of supper.
By then we realize that we've missed all connections up the line.
The men tell us we'd better get off now and spend the night somewhere.
Constanza hesitates, we don't jump to it, the stops are so brief, the stations look so dark.
Eventually  they practically push us out.
There is still a bus and it takes us to that hotel on the port.
Next morning we know where we are.
Constanza is able to put a name to it, she has seen that waterfront before but where?
She has seen paintings of it: it must be, we are at, St-Jean-le-Sauveur.
We are here .
‘First thing I did was to try to get us organized to leave again.
Not so Constanza.
Ought we to rush on before doing more about the ring?
‘Constanza,’ I said, ‘we are expected.
Lewis is waiting for you.’
‘So he is,’ she said.
‘I couldn't budge her.
The weather was delicious; she liked the look of the place, the last weeks had been hectic.
Every day it was something else.
It was Sunday, she was expecting a detective, the timetable at the cafe was out of date.
‘Darling, there's no hurry .’
‘Once he knew where we were Lewis telegraphed every few hours.
‘What are you going to tell him?’
Exactly, she said.
Then I did ask her, ‘You haven't changed your mind, mummy—you are going to marry Lewis?’
‘I don't know, I don't know,’ she said, ‘let me wait.’
‘I don't like waiting.
I can't bear it.
And there was nothing I could do.
‘One morning she had made up her mind.
‘You'd rather like me to marry Lewis, don't you?’,
‘Very much, I said.
‘Why?
‘We are used to giving answers.
I tried to tell her.
I wanted to have her looked after, have her settled—even if it sounds like Anna—I wanted it for myself.
It would be nice for us to have a home.
‘She listened to me and said, ‘I'm sorry, darling, but I wasn't going to do it for you .
You have your own life before you (rather as you said to me, Therese) and you must make it for yourself.
She has not.
Only when we had that row did I realize how much the wish to please her had come into it.
Again!
I've learnt nothing.’
'’ But she was not pleased.’
'’ That's the irony of it.
As she sees it, what did I come to offer her (and she waiting all these years)?
Marriage to a middle-aged art critic who has turned dealer.
I didn't dress it up; no wonder she took it as life letting her down once more.
Lewis ought to have gone himself, he is a showman:he might have caught her, Simon's friend, as he did catch me.
'’ But mama is not the point.
The point is that I made a mistake—oh, I do have a feeling for him, that helped to confuse the issue, we do like one another—what I have come to see is that my falling for Lewis was not what I took it to be.’
‘I did not ask her what she had taken it for.
She was cool that morning, detached, brutal with herself—people say that Constanza has such arrogance, well, she also has humility.
I knew she would go on.
’’ I took it for something inevitable.
A link with Simon.
I took it for a continuation.
Now I see that it was—marginal.
It tied up some loose ends.’'
'’ And now,’I said when I had taken it in, ‘what will you do now Constanza?’
‘She evaded that.
‘Write a letter to Lewis.
It's not going to be easy to convince him.’
(She was right there.
Fortunately he's gone to South America.)
'’ With yourself?
Where will you go?’
'’ Go?
Why not stay?’
'’ What for?’
'’ I have a feeling that I ought to sit back—one chooses too often—that the next move is not up to me.’
'’ Why here?’
'’ We are here.
Don't you think that fate has given enough hints?’
‘She even took this awful villa, it was offered, it was available; and when I saw that she was firm about not letting any of her friends come out to stay with her, I decided to stay myself.
She wanted to be alone—she never was before—but perhaps not entirely alone.
I just told her that it might be  interesting for me to get to know something of France, after all I was still young for University Entrance and could probably arrange to do some of the work here.
She gave me rather a long look but let it go at that.
‘It was she who liked being in France.
No memories, no ties: new ground and neutral ground, restful she called it.
She found the French mysterious and fascinating and liked to listen to them talking among each other and me to take them off for her afterwards.
We did laugh so much during those months—you must have seen us sometimes at the cafe.
We'd never been alone together for so long before.
I did a lot of work; Constanza read.
Racine, Balzac, new novels.
We used to picnic below Michel's tower, it was shut up—they told us it belonged to a French man of letters—it's more sheltered than the villa.
And we talked and talked, on our walks and late at night, I sitting on her bed wrapped in a blanket, goodness the place was cold.
She did talk about her life—Rome, the war, Anna—all that came up.
but so much else besides.
‘The future of human society.
Had it made an irrevocably false start?
The compass error that gets harder to correct with every mile you go?
How simple and shining it all had looked when she was young and mama was preaching democracy and she went one better with her faith in Fabian Socialism.
The influence of private individuals on events was negligible—and yet they must keep on.
‘One thing I learnt in England: public opinion, the sum of private opinions, does matter, can matter often for good.’
How did we get into the situation of today?
Economic bewilderment in the United States, uninspired government in Britain, unemployment, gloom, insuperable problems everywhere, unspeakable things happening to men and women inside half the countries in the world.
‘In our poor Italy on a comparatively petty scale,’ she said.
‘Think of Soviet Russia.
Yet never make that mistake, Flavia, never take lightly the  one man in the prison cell.’
She believed that there would be changes, a new cycle of prosperity, Mussolini will fall.
‘But when?
How?
What about the people to whom it will have cost perhaps a third of their lifetime?
What about our tendency to slide into the next trap?’
‘Do we know our true needs?
She asked herself, Are we inescapably the products of our habits and environment?
Are we not already too many,simply too many , to be able to change the patterns deliberately?
Who should begin?
Quis custodiet?
It is hopeless.
’’ Constanza, some things have become better?
Which do you think are good, entirely good?
The rule of law?’
'’ Yes,’she said.
‘Where it obtains.’
'’ What else?
The Kellog Pact?’
‘She said, ‘The invention of anaesthetics and the abolition of judicial torture.’
‘Where it obtains .
And that would get us back to castor oil and the secret police; Lenin's Kulaks in the cattle trains, Devil's Island, English prisons.
Oscar Wilde.
Crime.
Ends and means.
Free will.
Character, what makes it, what destroys it.
Conduct.
She would speak of the necessity of holding on to a framework of belief, a reasonable percentage of belie
‘One thing she often came back to was what she called the great divide in all individual lives.
Youth, when death has no reality (she doesn't mean fear of death, children can have that), and our actions and pleasures are for their own sake, for what they are now and new .
Middle-age when the fact of death—impermanence, and our own slackening of impetus—is the dominant, the clef changing the notation; what we do, we do for the n th time.
What will it add up to?
We are concerned then with the sum not the parts.
What is achievement?
Art, undoubtedly.
Religious experience? outside her range.
Science? for what ends?
Increasing human happiness? another chancy one that.
And for the ninety-nine without a vocation?
‘Pessimism, she affirmed, is to her the most rational view, the long-term view.
In the present she mostly enjoyed herself, or had so far: ‘I've been sad so often yet from day to day I've enjoyed everything that was going.’
'’ Mummy,’I said, ‘in your whole life what have you enjoyed most?’
'’ Hunting, I suppose.’
‘And we talked about the books we were reading.
She reread Howard's End , twice, it was so beautifully fatalistic, she said, it suited her present mood.
Among the new English writers, I am backing Aldous Huxley and she's backing Evelyn Waugh.
Someone sent her Vile Bodies , when she had finished it she cried.
She hadn't done that she said since she was my age and came to the last page of Le Rouge et le Noir .
‘I said nothing happened.
Well, Anna came a few times.
She had herself driven over and never spent more than the day.
She brought us Parmesan and Italian vegetables and Mena to do an afternoon's worth of sewing, but it never went right, she disapproved of us dreadfully.
The mistral, the villa (’ When I think of Somerset!’
‘Don't Mama.’),
Constanza's aimlessness.
'’ What are your plans?
Your brother is doing very well.’
'’ All of a sudden?’
'’ Giorgio is marketing a new design for a motor car and they are favourably impressed at Turin.’
‘She never mentioned my having got stuck here as well, but I could hardly look her in the face.
She wasn't even glad about Constanza's having given up Lewis.
‘Mena, is she worse?’ we asked.
We asked that, we did not ask, ‘Mena, what can we do?’
Her answer was, ‘She is tired of herself.’
‘When she was gone we felt miserable, angry with her and like criminals.
‘The rest happened by post.
First it was something good, or so it seemed to me.
Constanza was moved but sceptical.
It was late in the day and nothing had led up to it.
For the letter was from the prince.
Poor Anna had been very indiscreet, the fascisti were going to arrest her or put pressure on  her to leave the country for good, but he had been assured that if the principessa were to live again with him quietly in Rome nobody would touch her.
He was offering her the protection of his house and name.
‘She is my wife.
We are both getting old.
I have missed her.’
‘I said, ‘Giulia?’
'’ Giulia is old now and papa has persuaded himself that he is; he has allowed himself to slip into old age.
Mama has not done that.
She hasn't softened,she isn't resigned.’
‘So Constanza went and met her mother halfway at Nice.
She came back defeated; she had not been able to move her.
‘Constanza's next task would have been to get her to leave Italy…without too much pain.
‘Will it be London?’
I asked.
‘Do I have to live with her?’
‘Before we did anything there was something else.
It was good and bad.
An envelope arrived with only a receipt inside, it was for the ruby ring.
It was at a jewellers’ in Milan and could be retrieved for a certain sum.
Constanza was stunned.
The ruby was coming back to her!
It had been pawned with a discreet firm and the person who had pawned it was her brother Giorgio.
‘It was all too obvious to hindsight.
When Giorgio had descended on us that day in the train he had asked her to advance him the money to build the new car, and when she had turned him down he was furious.
He snatched the ring.
(Constanza has a habit of slipping it off and placing it on the table in front of her.
She's done it for years.)
Now she had to pay up.
She telegraphed Anna to meet her, she couldn't have put her hand on so much money on her own.
‘They met again at the same hotel.
An orchestra was playing and they were served tea.
I don't know why’ Constanza told me that when she told me so little else.
Only this.
When Anna heard, she changed: she became formidable.
She cried, ‘So my son is a thief.
That, too !’
She turned on Constanza; Constanza lost her head, she struck back, she said the things she had not said in a life-time, the things that should not be said.
Anna rose and walked away, very slowly and stiffly—Constanza tried to follow her but a waiter held her up with the bill.
When at last she got out of the hotel Anna's car was moving down the drive.
‘Constanza went back to St-Jean.
The day after we tried to telephone from the post office but could not get through to Alassio.
Four days later early in the morning the telegram came.
‘When Constanza got there she was told that her mother had made a mistake with her sleeping pills, her maid had been witness to that.
Veronal.
The principessa's heart, had been bad for some time.
Mena was unshakeable.
America cabled that Anna had left instructions to be buried in Rome.
And so she was.
From her husband's house.
‘Afterwards Constanza came back here with Mena.
They were both…strained.
They did not talk about it, we did not talk about it.
(At first.)
Let her rest in peace, Mena said.
Constanza was kept busy coping with Anna's estate.
It had to be done through the American Consulate at Marseilles, sixty miles there and back, she was away most of the day; I was glad of that too, we didn't really want to be alone with each other just then.
And when that was over, well, since everybody here seems to know about it, there was Michel.
‘Constanza has been…fortunate.
(She doesn't like one to use the word lucky.)
‘Did you know that Michel actually turned up on that dreadful morning when Constanza was frantic to get to the station?
I thought he was the taxi driver.
He came as a neighbour offering help.
‘The week before we had noticed that the shutters were open at the tower (no more picnics) and we had seen the car.
The French politician had arrived.
We used to refer to him as the man of principle.
You see we had heard quite a bit about him—the locals boggle at the way in which he doesn't  dodge his taxes.
We were told that he refused to take his seat in the Chamber of Deputies because there was something he didn't approve of in the campaign.
‘Mummy, he must be an awful prig.’
‘He doesn't sound like one.’
She had bought a copy of De L'Administration .
‘That's written by a first-class mind.’
‘Well, I didn't take him in that morning.
When he came back later on to ask if I needed anything, I was struck by his face—the intelligence in it, the structure, it is a noble face, isn't it?
Constanza says it's a French period face, Clouet, the portrait of Monsieur Pienne (clean-shaved).
And I was struck by his youth, I expected someone…ponderous, not a man in espadrilles and blue over-alls who moves like a feather.
He is Lewis Crane's generation actually, about ten years older than Constanza.
You know that he stopped by the villa every day asking what he could do for me, offering lifts, bringing books, staying to talk.
The kindness!
And he a writer, not minding about his time.
‘I asked (I was trying to fit in what we'd heard of him) about his having passed out of the Ecole Normale so high, which had rather impressed me.
He was amused, though not very.
He said that he was not a Normalien , he was Condorcet and Polytechnique .
’’ Marcel Proust went to Condorcet?’
'’ Right.’
'’ But not on to the other?’
'’ Right again.’
'’ You did pass out high?
What's the French equivalent of a Balliol double first?
And would you mind explaining what is wrong with being Normalien?
I'd have thought one had to be very bright indeed even to get in?’
‘Ambition,’ he said, ‘L'amour du portefeuille .’
‘You didn't take up a profession, you went into politics and gave them up again?’
‘I gave up front-line politics, yes.’
‘Would you call yourself an homme de lettres?’
‘He laughed and said that nobody under ninety called  himself that nowadays.
I said, more's the pity and that I had seen the term both in the Petit Larousse Moderne and the Figaro Littéraire .
‘Michel laughed again and said, ‘Well, we do have a great many men of ninety.
All the same don't believe everything you read,ma fille .’
‘Another time I asked him about his having turned down Parliament on a point of principle.
That really amused him.
‘I've never had the honour of being elected.
I stood down well short of it.
I see that I enjoy an exaggerated reputation for probity among my compatriots.
I can assure you it is wonderfully easy to acquire.’
'’ But you could have?’
'’ Become a legislator?
That, too, is not difficult.’
He had come to realize that the technique of politics as currently practised was ineffectual and in the long view immeasurably harmful in twentieth-century conditions.
To maintain any form of quality and security in our environment and lives we would have to scrap most of our notions and tackle everything from different ends.
‘The knowledge is there, it needs to be applied.’
‘Wasn't that a tall order, I said; and again please to explain.
What about democracy, what about that technique?
‘Michel said I reminded him of his audience at the time when he made speeches.
Democracy, alas, though still far from being universally  practised or accepted, was already out of date.
’’ But we know that any alternate system is inevitably worse, much worse?’
'’ We might say that democracy, at this stage, is preferable to any current dictatorship and to many periods of absolutism in the past.
Can we say that it is preferable to any system or order of government that might be devised?’
‘I asked him what he had in mind.
’’ A controlled hierarchy, selected rather than elected.’
‘By whom?‘
’’ Controlled by law.
Selected by objective tests.’
'’ What will come first?
The laws and the tests, or the hierarchy?’
'’That is the crux.
There we have infinite moral and political problems.
The initial mise au pouvoir , the right beginning.
It may be impossible.
It is worth thinking about.’
'’ My mother says, As we cannot call in the gods,quis custodiet ?
'’ The beautiful lady whom I drove in my car?
A quoi rêvent les jeunes filles ?’
‘When Constanza was back, Michel took her into Marseilles every day.
I don't think she noticed him beyond feeling vaguely grateful for his kindliness and care.
I don't think they talked much in that car; she was still so tense and shocked.
He drives fast and she's always liked speed.
He seemed to know what she needed, silence, a little small talk to make it natural, transport at the door.
When he brought her back he just drew up in front of the villa, jumped out, opened door, kissed hand, ‘Bon soir, Madame ,’ and he was off.
I went up to the tower sometimes later in the evening for a talk, he had said I might.
We sat in his lovely round room with all the books (little I thought!)
. I asked him what he did with himself in Marseilles all day long?
‘Oh, I get a surprising amount of reading done in the car.’
‘Notes and all?
I do call that concentration.’
But did he mean that he actually sat waiting outside the U.S. Consulate?
‘Well, they do keep her there till all hours,’ And what did they do between twelve and two p.m.?
‘I usually drop her at Cintra's Bar, she can get a sandwich there and a glass of port.’
'’ You drop her?
You don't go in?’
'’ She hasn't asked me to.’
'’ But, Michel, dear, isn't that what the man's supposed to do?’
‘He said very sweetly and tenderly, ‘These are no normal occasions,elle a eu beaucoup de chagrin .’
‘A few days later he told me that he'd been to Cintra's with her.
At the door she had suddenly looked up and said, ‘Don't you eat?’
He said, ‘A coté .’
Constanza said, ‘How absurd, and how perfectly awful of me.’
I told Michel that was all very well but for goodness' sake stop taking her to that white port-wine place, the sandwiches there—though delicious—are minute.
‘Do take her to a proper restaurant.’
From then on she came to the surface more; it wasn't long before she said to him, ‘This cannot go on, haven't you anything better to do than being my chauffeur all day?’
‘And what did you say then?’
‘Flavia, you ask too much,’ he said, and surely I could work that one out by myself.
I think I can.
‘Then there was the day she told him that she had read his books.
That shook him, though he made light of it.
To please him, I said, ‘What's more she really admires them.
You have such a lucid style.
Your ideas disturb her—they are open to misconstruction.’
He looked dazed—he who is always so unruffled, so controlled—he muttered something like fancy her being interested in that kind of stuff.
I bridled (I shouldn't have), ‘Because she is a woman?’
(The other night I had asked him if he didn't think they ought to have the vote in Switzerland, and he said it was irrelevant.)
‘What about myself then?’
'’ A taste for abstract ideas is common among people under twenty.
It wanes.
It is not difficult, as you will learn, to find readers; it is dangerously easy to find disciples; it is extremely hard to find anyone you are personally attached to who will care two hoots about your work.’
‘I thought then of the wife, the difficult woman with the nerves, St-Jean was talking about, whose caprices and  demands had made his life so impossible.
Perhaps that story, too, was inaccurate.
I hoped so.
‘Constanza and I did not really talk about Michel.
She had told me, quite sharply for her, to drop that silly name we used to have for him, the man of principle.
When one morning she told me that they were going away, I can't say that it was a surprise.
The way she put it was that Michel had very kindly offered to drive her to Paris, which she had never seen properly (Simon used to grumble so about not being able to take her because of the war).
Did I think I would be able to manage for a while on my own?(with Mena, and Mr James in the offing).
‘I didn't even want to ask anything.
I only said, ‘Constanza, go; have a lovely time.’
‘Before they went off, Michel and I had a talk.
He gave me the keys of the tower.
‘It's a good place, it's yours.
Use it.’
Then he said, ‘You know we are going to get married.’
After I had congratulated him, I said, ‘You mean you asked her and she said Yes to you at once?
She didn't say she wanted to wait?’
'’ It was just a decision we came to.
I believe it was your mother who said, Wouldn't it be the best thing?’
'’ She asked you?
Like the day outside Cintra's Bar?’
I could not forbear to congratulate him once again.
'’ As a matter of fact I'm afraid that we shall have to wait.’
He had neglected, he said, to press for the completion of certain formalities.
‘The issue seemed academic.’
To put it bluntly, he was not really divorced.
It was a matter of time, most steps had been taken, ‘We are leaving St-Jean to avoid talk; we shall have to be reasonably discreet for the next few months or so.’
‘I said, ‘It will be good for her to get away from here.
Michel, you are a responsible man.’
He said he hoped he was and I embraced him.
‘After they had gone (they left one evening after dark, Constanza having said that there was one thing Michel refused to put on me—he will have to learn to be a bit less scrupulous, poor lamb—so that she would have to do it, and it was not to let on: ‘Tell our friends I've gone to Italy to look after my papa; as for Michel, he's God knows where, you don't know, it's nobody's business and they're used to his comings and goings.’
I said to count on it, what else?)
So after they had gone I began to use the tower.
I made myself the timetable you know.
At first I thought about it a good deal, naturally, and the more I thought the more I liked it.
I have a feeling it will do.
I love Michel.
I have a feeling that this time it will be all right for her.
When she was younger she thought she knew what she was waiting for.
Now in a queer way, a looking-glass way you might say, she seems to be getting it.
One is always warned about the perils of wishing—perhaps Constanza won't be in trouble because she is not getting her wish literally.
She used to be drawn towards political life, she dreamt of the English statesman, yet when Simon went for office she was against it.
Isn't Michel a politician in reverse?
His life is political theory, politics minus self.
He has chosen obscurity? privacy? independence?
‘Half her past life with Italians, half with the English, now it will be new ground as she has said.
Michel's told me a few things about himself; he comes from a family of lawyers and administrators.
There's always been land.
His father and mother are dead.
One brother is a magistrat in Paris, the other farms.
(Experimental farming on Michel's persuasion and advice; it's not doing well and the brother is taking fright.)
His sisters are married to the same kind of men.
He, too, married a girl of his own milieu; they've been separated for many years.
No children.
A part of his inheritance has gone in a number of ventures; his books make about two and six a year.
‘Unlike Mr Crane's.
I told her to think twice.’
'’ Then you haven't got a jealous disposition?’
‘He said coldly, ‘Of all human failing jealousy is perhaps the most deplorable and most dangerous.’
'’ Not worse than cruelty?’
'’ It leads to it.’
‘What else did he tell me about himself?
When he was young he loved horses.
’’La chasse à courre ?’
'’ Jumping.’
‘Do you mean show jumping?’
‘Oh, I gave it up ages ago.’
When I told Constanza, she who has a memory for these things said, ‘Good Lord,not M. J. Devaux who came over with the French team after the war?’
‘So they have that, too.
It is curious that it should have happened, that Michel came upon the scene the very instant she was really free for the first time in her life.
I suppose from day to day Constanza always did pretty well what she pleased, but Anna was always there.
‘I don't think mama will approve of that.’
‘I daresay mama will be glad.’
‘They sent the bill, I must forward it to mama.’
That's all over.
Michel thinks she will be in for a bad time when she realizes it.
He will be there.
It is a new life, nothing less.
She has signed the long lease for the house inland, it will be for both of them,Deo volente , as she would say.
‘When?
I don't know.
I pass by the house now and then but it doesn't seem awfully real to me yet.
I've stopped thinking about that part of the future, I've stopped worrying about her .
We can all start out now on our own.
‘Michel wrote to me sometime ago—not from Paris– that they would be away a good deal longer than they originally planned, complications having arisen.
Nobody except his lawyers and myself know his whereabouts or have an address and it might be as well to leave it at that.
Constanza has added a scribble, ‘We've been running into a rather nasty situation.
I keep telling Michel that nobody is in the slightest doubt that we've run off together, but the fact  seems to be that as long as there's no actual proof, it can't hurt us.
So, darling, keep mum about where we are.
I know we can count on you.
Let's pray we shall be back before you have read ten thousand books.’
‘So I will not tell—not even to you—in what country they are.
‘When it's all done and Michel has made an honest woman of her, Constanza wants us to go to Rome, the three of us, and pay our respects to her papa.
She says Michel and I will be able to sustain each other.
For a minute I liked the idea, now I don't.
Isn't it a bit late to acquire a family, that kind of a family?
What could I say to my grandfather?
Very likely he expects a bambina — even Constanza found they didn't speak the same language any more.
Oh, I know the prince isn't a fascist, he's got nothing but contempt for Musso; Constanza says her father was never the man who had much faith in any trains running on time; but he is a man who can still get favours from the regime.
It's different for Constanza, she's got so much affection for them.
For me, it will be…awkward…unnecessary?
And to think what it all meant to Anna.
‘I don't want to think about that, I don't want to look at the actual scene, I've got over it, haven't I?…the way she died…and all that went before.
It doesn't have much to do with me?
Just because she brought me up.
That was because of the custody.
Very well, I loved her.
I did do that.
Now I want to get away from it, that is the truth.
That is the reason I sent Mena away and kept Mr James from coming—I know it now, I can see it now,this instant.’
Flavia became aware of her voice and that it was loud, aware of herself on her feet rapidly walking the floor at first light.
‘It was their story, everything in it seems to have led to the next thing—now it should have a stop!
I want no more of it.
I can become an English don and…other things  besides.
It is over, it cannot touch my life, it is not part of my story.
Therese—tell me it is not?’
But Therese in the bed was peacefully lying asleep.
Flavia flung herself out of the room.
For a minute she remained on the landing, shaking with humiliation and rage.
Then she took refuge in Loulou's bathroom.
Tears rolling down her face, she turned on the taps.
She threw handfuls of Loulou's bath-salts into the hot water, then emptied the jar.
There.
A dash of eau-de-Cologne for good measure.
Lying in clouds of scent in the sunken tub filled to the brim, that streak of equanimity she had asserted itself.
She began to giggle; ruefully.
And all of it in English!
Poor Therese.
Perhaps just as well?
Just as well .
CHAPTER FOUR
Some Weeks
I
Is everything only what we remember it to be—neither more nor less?
Where, then, and when is truth?
Does it take two to tell it?
Flavia herself that morning had slept late.
And when she had woken and eaten everything the femme de menage had left for lunch plus some extra eggs and some ham, she was no longer certain what had taken place the night before.
Can I have said all that?
She did not actually remember herself as talking the whole of the time—could there have been silent passages when the words were only reeling through her mind?
And when had Therese dropped off?
Had she herself perhaps dropped off at one point?
She was not able to tell.
Nor Therese, too likely.
Flavia was resolved not to ask.
That, never.
‘You are late, coco,à table , you're going to have baked pigeon tonight.’
That was the opening of the following evening, the evening to be faced.
And when they were alone, in the same room, there was no indication whether anything at all had reached Therese's mind.
Flavia, once more and very firmly, told herself,tant mieux .
And after a week or so she found herself able to tease.
‘See you tomorrow, coco?’
‘How not?
For dinner and bed.
No extras.’
‘I keep asking you to come out in the boat, you say you have to work.
What are you laughing about?’
Flavia kissed her hand.
‘I will go in the boat.
Tomorrow?’
That was not Therese's way to treat the sea.
‘Tomorrow there may be mistral.
Today is right.’
‘I can't, it's my essay day.’
‘You ought to have a holiday.’
‘A holiday must be declared in advance, like a law.’
Flavia stuck to her guns and when she turned up next morning was told by the Loulou boys that she didn't know one wind from the other.
No boats out today.
Mama has driven to Toulon.
‘To buy fish, papa is arriving.’
‘He does eat a great deal of fish?’ said Flavia.
' Stupid .
He paints it.’
‘Doesn't he do mostly portraits these days?’
The three little boys danced about her.
‘Portraits of fish.
Dead fish—nature morte , get it?
When papa's away he paints ladies, at home he paints fish, stinking fish, rascasse, red mullet, sea spider, octopus, at night it goes into the icebox, table and all, it stinks all the same.
It de-com-po-ses .’
Having gathered so much about Loulou's working habits, Flavia walked home by way of St-Jean.
On the waterfront she ran into the most assiduous of her mother's winter acquaintances who greeted her with an exhibition of surprise.
‘Well, well, our bookworm in person.
In broad daylight what's more—and looking very charming in it too.
To what do we owe the honour?’
‘I'm having a holiday.’
Flavia said.
‘I fully understand: the day not being Sunday.’
Flavia gave him marks for memory.
‘What excuse have you got to offer for not coming home with us for lunch?’
Flavia hesitated.
‘Caught you.
My wife's shopping over there, let's get out of the sun.’
He steered her towards an awning.
‘We can look at the ships from here.’
Albert Fournier was a slightly paunchy man, probably in his fifties, with silvery hair and a soft, handsome and not un-intelligent face marred by a fatuous smile.
He might have been a minor orator, not quite in the senate, nor yet on the stage, more likely at the Bar of some prosperous provincial town; in fact he had made his early and relatively modest pile in some wholesale business.
He was a well if conventionally educated man, and a man of various interests and hobbies.
Flavia spent a not uncompanionable quarter hour with him talking mast ratio and tonnage.
He drank a pastis , she a citron pressé .
When Mme Fournier joined them, Flavia rose and relieved her of her market basket; Fournier did neither.
She was a plumpish woman, about ten years younger than her husband and still moderately pretty.
She had a fine head of chestnut hair, protruding eyes and an upturned nose; she wore patches of rouge on her cheeks, high-heeled sandals (to Flavia's disgust) and a tight cotton dress.
The whole looked a good deal less awful than the parts.
She, too, greeted Flavia with exclamations and innuendo.
‘So mademoiselle is no longer burning the midnight oil?
La vie de bohème seems to suit you, you're en beauté, ma petite .’
Flavia automatically scowled.
Fournier said, ‘Bohème ?
I'd call it la vie de millionnaire .’
‘Les artistes restent les artistes ,’ said his wife.
Bouvard et Pécuchet , Flavia said, not aloud.
‘A little bird tells me—oh, St-Jean is full of them—you are dining every night at that great barrack of a house.’
Peinture a l'huile—cuisine au beurre ,’ said Flavia.
Comment?’
But her husband laughed.
‘And do you have any news,’ shesaid — he gave her a look, ‘Oh, news, I mean new, you know—’
‘Too much of it in the papers,’ he said,
‘Indeed,’ said his wife.
‘Which ones do you read?’ said Flavia.
In her own house (a villa furnished to the last square inch) Mme Fournier changed into a punctilious, even formal  hostess.
She addressed her young guest with civilities suitable for a personage of advanced years and uncertain appetite.
Just the simplest little déjeuner à l'improviste , you must excuse us.
May I persuade you—another morsel?
I'm afraid there isn't anything very exciting to follow.
Flavia responded like a well-behaved little girl.
Fournier, more relaxed himself, observed them with detachment.
When he had had enough he said, ‘Ça va , Rosette,’ and started a conversation.
It was an ordinary conversation, not an interrogatory; for the first time since Flavia had known the Fourniers, they did not try to draw her out.
If they didn't keep off personal remarks at least they asked no questions; personal subjects were ignored or dropped.
They did float up (because they were avoided?).
Mention travel, and it led to a woman travelling alone; lending a novel, to a circular room full of books—there was that underswell.
Fournier talked to Flavia about her own reading; she must promise to come back soon, they told her, they were expecting a houseful on the Quatorze Juillet , nephews and nieces, young married people,des universitaires , they will be interested to meet you.
Flavia had a sense that they were trying to flatter her, butter her up; she didn't like it, she didn't like the Fourniers enough.
She felt vaguely uneasy, wishing she had not come.
One of their nephews, they told her, had just got his degree in agronomics, he was going to teach, he couldn't afford to farm.
‘I thought farming in France paid well?’
‘For farmers perhaps,’ Fournier said, ‘not for young men with theories.’
‘You need a fortune to farm with those, some people have all the luck.
Well, live and let live, that's my motto, isn't it, Albert?’
As long as you can see them doing it,ma chère .’
Just when Flavia felt that she could decently leave, her host said that he would like to show her something.
‘Oh, Albert, you're not going to do that, she doesn't want to see your bricks.’
Fournier led Flavia through a back door to an outhouse.
He opened the door to a large room completely bare except for a vast trestle-table that filled it from wall to wall.
This table was covered with what looked like a toy village, or rather a toy landscape for there were rivers and hillsides and boundaries and hundreds and hundreds of minute patches of green in every geometrical shape and minute model manor houses and chateaux and farms.
Flavia stepped forward, looked: looked at her host, looked at the toy landscape—it was a homemade, handmade relief map of the vineyards of France.
She ran a finger up the pale blue painted ribbon that was the Rhône, came to the Saône, touched the Côte de Beaune, the Cote de Nuits, bent to read the microscopic legends on the sign-flags, Corton-Charlemagne—Chambolle-Musigny —'; Oh, oh, oh .’
'…and it's so…delicate.
Oh.
…You made it yourself?
It must have taken years and years—?
Is it all there-?
Is it accurate?
Is it complete?’
He said it had taken years.
He was still making corrections; he was doing his best to keep it up to date.
‘May I?’
‘What, my dear?’
‘Look at it?’
‘You are looking at it.’
‘I mean longer…slowly.’
He showed her the cases with other small flags on pins: these he used in the autumn to mark the beginning of the vintages, and the card-index where he kept the regional weather reports year before year.
Flavia said, ‘It must be a bit like…being a don.’
He handed her a magnifying glass.
The sign-flags showed the average annual yields.
Chateau Branaire-Ducru 1OO tonneaux.
Giscours 20 tonneaux.
Lascombes 35.
‘A tonneau is four hogshead, isn't it, about twenty-five gallons?’
When she did leave Mme Fournier was on the front doorstep.
Flavia thanked her.
‘Now you promise to come again?’
‘I will.’
‘To meet our young people.’
‘The young people?’
As Flavia was about to trot down the drive she told herself, The world is not full of bugbears.
Next moment she nearly tripped over her espadrilles, the lacing had got undone; as she was stopping to tie it again she heard Mme Fournier's voice, always strident, from inside.
‘First time that thing's been of some use!’
And his voice now, too, angry and loud, ‘Rosette—one day I will strangle you.’
‘Unless you have a stroke first,cher .’
‘One thing, I'm not going to help you use that girl.’
‘Suit yourself.
I don't think I'm going to need you.’
II
For Flavia these were social days.
Days of social thin ice.
Or not?
There was no one to ask.
One evening Loulou had arrived.
He looked almost exactly (had kept up looking?) like the full-length self-portrait of some twelve years ago.
The stance, so rugged, so burly, so male, little-boy male; the scrubbed primary coloured clothes, the cotton trousers with the buckled belt, the brilliant shirt, the rolled up sleeves.
And the head, the solid round head with the thick short hair, the smooth round face with the innocent look, the sturdy look, the poet's look—the sad, slanting eyes.
He seized Flavia by the shoulders and shook her,, looked into her face and bellowed, ‘So that's the little girl who reads Voltaire at the bistro.’
She grinned at him.
She felt, it did happen to her with strangers, immediate sympathy: she liked him.
Loulou charged up to each new arrival, thumping and hugging in a demonstrative greeting.
That over, the vitality seemed to go flat; he remained a centre, yet had little else to say.
Good to see you, Loulou—Tell us, Loulou—Well then, Loulou—
Dinner was served.
The host filled glasses, made a show with the carving things, held out his plate.
Flavia saw that he ate and drank very little.
‘How was Cap-Ferrat?’
‘Hot.’
‘How was Venice?’
‘Hotter.’
‘How is Fabrice?’
‘Bearing up.’
‘How is Marie-Rose?’
‘Carrying on.’
‘Have you finished her?’
Loulou made a gesture, ‘Finished…
Who ever does?
Except that fellow Van Dongen.’
‘But you sold it, Loulou?’
‘Sold it.
The viscount paid in advance.’
Therese said, ‘He brought the photographs,c'est une belle toile .’
Paul said, ‘She's right, it's a good Loulou, even a spectacular Loulou.’
‘Oh, shut up,’ Loulou said.
His own words were taisez-vous,which was more gentle and sad.
Flavia, in two or three minds, looked on.
The painter—?
L'uomo simpatico ?
Therese's husband—?
What do married people tell each other?
Is it…am I, worth telling about?
What does he know, what does he think?
What does she think for that matter?
Is it better or worse or nothing because I am a woman?
Here they are—their words, their faces, but what, oh what, goes on behind people's skulls?
And here are my words and face.
Yes, thank you.
I will, thank you.
Go to Toulon to  the bal musette ?
All of us?
Too late?
Yes, oh no, I'd love to.’
‘Loulou is tired,’ Therese said.
‘No more than usual—we're all tired—the whole world is tired.
Not that one,’ he pointed at Flavia, ‘that's not her problem yet.’
Manners are supposed to help carry things off.
But what kind of manners?
What is the code?
Is there a code for this?
Constanza says that the novel plays such a part in shaping social behaviour.
Perhaps the novel has not caught up?
What are you giggling about, Flavia?’
Aspects of the novel.’
They went in two cars, Giles' and Therese's, Loulou's Buick being turned down as too showy for the quarter.
But the Bugatti is even longer, said Flavia, look at the bonnet.
That's all right they told her, everyone loves a sports car.
Loulou danced twice with Flavia, once with Therese and twice with Jeannine and sat down for good after that; Flavia danced also with Giles, with Paul and with Therese who was able to show the steps.
Therese danced also with Bobbie and Paul; but most of the time the women in their party danced with the men who between dances stood watching against the wall.
Many of them were sailors.
Therese had explained the rule here that a girl must either accept to dance with everyone who asked her or not get up at all.
The band was two accordions and the tunes were chaloupés and javas valsées , penetrating, jerky, fast, and they were danced with extreme devotion and virtuosity.
The dancers did not speak.
The place smelt of caporal tobacco and hot light bulbs.
There were a few wooden tables and benches and those who occupied them drank diabolo , white wine clouded with crème de menthe .
The men against the wall drank little or nothing, and the most serious devotees danced chiefly with one another.
Therese was much sought; one time the other couples stopped and fell back, and she  and her partner, a slight man with a pock-marked face, received a solemn ovation.
On their way home they first dropped Jeannine.
Loulou flung his arms about her and kissed her lovingly on the mouth.
‘Ah, la belle fille —’
‘Hurry up, Loulou,’ Paul said, ‘we still have Bobbie and Flavia.’
On her own doorstep Flavia, relieved to know the form, returned Loulou's kiss with pleasure.
Turning away she called, ‘Ah, le beau garçon —’
For the second time that month Flavia slept late.
When she got to her desk she saw that it would not do; it was not an essay day but at that rate there would be no essay to write; she had not done her week's reading.
She cut out her morning bathe, cut down her luncheon to minutes, stuck to work till the end of the afternoon (Concentrate, Don't stop: if Michel can do his kind of reading in an open car in the street…).
She could not keep from the house on the bay but went late for a brief evening swim and, elated with resolution, left soon after dinner.
Loulou saw her to the gate.
He did not kiss her good night.
It flashed through her, He only kisses in public.
By the end of the next day Flavia had caught up with her work.
‘Where are they?
Where's Loulou?’
Loulou is trying to paint.’
‘Trying——?’ said Flavia.
‘They've had a row,’ said Jeannine.
‘Oh.’
‘Therese doesn't want him to go off to paint the Belgian ambassador's wife.’
‘Belgian minister's wife,’ said Giles.
‘Don't spoil Loulou's fun.’
‘Why doesn't she want him to?’
‘For one thing she thinks he needs a rest and the children will be very disappointed.’
‘And the second thing?’
Jeannine shrugged.
Giles said, ‘The whole set-up is not for her.’
‘Loulou wants her to go with him,’ said Jeannine.
‘Can you see her?’
‘Therese could go anywhere,’ said Flavia.
‘Indeed,’ said Giles.
‘Anywhere she wants to.
She doesn't want to.’
‘Loulou is a very attractive man—he is , isn't he?’
Giles laughed.
‘How would I know?
Don't you know for yourself, Flavia?’
‘Oh, I do think so, I want to know if he's considered so?’
‘He is considered so,’ said Jeannine.
‘By the Belgian minister's wife?’
‘I shouldn't be surprised.’
‘And is he…fond of her?’
‘Loulou's fond of everyone.’
‘You mean, not really fond?’
‘Quite.’
‘Except Therese,’ said Jeannine.
‘Ah, yes, except Therese.’
‘So it isn't that she…objects to?’
‘Therese and Loulou,’ said Giles, ‘have been married a long time.
They understand each other.’
‘I see,’ said Flavia.
Presently she said, ‘Then why did they have a row?’
‘She thinks it's bad for him to go up there, the North, he really hates that country—
‘The country of his youth,’ said Jeannine.
‘But he was born in Rumania—Larousse says so?
I thought that is why his long name ends in ov.’
‘His father and mother immigrated when he was two.
They came to France to find work.’
‘In a cable factory and the mines.’
‘Did Loulou wish they'd come and settled here in the Mîdi instead?’
‘They would have starved in the Mîdi.’
‘Are his parents alive?’
‘Very nicely set up, thanks to Therese.’
‘And now he goes back to paint the Belgian ambassador?’
‘Therese feels that it's, well, unnecessary.’
‘At any rate she wants him to work less hard.’
‘To work less .
She thinks they don't need all that money.’
‘But she spends it,’ Jeannine said.
‘Therese is insanely generous.’
‘But she doesn't like money and she doesn't like him to like it.
She doesn't want Loulou to want the things he wants: for her it's a weakness, Therese is a moralist—’
‘A moralist somewhat disguised,’ said Jeannine.
‘Not an obvious one, but mark you, Flavia, a moralist.’
‘Yes,’ Flavia said, ‘a moralist at the core—I think I know someone else like that.’
‘You must have had a full life?’
‘Oh, I suppose in a way I had.’
‘Therese, I went to a party last night.’
Therese absently but kindly said, ‘Good.’
‘A soirée : young people, dozens of them.’
‘Very good.’
‘There was peach cup—that was very good; and we played guessing games and I won three times and later on they rolled up the carpet—figuratively—we just went out on the terrace and turned on the gramophone and danced.’
‘You enjoyed that, coco?’
‘Quite.’
‘Therese, I'm going dancing again tonight.’
‘Splendid.’
‘I've taken to it.’
‘What, coco?’
‘Dancing.
It's conducive to thought.’
Therese let that pass.
Then, waking to responsibility, ‘You are not going dancing in Toulon?’
‘Nothing like it.
I told you—paper-games first,young people, students, they're all going to be professors and headmistresses the day after tomorrow.’
These members of her own generation, give a few years, were undeniably pleasant, serious, clever.
A long chalk from resort children.
A long chalk, also, it would appear from their aunt, Rosette Fournier.
There were the agronomist nephew and his wife who was already a schoolmarm, two younger brothers, one having finished his philo , the other his service militaire , a niece who was at the Sorbonne and her fiancé reading economics at the university of Rennes.
They were staying in the house and were joined almost daily by a number of their friends on holiday on the coast.
Articulate, easy to be with; filled with ideas and knowledge; nor could anyone say that they were a bad-looking lot, the young men got their sun-burn, the girls were pretty and well-turned out.
Surely they must be interesting?
Flavia enjoyed the paper-games and, as she had said, the dancing; she went nearly as often as she was asked (Better not hang about too much in the house on the bay); she enjoyed the company…moderately.
Not one of them struck her fire.
Recently we have been learning that young animals, puppy dogs, even a giraffe, brought up exclusively by humans will be unable later on to identify themselves or establish emotional contact with their own species.
Thus Flavia was unable to feel a sense of kinship with people who were not decisively older than herself, who were not real grown-ups as she still called them.
On one occasion she caught her host's eye.
He responded.
‘It's still here.
I keep it locked up these days.’
‘You think I might—?’
‘Slip out?
Come along then.
No, I tell you what, I am going to show you the place where I hide the key.
Then you can go by yourself whenever you want to.’
‘How kind,’ she said, ‘how kind people are trusting me with their keys.’
So sometimes she would sit out a dance or two by herself in the outhouse, by the Gironde, by the Garonne, in the Haut-Médoc, the Graves, Entre-Deux-Mers.
She wondered if her father had ever been there? really been there, in the flesh?
One night after shuffling absently through a foxtrot, Flavia was walked a few steps into the garden by her partner and given a kiss, she quite cheerfully accepting this custom of the country.
Bocca bacciata non perde ventura …
Two dances later (had word got round?) another partner, it was the philosophy brother—or could it be the soldier brother? —kissed her.
Unlike Loulou, this young man did not stop but began to kiss again.
Flavia stepped back smartly.
In a clear voice she said, ‘What's all that about?’
The young man faltered, but managed, ‘If you'll only let me show you—’
Flavia looked at him, but it was too dark for him to see her face: she had to add, ‘What do you think you are doing?’
'Eh, ben —I thought—I—’
‘You don't want to go to bed with me?’
Flavia continued in ringing tones.
The young man faltered again.
‘No, you don't.
You hardly know me, you know nothing about me, you don't like me enough.
I don't like you enough.’
The young man had recovered enough to sulk.
‘Oh—L'amour .’
‘We are not talking about l'amour ,’ Flavia said, keeping the stern face he could not see.
‘I'm talking about liking  people, liking them enough to be friends.
Going to bed with one's friends doesn't matter; but one's got to be friends.’
‘Quite a speech,’ he said.
‘I'm not unsurprised myself.’
The young man said, ‘You are a funny sort of girl.’
Flavia still wonderfully cool, said, ‘That's as may be.
Now if you wanted to sleep with someone just to find out about it, I can understand that, but surely you are…beyond that stage?’
For the first time, the boy laughed, ‘You're right there.’
‘So why don't you go and find a girl you really like and who likes you very much.’
She added kindly, ‘It shouldn't be difficult for you, you are good-looking, aren't you?
There are plenty of pretty girls just now, the beaches are full of them.’
‘I was out dancing again last night.’
‘Did you enjoy yourself, coco?’
‘I did rather.
I found I had a code.’
‘What did you say?’
‘A code of behaviour.’
‘You are hopeless.
But what were you doing?’
‘Dancing at the Fourniers.’
‘The Fourniers?
Have you been going there ?’
‘About three times a week.
But you knew?’
‘You didn't say so.’
‘You didn't ask me.’
‘I don't ask you where you are going, coco,’ Therese said.
‘True enough,’ said Flavia.
‘Anything wrong with my going to the Fourniers?’
‘None of my business.’
‘But you don't like it?’
Therese admitted as much.
‘He isn't so bad, you know, I could tell you something about him —’
Therese dismissed them, ‘Ce sont des bourgeois .’
There were too many angles to that.
Flavia remained silent.
Presently Therese said, ‘Come out in the boat with me.’
‘Tomorrow?’
‘Yes.’
‘What about the mistral?’
‘There won't be mistral.
We are going to the islands.’
‘A picnic?’
‘We'll take one.’
‘The boys will like that.’
‘The boys are not going.’
‘Who is going?’
‘You and I.’
It was a clear day.
They sailed, they landed, swam from rocks in clear water.
They found a place in the shade to take their bread, fruit and wine.
‘Does anyone come to this island?’
‘Only the shepherd and not this time of the year.’
The afternoon was hot and still; timeless.
Flavia said, ‘E poi non se muove .’
Therese said, ‘Comme j'aime ce pays .’
Presently Flavia said, ‘I did miss you so.’
Therese said kindly, ‘So did I, mon coco.’
And added, ‘Don't worry about things, there is nothing to worry about.’
‘Very well then, I shan't.’
To herself she said, I trust you.
And then, quietly, intensely, ‘I do like you, Therese, I like you very much.’
Therese touched Flavia's cheek, ‘T'es un brave coeur .’
Oddly moved, oddly comforted, Flavia said, ‘Oh, I do hope so.’
They saw the sky.
Time to go?
They went into the sea once more, then ate the last of the fruit.
As Therese untied the boat, Flavia said, ‘I would like to come back here.’
Therese said, ‘Oh, you will.’
‘Loulou has put off his journey.’
The engine was on now and they were running smoothly towards the mainland.
‘He is not going to Belgium?’
‘He is going to stay here for a while.’
‘Oh, Therese, I am glad.
That was what you wanted, isn't it?’
‘He needs the rest.’
‘Will he do a…still-life?’
‘Possibly.
One doesn't ask Loulou about his work.’
‘Therese—I am fond of Loulou.’
‘He likes you, too.’
‘Up to a point?’
‘Oh, you know what Loulou is, he needs a hundred people.’
Presently Flavia said, ‘Doesn't he come out with you, doesn't he come to the island?’
‘He's never been out in the boat.
He hates the sea.
Some people do.’
‘The boys don't, they're going to be sailors.
Do they mean the navy or having their own fishing-boat?’
‘At the moment Pierrot wants to be captain of a transatlantic liner and the twins are going to be purser and head steward.’
‘The Loulou gang.’
Therese said, ‘Life is not going to be easy for them, an artist's sons.
They are giving Loulou the Légion d'Honneur , you haven't heard?
It's going to be announced in the autumn.’
‘May I congratulate him now?
Tiens, Monsieur est décoré !
He'll have a red ribbon to his buttonhole—but he doesn't wear a coat, what will he do?
Can you wear le ruban on a shirt?
But I do say good for France to honour artists.’
‘Loulou has a dress-coat,’ Therese said in an expressionless tone.
‘Therese—’ Flavia had been exercised by this.
‘You believe you never tell me what to do, and then you are suddenly shocked.
Like by my going to the Fourniers.
I think you are right.
I've never felt…comfortable with  them, and I think I had a kind of lesson, I'm going to stop going to their house.
Oh, not rudely suddenly, just less often, tapering off.’
Therese thought, then committed herself, ‘That would be my instinct.’
‘Agreed then, no more soirées .
Yet I still don't understand you —remember when you put a stop to my having dinner Chez Auguste ?’
‘Oh, that.’
‘You mean it didn't matter?
It mattered less than the Fourniers?’
‘It wasn't suitable.’
‘That's exactly what you said.
Now you tell me that the Fourniers are bourgeois, well,Chez Auguste wasn't that .’
‘Nothing to do with it,’ Therese said.
‘It wasn't right because of what people might say—seeing you there night after night eating alone, they might have said you had been abandoned.’
‘What people might say — from you ?
Now isn't that bourgeois?’
Therese said, ‘Mon petit , the people who talk don't matter, I wasn't thinking of them, I was thinking of your mother, of what they might be saying about her .’
‘Isn't that precisely what the bourgeois do—thinking of their mothers?’
Therese said with some ferocity, ‘They think of themselves.’
CHAPTER FIVE
Friday Saturday Sunday
I
The car that drew up outside the villa at sunset was of an obsolete make, long in the bonnet, high on the wheels, cared for, faintly absurd, the kind of car that nowadays would be called vintage.
Flavia, looking from an upper window, saw it, saw it on the exact spot where she had first seen Michel, experienced confusion, incredulous joy, a pang.
Then she perceived Rosette Fournier, who normally drove a Peugeot saloon, in the passenger seat.
Flavia pulled on the clothes she had been about to change into and ran downstairs.
Mme Fournier was still in the car, she called out that she had only come to deliver a message.
Flavia approached.
Rosette Fournier was not alone, next to her at the wheel Flavia saw the clear-cut profile of another woman.
It was a classic profile, with the smooth texture, the pure line, of an artefact, finished, perfect, austere.
Set against the high side-window of the open car and the evening sky, the effect was extraordinary, the portrait, Flavia thought she saw, of Isabella d'Este.
Ought to be scolding you, Rosette Fournier was saying, the way you've forgotten us—well, here I am with an olive branch—
The stranger at the wheel turned her face, Flavia saw grey eyes, deep-set and large, the small full mouth boldly designed, the helmet of burnished curls.
Rosette Fournier in unwontedly off-hand style said, ‘Flavia—Andrée.’
The stranger directed a look of open interest upon her.
Flavia gravely bowed.
—A little party—just a few friends—we are counting on you—tomorrow
They were gone.
Flavia managed to recall that she had been asked to dinner and that the time was eight.
She believed that she had accepted.
Several times that evening at Therese's house, Flavia was on the point of saying, Rosette Fournier turned up with an apparition—who can she be?
Or, The Fourniers have got hold of a rare bird, you know.
Each time she felt that she could not say it.
II
The stranger stood in the Fournier's drawing-room in a simple white dress and some jewellery.
Practically a tennis dress, Flavia noted with approval, having no idea who had made it, nor indeed that it was made, nor how much it must have cost.
The stranger was neither short nor tall, and very thin, with a figure of the ‘Twenties, slightly spidery, ineluctably elegant.
Her skin was honey-coloured and, except for having probably retraced her mouth and eyebrows, she wore very little make-up for the time.
The age that Flavia gave her was Constanza's, perhaps a few years more.
Fournier, having greeted Flavia, led her forward, his wife called out in her sharp way, ‘They have met.’
The stranger held out her hand with a brief unseeing glance, then turned to resume a conversation.
It was a formal French dinner-party: best china, a second maid to wait at table, three wines.
The stranger sat at her host's right.
Flavia, from her distance among the hoi polloi, observed that only Mme Fournier used her Christian name, everybody else, including the host, addressed her as Madame.
The atmosphere—at least until the second course got going  —was stilted, the elder generation on their best behaviour, the younger, if a shade sceptically, following suit.
The stranger was talking, the voice was metallic and occasionally high: The tone, Flavia thought she was able to discern, was  worldly : a worldly French voice.
Animation gained, everybody began to talk, Flavia could no longer hear; she only looked.
Her neighbour, after helping himself well to leg of mutton as the vast dish had at last come round to him, said (confirming her), ‘Our guest of honour is a real femme du monde .’
Flavia clamped down on herself.
No pumping, no questions.
Nevertheless it was not too dishonourable to keep this line of conversation from fading out, so she said, ‘You don't like them?’
‘Frankly—no.
I admit that Tante Rosette has produced a wonderfully decorative specimen.’
‘Decorative—?’ said Flavia.
‘Precisely.
The surface is all right — .
But you don't want to have to look at a woman too much—it's too romantic.’
‘Perhaps it is that,’ said Flavia.
The burgundy was going round.
‘Well at least we've got this beano thanks to her—Aunt's been planning it for weeks, ever since she heard that this lady might be coming down here, you'd think she were dining the Prince des Galles .’
‘She is not staying at the house then?’
‘Gracious, no.
At the hotel at Bandol.
Aunt knew her at school; Aunt went to a posh boarding-school—only for a year or two—and she likes you to know it.
It seems that this Andrée woman was the star turn there, won all the prizes, played all the parts, set the fashion or whatever it is they look up to at those girl schools, you should know.’
‘I do not,’ Flavia said firmly.
The stranger was talking with vivacity; she was eating little and without attention; her wine-glasses were untouched.
The pomegranate mouth still glowed impeccably, the sculptured curls lay smooth; people were beginning to look flushed, she remained a fount of coolness.
‘Mademoiselle Flavia—’ her neighbour said.
‘Flavia.’
‘Then you do like me well enough?’
‘I loathe being called Mademoiselle.’
‘Because you can't wait for the time when you'll be a married woman?’
Fournier, who was keeping an eye on their end of the table, called, ‘Look after young Flavia's glass—she likes her tipple.’
The young man complied.
‘I wonder why she came, though?’ he said, ‘she doesn't look as if she needed a free meal.
It couldn't be for my uncle's charms, or could it?
Aunt hasn't let on much about her chum.’
No questions.
Not those sort of questions.
Not like the Fourniers.
‘I gather though that she's not exactly a woman without a history—I daresay Aunt exaggerates—and rather at a loose end at present —and.’
There was champagne with the ice-pudding.
Flavia and the young man gulped their first glass.
‘Flavia,’ he said, ‘I do like you—may I?
I've been thinking of what you said the other night, about being friends first.
It means you are not to use people, doesn't it?’
The stranger had not once glanced in their direction.
‘You think we could be friends?
At least try to be friends—?’
‘What were you saying?’
The men rose with the ladies.
Coffee and liqueurs in the drawing-room.
‘I'll have some brandy, please,’ Flavia said.
The stranger had been settled on the sofa.
Glass in hand and very quickly Flavia walked across the room and took the still empty seat beside her.
‘Madame…’
But it was the stranger after all who began the conversation.
‘Yes, do come and talk to me,’ she said in English.
‘Strike me pink,’ said Flavia.
‘I've heard so much about you.’
She vaguely indicated the room at large.
‘Good, I hope?’ said Flavia.
‘Oh,only good.’
The stranger's smile was not easy to interpret.
Contemptuous? plain cynical? cool, amused?
‘What else?
You live alone, you are industrious, you are well-read, you are a gourmet—as I can see.’
It was fluent educated English and the accent had only a trace of French as well as a trace of English nanny.
Flavia took a swig from her balloon glass.
‘I am rather fond of decent brandy.’
In point of fact she had hardly tasted any before.
‘Tell me about yourself,’ the stranger said.
Flavia did.
‘History is going to be my subject—modern history—Of course it's a frightfully easy degree, but it happens to be what I'm most interested in’(even as she was uttering the words she was aghast), ‘that, and literature naturally, and political journalism.’
‘You are so right,’ the stranger said, always with that look of persiflage upon her face, ‘there is nothing to a degree, unless you are a complete clod, I got mine for a bet—’
‘No-?’
‘At Aix university.’
‘You mean that you are…you are—?’
‘Nothing at all, thank God.
I told you I did it for a bet.’
‘What was your subject?’
‘I've forgotten.’
‘But it is true?’
Flavia said.
‘The degree?’
‘Yes, oh, yes.
But you mustn't be naive.
It doesn't suit you.
It doesn't suit young people.
Go on, tell me more.’
‘Well, you see, it is now more than ever that practising  politicians need the help of disinterested trained historians
‘My dear,not about your ideas, about your circumstances—they appear to be more unusual.’
Flavia taking her own line said boldly, ‘I would like to talk about you .’
‘Have you anything original to add to the subject?’
Her eyes on the stranger's face, Flavia said, ‘Nothing original, I'm afraid.
I could quote, though; there's a choice of sonnets.’
‘No, thank you.’
Flavia said, ‘You seem to enjoy neither poetry nor ideas.’
‘Oh, quite.’
‘What do you enjoy?’
Again the stranger's expression was not easy to interpret.
‘People,’ she said.
Presently one of the young men came to Flavia ‘We want to dance, we need support, Aunt Rosette is against it, won't you go and ask Uncle Albert?’
Flavia looked helpless.
‘Don't you see,’ the stranger said, ‘she doesn't want to wheedle your Uncle Albert into winding up the gramophone, she wants to sit and talk to me like a civilized person.
Go away.’
When the drink tray came round again she accepted a glass of fresh orangeade.
Flavia had just sense enough to refuse to have her glass refilled.
‘Don't you ever—?’
‘Drink?
No.
It makes one miss so much.’
She looked about her.
‘This party.’
‘You mean that you…enjoy being the only sober person here tonight?’
‘The only entirely sober person.
Oh, I think we ought to except our hostess,’ she added with a curious air of satisfaction, ‘Rosette knows how to keep a clear head, a remarkably clear head.’
Flavia managed to monopolize the guest of honour for the rest of the evening.
When there were signs of breaking up, she said, ‘Let me take you home.’
The stranger gave her a look.
‘Towing my car as well?’
Flavia hung her head.
‘I meant in a taxi.’
‘Cruising in the olive groves, no doubt, at twenty-five minutes past midnight?’
Flavia looked deflated.
The stranger ceased to rub it in.
‘May I take you home?’ she said.
Flavia meekly followed, She sat wordlessly, gazing at the profile of the woman at the wheel.
The drive lasted only a few minutes.
Getting out, Flavia said dully, ‘Thank you very much for giving me a lift.’
The stranger said, using French, ‘Merci pour la bonne soirée .’
III
Next morning Flavia did not sleep late.
She woke early stabbed by wretchedness.
As the high points of last night's blustering and boasting passed through her mind one by one, she groaned aloud.
Oh, God .
And sticking to that sofa!
The Fourniers must have been mad—I have ruined their party.
Why did they let me?
Veritas ?
Another recollection—oh .
She will never want to see me again.
I cannot bear seeing her again.
At the moment Flavia could not bear .
herself.
She ate some breakfast.
Work was out of the question, she could not think about it; she did not dare go to the tower, she felt she had damaged something: loose talk means hubris.
She hung about the villa.
The day being Sunday there was no femme de ménage; there was also nothing to do.
Presently she heard a klaxon, two slight short blasts like a morse signal—the stranger: Andrée, in person.
For a  moment Flavia believed that she had come to scold her and cringed.
Pulling herself together she went out.
‘Hello, good morning, I've come to give you a driving lesson.
Not an unuseful accomplishment for people who want to see ladies home.’
Flavia said with a certain dignity, ‘I'm under age for driving.
And I want to apologize for last night, I made an awful ass of myself, I am sorry.’
‘My dear, you made my evening—that ghastly gathering —don't give it another thought.’
Flavia said, ‘You are too kind.’
In the disenchanted mood of that morning it went through her: She is not.
Whatever she is, she is not that.
Something made her say, ‘The Fourniers took a great deal of trouble.’
‘They certainly did.’
She gave a hard look at Flavia and said in a hard tone, ‘Now you're not going to break a lance for Rosette Fournier?
You are not going to tell me that you like her?
You know perfectly well that you don't.
It's not your milieu, neither yours nor mine, so don't let's pretend.’
‘But you went there?’
Andre1e brushed it off.
‘As one does.
I went.
You went.
We're quits.
Only don't wax sentimental over their hospitality, just thinking of it gives me indigestion.
And now aren't you going to ask me in?’
Flavia opened the gate.
‘It's a beastly place.’
‘So I can see.
You chose it, I presume?’
Flavia did not answer.
They went into the dining-room.
Flavia saw Andrée glance at the square of oil-cloth off which she ate her meals.
‘And you also pursue your studies in the salle à manger ?’
‘I don't work in the house, I don't work here.’
‘Where do you work?’
‘In a place someone lent me,’ Flavia said with a closed face.
Andrée let it pass.
Flavia took the chance of changing the conversation.
‘Are you going to stay here long?’
‘I don't expect to.’
Her voice had become fuller.
‘I'm here to do a job.’
‘Didn't you say you did nothing?’
‘I do give that impression, don't I?
I turn my hand to a job now and then.’
Again that elusive air of enjoyment.
‘Call it a mission.’
‘A secret mission?’
‘Of course.
I'm staying as long as it takes.
I'd give it a week; the inside of a week.’
Presently she said, ‘Now I mustn't keep you, I only sought you out in your lair because this benighted village boasts no telephone, one has to be one's own messenger—well, as they say,on est jamais mieux servi que par soi-même .
Will you come and have dinner with me?’
Flavia said, ‘If you really want me to—?’
‘Now you are forcing me into the most obvious remark of the week: I only do what I want—within our poor human limits.
Tonight, then.’
‘Tonight?’
‘I told you there isn't much time.
Eight-fifteen, shall we say?
At my hotel?’
Andrée reversed the great car with a minimum of effort.
‘I have a suite, if it's a fine night—it's never anything else in these damned summers down here—we'll dine upstairs on my balcony—much more romantic, don't you agree?’
That was her parting shot.
Flavia spent most of her day puzzling about the stranger.
It crossed her mind that she might be a woman spy—like Mata Hari.
She dismissed the thought as childish.
IV
There was a half-bottle of champagne in an ice-bucket and two glasses.
Flavia, though glad to see it, felt obscurely affronted.
Not as if it were Mr James giving a treat.
This is out of place, not a…true gesture.
‘Help yourself.
Only one and a half drops for me.’
Flavia did as she was told; then tried not to drink too fast.
Andrée handed her the menu.
‘Order our dinner.’
With a revival of pleasure, Flavia took it.
‘Now, then—’ It was an international hotel menu of the kind Flavia was familiar with from her grandmother's days, impressive enough though the variety of dishes would exceed the variety of tastes.
Perhaps Andrée was not aware of that?
Yes, of course she must be, only she didn't care, she looked down on food: there was no fun in it.
Flavia put the menu aside.
‘But you won't enjoy it.’
‘Very likely not, but that doesn't dispense me from taking nourishment at regular intervals, nor other people from cooking and serving and ordering it for me.’
She refilled Flavia's glass.
‘Now go and choose a dinner for someone who is not interested in food—it's not the last time that is going to happen to you, my dear.’
Flavia gave her mind to it.
When the waiter came, Andre1e referred him to her.
‘You are putting me through my paces,’ Flavia said evenly.
She ordered consommé madrilène, sole florentine and framboise nature.
‘Quelques pommes vapeur?’
‘No potatoes.’
‘Une salade?’
‘No salad.’
‘A little chantilly with the raspberries?’
‘No cream.’
‘Very good, mademoiselle.
Et comme boisson?’
Without a glance at Andrée, Flavia took the wine-list.
‘Half a bottle of number 32, cooled,’ 32 was a dry Graves, ‘and a bottle of Evian water.’
‘Coffee?’
‘We'll ring for coffee.’
‘Your French is not bad,’ Andrée said when the waiter had gone.
Flavia gave her a somewhat grim look.
‘You mustn't make faces at people, my dear; you look like a dog that's baring it 's teeth.
Drink up, finish your bottle.’
‘No thank you,’ said Flavia.
‘My dear, not dog—bull-dog.’
But sensing perhaps the hostility in Flavia, she added, ‘I tease too hard—forgive me.’
Her eyes on Andrée, Flavia said, ‘I cannot…understand you.’
‘You do drive one into uttering banalities.
Is it usual to understand anyone—I'm not even referring to my enigmatic self—at one's second meeting?’
‘Fourth meeting,’ Flavia said.
Andrée took that one in.
They sat down to dinner.
‘I asked for it,’ Flavia said, ‘the teasing and all, after the way I pretended I could get you a taxi.’
‘That was charming of you—it showed such a chivalrous nature.
You are half Italian, aren't you?’
‘Quarter.’
‘How is that?’
‘Too complicated.’
‘But there is an Italian grandfather?’
‘Yes.’
‘Who is quite ill?’
‘No,’ said Flavia, ‘I mean yes.’
‘Read any good books lately?’
Flavia laughed.
‘At least you are not stupid,’ Andrée said.
‘Nor are you.’
‘Pour me some Evian.’
‘Has anyone ever told you—’
‘Probably.’
‘Has anyone done your portrait, I mean a modern painter?’
‘Others are hardly available,’ said Andrée.
‘Have you never thought of Loulou?
I think Loulou could do you—he's very good with eyes.’
‘Ah, poor Loulou.
He does everybody nowadays.
Oh, I forget you know him—and that extraordinary wife of his.’
‘Therese is a truly extraordinary woman.’
‘My dear, how loyal, how English!’
Then, suddenly, brutally, ‘Do you sleep with her?’
Such was Flavia's pride in the fact that she answered smugly, ‘That is my business.’
Andrée said, ‘I thought so.’
Flavia did not speak.
‘A vastly overestimated pastime, or isn't that what you call it?
Perhaps it still has the charm of novelty?’
Flavia still said nothing.
‘Do you loathe me?’
Flavia nearly answered, I do, I do loathe you.
But would have had to add, A part of me does.
Instead she said, ‘Your bark may be worse than your bite.
I hope it is.’
Andrée seemed delighted.
‘You've only had my bark; so far.’
Presently, as if seized by sudden revelation, Flavia put down her knife and fork.
She said in a neutral voice, ‘Why do you bother with me?’
‘What an elegant way of putting it.’
‘I bore you, I could only bore you.’
‘On the contrary,’ said Andrée.
‘I am nothing.’
Flavia spoke with both humility and coldness.
‘I have no…merits yet; and what I want to be would be nothing to you.’
‘How can you be so certain?’
‘You are not interested in anything I'm interested in.’
Then Andrée saw that Flavia was near tears.
‘If I told you that you had a good many things I am interested in?’
‘I wouldn't believe you,’ said Flavia.
‘Don't underrate yourself.’
Flavia looked up.
‘I have a pretty good idea of how you see me.’
Andrée's voice had changed to a lower key, that air of persiflage was gone.
‘I can almost read your thoughts—yes, you are transparent, my dear—has it occurred to you that what you see and hear, my bark, might be a façade?
You are a very intelligent girl and you have read a great deal—no, I mean it; one thing you can't say is that I have been trying to flatter you—but you don't know everything, you don't know the French, the real French (though the Fourniers are quite an example of one kind), you can have no idea of what life among us is like, the attitudes, the demands; if you like, the values.
You have no idea, have you, what my life's been like?’
‘No,’ said Flavia.
‘In a hard school, a façade is a protection.
The favourite French façade is bonhomie, that perpetual guzzling:la chaleur des après-diners , and the couchage .
Well, that doesn't happen to be my style, my choice of façade.
The pursuit of good living is not the innocent thing you would like it to be, my dear; you weren't born in time to watch my compatriots during the war, the energies they put into it, the boys dying Pour La Patrie while the family at home fought about L'Héritage and assured the survival of La Bonne Cuisine .
‘Don't think I'm anti-food as such.
That was quite a nice dinner you ordered, though you needn't have been quite so Spartan—I'm glad to see you've allowed us some sugar with  these raspberries—I appreciated your nuance of not having the fish just grilled.
‘To return to myself, to my particular egotissimo .
If I appear, let us say, disenchanted, it is because I have reason to be.
My life-’ Andrée appeared at a loss for a word.
‘Your life has not been happy?’ said Flavia.
‘If you wish to simplify.’
And then, ‘God, how I hate talking this way.’
‘Not happy,’ Flavia said, ‘when you are so beautiful?’
‘Am I?’
‘You are too beautiful,’ Flavia said in a heart-broken tone.
‘Too beautiful for what?’
‘For everyone.
For me.
More beautiful than anyone can bear.’
Andrée, in her other manner, said, ‘Looks are useful.’
‘Don't,’ said Flavia.
In the full, serious voice again, Andrée said, ‘I told you I tease hard.
And not only the young.
I'm known to speak harshly to my contemporaries.
New friendship does not come easy to me, I feel compelled to play it rough at first—your idealism, for example, I had to find out whether it was capable of standing up; testing and teasing, for me, are a kind of initiation—
Flavia, sitting very still, was not sure if she could trust her ears.
‘We all have reticences, they take different forms.
What are yours?
I can tell you: you will talk about your ideas, you will not talk about your feelings.’
She looked Flavia full in the face, ‘I do not mean your feeling for me, though you have hardly talked about that either.
I mean is there nobody you are fond of?
(Except Madame Loulou.)
Are you a misanthropist, or are you an orphan?
Come on, any brothers or sisters?’
‘Not really.’
‘A father?’
‘My father is dead.’
‘I thought your mother was divorced.’
Flavia looked taken aback.
More gently, André said, ‘You see?
You don't talk about her.’
When Flavia offered no help, she continued, ‘You see??
Perhaps it's just because you don't like her?
More daughters than would admit it hate their mothers.’
Flavia put her hands under the table and crossed her fingers.
‘Or is it that you think so highly of her that you can't bring yourself to cast her pearls before swine?
That would be your English side coming out; I rather prefer you when you are being Italian.
Or it might be that you don't want to talk about her because there is something to hide?
‘Now before you go on presenting that blank face to me, think for a moment.
My dear, you are on the young side—I am only stating a fact, the kind of fact the world sees—to be living in a kind of bachelor's establishment, so naturally one asks oneself where is that mysterious lady, her mother?
Why has she gone away?
Your treating the question as if it didn't exist is no help to you, no one ever got away by playing the ostrich.’
Flavia said, ‘But surely the Fourniers must have told you?’
‘Of course they have!
You can imagine how fascinated Rosette is by everything a woman like your mother does; but that needn't mean that there's much truth in what she tells one.’
‘Quite,’ said Flavia.
‘So I can't say that I know where your mother is or why she left.’
‘Why should you want to know?’
‘You are an extraordinary girl—quite insensitive girl some ways.
If you don't get it, there's nothing for me to add.
Here I am talking to you about myself—a thing I assure you I very very rarely do—while you are shrinking from making the slightest personal communication to me.
It isn't encouraging, is it?
It isn't even friendly.
You are treating me as if I were another Rosette Fournier.’
‘Oh, no.’
‘Oh, yes.’
‘I am sorry.
I suppose I have been beastly.
I didn't mean to.’
‘Never say that, it's the feeblest excuse, like a housemaid after breaking a vase.
Either mean it, or don't do it.’
With some effort Flavia said, ‘I don't want to talk about my…about our…family affairs at the moment.…
’ With reluctance she added, ‘There are reasons.’
Andrée gave her a half-smile.
‘Am I to take that as a sign of your confidence?’
‘It wasn't much.’
‘As a reward you may change the subject.’
‘Any good book lately?’
‘Point Counter Point—Contrepoint as we had to call it in our rigid language—for the third time I might add.’
‘You read Aldous Huxley?’
‘He's not a monopoly?’
‘You said you didn't like ideas.’
‘I like his about people.’
‘I think he knows everything,’ Flavia said.
‘There is no one like him.
Have you read all his books?’
‘Most of them.’
‘So has my mother, though she does not put him as high as I do.’
Then she took another step forward, ‘What would you say were your political views?’
Andrée gave her a look of not unbenevolent irony.
‘In the narrower or the broader sense?’
‘Both.’
‘Well, none in the first: the more respectable French don't go into politics.’
‘I heard that.’
‘Those who care about keeping their hands clean stay away, though we are apt to follow a general in a crisis.
In the  second: the obvious views, you could fill in the form for me.
We're in a mess and nothing is going to pull us out; I am not a socialist; I'm not impressed by your little man in Rome; I don't like ultra-nationalists (I'm not one of those who'd follow the general); I think there is something to be said for constitutional monarchy but in France that cause is as dead as mutton; I have not much faith in the League, nor in democracy as an up-to-date technique of government.
Call me an enlightened defeatist if you wish.’
Flavia nodded.
‘Then you are for clearing up the mess if we could, you are against—
‘Dictators and war.
I am on the side of the angels—that's what you wanted to be reassured about?’
‘Yes,’ said Flavia.
Presently she said, ‘I know I haven't earned another turn, all the same may I ask you a question, a semi-personal question?’
‘I won't guarantee an answer.’
‘Your degree?’
‘What about it?’
‘It's been puzzling me.
You said that you got it for a bet, well a bet is usually something like swimming in the North Sea on Christmas Day, I mean something sharp and brief, while working for a degree, however brilliant you are, takes years.
You have to keep on, it's a way of life, and not being interested all that time—I can't see it.’
‘All right,’ Andrée said, ‘I don't mind telling you.
It was a half-truth.
I did it for a bet—with one of my uncles, his side being that I wouldn't stick to anything—and because it seemed as good a way as any of getting away from home, but I was not uninterested and I have not forgotten my subject.’
Flavia was listening.
‘I rather liked the work—it was not all easy, I had to make an effort, quite an effort, at times; but less than most, I knew I was good at it.’
‘Exceptionally good?’
‘Since you ask, and since we're talking for the record: Yes.
They told me I had an academic future, a considerable future.’
‘But—?’
‘I gave it up.
I didn't go on.
There are other ways, you know, for a girl to get away from home.’
‘Didn't you want…the academic future?’
‘The intellectual side was all right.
It was a kind of exercise, like a perpetual crossword, rather more rewarding.
It's not bad to succeed, to excel, and it's always satisfying to solve a difficulty.
It might have done.
Work is a good deal less boring than doing nothing at all.’
‘What went wrong?
You weren't sent down?’
‘Indeed not.
I backed out; you might say, I ran.
What was wrong?
The life .
My not being a man.
My dear, don't talk to me about an academic career for a woman.
A female don!
She really hasn't much choice, there's the glorified schoolmarm; there's the brave little woman who tries to be a good wife and housewife, and I daresay mother, as well, and makes a point of her pretty clothes; and there's the bluestocking, the eccentric and frump, the mathematic's dean who doesn't know which side her tea-cup is chipped.
As for the wining and dining don, you won't find her , she doesn't exist, and if she did the men wouldn't have her.
Talk of segregation—you will sit with the men all right, you will sit round a table with them talking examination papers, you won't be at the table when the decanter goes round.
‘French universities are bad enough, English are ten times worse.
They sent me to Cambridge for a couple of terms—that's where I first realized I must run—I don't want to blaspheme about one of your famous institutions so I shan't tell you the name of my college though you're longing to know—the girls in their bed-sitters, the cocoa-drinking, the tittle-tattle, the atmosphere of heartiness or domesticity in the combination-room—But, my dear, it must be getting late  and here I am telling you things that you know as well as I do.’
Flavia looked at her watch.
‘It's a quarter to two.’
‘It can't be?’
Andrée said.
‘How flattering for both of us But you are cold?’
‘I don't think so,’ Flavia said.
‘You're shivering.’
Andrée touched her arm.
‘Chilled to the bone.’
She went indoors and returned with an enormous, rough-looking navy-blue sweater.
‘There, put that on at once—catch it.’
Flavia gave a gasp of surprise.
The sweater was as light as a puff and as smooth as a bird to touch.
‘Keep it,’ Andrée said.
‘It suits you, go and look at yourself.
I'm giving it to you.’
‘Oh, no?’
‘It's yours.
It's an Hermes.’
‘The messenger of the gods?’
‘The shop.’
A minute or so later Flavia said, ‘Time for me to go.’
‘How?
How did you come?
I should have asked.’
‘By the bus.
I'm going to walk.’
‘All of twelve kilometers?
I'm going to drive you home.
That's to be our custom.’
They went by the sea route; the night was clear and calm.
They sat side by side in silence.
Outside the house Andrée turned the car; as Flavia got out, she did too.
‘Good night, Flavia.’
She kissed her on the mouth.
It was a chaste kiss.
Flavia's heart turned over.
For a long time she stayed outside keeping from sleep to hold that moment, hold it as being now, not letting it go to be yesterday, go into the past.
CHAPTER SIX
Monday Tuesday Wednesday
I
Next day was Monday.
Flavia did not go to the tower.
She did not go to the sea.
She stayed at the villa waiting for the long car.
The sense of happiness had remained.
At times she heard a voice clearly, She cannot mean it.
Another voice answered,Don't underrate yourself .
The morning went.
The afternoon began.
The sun-set hour.
When it was nearly dark, Flavia gave it another ten minutes, another five; five more.
Then she locked up and went to the house on the bay.
Although it was late, the Loulou boys were still hopping about.
‘You didn't come yesterday.’
‘She didn't come the day before yesterday.’
‘Did you find somebody else then to give you your dinner?’
‘Maman asked after you.’
‘Papa asked after you.’
‘Not today!’
‘Today she must mind her step.’
‘Papa is in a temper.’
‘A fil-thy temper—he has thrown them all out, he has thrown them all out of the window.’
‘Is something the matter?’
Flavia asked.
‘Fifty dozen tuberoses—five hundred tuberoses—five hundred dozen tuberoses—last night they went into the icebox, this morning they were brown .’
‘White into the ice-box, brown out of the oven, five thousand white flowers—they stank .’
‘They stank worse than fish, worse than fish, five thousand francs worth of white flowers, five big pots of white oil paint—’
‘Papa isn't shouting about the francs, it is the arrangement,the flo-ral ar-ran-ge-ment , he cannot paint fifty dozen white flowers when they are brown.’
‘And stink.’
Flavia went up to the terrace and quietly took her place.
Therese greeted her kindly.
Loulou was not there.
‘Monsieur n'a pas faim ,’ said the maid who brought their soup.
There was little conversation, and presently the maid returned to say, ‘Monsieur demande Madame.’
Therese rose at once.
Paul said, ‘It really is a disaster.
He will attempt these monstrous huge things.’
‘Loulou is in arrears with his dealer,’ Giles said.
‘This thing would have helped.’
‘It wouldn't go by the square foot?’
Flavia said.
‘As a matter of fact it does.
Contracts go by the square inch .’
‘Hadn't we better leave?’
Bobbie said.
‘Therese would want us to finish dinner first.’
They decided to do that and leave afterwards.
At the gate Flavia said, ‘Will he go to Belgium now?’
‘Very likely.’
At the villa, she found a screw of paper in the flowerpot where she had left the key.
Feeling quite sick already, Flavia undid the scrap.
Disappointed to find that Mme L. has stolen a march on me.
(Again!)
A.
II
The next morning too was wretched.
When Flavia remembered that tomorrow was going to be her essay day she ran up to the tower to fetch some essential-books which she set out with grim awareness on the dining-room table at the villa.
She made a few attempts and found that she could not work, she could not even read.
What does one do, she asked herself.
What can one do?
At 2 p.m., rather than face more questions from the femme ménage, she ladled the food that had been left for her to eat into one bowl and carried it some way down the hill to a place where she knew it would be picked up by stray dogs and cats.
Half an hour later she could hold out no longer: she drank a cup of coffee and two glasses of cold water, put some money in her pocket and walked into St-Jean.
It was very hot.
The port lay somnolent, the shops were shut.
So was the post office.
She waited outside in the street, shaking in anticipation of the telephone call.
Soon she was joined by a peasant woman dressed in black who told her that she was trying to get on to the hospital in Toulon for news of her son.
As the woman spoke she cried.
Flavia looked and listened as if to events taking place at one remove.
The woman pressed a paper into Flavia's hand.
‘You are going to help me, the post ladies have no patience.’
Duly the office opened.
Flavia, none too practised herself, managed to get the number.
It took time.
She stood in a dark stifling cell, the woman mumbling by her side.
‘You will speak for me, 'she said.
There was an answer.
Flavia whispered urgently, ‘Whom do I ask for?’
‘Rintini, Joseph.’
There was a wait and another voice and another wait.
Then, ‘There's been no change, you may inquire again in the evening.’
Flavia transmitted, the woman cried some more and said, ‘Go and ask what I owe them.’
Flavia did.
The  woman counted out the sum conscientiously.
Flavia said, ‘I hope you will have good news this evening.’
‘It's nothing to you,’ said the woman.
Flavia followed her out of the post office.
The air was cleaner, the heat different.
She had been spared telephoning after all—she realized that she did not even know whom to ask for at the hotel in Bandol.
She walked on to the Fourniers' house, dragging every step.
Constanza would have carried it off, casually, lightly: By the way your charming guest the other night—so stupid of me—
But when Flavia turned into the Fourniers' drive she saw that she had been spared that errand as well, for there, shining, immobile, unconcerned, stood the long car.
Her first impulse was to turn and flee.
Then she saw that the verandah doors were open and inside in the shade on two wicker-chairs, talking earnestly to one another, were Rosette and Andrée.
Flavia's second impulse was to flee.
Too late.
She had been seen.
She walked straight in, feeling she had never needed as much courage in her life before.
Madame Fournier did not open fire.
She seemed to wait for an initiative from her friend.
Andrée took her time.
She looked up lazily then said in her cooler manner.
‘Talk of mad dogs and Englishmen, how brave of you to go visiting at this hour, Rosette and I haven't stirred a finger for ages.’
Flavia could think of nothing at all to say.
‘Albert and the others are out, he's taken them to le Lavandou for the day.’
When this didn't lead to anything, Rosette continued, ‘They'll be so sorry they missed you.’
‘That's the remark you ought to have made,’ said Andrée.
‘Yes.’
‘It's heat-stroke—Rosette, you'd better get her a long cool drink, go and make her some lemonade.’
Rosette Fournier got up to do as she was told.
‘Well, big-eyes?’
Flavia said, ‘I would like to speak to you.’
‘Well?’
Flavia looked at the open doors.
Rosette could be heard talking in the kitchen.
‘Not here.’
Andrée shrugged.
‘My dear, this is not my house.’
‘Couldn't you leave?’
‘Like that?
With you?
You must be mad.
Besides I promised Rosie-Posie to stay for tea.’
Flavia turned away, took a few steps, came back and stood still: keeping her eyes on Andrée's face she said with complete intensity, ‘I love you.’
Andrée from her chair said, ‘Well?’
‘Well?’
Andrée said again.
Flavia said, ‘I had to tell you.’
‘And did.
What next?’
‘I am asking you—after this solemn declaration, what next?’
‘I don't know,’ Flavia said.
‘Nothing.’
‘Are you in the habit of making that world shaking announcement?’
‘No!‘
‘Then since you appear to be singling me out, what do you expect me to do?
Fall in your arms?
Exchange rings?
Are you sure you've got your first premise right?
Aren't you going on from a mistake?
We're of the same sex, let me remind you, we're not supposed to fall in love with one another.
Most women's tastes are not as catholic as Therese Loulou's.’
Flavia, almost relieved to have reached as much firm ground, said, ‘I didn't think you were…
I didn't know about…your inclinations.
I didn't feel…
I almost knew it was not possible.’
‘How sure you are of everything.
But I'm not talking about my inclinations, as you call them.
Of course you know nothing about them.
Again unlike Madame Loulou, they are not generally known.
What I was talking about are your inclinations and I would suggest that you know nothing about them at all.’
‘But I do.’
‘You are having the kind of crush that is natural in a girl your age, and if you hadn't been seduced by a certain person (whose name I shall not mention again since you dislike it so) that would be that.’
‘No—no.’
‘You have not reached the stage at which you can know.
You've had no conclusive experience, have you?
You haven't had an affair with a man—that's understood at your age—but have you had a feeling for a man?’
Flavia said, ‘I don't think I connect men with…love.’
Then she thought of Loulou and felt confused.
‘So until you know a little more of what it's all about, don't expect me to take you seriously.
A second point—impudence or naivety?
You come here to offer me your undying devotion while you have an entanglement with the lady whom we don't seem to be able to keep out of the conversation.’
‘It has ceased to exist,’ Flavia said grandly.
‘Has it?’
Andrée said.
‘How very sudden.’
‘I'd do anything you want me to.’
‘That's what people say.
Do you want me to take advantage of it?’
‘Yes,’ said Flavia.
‘Don't wait for orders.
It's up to you, it's always up to the suitor to present an acceptable brief.
And now we've had enough of the subject.’
Flavia said, ‘Your head seen against the white wall, it shows up the structure, I know now whom you remind me of, I saw it when I first met you, but could not place it, it's not a literal resemblance, it's something basic, you do look like someone I know.’
‘Who is it?’
‘It's a man.
You have heard of him—they must have talked about him.
Michel.’
Andrée said, ‘Oh, yes, we've been told that before, people seemed to find it surprising.
It isn't.
Michel and I were cousins, not first cousins of course—’
You are related to Michel?’
‘Why not?’
‘Your name, then?’
‘Devaux of course.’
Flavia said, ‘That's rather delightful.
And now I do see—the car?
Only that yours is a Panhard and his a Delahaye, the year must be the same.
Is it a family taste?’
‘A shared taste,’ Andrée said.
Then not ungently, ‘I ought to tell you, they did talk to me about him, it can't be news to you what they are saying, that Michel has run off with your mother and that he wants to marry her.
Which doesn't mean that I am convinced, I would never rely on Rosie-Posie's gossip alone.’
And before allowing Flavia to indicate a stand, ‘By the way what is she doing?’
And suddenly in French, in a voice as shrill as a station-master's whistle, ‘Rosette—come back! that lemonade must be getting hot.’
Flavia said quickly, ‘You will let me see you again?’
‘Very likely.’
‘When?’
‘Bull-dog.
Tomorrow evening.
I'll call for you—no, come down to the port and look for me, I may be there.
If you've been good.’
III
Flavia walked away from the Fourniers' house seeing the next stage of her course.
She had never been to the house on the bay at that end of the afternoon, and found Therese abstracted and busy.
She was taking crates out of her car; Flavia gave her a hand.
‘He's started again and he's pleased about it,’ Therese said.
She had been to most of the early-morning markets as far as Hyères.
‘Let's hope they will keep this time.’
They had been advised not to keep them too cold and also to cover them with  waxed paper.
‘Now he has got fascinated by the paper as well, he's made it look like a field of bridal veils, but it's going to be difficult to keep it in place when we move it at night.
You have no idea how heavy flowers can be.’
When they had finished unloading, Therese said, ‘My coco, I shall be helping Loulou for the next week or two, I don't like leaving him much when he's working on those big things.
Afterwards you and I will have a day on the island.’
Flavia said, ‘I have to tell you something.’
Still preoccupied, Therese said, ‘Yes, coco?’
After Flavia had stated, baldly, that she had fallen in love with someone, Therese gave her a look.
‘Good,’ she said, ‘I hope it will go well for you.’
There was a pause while Flavia waited, half hoped, for the questions which she realized Therese would not ask; while Therese too, perhaps, was waiting.
When it was clear to each that the other would not speak, Therese said, ‘But you don't look happy, my darling, that's often the way it goes.
It's seldom easy and never for long.
But one comes out of it.
Is there anything I can do to help?’
‘Oh no,’ Flavia said, but had the grace to add, ‘thank you.’
‘We shall be seeing you at dinner presently?’
‘I don't know,’ Flavia said with open wretchedness, ‘I don't think I ought to come so often now.’
Therese said, ‘That is all right, coco, come when you feel you can.
Well,bon courage , and good luck.’
Going through the gate Flavia nearly cried.
She told herself, it would not really be doing something for Andrée if it did not come hard.
It was cooler and beginning to get dark.
Flavia set out on an aimless walk.
She remembered the early summer when she was really alone without anyone to talk to: how fast the days went, too fast.
Now it was the hour when they brought out the pastis and big water-jug and lit the scented candles on the terrace above the bay and Paul and Jeannine and the  rest of them were beginning to arrive and Therese was telling them what there would be to eat.
Flavia longed to go back and slip into her place just as the soup was brought and hear them telling about Loulou's day.
But she felt she was under orders (there was some comfort in that) to spend the evening in the wilderness.
She was headed towards Bandol but checked herself halfway and returned in a semi-circle.
It struck ten o'clock as she walked into St-Jean.
She was hanging about the waterfront when she heard steps behind her.
‘Flavia—what luck!’
It was the Fourniers' nephew.
He looked flushed and pleased.
‘Oh, we've had such a marvellous day, Uncle Albert took us to the Marine Museum and then we went on to collect sea-shells ourselves, he knew where to go for them, we found hundreds; and we had a lobster picnic.
We only just got back, the others have gone home, I was stopping for cigarettes when I saw you.
What a perfect end to a perfect day, come and have a drink with me,please .’
Flavia accepted.
‘In the afternoon we went to the festival concert, the Bach violin and Schubert, that was marvellous, particularly the Bach, it made me feel one could be like that—you would know what I mean?’
The waiter, who was an Italian, remembered Flavia from old days.
There was some long-time-not-see and he asked about her mother.
‘What are you going to have?’ the young man said.
‘A brandy and soda, if I may.’
‘Two,’ said the young man.
The waiter brought two tall glasses and filled them a good way up with Courvoisier.
‘Whoa ,’ said the young man.
‘Your syphon's going to splutter,’ Flavia said.
It did.
The waiter looked delighted.
‘A la vôtre ,’ the young man said before he drank.
He took a long pull.
‘Goodness, I was thirsty.’
Flavia took a long pull too.
‘Do you realize that I haven't seen you for three whole days, Flavia?
I've been thinking of you though.
Today, too; how I wished you had been with me at the concert.
And now —here you are .’
He went on in a similar vein.
‘But you are very silent tonight?
I'm not offending you by what I've been saying?’
‘Of course not,’ Flavia said, trying to pull herself into the present.
He began talking about the state of the world, saying that he hadn't even looked at a newspaper all day, when one was enjoying oneself one too easily forgot everything that was not on the personal level: and yet how desperately the economic situation was deteriorating everywhere week by week, it could not end well, it might lead to anything.
As for the French government, the French general public for that matter, ‘It hasn't hit us yet, so nobody cares.
I bet you and I, Flavia, are the only people in St-Jean who have heard of The Economic Consequences of the Peace .
Flavia entered the conversation sufficiently to say, ‘Heard; not read.
Not yet.’
‘One of the things I like you for,’ the young man said, ‘is that there is no pretence about you.
French girls are always out for something.
With you I would feel I had an ally.’
That's what a man needed in his life and work, a friend, an ally, not an idol or a toy.
‘Oh, quite.’
‘But I'm talking too much—it's having you all to myself for the first time.’
An idea struck Flavia.
The conclusive experience ?— here it was.
On a platter.
She got up.
‘Shall we go?’ she said.
‘May I see you home?’
They walked up the hill side by side.
When they spoke it was generalities.
Flavia was thinking of her essay with a pang, and of the prep she had failed to do in the morning, the morning—could it be? —of this same unending day.
She took herself in hand, the essay she told herself firmly had to be shelved: one step before the other.
At one point she stopped in her tracks.
‘You know—I feel awfully light-headed.’
‘The air-?’ he said with some concern.
Flavia almost giggled.
They dragged their steps as they approached the villa.
Flavia was thinking of the monstrous mass of tuberoses now reposing inside that vast refrigerator under their paper veils.
She wished it could be dear Loulou.
Onward Christian soldiers.
Outside the front door he kissed her.
She did nothing to help and nothing to hinder.
She hoped he would go on.
He did go on.
She said politely, ‘Would you like to come in for a last drink?’
She unlocked the door and they stepped inside.
She said, I usually don't turn the lights on when I come home at night, it's a habit I have.
Is that all right?’
Then, still in the tones of an uncertain hostess anxious to do well, she said, I have a room upstairs.’
If the young man was surprised or taken aback, he did not show it.
He was twenty-two or three, he was French, and to him also the encounter may have appeared as something handed on a platter.
To Flavia like that other first time it was both half-known and startling.
Memories of her grandmother's judgements obtruded themselves and she closed her mind against them.
Her own refrain went: This is not for me.
The young man said, ‘Are you sure you're all right?’
Meekly, Flavia said, ‘Would you do something for me?’
Indeed.
‘Would you get me something to eat?
I think I'm going to faint, I'm so hungry.’
Reassured, the young man became almost gay, ‘Let's go and raid your larder—let me cook you my scrambled eggs.’
‘You won't find a scrap in the house, all the food…well, it's gone.
Shall I tell you a secret?
I've had no lunch and dinner.’
So he took her down the hill again.
When they got to St-Jean it was only a little past midnight and the cafes were still open.
The young man ordered two large ham sandwiches and Flavia devoured them while he drank a glass of beer.
‘Thank you,’ she said, ‘that was kind of you.
And now don't dream of walking me home again.
No, don't.
I insist.
I'm used to being on my own and you've had a long day.’
Baffled or relieved, the young man let her go.
IV
Flavia got up next morning when the alarm clock rang: Andrée in the evening; meanwhile an honest day's work (for a change).
She went to the tower and buckled down.
Bull-dog is who bull-dog does.
To her tutor she wrote a frank if casual note apologizing for not sending an essay this week.
She had slipped into doing no work for some days, would he look at it, please, as a kind of holiday—after all she had not had one since they had started on the course—she hoped she would be able to do better again next week.
When later on she went down to the sea she felt almost as cheerful again as in pre-Andrée days.
Had she been asked that minute what her exact feelings were, she might have said, I have done what I can for Andrée, if she's going to blow cold again, if she doesn't want to see me any more,vogue la galère , I shall have to survive, I shall.
I always knew that she was not going to stay—perhaps I'll be better without her.
Yet had the question gone on, And what if she does not turn up on the waterfront tonight?
The answer would have been, Ah,that would be unbearable.
Flavia was there so early that she ran into Therese in the little square where people left their cars.
Therese took in Flavia's gleaming silk shirt and eager face.
‘You're looking very nice, coco,’ she said.
She noticed the new sweater Flavia was carrying and praised it generously.
‘You know where that exquisite wool comes from?
It is very rare.’
Flavia said, ‘I got some work done today—I think I'm going to be all right.’
They were still talking when Andrée was there.
Andrée saw Therese, and Therese saw Andrée.
She walked up to them with a kind of swagger.
Flavia saw a curious look pass between the two women—defiance? on Andrée's part; stony anger on Therese's.
‘Bon jour , Andrée.’
‘Bon jour , Therese.’
They did not shake hands.
Therese pushed a basket into Flavia's arms.
‘Take it to the car for me,’ she said.
It was an order—a rare thing from Therese—and Flavia could not refuse it short of gross discourtesy in public to an older woman and a friend.
She was marched off under Andrée's eyes.
‘I did not know Andrée was here!’
Therese still had her Medusa face.
‘Have you been seeing her ?
That is bad.
How could you?’
Humiliated enough and ready to dig in her heels, Flavia said, ‘What's bad about it?
Do you mean her being connected with Michel?’
Appalled, Therese said, ‘If you don't feel it—’
‘Are you going to tell me it's unsuitable?’
‘It is—and it is wrong,’ Therese said majestically.
‘Besides it's dangerous.’
Softening a little, she said, ‘Can't you see, coco, that she's an extremely dangerous woman?’
Flavia was infatuated enough to be taking this as a compliment.
‘What is she doing here?
Wherever she appears, she's up to no good.’
Again more mildly, she added, ‘I wish I could forbid you to go on seeing her.’
Flavia said, ‘But you can't.
I'm going to have dinner with Andrée.’
Truthfully, superstitiously, she added, ‘At least I hope so.’
Andrée, waiting in her car, asked with something short of her usual self-possession, ‘What did that termagant say about me?’
Flavia thought, She's lost face because it has come out that she is on Christian-name terms after all with Therese.
Relieved to be let off herself, she said lightly, ‘Oh, a dire warning, you're bad and dangerous to know.’
‘Was that all?’
Flavia seized the chance of teasing in turn.
‘She didn't give chapter and verse.’
In another tone, she said, ‘Not that I would have let her.’
‘How loyal, how British,’ Andrée said and it sounded almost like approval.
After that everything between them became easy for the time being.
Andrée without appearing to do so took charge of the evening.
They drove a short way along the coast to a restaurant that was neither smart nor squalid, hushed nor noisy, and where a dinner they paid no attention to was served to them seemingly without any act of volition.
They talked.
Andrée appeared to have padded most of her edges; she was being considerate, intelligent, serious, talking like an elder person generous with knowledge to a younger one, and Flavia ceased to feel an absurd adolescent and a target.
Andrée spoke of Saint-Simon and compared him to some English memoirists; she spoke of the astonishing variety of the classical French novel,La Princesse des Clèves, Adolphe, Les Liaisons Dangereuses .
Of the latter, Flavia said, ‘I realize that it must be well done, but I couldn't bear it when I read it.’
The duplicity and wickedness of Mme de Merteuil.
‘It made me quite ill.’
Andrée showed a claw.
‘Reality would make you feel ill.’
‘Isn't Mme de Merteuil too bad to be real?’
‘Possibly too much of a piece for modern fiction.’
They talked, inevitably, of Marcel Proust.
‘Michel would never let me meet him,’ Andrée said.
‘He doesn't approve of satisfying one's curiosity or of seeking out the notorious.
He doesn't approve of Proust either.’
‘Surely not?’ said Flavia.
‘You haven't begun to know Michel.
He's against rummaging in one's past—not that even he would use that term for A la Récherche though he really detests the style.
Michel still worships Anatole France.’
‘So did Proust,’ said Flavia.
‘But he didn't noticeably try to write like him.’
Then Andrée talked about Paris, where she lived.
A large carafe of wine was on their table and Andrée filled up Flavia's glass from time to time.
‘I'd give a great deal,’ Flavia said, ‘to know about you, to know what your life is really like?’
Andrée's quizzical expression returned.
‘Would you?’
Then she veered; assuming her least play-acting manner, she said, ‘I understand you, I also have that passion to get to know about people, to find out what's behind them, what they want, what they're after.’
‘How much truth is there in the phrase, What makes people tick?’ said Flavia.
‘Does it mean that everybody has some definite thing that moves him?’
‘Not one single thing—a clockwork isn't so uncomplicated either—a combination .
Ah, yes, find that and you can make them tick.
Or stop them from ticking.’
‘I shouldn't like to be able to do that.’
‘I told you,’ Andrée said, ‘you haven't enough stomach for the world.
And don't think that being squeamish is a virtue in itself—there are many ways of doing harm.’
Flavia would have liked to hear more about this but Andrée was already on to something else.
‘Glissez, mortels ,’ she said, ‘n'appuyez point .’
All in all it could be said to have been an amicable evening.
They had left the restaurant and were taking a few steps on the front.
Suddenly Andrée said, ‘Take me to the place you work in, show me your hide-out.’
Flavia manifestly hesitated.
‘What's the objection?’
But Flavia was unwilling to express what she strongly if obscurely felt—that a matter of trust was involved.
She said, ‘You see I was given it to work and read in, not to…entertain.’
Andrée said reasonably, ‘You're not being asked to throw a cocktail party.
My dear, we have things to talk about and I don't expect to be here for very much longer—would you prefer us to trail off to my hotel or some public place, or to your frankly not very inviting villa?
Surely the place you work in has a more civilized atmosphere?
And I'd like to see it.
Can't you take a friend, even if it's a recent one?’
There was nothing decently to be done and so with disproportionate reluctance Flavia took Andrée to the tower.
The key, here, was not kept under a flowerpot or stone but in a more foolproof and elaborate hiding-place.
Flavia unlocked, let Andrée pass, preceded her to the top floor to light lamps.
‘Civilized enough?’
Andrée stood in the round room looking at the books with a mixture of curiosity and distaste.
‘You do know where we are?
You know whose this is?’
‘Knock me down with a feather, to coin a phrase,’ said Andrée, ‘it's his, it's saintly Michel's retreat.
I've, heard about it.’
Seeing it anew, Flavia said, ‘It is something?’
‘Oh,very comfortable,very sober,very insulated—I know Michel's taste in house furnishing.
What's the rest like?’
‘I don't use it, it's kept locked.
I only come up here.
That's where he works.’
‘You admire him, don't you?’
‘Oh—yes.’
‘What do you admire about him?’
Flavia thought.
‘Doesn't the whole of him strike one?
His mind.
His manner: so calm, so kind, so on top of things.
His looks.
Don't they show up what he is?…alert and benign —he is as good as he is intelligent.
Like an…ideal judge.
A young judge.’
‘An ideal judge,’ Andrée said.
‘What flights of fancy.
I daresay his brothers might accept that one.’
‘Not you?’
‘I'd rather take the law into my own hands.’
‘I don't believe in that,’ said Flavia.
‘Meaning—?’
Andrée said, not missing a thing.
‘Meaning that all the same you might do so yourself?’
‘I have done so,’ Flavia said.
Andrée let it pass.
Flavia went on following her train of thought, ‘I cannot see him doing even a disinterested thing if it went against a rule.’
‘Not he ,’ said Andrée.
‘He's so unlike anyone else.’
‘And wants to be!
He despises the human race and the combinations that make it tick; the human race in its present state, he'd qualify—he'd like to send us all back to nursery school—so he has to behave as unlike his fellow beings as he can.’
‘Behave better?
Isn't that all to the good ?’
‘That depends on how you count the cost,’ said Andrée.
‘But Michel is so very kind to the fellow beings.’
‘So is the Seigneur supposed to be.
With and without the capital S. You've heard him go on about those selective hierarchies?’
‘I know he is fighting the mediocre common denominator  in politics and life, but isn't he personally an extremely modest man?’
‘I would say he was too proud to put his light above a bushel.’
‘You don't approve of Michel?’
Andrée played it lightly.
‘The prophet in his own home as one might say—’ She settled into the big armchair.
‘There wouldn't be such a thing as a cigarette?
I thought not.
He doesn't even smoke.’
She looked at Flavia.
‘Oh, do sit down, or stand still, you make me nervous.
You're too young to have habits.
That's better.’
She looked at Flavia again.
‘Tell me, does your mother enjoy principles and abstract ideas?’
‘Oh, yes, she does,’ said Flavia.
‘Really?’
‘Not that she has so many herself—principles I mean—but they are essential with…when…’
‘When—?’
Flavia said bravely, ‘She looks for virtue in those she loves.
It's in our family, we all do.’
‘Tell me, is it true that Michel wants to marry her?’
‘It is true,’ Flavia said.
‘There—you're on the defensive again.’
‘I don't mean to.
It's because—can't you see? —it's really not up to me to talk about their…concerns.’
‘Their…concerns are being talked about.
Do you prefer me then to get it all from Rosette Fournier?’
Flavia hung her head.
‘My dear, it is time you told me a little more about it.
So Michel wants to marry her—what about your mother?’
‘Oh, it's all right, she didn't even hesitate, she as good as popped the question herself.’
‘Did she?
You know that Michel is married?’
‘Oh, that,’ Flavia said, ‘you must know that's just a technicality.’
‘Is that how you see marriage?’
Flavia said with some spirit, ‘That's how I see divorce.
His ought to have gone through ages ago.’
There was a silence.
‘I know,’ Flavia went on, ‘that people don't like a divorce in their family, but when you think that his has so long ceased to be a real marriage You haven't seen them together, Michel and…
Constanza.’
‘No, I haven't seen them together,’ Andrée said.
‘What is she like, apart from being keen on other people's principles?
Albert Fournier says she isn't too bad-looking.’
‘Did he put it that way?’
Flavia said.
‘Rather Southern? rather sultry?
Correct my impression, I'm listening.’
But Flavia merely said, ‘You will be able to judge when you see her.’
‘Mule.’
Flavia relented.
‘It just struck me, you and she have the same long eye-lashes, silky long, and so has Michel.
That's a coincidence.’
‘Any others?’
‘You both have that golden skin, but yours makes one think of lovely geometrical planes, you're all bone, she's got bone too, but what one sees most is contour and colour—no, you are not remotely the same type, she could never be painted by a Modigliani or a Loulou, or a Piero for that matter, she is something between a Titian and a Gainsborough.’
Having warmed to it, Flavia went on, ‘And then you are so essentially neat, no, neat is too prosaic, you are so…styled , you look as though you had been made .’
‘Whereas she?’
‘Is more like flesh and blood,’ Flavia said impartially.
Andrée gave her a look that she could not interpret.
‘She's well-read, like you.
Like you, she likes to tease and can be rough.’
‘Tell me something about her life.’
‘If you promise to go to sleep,’ said Flavia.
‘People get bored if you try hard enough to tell them how things were.’
‘Haven't you found me rather a good audience?’
‘At moments,’ Flavia admitted, truthfully.
She had no  desire whatsoever to repeat her own performance.
The very brief account she gave now was selective—it referred to Anna but not to Anna's story; Rome was a place of origin; there was no mention of a Mena or a Mr James (Simon she could not entirely subdue), the prince was a bare name.
Nevertheless the account glowed.
‘You see,’ she said, ‘I had that winter with her.’
Thoughtfully, Andrée said, ‘Do you think your mother cares two hoots about being married or not married to a man?
From what you've been telling me I shouldn't think she did?’
‘Odd thing,’ Flavia said, ‘I shouldn't have thought so either and now I'm convinced she does.
She's never been one for unnecessary nonconformity and there's the Italian family to think of, but there's more to it.
I believe she used to be so reluctant about marrying people because marriage is important to her, she's only been waiting for the right one.’
‘So you think that she wants the substance and the form?’
‘Oh, yes.
The one would be less without the other.’
And Michel?’
‘He feels the same way.
I saw how protective he is about her, and how could he protect her better than by being married to her.
And don't you think, he'd like to score a happy marriage to set against the other one?’
‘And you?’ said Andrée, ‘Wouldn't you rather keep her to yourself?’
‘I want it for her, I want it very much.’
‘For yourself ?’
Flavia said happily, ‘It would be quite wonderful, I should have a family to come home to in the holidays all my life.’
She added quickly, ‘At least for many many many more years than one can think of.’
‘By the way,’ said Andrée, ‘leaving that rosy future aside, where are they at this moment?’
‘I can't tell you that.’
‘So they are together.’
‘But you said you knew?
Apparently everybody does.’
‘Everybody guessed .
Now you have told.’
‘Only to you.’
‘Yes,’ Andrée said, ‘only to me.’
‘You are not going to repeat it?’
‘I don't think I shall repeat it.’
She looked hard at Flavia who as so often could not tell whether Andrée was serious or contemptuous or amused.
‘But I would rather like to know where they are?’
Flavia was silent.
‘They left France, haven't they?
My dear, I thought that you and I had become—friends?’
‘I've only got a poste-restante address myself,’ said Flavia.
‘But where?
What country?’
Flavia began to count till ten hoping that Andrée would get on to something else.
‘I bet you told her , you told your belle-laide ?’
‘I didn't even tell Therese.’
‘Even .’
Andrée's eyes flashed.
‘You will do nothing for me—except spout fine words and declarations.’
‘I would do anything for you,’ said Flavia.
‘Well-’
‘Anything within reason.’
‘More fine words.’
Flavia plunged.
‘I did what you told me to—I've got it now.
You remember?
The conclusive experience.’
‘What are you talking about?’ said Andrée.
‘I should be allowed to know about my inclinations now.
I've had an affair with a man.’
‘You had what?’
Flavia repeated her words.
‘When ?
You haven't had the time.’
‘Last night.’
‘Say that again.
And with whom, for heaven's sake?
Don't stand there, tell me about it.’
In a reticent but factual way, Flavia did.
‘So you and he went up to the villa?
And then you went back into St-Jean again for supper?
That was the only consequence you were bothering about?’
‘Only I ate supper,’ Flavia said.
‘And what on earth made you do it?’
‘You.
I thought…
I understood that you might like me better if I had experience, if I didn't have opinions about things I knew nothing about.…’
Andrée had begun to laugh.
It was the first time that Flavia heard her do so.
She laughed and she laughed, and she laughed again.
‘You did that for me?’
‘Of course,’ said Flavia.
Andrée's control seemed to have gone.
Flavia watched her with distaste and some alarm.
In her smallest voice, she said, ‘Perhaps it was a mistake?’
When Andrée had recovered she said, ‘And yet you will not tell me that simple thing?’
‘It involves them .
The other…last night, that was only me.’
‘Only you !
The dear little girl, Catherine the Great, isn't in it.’
Before Flavia could find her bearings, she went on, ‘Only what involves them is sacred?’
‘Why do you want to know so much where they are?’
Flavia said soberly.
‘Why should I want to know where Michel is?
You are being stupid and impertinent, you're beginning to irritate me.’
Still soberly, Flavia said, ‘I've thought about it hard, do believe me.
Belonging to Michel's family doesn't mean that you have to know where he is.
My mother's aunts and cousins in Italy don't know where she is and I wouldn't tell them if they asked.
Please, try to look at it the way I have to—you must know that it's an important matter because of Michel's divorce; if it were known, if it could be proved, that he is,’ Flavia looked at Andrée and continued firmly, ‘living with my mother, the divorce could still be stopped.
You must also  know that there is a time limit and that it is nearly up.
These are critical days.
If Michel had wanted you to have his address he would have sent it; he must have yours.
Now don't you agree?
I have no right to go against what I must presume to be his wishes?’
She added, ‘I'm sure it's only because of safety in the smallest possible number, only his lawyers and my mother's father have the address, aside from me, and I only have it because they didn't like to leave me here without one.’
Quite soberly too, Andrée said, ‘I can follow your argument.
As far as it goes.
Now let me present you with another one.
Yes, I do happen to know that these are critical days.
Though that was not my subject at Aix, I've made rather a point of knowing a certain amount of French Civil Law.
Assuming now that I was aware of one or two facts of which you, my dear, could not be, assuming that I had something of importance to communicate to Michel, would you still stick to your stubborn refusal?’
‘You mean that you do know something that may help them?’
‘Might that not be the motive for my request?
Imagine my being in a position to tell Michel something that he ought to know—that may be vital for him to know.’
‘Couldn't you reach him through his lawyers?’
‘By way of Paris?
When time may be of the essence?
You don't know what lawyers are, seldom a constructive force in private affairs.’
Flavia said, ‘Could you…would you consider sending your message through me?
Would you trust me with it?’
‘As much as you trust me ?’
‘Oh, what ought I to do?’ said Flavia.
‘Follow for once the judgement of your elders.
I know for certain that your giving me Michel's address will make a very great difference to the two of them.
How will you feel about that afterwards?
Think for a minute.’
‘May I have some time?’‘
Six more rounds of the room?
Go on.’
Presently Flavia said, ‘All the same, I can't do it.
I promised.
‘He made you do that?’
‘He did nothing of the kind, he wouldn't even ask me.’
‘So we promised mummy.
And now we're more concerned with our little rules than with what's going to happen to mummy in the future.
And don't make faces at me.’
Flavia controlled herself.
‘It's not a rule, it's…’
‘What?’
‘A kind of instinct.’
‘Do you believe in instinct?
Your own instincts?’
‘I don't know.’
Andrée said not unreasonably, ‘Why not do as I ask you and let me look after the consequences?’
‘You may be right,’ Flavia said, ‘that's the devil of it.’
Andrée said, ‘Look at me—you don't look at me any more.’
With candour and concentration, Flavia did.
Andrée gave her a mocking, almost tender smile.
‘Mon bel éphèbe —?’
Flavia cried out, ‘Your…looks have nothing to do with it.
Should have nothing to do with it.’
‘Haven't they, though?’ said Andrée.
With a coldness, a remoteness, a knowledge, that seemed to have descended on her without volition, Flavia heard herself say, ‘You are making a mistake .’
An expression of open delight appeared on Andrée's face.
‘Oh, but I court them, the way I play my game!’
‘I don't know what you mean, I don't want to know.’
With an instant return to sweet reasonableness, Andrée said, ‘Admitted that I've been trying to seduce you, doesn't that only go to show how desperate I am to get my way?
Desperate to get my message to Michel?
Well, it will be on your head.’
Flavia said, ‘I'm getting confused, please give me time, let me sleep over it.’
‘No, you may not.
I've had enough of you.
Who do you think you are?
Let's have no more nonsense, miss—give me that address.’
‘Please don't make me,’ Flavia said.
‘I am going to make you.
I insist—or.’
‘Yes?’
‘I shall never see you or speak to you again.’
‘Do you mean it?’ said Flavia.
‘I mean it.’
Andrée got up and went to the door.
Then in her full, sad, serious voice, ‘Perhaps I shall regret it, more perhaps than you will ever know, you foolish girl.
But I do mean it: if you do not give me my answer now, I shall have to go, for ever.’
Flavia said, ‘Then you will have to go.’
‘Is it over then?’
Andrée said, turning away.
Flavia sat down in the chair beside the desk.
She said slowly, ‘It was over.’
But Andrée had already left.
V
Flavia woke feeling sadder and wiser; such was her sense of escape, of relief, that she felt free to grieve.
She spent half of her morning crying.
Crying for the stranger, crying for the lost face—She was so beautiful—crying again.
And now for picking up the bits.
The day was Thursday, the start of the academic week; Flavia combed her hair, washed her eyes and marched herself to the tower.
She let herself in, went up the stairs, set the shutters; she had meant to leave all behind but was seized then with the oppressive memory of Andrée in that room.
She might have been present now.
Still resolute, she turned to the desk: something was wrong, her books and papers did not seem to be in their usual place.
They were still neat, aligned and stacked precisely, even to the point of pedantry, they were in perfect  order, only it was an order that made no sense whatsoever, an order in which Flavia had not left them.
She felt fear.
She opened a drawer: the same deliberate rearrangement of envelopes, pencils, pens.
She opened the drawer where she kept the letters she received.
They were there.
Her tutor's in one bundle; the three thin sheaves, Mr James's, Constanza's, Michel's.
On top of Michel's last a piece of paper had been clipped.
It read,
Mission accomplished A.