

5
JOHNNY'S CIRCUS
THREE days a week during term time Minton went down to Camberwell to teach at the School of Arts and Crafts.
Though like most artists he regarded the opportunity to teach a mixed blessing, he had a knack for communicating and sufficient generosity of spirit to enthuse others.
When he first took up the post in September 1943 one of his students was the fourteen-year-old Robert Hunt, then doing a junior art scholarship and familiarly known as Bobby.
One afternoon a week he received tuition from Minton whom he first saw seated on a windowsill, hugging his legs and looking as young as some of the students he taught.
He brought to his teaching humour and energy; instead of the sparingly composed still life, he heaped up with exotic abundance the fruit and vegetables which he afterwards gave to the students to take home.
He also obtained the ends of newspaper rolls from Peckham Press, at a time when cartridge paper was rationed, and encouraged his pupils to draw on a large scale.
When Bobby Hunt moved to Doncaster Art School, after his home was damaged by a bomb and his family moved north, he found the teaching, by comparison, dull and old-fashioned.
Bobby returned to Camberwell the day after VE Day and now did two classes under Minton.
Minton began to take an interest in this working-class lad with his Italian ice-cream-seller looks, sunny character and ebullient gregariousness.
Unlike some of the young men attracted into Minton's orbit, Bobby had a liveliness and curiosity that enabled him to respond and he was soon reading some of the American and Russian authors Minton admired.
Up until now Minton's homosexuality had presented no bar to friendship with female students.
The innocence that prevailed at the School concerning sexual matters was symbolised by the fig leaves which had been attached to the plaster casts of male nudes and which eventually the girls removed.
In conversation with the boys they learnt of Minton's homosexuality and though this ruled him out as a potential husband it  did not diminish their desire to be in his company.
On one occasion Minton invited two students, Erica Macdonald and Hazel Lemon, to tea at Bedford Gardens.
The two girls hugely enjoyed this honour until the Roberts came in and glowered at them.
As an air-raid had just begun they could not leave and had to remain in an ambience where, as they now acutely realised, they were not wanted and did not belong.
As Minton's relationship with the Roberts deteriorated he began to gather round him a gang of male students at Camberwell who became known as ‘Johnny's Circus’.
At the same time the girls began to be aware that his kindness towards them, his willingness to play, had diminished.
They found it hard to understand what he saw in the boys he now surrounded himself with, some of whom seemed to the girls stupid and callow and bad at drawing.
As Erica Macdonald admits, it did not take much to make the girls steer away.
Even Judith Hollman, who had begun posing for Lawrence Gowing, now saw less of Minton.
Bobby Hunt was not the only member of this circus in whom Minton inspired a very genuine devotion.
He delighted his acolytes with tales about his time in the Army and how he had once lost an entire platoon.
Knowing that these young men faced compulsory national service in the near future, he passed round A. A. Milne's Peace with Honour to give them arguments when faced with a tribunal.
Brought in by his friendship with Bobby was the tall and often silent Owen Wood who turned sixteen soon after he entered Camberwell in October 1945.
Bobby, attempting to impress one of the more glamorous female students, had invented for Wood the name ‘Oska’ and this nickname, in Bobby's spelling, stuck.
Oska was instantly impressed by Minton's easy, welcoming manner.
He took the two boys off to a Lyons Corner House in peckham Rye, invited them to Bedford Gardens to meet Colquhoun and MacBryde, showed them his paintings, played Marlene Dietrich and Billie Holiday records and in one remarkable evening left them firmly hooked on the Bohemian life, determined also to become artists.
Two others who also became central figures within Johnny's Circus were Bobby's friend peter Dunbar, later to become art editor of The Financial Times and subsequently The Economist , and an Italian youth called Eric Verrico who, though not interested in talking about books, occupied a definite position because of his astonishing good looks.
At first, however, it was on Bobby that Minton's interest chiefly focused.
He did much to break down the cultural barriers inherent in Bobby's background, replacing his love of Walt Disney with an interest  in French films.
When he learnt that Bobby played the trumpet, he promptly took him to Stravinsky's Petrushka and shared with him his passion for Sibelius and Bach as well as his fanatical admiration for Fats Waller, Louis Armstrong and Cab Calloway.
With his knockabout wit he teased Bobby mercilessly, drew out his love of salacious humour and became the most important influence in his life.
Hunt remained at Camberwell until July 1947 and in his last year did an illustration course under Minton, developing a Mintonesque style.
This proved useful in later years as Minton would occasionally ask him to help out with a design.
‘This is my ghost!’ he would openly announce, in the kind of voice that enabled him to give an inimitable rendering of the handbag speech in The Importance of Being Earnest .
The exuberance that Minton helped generate at Camberwell was related to a deeper excitement animating the whole school.
Soon after the war ended it trebled its student members when the Ministry of Education issued grants to ex-servicemen in an attempt to prevent a recurrence of the disillusionment that had set in after the First World War.
Extra buses were put on to cope with the increase in numbers; the school restaurant overflowed and three new cafés opened near by in the Camberwell Road.
In the life drawing classes it was hard to get a seat and many sat on the windowsills.
But the cramped conditions merely heightened the sense of urgency many students, after years of military training and service, brought to their work.
The principal, William Johnstone, though he played the eccentric was in fact very shrewd.
He was keen to encourage the vocational aspects of art education and attracted into the various departments concerned with commercial art men and women of talent, including Macvyn Wright, Toni del Renzio, Mervyn Peake, Albert Halliwell (later to follow Johnstone to Central School of Art where he became a catalyst for the teaching of basic design) and Gertrude Hermes who was responsible for wood-engraving.
But the reputation of the School was further enhanced by the painting department where again Johnstone succeeded in appointing a changing roster of artists representative of a variety of styles.
Though there were ‘no rules, no very strict courses’, as William Johnstone insists, the consensus style was, despite the contradictions in manner and intent among the teachers, realistic, a further continuation of the Euston Road School's commitment to measured observation and deliberate construction.
Significant in this development had been the appointment of Victor Pasmore in 1943.
He  joined Lawrence Gowing, John Dodgson and B. A. R. Carter, all of whom had been associated with the Euston Road School, and with the arrival in 1945 of William Coldstream and Claude Rogers its influence was further solidified.
It was evident to the students that a schism existed between the painters and those concerned with printmaking, illustration and design, amongst whom there was a tendency to kick against sober realism in the search for more imaginative solutions.
But this friction was beneficial for the students, as they not only learnt a rigorous method of representation but also were exposed to more liberal attitudes.
As a result Camberwell was at this time one of the most fertile art schools in Britain.
One who arrived soon after the war ended, to study illustration on an ex-serviceman's grant, was Humphrey Lyttelton.
His pen-and-ink drawings provided Minton with unrelieved amusement, as Lyttelton has recalled: Humphrey Lyttelton's presence at Camberwell helped make it a centre for the beginnings of ‘trad’, a jazz revival which replaced ‘the polite and effete noise which had hitherto passed for genuine jazz’ with a new vitality and energy.
At Camberwell Bobby Hunt formed the Bob Hunt's Ragtime Band (Bobby on trumpet, Oska on trombone, Monty Sunshine on clarinet, Terry Arthurs on piano and Denis (‘Pip’) Piper on a one-string bass made out of a wooden box and a broomhandle) and which rehearsed at lunchtime in the pottery room, Minton helping some of its members to buy their instruments.
He, too, was caught up in the excitement for jazz and with Bobby and other students went down to the Red Barn at Barnehurst, a half-hour run from Charing Cross, to hear George Webb's Dixielanders, the band that pioneered the New Orleans revival in Britain.
This was the period when admirers of ‘trad’ adopted a purist stance, listened rather than danced and frowned on anything slick or commercial or which smacked of the professional dance band.
Only when the authenticity of ‘trad’ became  accepted, by the BBC and record companies, did this embattled stance relax and ‘jazz-for-dancing’once again become acceptable.
Whilst still a student at Camberwell Humphrey Lyttelton began playing fairly regularly at the Feldman Swing Club which met every Sunday in the basement at 100 Oxford Street.
When in 1947 he was invited to join the Dixielanders one of his fellow musicians was Wally Fawkes, the Daily Mail column-breaker and cartoonist, who came out to Camberwell once a week to attend Minton's illustration classes.
It was during one of these classes that Lyttelton, chatting with Fawkes, conceived the idea of forming his own band, which first came into existence in January 1948.
It played at, among other places, the newly formed Leicester Square Jazz Club which met in premises belonging to the NSPCC over the Café de l'Europe.
Students from Camberwell made it a regular haunt.
As there was no established pattern of dancing attached to ‘trad’ they let off steam by inventing their own steps, often with wild abandon.
Humphrey Lyttelton recounts: ‘We brought along with us a strong contingent from Camberwell Art School, and John Minton, now recognised as a distinguished painter, was among the most formidable and dangerous of the first school of dancers.’
When the Leicester Square Jazz Club suddenly closed, Humphrey Lyttelton's band moved, initially to Great Windmill Street and then to the large, ugly, smoke-filled basement at 100 Oxford Street which had previously housed Feldman's Swing Club and was now rechristened ‘Humph's’.
No alcohol was served but an atmosphere of uninhibited enjoyment prevailed.
Minton used this setting for his drawing,Jam Session , which he produced as a cover design for the July-August 1949 issue of Our Time , a left-wing arts magazine.
His own likeness appears squeezed in above his initials in the right-hand corner.
COVER DRAWING FOR OUR TIME
There is a correspondence between the rhythms of jazz, with its fondness for syncopation, and the sometimes gawky, angular movement that from now on often animated Minton's work.
The jazz scene confirmed his liking for youthful excitement and the importance that his student friends now had in his life is registered in a series of portraits.
In 1946 he undertook a triple portrait of Bobby, Oska and Eric Verrico (plate 13) from a drawing now in the Victoria and Albert Museum.
There followed individual portraits of Bobby (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), Eric (Royal Albert Museum, Exeter), Oska, who sat on several occasions, as well as one of Judith Hollman (Colour Plate VIII).
Owing to the stylisation employed, the faces in all these portraits are stiff and mask-like. psychological intensity varies, but all create haunting presences.
Form is generalised in the search for sinewy strength.
If the simple outlines are resonant of Modigliani, there is also a hint of the then fashionable artist, Bernard Buffet.
Minton would have been familiar with Buffet's art, and that of other picasso-influenced French Realists, either through reproductions or from exhibitions he had seen at the Anglo-French Institute.
This had opened in Fulham in 1945, but soon moved into the buildings formerly occupied by St John's Wood Art Schools where it became a vital centre for those interested in French art.
It was run by Alfred Rozelaar Green who, having lived and worked in Paris before the war, wanted to imitate in London the French free academy system which offers an open house to anyone wishing to draw, paint or sculpt for as many or as few sessions as they wish.
During its six years of existence, Minton was one of a wide range of English and French artists who either visited it or, like Léger, lectured there, or who performed as guest teacher-critics.
It brought to London new work by contemporary French artists and also held lively Saturday night dances which Minton frequently attended.
The new artistic climate found Minton striving to restrain his romanticism beneath taut design.
But this ambition lost its edge when he painted a subject that had homoerotic interest.
When painting or drawing Oska, who was too Nordic for Minton's taste, he achieved an objectivity that is lacking in the poorly co-ordinated Cornish Boy at a Window (Government Art Collection) for which Eric Verrico posed.
Later, in the 1950s, by which time his style had become more naturalistic, he would sometimes make ‘cheesecake of a boy he fancied, adding muscles that were not there.
But the unevenness of his painted oeuvre also suggests that the slower, relatively sluggish medium of oils ill suited his mercurial temperament.
Only rarely in the late 1940s did he achieve in paint the finesse that now characterised his figure drawings.
The extent to which he had refined and condensed his drawing style can be seen by comparing an early self-portrait in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge with that produced in 1946 (Plate 11); the repeated, searching strokes in the former have been replaced by a confident, knowing accuracy of statement, producing a stylised likeness, brittle and poignantly self-contained.
Minton's virtuoso performances with pencil or pen and ink commended him as a teacher.
His students aspired to his dexterity and adopted his devices.
‘Grass you draw like this,’ he would say, in a self-mocking demonstration of shorthand effects.
These enabled his pupils to get off the ground and many began imitating the set of motifs he introduced into his illustrations.
Once assimilated, these devices and motifs gave the students a feeling of having mastered something, but when Dodie Masterman took over Minton's illustration class and took them through the basics, she found many of them very inept.
They instantly felt less grown up, whereas Minton had encouraged them from the start to tackle imaginative work by giving them articles from Lilliput with the illustration blocked out and the instruction that they were to do their own.
When Susan Einzig was appointed to the illustration department in 1946 she saw instantly how destructive Minton's influence could be, for the drawback of his teaching was that it did little to encourage the discovery of a personal style.
This did not prevent her from becoming, likewise, totally seduced by his example.
Her friendship with him began soon after she arrived at the School.
One lunchtime Minton, wearing what seemed to her a hideous sweater knitted for him by his mother, sat opposite her in the school restaurant.
By the end of the meal, made exuberant by his anarchic wit, she realised she had never felt more intensely alive.
She had come to England from Berlin in the 1930s and had begun her studies at Central School of Arts and Crafts.
When war broke out she had been evacuated to foster parents in Yorkshire until the junior art schools at Central, Camberwell and Hammersmith were resettled as the London Art School at Northampton.
From there she returned to London to do war work, also accepting commissions as a  free-lance illustrator on the basis of which she approached William Johnstone who invited her on to his staff.
Einzig was so frequently seen in Minton's company that to outsiders it seemed as if she became his other half.
The role she assumed in his life further limited the amount of attention he gave to female students.
Though not conventionally pretty, she dressed with flair, had a brave and decisive personality and considerable vitality.
Those who saw her and Minton jiving together never forgot the co-ordinated abandon with which they cleared the dance floor.
He shared with her a great many affinities and interests and returned her respect.
He also enjoyed the ornamentation provided by an attractive, vivacious woman and he made a great fuss of Susan in public, as he did also of Wally Fawkes's girlfriend and later wife, the red-haired Sandy Carmichael, of whom he was genuinely fond.
When she was thrown out of her digs he found her a room in Randolph Crescent and to get her on to her feet again paid her rent for a month.
But Susan Einzig had a more significant, also more complex, place in his life: though to all appearances she and Minton were a couple, he used her as a decoy to attract into their orbit, through her role as the attractive elder woman, keen on dancing and having a good time, the lusty heterosexual students whose company Minton needed and whom, when rebuffed by Susan, he scooped up on the rebound, with mocking asides about the inadequacy of women.
This did not prevent Minton's relationship with Susan Einzig becoming, for her, one of the most important in her life and his positive influence on her as an artist endures to this day.
He would not have created around him such a large and adoring circle had he not had very real capacities as a teacher, a gift for friendship and for infecting others with his passion for art, literature, films and music as well as a readiness to share in the post-war desire for a better world.
Added to this was his sense of justice and compassion, his lack of humbug and snobbery and, above all his brilliant, mind-jolting sense of humour.
LETTER FROM JOHN TO BOBBY HUNT
He also knew what it was like to be alive and young.
Whilst living at Bedford Gardens he began taking Bobby Hunt around his favourite haunts.
On one occasion after they had been to see the film Odd Man Out , thick fog prevented Bobby returning home to Blackheath.
Minton invited him to stay the night, warning him that there was only one bed which they would have to share.
Hunt, who had occasionally had to sleep in the same bed as his father, found nothing alarming in this until Minton, who had put his arm around the younger man, began  moving it slowly down his chest.
Bobby grabbed hold of his hand and held it tightly: Minton turned his face to the wall and began to sob.
The next morning they travelled together to Camberwell by bus, Minton morose and unhappy.
For a period after this he stopped inviting Bobby for meals at Lyons and took Eric Verrico instead.
Bobby, who had not until then encountered homosexuality, was left uncertain about Minton's feelings until one night in the winter of 1946 — 7 when he accompanied Minton and Keith Vaughan to the Café Royal.
Vaughan then told Bobby, whilst they were alone together at the bar, that Minton was very much in love with him.
Though Bobby could not return his feelings their friendship survived: Bobby had a knack for making something out of any situation and in Minton's company a lot of fun was to be had.
When Minton learnt that one of the young man's interests had not yet been fulfilled, he arranged matters so that after one Hampstead Arts Ball Hunt lost his virginity.
Thereafter Minton never lost an opportunity to tease Bobby about his sex life which soon became linked in his mind with Hunt's premature baldness (‘Losing  your hair, dear boy?’).
And sometimes he provided cash to help Bobby woo a girl and subdue her mum.
JOHNNY'S Circus became an important feature of his life at 37 Hamilton Terrace, a house belonging to the Tory MP Colonel Martin Lindsay, the two lower floors of which Minton and Keith Vaughan had repaired and converted in August 1946.
It was Minton who secured the lease on the house and informed Vaughan of his share.
Only when they moved out and the lease was surrendered did Vaughan discover that he had been a victim of Minton's generosity and had been paying only half his fair share.
This caused an angry confrontation and Minton apologised for his deceit.
At Hamilton Terrace Minton used as his studio and bedroom an airy ground-floor room with french windows opening on to a balcony that overlooked the large garden.
Vaughan occupied a smaller studio-bedroom, which also had french windows, on the lower ground floor.
There were in addition downstairs a boiler room with a bed in it, a bathroom and kitchen.
This division of the space available allowed for the cultivation of their different tastes: whereas Minton listened to Billie Holiday as readily as Bach, Vaughan's interests were more purely high-brow.
He brought with him a piano and played it obsessively.
By nature fastidious, he worked towards his oils through a series of careful studies and always painted with a piece of blackout material hung behind his easel.
The contrast between the two artists' studios — one neat and methodical, the other more haphazard — pointed up the differences in their natures: Vaughan, cautious and stubborn; Minton, flamboyant and easily derailed.
The arrangement, however, was not just expedient.
To an extent the friendship between Minton and Vaughan must have rested on shared interests.
Both had for a period apprenticed their ideas to those of  Graham Sutherland and both paid homage to Picasso, Vaughan equating him with Auden and Bartók as an artist who had evolved ‘a coherent vocabulary of form appropriate to our life’.
Both had begun the war as conscientious objectors, Vaughan ending it as an Orderly Room clerk for the Army in a prisoner-of-war camp in Yorkshire.
Though it is not known how the two friends met, they were corresponding with each other by 1945, Vaughan sharing with Minton, in the immediate aftermath of war, his mood of cynical disaffection.
‘A creeping sense of sickness comes over me at the unnecessariness of mediocre painting,’ he wrote, admitting also that he sat back, whilst others indulged in what seemed to him brittle insanity, ‘with a sort of smothered grin and tight feeling of suffocation’.
Vaughan's constant sense that he was one of life's outsiders, never a participant, that he was always ‘trying to hold on to a reality which is no more than a projection of my own nerves’, made him sympathetic to the blighted, visionary anti-hero in Benjamin Britten's opera,Peter Grimes , the première of which marked the reopening of the Sadler's Wells Theatre after the war.
‘Have you seen Grimes yet?’ he asked Minton, who went to great lengths to obtain seats for himself, Denis Wirth-Miller and Richard Chopping, even after he had seen it twice.
At Hamilton Terrace Minton may have been relieved, after the turmoil of Bedford Gardens, to find himself sharing with someone who came from a similar background.
Vaughan was well educated and middle class, his father having been an engineer, his mother a talented musician.
Like Minton, he was closer to his mother, his parents having separated when he was ten.
He, too, had a passion for ballet and was to transport his fascination with its highly formalised use of stance and gesture into his art.
He, too, had lost a younger brother during the war and remained bitter in his attitude towards Establishment politics.
Unlike Minton, Vaughan had no formal training in art.
Instead he had worked for several years for Lintas, the advertising agency owned by Unilever, only abandoning this job a few months before war broke out in order to concentrate for a period entirely on his painting.
During the war he had adopted a neo-romantic style in his drawings of landscapes, apple trees, houses and labouring figures.
He also began using the fashionable technique of mixing wax resists with gouache and watercolour, a technique which Minton once described as ‘a matter of the successful steering of accident’.
The romanticism in both men was closely linked with their homosexuality and the tragic mismatch between  their ideals and reality.
An affair between them was unlikely because, in homosexual jargon, they were ‘bread and bread’.
Both were the kind of homosexuals who felt sexually inhibited with partners from their own educational background and class and who rarely found in one and the same person both lover and friend.
The artist Michael Wishart, confronting this in himself in his autobiography,High Diver , argues: ‘physical beauty, unless accompanied by brute stupidity and a nature devoid of creative aspirations, is not compatible with sex appeal.’
Soon after they moved in to Hamilton Terrace it became apparent that association with Minton brought out the petulant, fussy side of Vaughan.
His journals reveal a conservative belief in good behaviour, self-discipline, kindness and tolerance, also an acute sensitivity to the delicacy in human relations.
When Minton's student entourage descended on Hamilton Terrace, Vaughan sometimes made his disapproval felt.
He was five years older than Minton and watched critically as Minton suppressed his intelligence in order to get on with his Circus which sometimes included boys of adolescent mentality.
Erudite and cultured, Vaughan could at times barely hold back his impatience.
He vented his annoyance in his journals, reporting arguments between Minton and himself: He then proceeds to analyse the positions implicit in the above exchange in niggling detail, miserably aware that both he and Minton suffered from self-doubts and insecurity.
‘All this,’ he adds, ‘apropos of the drunken caterwauling in the kitchen from J and his cronies while I am trying to read Gide's Journal on a Saturday evening.’
Despite the rapid growth of ill feeling between Minton and Vaughan, their home at Hamilton Terrace attracted many visitors, who turned up as and when they wished, some hoping for roast beef at breakfast as Minton frequently began cooking a large joint at eleven o'clock at night.
Lucian Freud was among those who sometimes called in at breakfast and who, whilst Bobby Hunt made coffee, lay sprawled round the room, exercising their wit on the contents of the day's newspaper.
Minton's generous hospitality was extended to many, to Robert Frame, Leslie Todd-Reeve and his wife, Nessie Dunsmuir and her sister who lodged for several weeks at Hamilton Terrace before and after a major operation.
Countless others dossed down, either in the boiler room or Minton's studio, after a night's drinking left them either incapable or unwilling to return home.
Yet Minton's sociability was only one side of the coin: when it landed the other way up his loneliness was all too apparent.
Michael Wishart recollects him saying, ‘Please stay, I can't cry all night,’ his request reflecting not on sexual need, for he never touched Wishart, but on a recurrent despair.
One person briefly involved with Minton in 1946 was Patrick Woodcock.
They had met during the early months of the war at the home of Woodcock's uncle, the Midland Bank manager Fred Elt who, though respectably employed, was something of a Bohemian in his fondness for mistresses and for paintings.
He had bought pictures by Minton and Ayrton whilst having an affair with Ayrton's mother.
Woodcock, who was living at home in Birmingham and studying medicine, enjoyed his visits to his ‘wicked’ uncle in London.
He then went into the Army and did not see Minton for some time.
His marriage, in 1943, was annulled three years later largely because Minton that year uncovered Woodcock's homosexuality.
It seemed to Woodcock that Minton recognised this aspect of his nature almost before he himself did.
When asked how he knew that Woodcock was gay, Minton replied, ‘Your wit.’
The affair was short-lived and never intense enough for them to quarrel.
Woodcock was shocked at the extent of Minton's self-loathing: convinced that he was physically unattractive, he looked to alcohol and wit as the agents most likely to get someone into bed.
Woodcock also perceived that for Minton sexual desire and emotional attraction occupied two separate areas.
In bed he was further surprised to discover that a person capable of such mental sophistication could retain a physical side more typical of a child of eight.
Woodcock remained a fairly frequent visitor to Hamilton Terrace.
He noticed that Minton often talked despairingly and on several occasions involved himself and Vaughan in discussions of suicide.
As time went on he found that his own tastes, especially his interest in music, aligned him more with Vaughan than Minton.
He remained a close friend of Vaughan up until his death, but after 1950 he saw little of Minton, finding him a social hazard.
Occasionally Woodcock drew alongside Vaughan, Minton and others during weekend gatherings at Hamilton Terrace.
These began around  1947 and went on for about two years.
They mostly consisted of Camberwell students.
Susan Einzig, who was often present, felt that the excitement generated grew out of the sense all had of being a part of a gang, special and apart.
Woodcock noticed that all the young men looked rather the same, ‘like corrupt cherubs’.
The usual pattern was for all to congregate in Minton's studio where he might cook a large risotto after which they went to a film.
In the evening they gravitated to Soho, moving from the Wheatsheaf, to the Highlander, the Black Horse or the York Minster, and perhaps taking in a meal at Fava's, then Minton's favourite restaurant, before returning to 37 Hamilton Terrace to crash out on divans, some staying the night with Susan Einzig at her flat in Hampstead.
The next day Minton might insist on a walk on Hampstead Heath in the morning but the nub of the weekend came in the afternoon when all sat down to draw, Minton inspiring them all to work and try hard.
Eric Verrico was the one who most frequently posed, for, looking as if he had stepped out of a Caravaggio, he was the most beautiful of Johnny's Circus.
With his energy, exuberance and wit, Minton tended to impose his personality on any situation.
He could also be as volatile as the Roberts.
When they arrived at Hamilton Terrace it was impossible to predict whether they would behave with irresistible charm or throw the chairs across the room.
Vaughan's gravity may have exacerbated Minton's flippancy, his flightiness becoming a form of self-protection from Vaughan's unremitting critical intelligence.
The downward spiral in their relationship was observed by the poet Alan Ross, who lodged in the boiler room at 37 Hamilton Terrace for the better part of a year.
‘Whereas Johnny made light of everything,’ he has recalled, ‘Keith brooded, rather old-maidish in his habits, on art and life in his voluminous notebooks.
From time to time he did break out, cruising Soho and returning drunk, with or without bedfellow.
But these were rare occurrences, and when later a longstanding relationship developed it brought frustration and irritation rather than contentment.’
After only two years in the same house as Minton, Vaughan wanted to escape.
When preparing extracts from his journals for publication in 1966, he cut and revised his original entries.
One entry, elided with others in the published journals under the date 14 August 1948, was in fact written on 31 October 1948 and in its original form provides far greater insight into the animosity that now existed between the two friends.
Minton's acolytes meanwhile underlined Vaughan's solitariness.
Further on in the above entry he admits he can only be less than himself in company.
He worried persistently about the poverty of his social life and bitterly complained: By June 1949 they had reached a further stage in their relationship.
‘Estrangement from JM almost complete,’ Vaughan wrote in his journal, ‘scarcely ever meet — only amicable, rather strained pleasantries to say to each other.
Sometimes I feel…the accusation that my presence on the perimeter of his life, my stillness in the middle of his movement, seems to represent,[is]almost intolerable.’
Vaughan was still brooding on Minton six months later.
Again, the journal entry is more interesting in its original version than in the published account.
Despite the discomfort their shared accommodation caused, the arrangement lasted in all six years.
For much of the time there was continuous subcutaneous and repressed friction, broken by occasional and emotionally trying attempts at reconciliation.
Because Vaughan could never entirely rid himself of envy of Minton and his way of life, he remained edgily critical of him.
But though the negative aspects of their relationship outweighed its benefits, their association had proved useful.
Minton provided the introduction to William Johnstone which obtained Vaughan a job teaching composition and illustration at Camberwell.
In addition the similarities in their decorative and illustrational work suggest that each was stimulated by the other's ideas.
An artistic affinity is also affirmed by the fact that they shared, along with Julian Trevelyan, a Lefevre Gallery exhibition which ran from early December 1946 through to mid January the following year.
It was then that Minton acquired the label ‘urban romantic’, for he exhibited nine oils and ten gouaches based on the quays and wharves in the region of Southwark and Bankside.
Michael Middleton, writing in The Spectator , observed that Minton had ‘translated an essentially elegiac vision into a closely knit architecture of great firmness and richness without the loss of poetic intensity’.
Eric Newton in The Sunday Times regretted Minton's ‘entirely cerebral’ approach, but liked his more direct wash drawings of river scenes.
The Times also admitted the ‘intensity and strangeness of his scenes’, whilst Bernard, Denvir, in The Studio , thought Minton's colours evoked ‘the sempiternal sadness of the industrial background’.
Minton, like Whistler, was attracted to the docks by more than just his sense of sight.
In one artist's statement, he remarked: Whilst the Lefevre exhibition established him as urban romantic with a particular feeling for Thames-side subjects, a number of commissions followed which allowed him to develop this vein.
For the May 1947 issue of Our Time he drew London Docks .
In this he concentrates on two men guiding a crate on the end of a pulley.
Through its sense of action, energy and rhythm, the drawing conveys the movement of the docks.
Next Lilliput asked him to paint three pictures based on London's river for reproduction in the July 1947 issue of the magazine.
H. M. Tomlinson supplied a brief commentary.
Kaye Webb, then the magazine's art editor, recollects that Minton first produced black and white wash drawings and was not in the least annoyed when asked to rethink his designs in colour.
The final gouaches —St Paul's from the River, Blackfriars Bridge (Plate 10), which enjoyed a double-page spread, and Cranes at Bankside , even though they lost a certain precision and intensity in reproduction, make an impact that is buoyant and tough.
The strong, heavy colours suggest neither daytime nor night, neither the real world nor a theatrical equivalent, but an in-between world that is unusual, not quite of this world yet not wholly out of it.
Owing to Minton's technique of holding the design together through the use of a consistent low tone, the colours are darker than one would expect and suggest the kind of livid colouring that occurs just before a storm.
These deep colours have an oppressiveness which is neither cloying nor mournful but richly potent.
A similar mood is found in London's River: Pool of London , a gouache painting executed for London Transport in 1951 and from which 3,200 posters were made for use on the Underground (Colour Plate XIV).
It is arguably one of London Transport's most impressive posters.
Minton's continuing involvement with the River Thames is also affirmed by his illustrations for John Herbert's essay, ‘London's Port and River’, in the book Flower of Cities , published in 1949, and which allowed him to draw upon a well-developed vocabulary, with freedom and confident mastery.
MINTON'S success as a commercial artist owed much to his association with John Lehmann, to whom he had been introduced by Vaughan.
Lehmann, novelist, poet, literary critic and specialist on the history of the Danube, had edited New Writing in 1936.
It originally appeared under the imprint of the Bodley Head, having been steered into existence by Allen Lane shortly before he left that firm to found Penguin.
In 1940 Lane revived New Writing , retaining Lehmann as its editor, and turned it into a paperback.
Owing to Penguin's prolific output during 1918 and 1939, the period which formed the baseline from which paper ration allowances were calculated, it had more paper than most at its disposal during the war years.
This enabled Lane to sustain a print run of around 75,000 when Penguin New Writing proved an outstanding success.
‘These slim volumes,’ Robert Hewison has observed, ‘with pastel covers and fragile wartime paper, became emblems of survival which no Ministry of Information publication or film documentary could manufacture.
Tucked in battle-dress pocket, gas-mask holder or factory overall, they created a link between the civilian and military worlds, and in the years of rationed poetry and imaginative confinement, it is no surprise that they sold out as soon as they appeared on the bookstalls.’
In his choice of contributor Lehmann was able to draw upon his wide-ranging contacts, for he had lived for a period in Vienna and had also travelled Europe in search of material.
But it was not only the international flavour of Penguin New Writing that distinguished it from other symposia of this kind; Lehmann also had an active interest in the visual arts, and in particular promoted the neo-romantics.
Lehmann was an eminent figure within the literary world; in addition to the editorship of New Writing , he had, since 1938, acted as General Manager and Director of the Hogarth Press.
He consolidated his position by holding soirées, first on the sixth floor of Carrington House in Piccadilly, and after the war at 31 Egerton Crescent.
Here some of the most brilliant names of the day mingled in rooms hung with paintings by Piper, Sutherland, John Banting and Michael Ayrton.
‘The elegance of his surroundings are [sic]withering,’ Vaughan commented in his  journal, having been introduced to Lehmann by the Greek scholar Cosmo Rodenwald, with whom he served in the Pioneer Corps.
When Penguin New Writing began to incorporate photogravure illustrations in 1942, Vaughan had been the first contemporary artist to have his work reproduced.
Between 1944 and 1946 he contributed articles to the magazine, and when in 1946 Lehmann set up as a publisher, Vaughan initially accepted charge of design and production.
But despite his willingness to collaborate with this tall, blond, handsome editor and publisher with his square, even teeth invariably clamped over fat Turkish cigarettes and whose ice-blue eyes sometimes narrowed as he weighed up the profit or nuisance value of a potential contributor, Vaughan regarded Lehmann critically, detecting mistrust and calculation behind the editor's apparent kindness and friendliness.
As a homosexual, he noticed with dismay that with Lehmann, as with so many homosexuals in the literary and theatrical world, professional brilliance and public success overlay a private life, petty and unsatisfactory.
In turn Lehmann noted in his autobiography that Vaughan had in him ‘a very strong streak of tough, unnatural stubbornness’ and an unwillingness to relinquish preconceived views.
More affectionate is his account of Minton who had, as he records, ‘been brought along to my flat one evening by Keith Vaughan, where he sat on the floor with a drink in his hand, laughing a great deal and saying very little.
I remember being struck at once by his gaiety and warmth, and the way these two characteristics gave a face that was not exactly good-looking, in fact had an element of the grotesque in its narrow axe-like boniness under the untidy mop of black hair — a face seen in an elongating fun-fair mirror — an aspect of compelling charm, almost of beauty.’
Lehmann's interest in the neo-romantic painters rested on his belief that their lyrical and imaginative spirit counteracted the materialism and pseudo-sciences of the day.
Though one of Minton's and Ayrton's designs for Macbeth had been included among other Shakespeare illustrations in the December 1942 issue of Penguin New Writing , it was not until 1945 that work by Minton began to make a regular appearance in its pages.
That year Lehmann also commissioned Minton to design covers for the magazine.
As it then appeared quarterly, Minton executed four designs, each vignette alluding to one of the four seasons, evocatively suggested by a few simple ingredients in a neo-romantic style (Colour Plate X).
‘Allen Lane and the rest of the crew down at Penguin  Books like your designs very much,’ Lehmann told him.
‘They propose to pay you £30 for them.
I hope that will be all right?’
Thereafter, possibly because the magazine began to appear more irregularly, Minton produced one further design, showing pages of manuscript fluttering down between buildings, and which was used for the next seven issues.
When John Lehmann grew impatient with what he considered to be too cautious a policy at the Hogarth Press, he set up his own publishing house with modest financial backing from family and friends.
He was now able to pursue his interest in book illustration and gave work to Edward Bawden, Robert Medley, Humphrey Spender, Edward Burra, Ayrton, Vaughan and Searle among others.
During the next six years he published over two hundred books, his imprint receiving Book Society accolades and design awards and sustaining more posthumous interest and admiration than any other mainstream publisher of that period.
Many of his books display high artistic standards, not only on the dustcover but also in the attention paid to the typography, boards and spine.
But of all the artists employed, Minton contributed the most: twenty-three of Lehmann's books bore Minton dustjackets and four of these were substantially illustrated by him.
Minton's first printed book jacket had accompanied William Sansom's Three, published by the Hogarth Press in 1946 and probably commissioned by Lehmann before he left that firm.
It shows a cracked wall, painted in grisaille and framed by columns, with a bill posted on it giving the title and author's name.
Reminiscent of Minton's sets for Macbeth , it gives no indication of the exuberant inventiveness Minton was to bring to Lehmann's imprint.
Perhaps Lehmann's confidence in his work acted as a spur.
For though it has been suggested that Minton's attendance at Lehmann's soirées was in part determined by his hope of work, he would also have been stimulated by the company he met.
And though at first he appeared shy and ill at ease, he rapidly became a favourite.
He had a genuine liking for Lehmann, whose exacting, aristocratic and somewhat dictatorial manner some found repellent, and decorated three tables for him, each with a different compositional theme.
He also gave Lehmann, in spontaneous bursts of generosity, watercolours and drawings, sometimes as peace offerings when he was late with a commission.
At Lehmann's gatherings Minton's clowning and high spirits could infect all those present.
The friendship between the two men was warm enough for onlookers to suspect an affair.
Unlikely as this is, Minton was nevertheless a welcome visitor to  Lehmann's cottage near Three Bridges in Sussex, acquired in 1951, and which had two acres of land and a miniature lake.
Here Minton would occasionally stretch out under the trees and draw.
ILLUSTRATION FOR THE SNAIL THAT CLIMBED THE EIFFEL TOWER
At Lehmann's Minton met Christopher Isherwood with whom he got on well.
It was probably here, too, that he first encountered Paul Odo Cross, the wealthy ex-ballet dancer who lived with the plant photographer, Angus Wilson, at Tidcombe Manor in Wiltshire, where they created a marvellous garden and influenced Cedric Morris with their growing and breeding of irises.
Cross had formerly been a lover of Cedric Morris and when the East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing burnt down at Dedham, he helped Morris and his partner, Arthur Lett-Haines, move into the house named Benton End where the school was re-established.
After Cross and Wilson had moved to Jamaica, taking the painter Eve Discher with them to act as their housekeeper, Minton stayed with them on his visit to that country in 1950.
Three years earlier he had produced twenty illustrations, as well as endpapers and cover design for The Snail that Climbed the Eiffel Tower , short stories for children which Paul published with Lehmann under the name ‘Odo Cross’.
It is one of Minton's most delightful books.
His empathy with the childhood world of romance and humour creates instantly absorbing scenes, intricate but never over-ornate. they perfectly complement the text and are resonant with neo-romantic traits, notably the twisting paths that take the eye into this other world, with pleasing and imagative effect.
A still more ambitious project was the publication in 1948 of Time Was Away: A Notebook in Corsica , with spine and typography designed by Keith Vaughan.
This lavish, anti-austerity production resulted from a visit made to Corsica by Minton and Alan Ross, at Lehmann's suggestion.
Lehmann preceded it with a collection of Alan Ross's poems,The Derelict Day: Poems in Germany , which appeared in 1947 with a dustjacket by Minton (Colour Plate XII).
The forlorn street scenes that ornament front and back, in black and grey monochrome, alleviated only by the red-brown used for the author's name and title, return us to Minton's scenes of devastation of the early 1940s.
Minton's use of a high viewpoint, which flattens his imagery and brings it into tauter relationship with the overall format, became a device he frequently adopted.
The shabby buildings and trailing shadows on the covers of The Derelict Day match the spent, post-war mood of the poems which evoke a sense of waiting and desolate emptiness, of desire present but concealed beneath the surfaces of things.
Ross cannot now recall why Corsica was chosen as their subject.
Both he and Minton had a fascination with Nelson and his association with the island may have been a factor.
The island had also been visited by the young James Boswell, as his journal of 1765 records; but a more likely source of inspiration was Edward Lear's Journal of a Landscape Painter in which he, too, records a visit to Corsica.
When Ross and Minton set off in August 1947, stopping first in Paris where they obtained a passage to Ajaccio from the French Minister of Culture, Louis Joxe, they did not know each other well.
Ross had previously noticed that Minton seemed slightly uneasy on his own, ‘as if questions might be put to him that he preferred not to consider’, and liked better the easy banter encouraged by the presence of a crowd.
Thrown together for the duration of this working holiday, Ross now perceived in Minton an unavoidable ‘degree of melancholy that was both fleeting and profound’.
He continues:
The two men arrived at Ajaccio on the Portugal , a battered old steamer which moored alongside a palm-lined quay.
After the greyness of war-scarred London, tired, shabby and impoverished, the Mediterranean came as a sudden shock.
Stunned by the heat, they roamed the streets of Ajaccio for several days, visiting its churches and bars and trying to equip themselves with some understanding of their new surroundings.
‘Corsica is proving very exciting,’ Minton wrote to Edie Lamont: ‘full of Italianate romanticism.
The drawings pile up…
The Mediterranean heat is unbelievable.’
The exuberance he felt is manifest in his drawings: rarely have topographical subjects been treated with such freedom and energy.
The glaring light of high noon encouraged his use of rich blacks.
These convey not only shadow but also heat, his suns gaining in intensity from a surrounding ring of black.
His scenes are never static but animated by his fast-moving line and by his attention to the life of the place, to the boats, barrels, nets and figures at work.
From Ajaccio they travelled by bus to Porto Vecchio, Minton sleeping much of the time with his mouth open and head lolling against Ross's shoulder.
Once the bus stopped, however, he was immediately up and out, using the ten minutes available to sketch in the ingredients of a scene which he would later work up in a hotel room.
The scenery was almost too magnificent, giving Ross the sensation that they were seeing ‘a succession of stage sets but never any drama’.
They ate simply, put up in basic hotels and, in these pre-tourism days, saw few foreigners.
Some of the characters they met are portrayed by Minton in the book.
Ross now admits that their conversations with the island's inhabitants made them ‘overconscious perhaps of island sloth and corruption, of the drug-running and fatalism that seemed the legacies of a colonial past’.
He also noticed that Corsicans discussed the political principles connected with their dependency on the French less than the price of produce in Marseilles or the cost of cocaine.
‘Life, for all but the old,’ he concludes, ‘took place somewhere else.’
This awareness provided the book's title, drawn from a line by Louis MacNeice: ‘Time was away and somewhere else.’
The towns they visited exuded an atmosphere of sinister disquiet; very different was the Dominican monastery they discovered at Corbara.
They were shown round by a Père Obein whose calm wisdom and urbanity so impressed them that he remained for them a touchstone of good sense.
For some time afterwards whenever a crisis occurred they would ask each other, ‘What would Père Obein say?’
When it was time  to leave they had difficulty in getting off the island.
Several Air France planes were cancelled owing to bad weather and they were forced to book seats with a private line.
The ramshackle eight-seater at first did not take off because of a storm after which a pilot could not be found.
They had little confidence in the pilot who was eventually produced and whose hands shook like those of a dope-fiend.
No sooner had the plane risen into the air than a door flew open revealing a square of blue sea, and a concealed cargo of contraband slid across the floor.
Whereas The Snail that Climbed the Eiffel Tower had allowed Minton to rework, in lighter and more decorative form, imagery coined in his landscape drawings of the mid-1940s,Time Was Away opened up a whole new repertoire.
Minton's drawings do not simply illustrate Ross's text but, in their breadth and vigour, enlarge upon it.
There is an absence of nostalgia and instead ‘a dry and factual documentary value’, as John Lewis has observed.
Apart from the profusion of black-and-white illustrations, the book carries eight colour plates.
Minton had first employed the process of colour separation in The Snail that Climbed the Eiffel Tower .
In Time Was Away he increased the number of colours used from three to four and began handling the separations with far greater elasticity and freedom.
In order to achieve a ‘bind’, blockmakers advise an overlap of  inch.
Minton, however, saw that a disparity between the outline drawing and the armature created by the blocks of colour could add to the liveliness of the image.
He deliberately used both brush and pen as boldly as possible to soften the mechanical nature of the process.
His colours — rust brown, yellow, blue and black, together with the mixtures they create when overlaid — add to the exotic, sultry atmosphere of the book as a whole.
It could be argued that the sumptuous illustrations overpower the text.
A lack of narrative drive leaves the reader with piecemeal vignettes, an impression confirmed by the poems tacked on at the end of the book.
Ross now admits that his decision to record what they saw and encountered without reference to any personal response, in imitation of the camera-like approach used by Christopher Isherwood in Goodbye to Berlin , results in an ‘inevitable distancing’.
Nevertheless when the book appeared in November 1948, passages from it having been previewed in Penguin New Writing 33 , it made a significant impact.
Though Minton's illustrations to an extent derive from the stock-in-trade ingredients used by topographical and Romantic artists, they yet compose an inventive and original style.
Time Was Away became a cult book among illustration  students.
One such was David Gentleman who was impressed by the apparent ease with which the drawings had been produced.
Some years later he commented on this to Minton who gave an insight into their insouciance: draw in the morning, when fresh, he advised, so that you can enjoy yourself in the afternoon.
COVER DRAWING FOR OUR TIME
Time Was Away displays Minton's striking ability to blend all the parts into a decorative whole.
In some of his subsequent books this apparently effortless fluency denies the Possibility of conflict.
In part the sweetness in his illustrative work grows out of his delight in the physical nature of things.
He was, for instance, inspired by the rhythm of physical labour.
His cover design for the July 1948 issue of Our Time shows a spreading weald inhabited by two pairs of figures.
The rhythm set up by their labour is pursued in the waving branches of the trees framing the scene and in the patterns created within the landscape.
This rhythm, though muscular, is not aggressive; it is not that of a march but a working rhythm that has joy in it.
It also suggests, in its repetition, a continuity of action within time.
We do not find in scenes like this the sudden fissures which, hinting at the Catholic underworld of sin, turn  Sutherland's landscapes into battlegrounds.
Minton's view of landscape is simpler and more harmonious.
It was the Kent countryside that inspired him and which he wanted to be a part of.
His drawings of it convey the sense of someone singing at his work.
When producing an illustration Minton had to be pragmatic: there was a need for clarity, to attract and hold the eye, for a decorative solution that did not conflict with the commercial purpose of the commission.
Not surprisingly he told the critic William Gaunt, ‘I find illustrator's drawing that is descriptive drawing very different from making drawings for paintings.
In fact I feel a definite conflict inherent in ‘painter's’ and ‘illustrator's’drawing.’
There was, however, sufficient overlap between his illustrative and painted work for one to fertilise the other; many of the drawings for Time Was Away afterwards provided the basis for paintings.
Nevertheless it could be argued that by practising as an illustrator, working to deadlines and within an acceptable style, Minton was gradually weakening his compulsion to paint.
In another undated letter to Gaunt Minton admits that owing to the pressure of illustrative work he had not painted for eight months.
In 1947, in addition to the work he was doing for Lehmann, Minton illustrated two books for Paul Elek —Treasure Island and The Wanderer , an English translation of Alain-Fournier's Le Grand Meaulnes .
Elek was keen on establishing himself as a quality publisher and commissioned work from other artists beside Minton — Edward Burra, Anthony Gross, Fred Uhlman, William Scott, Edward Bawden and Keith Vaughan.
There was talk of Minton in addition illustrating a book for Elek on South London but nothing ever came of this.
Elek also approached Edie Lamont after seeing her work at the London Group and discussed the idea for an illustrated book on Wales.
‘Elek is a very Persuasive and charming Central European — or is he Hungarian?— and easy to work with,’ Minton told her, ‘except he's rather evasive about the money.’
This last remark proved accurate: Elek encountered financial difficulties and Vaughan, on his own and Minton's behalf, took the matter of payment to his solicitors.
Alain-Fournier's The Wanderer (translated by Françoise Delisle) was one in a series of illustrated classics published by Paul Elek.
Minton may have selected which title he was to illustrate, as Le Grand Meaulnes , formerly translated as The Lost Domain , was a book he recommended to friends.
Its concern with adolescent love, and the way in which its idealism and purity cannot evade the sullying effects of adult realities, paralleled Minton's own fear of lost youth, his obsession with adolescence and desire for a love that could only exist in a state untrammelled by adult responsibilities.
The nostalgia, sadness and despair that suffuse the book would have echoed Minton's own sense of defeat and loss.
Suggestive landscape descriptions, based on the countryside of Alain-Fournier's childhood (near Blois, in Loir-et-Cher) allowed Minton again to delve into his now well-rehearsed repertoire of landscape devices, though unfortunately his original cover design was replaced by another in which the quintessential motif of a figure disappearing down a deserted lane is reduced to a miserable size and merely sits on the front cover like an enlarged postage stamp.
ILLUSTRATION FOR THE WANDERER
When writing the book Alain-Fournier drew on personal experience: at the age of nineteen he had fallen in love with a young woman he saw at the Lycée and with whom, though they exchanged only a few  words, he felt a powerful affinity.
She married and he only ever saw her once again, yet declared: ‘She was really, really, the only being in the world who could have given me peace and rest.’
Minton would have been aware of the book's autobiographical basis: ‘We all knew about Fournier's life,’ Patrick Woodcock remarks, of the Hamilton Terrace period.
He also recollects that Fournier lay behind their belief that the realisation of ideal love ended in death.
As Meaulnes says in a letter to Seurel, death alone will give him ‘the key, the sequence and the end of this adventure that failed’.
The second of the two classics Minton illustrated for Elek demanded a very different approach.
He brought out the ‘thriller’ aspect of Treasure Island through exaggerated perspectives, frequently adopting zoom-lens effects to bring foreground and background into a dramatic unity.
For the critic William Feaver,Treasure Island represents Minton's greatest triumph as an illustrator, ‘a surge of inky hysterics extending from the first creak of the shivering timbers of the Old Admiral Benbow to the vividly contrived Spyglass Hill’.
The drawing style is rough and abrasive, the heavy blacks underlining the sinister plotting of Silver and his renegades.
And though the illustrations are, as in The Wanderer , confined to black and white, Minton used the process of colour separation for the sumptuously rich endpapers.
No other book so well demonstrates the influence of the cinema on Minton's art: he conceived each design as if he were composing a frame, making frequent use of close-up and distortion.
Films formed a major aspect of his cultural intake and were a regular part of his life.
He went to the cinema at least once a week, in the company of Susan Einzig or his young male friends.
He saw a great many of the post-war American films that were beginning to appear in Britain.
Like thousands of others, he became fixated on the actor Montgomery Clift, going several times to see him in Red River Valley and detecting, accurately, homosexual tendencies behind Clift's portrayal of the sensitive masculine ideal.
His taste in films was eclectic; he enjoyed the popular ones of the day but also took Bobby Hunt and Oska Wood to French films at the Academy Cinema in Oxford Street, especially those by Jean Renoir and René Clair.
He came into still closer contact with the film industry when S. John Woods, as advertising director at Ealing Studios, invited him to design three posters.
Woods worked directly under Michael Balcon when he was appointed head of production in 1947 and was responsible for employing  Ardizzone, Bawden, Barnett Freedman, Peake, Minton, Piper, Searle and others, to produce posters and other advertising material.
As Bevis Hillier states, Woods ‘was to Ealing Films what Jack Beddington was to Shell and Frank Pick to London Transport’.
At a time when artistic merit had not yet been deposed by an overriding demand for commercial impact, he was able to commission an extraordinary range of posters from artists very diverse in style.
Both John Lehmann's books and Ealing Studios' film posters point up the fact that Minton was working in the last great era of illustration, before graphic means were ousted by photographic.
Some Ealing posters collaged graphics with photography, as Minton did in the publicity leaflet for The Loves of Joanna Godden (1947).
His poster for this film shows Googie Withers gazing over fields at the distant figure of the neighbouring farmer she loves.
It is purely graphic, as are his subsequent posters, for Eureka Stockade (1949), a turbulent scene entirely suitable for a ‘spectacular drama of Australia's Gold Rush’ with its clash between miners and the colonial government, and for Where No Vultures Fly (1951) which was one of Ealing's big box-office successes.
The gusto with which he designed these posters shows how whole-heartedly he gave himself to the task in hand.
Though his small decorative motifs can sometimes be compared with those by Keith Vaughan, the breadth and vigour of his illustrative work remained unsurpassed.
He could turn his hand to a neo-romantic pastoralism, as in The Wanderer , or to the robust characterisation found in Treasure Island .
When portraying factory scenes for advertisements in trade journals he would adopt a more straightforward, demotic style.
He also produced a lively documentary approach when portraying football crowds as illustrations for John Arlott's article, ‘Learn while you watch, in the Football Association's Book for Boys .
The variety of tasks he undertook included endpapers for one of George Weidenfeld's Contact books and decorated initials for another; a title illustration to accompany E. M. Forster's story, ‘Die Geschichte vom Meermädchen’ in Blick in die Welt (15 November 1947), a magazine produced by the Ministry of Information for distribution in Germany; whilst small and sometimes humorous vignettes by him continued to appear in Lilliput .
The confidence with which he approached each new commission rested in part on his familiarity with past masters, with the work of Bewick, Blake, Calvert and Palmer in particular.
He also admired the professionalism that Edward Bawden brought to his work in a variety of graphic media.
When John Lehmann published the second issue of Orpheus , an annual symposium of the arts which folded after the first two volumes, he employed Minton to design its dustjacket and small tail-pieces.
He also gave Minton a copy of Pinet's 1733 edition of Horace, with its engraved decorations, and asked him to use it as a starting point.
‘The result,’ Lehmann has written, ‘surprised my expectations: a series of tail-pieces in which classical motifs were married to John's romantic lyrical fantasy.’
ILLUSTRATION FOR ORPHEUS: 2
John Lehmann had such confidence in Minton's design sense that when he handed to him the typescript of Elizabeth David's A Book of Mediterranean Food he gave him carte blanche to do as he liked with it.
The book had arrived on Lehmann's desk unsolicited, an unprepossessing bundle of grubby typescript, and was given to Julia Strachey, then working as one of his readers.
She reported that it was well written and the product of an expert.
She then pointed to the recipe — Turkish Stuffing for a whole Roast Sheep — delighted by the disparity between the thought of this sheep and the few ounces of meat a week which begun jotting down recipes for this book after she had been sent back to England in 1945, owing to her health, from New Delhi, where she had been living with her husband.
Finding herself jobless and with little to do, she drew upon her past experience of life in the Mediterranean and began compiling recipes ‘less with any thought of future publication  than as a personal antidote to the bleak conditions and acute food shortages of immediate post-war England’.
When it appeared in the bookshops in May 1950, at a price of 10s 6d, Minton's brightly coloured and spirited dustjacket further confirmed its anti-austerity appeal.
If displayed in shop windows, Elizabeth David recalls, it could be seen far down the street.
ILLUSTRATION FOR A BOOK OF MEDITERRANEAN FOOD
Minton had already lent his talent to cooking when in 1946 he and Denton Welch prepared vignettes for Contemporary Cooking: Receipts from  Vogue 1945–47 .
In this his inventive energy makes Welch's more delicate line appear fussy and twee.
But both suffered from the blurring of detail which resulted from the reduction in size that their drawings underwent in printed form.
Minton also tried in some of these designs to do too much.
On the opening page a woman lifts the lid of a soup tureen, releasing a cloud of steam in which unfurls all the ingredients in the soup.
His imagination does not stop there but builds around it an architectural setting and a distant landscape.
All is compressed into a chapter heading illustration that shares the space available with the title, ‘Start with Soup’.
In A Book of Mediterranean Food his chapter heading illustrations occupy the whole width of the page and replace baroque extravagance with simpler, more pungent imagery.
Each section is preceded by a full page black-and-white design, its title written in Minton's characterful script.
The illustrations throughout achieve density without confusion, fecundity without claustrophobia.
No sooner had the book been launched than Lehmann asked Elizabeth David for another.
She had a small collection of recipes which had not been suitable for the Mediterranean book and these now became French Country Cooking , published in 1951.
One of the attractions of the first book had been Minton's delight in the shape of things — fish, bowls, tureens, vegetables, fruit, octopus, squid and elaborate sweets.
For French Country Cooking he borrowed from Elizabeth David many of the utensils that appear in his illustrations.
Again the book is prevented from becoming over-ornate by Minton's terse line and love of clear statement.
It had by now become his habit to turn to Bobby Hunt for occasional assistance, with such items as the plane in the final tail-piece in Time Was Away and which he did not know how to draw.
Several aspects of French Country Cooking were roughed out in pencil by Bobby and then worked over in ink by Minton and imprinted with his own personal style.
His drawings again register the pleasure in the ingredients and activity of cooking that is also conveyed by the prose.
Both books display Minton's effervescent gaiety, but, even before his illustrations became overlaid with a period nostalgia an undertow of sadness could be discerned beneath their cheerful manner.
6
MAD TEARFUL GAIETY
WHILST Minton lived at Hamilton Terrace it remained an open house for anyone wishing to call.
Friends snowballed, as well as hangers-on.
When the bookseller Martyn Goff wrote to Minton after buying one of his paintings, he received in return an invitation to visit.
On arriving at Hamilton Terrace he found the front door open.
As this seemed an invitation to enter, he knocked, called out ‘Is anybody there?’ and stepped inside.
As he was wondering whether to proceed further or retreat a woman appeared, possibly Minton's mother, who said, ‘Ah, hullo, you must be Johnny's latest boyfriend.’
Seeing the shock she had caused, she then told him not to be so rattled.
Goff became a regular visitor to Hamilton Terrace, a friend of Minton and also Vaughan, though the latter he found a taciturn, difficult person.
He witnessed Vaughan's resentment of Johnny's Circus, also the way in which Minton, like a piece of Sellotape, automatically picked up people when he went into a pub.
Goff thought that Minton, consciously or unconsciously, divided his friends into two categories, serious and fun — and was aware that he belonged to the first.
Minton, with teasing flattery, referred to his new friend, six years his junior, as his ‘property consultant’, for he asked Goff for advice when he began thinking and talking about moving.
In turn, Goff invited Minton for weekend visits to his four-hundred-year-old cottage at Dallington in Sussex.
Whilst there Minton did what he never did with his ‘fun’ friends: talked seriously about his work.
Goff recollects him saying that he felt in danger of being left behind because whilst exciting things were happening in art he was not being allowed to develop.
When Goff countered, ‘Nobody's stopping you,’ Minton insisted they were.
One difficulty lay in the endless commissions he received, usually for illustrative work within an established vein and which left him little time to experiment.
Towards the end of his life, when giving a talk on his career at the Royal College of Art, Minton was asked what had been the most  difficult factor to contend with.
He replied: ‘Instant recognition at an early age.’
There had begun to develop in Minton a dichotomy between the praise he received and what he felt he ought to be.
The strain this imposed became unbearable as the gap widened.
Drink accentuated the extremes in his nature, the melancholy and the exuberance, and he became capable of unnerving pranks.
Once when a policeman announced he was going to arrest him for being drunk and disorderly, Minton pointed to his helmet and expostulated, ‘What!
In that hat?’ and the policeman, deflated with laughter, let him go.
On another occasion a relatively small misdemeanour proved unforgivable.
Whilst Keith Vaughan was art director for John Lehmann's publishing house, he was a frequent visitor to their near neighbours in Hamilton Terrace, Hamish and Yvonne Hamilton.
On one occasion Minton, too, was invited to a dinner at which a famous pianist was present.
Everyone, Minton above all, pressed him to play; scarcely had he begun to do so when Minton fell snoringly asleep.
Careless in some situations, in others he proved punctilious.
He never lost the affection and respect of the bank manager Fred Elt whose portrait he painted and with whom he occasionally dined at Elt's basement flat in Gloucester Place, on one occasion taking Susan Einzig with him.
When Elt, after a string of famous mistresses, including the doctor Joan Malleson, settled down with Jean Ashman, Minton designed the invitation for a party they gave and painted a dado to ornament the room.
Jean had a daughter by her former marriage and, soon after moving to a flat not far from Hamilton Terrace, held a party for her, inviting adults as they as yet knew no children in the area.
When those invited cried off, Jean knew that Minton was the kind of person who would drop everything to help out.
This he did, entertaining the child wonderfully and asking her how old she was.
‘Seven,’ she replied.
‘My dear,’ he said, ‘you don't look a day under eight.’
His personal magnetism was enhanced by his ever-increasing public success.
It galled Keith Vaughan to observe Minton's mushrooming contacts, one commission leading to another.
It was Minton, not Vaughan, who was asked to judge competitions, who drew drawings for the Tribune pamphlet The Jews at Home by Woodrow Wyatt, MP; Minton who was invited by the British Tourist Authority to illustrate their official booklet on London and whose design for the ‘Christmas Books Number’ appeared, with a Picassoesque lamp on the cover of The Listener on 9 December 1948.
It was Minton, not Vaughan, who had become John Lehmann's favourite and who did six vignettes for the dustjackets of his Chiltern Library classics.
Still more irritating was the fact that whilst Vaughan laboured slowly, working up his ideas through a series of studies, Minton dashed out striking designs with astonishing facility, working with fierce concentration and a pertinacious resistance to interruptions.
If he needed to revise his original idea he made use of Process white or cut holes and glued new bits of paper together.
A complete professional, he performed to deadline and coined the motto: ‘Art for art's sake but money for God's sake.’
COVER DESIGN FOR THE LISTENER
His ability to generate energy, to charge any situation with hilarious fun, coloured the lives of all who came into contact with him.
Susan Einzig regarded him as one of the brightest jewels in a smart set.
Within this was a homosexual freemasonry with John Lehmann at its centre.
Minton, though very definitely a part of the circle, was also contemptuous of it and never lost an opportunity to poke fun at it.
Though his occasionally camp remarks signalled his homosexuality, he felt uncomfortable in the company of ‘nancy’ boys or ‘queens’.
Often there was an element of paternalism in his affection for adolescent boys and young men.
He created around himself at Hamilton Terrace a kind of family and it was this aspect of his life that allowed Susan Einzig to conceive of herself as a mother figure.
She loved the hot stews that Minton produced out of the oven when they returned from the pub.
Occasionally she stayed the night in the boiler room, and when Minton suddenly began exploding with wit, it was sometimes she who best engaged him in repartee.
For Einzig, Vaughan was another attractive ingredient in the Hamilton Terrace ménage.
This sensitive, intelligent and finely-made man sometimes allowed her to sit in his room while he practised the piano, on the understanding that he was not to be disturbed.
Only gradually did she perceive the extent of his coldness.
He and Minton had begun to lead almost entirely separate lives: Vaughan, anxious for a steady relationship, ate with his current boyfriend separately from Minton and led a quiet life behind closed doors.
Minton, meanwhile, became more and more extrovert and seemed determined to break all the rules.
Susan Einzig thought he dressed badly until one day she recognised in his ugly sweaters and ill-matched clothes a marvellous insouciance.
His anarchic, renegade spirit attracted those working-class boys who, on arriving at Hamilton Terrace, found themselves suddenly liberated from the limitations and conformity of their background.
Minton encouraged them to do as they pleased and a high time was had whilst he paid the bills.
If money gave him power, he himself became a victim of it: many of these young men, once the recipient of Minton's not uninterested generosity, returned in a steady stream for more.
Exposed to Minton's freewheeling, glamorous Bohemianism, some found it difficult afterwards to stand on their own feet, for Minton had effectively broken them away from their backgrounds or their jobs.
More than one underwent a major breakdown after his relationship with Minton was abruptly terminated.
Martyn Goff could not help noticing that most of  Minton's young men tended to play listening, attendant roles; they seemed to be looking uneasily over their shoulders as if aware that they did not really belong.
Goff thought none looked fully relaxed or wholly free of shyness or worry, even though it was really Minton, who played the grand seigneur , who was racked by doubts, anxieties and self-pity.
At times he openly despised his boys; one, who had a passion for candy bars, he nicknamed ‘Munchpot’: ‘Why don't you justify your existence, Munchpot,’ Bobby Hunt heard him say, ‘and empty the wastepaper basket.’
Minton gained respite from the chaotic comings and goings at Hamilton Terrace by going down to Kent, to stay with Newton and Edie Lamont at their house ‘Marshalls’, in Chart Sutton.
When they moved into this house in January 1945 Edie began writing the first of two consecutive five-year diaries.
Over the next ten years she logged in note form details concerning her three-acre garden, trips to London and the arrival and departure of guests.
From these diaries we know that Minton made between two and four visits to ‘Marshalls’ every year up until 1954, staying usually a couple of nights and returning to London with sheaves of drawings.
He drew the nut grove in the Lamonts' garden and the surrounding countryside, especially the view over the Weald found within two minutes' walk from their house.
With Edie, he made drawing expeditions to Little Chart Forstal, Frittenden and Tenterden.
His Kent landscapes had contributed significantly to the success of his 1945 Roland, Browse and Delbanco exhibition, soon after which he tried to interest the same gallery in Edie Lamont's work.
They found her drawings and watercolours too like his own and he disguised his embarrassment by joking to her that he seemed to have cornered the nut-tree market.
Edie was not dismayed and continued to exhibit occasionally in mixed exhibitions at the Leicester Galleries and at the London Group.
At one point she returned to art school, to do a printmaking course at Regent Street Polytechnic.
She also went regularly to exhibitions and on her visits to London would sometimes meet Minton, either for lunch in his studio or at a private view.
‘There's a comic article in The Studio this month,’ he told her in July 1947, alluding to the first full-length article on himself written by Bernard Denvir.
Minton's friends were aware that Edie Lamont was an important figure in Minton's life, but most knew little or nothing about her.
He deliberately kept the Lamonts in a separate compartment, their home providing him with a place to refuel in company he enjoyed and in  countryside he loved.
With Newton Lamont he exchanged lively banter.
When Time Was Away appeared, Newton wrote a spoof review of it.
He castigated the illustrator of Time Wasted Away for not bringing his work in line with that of Miss [sic]Vanessa Bell and, among other things, for depicting the sun as an eight-pointed starfish in the sky.
Minton responded with characteristic verve.
With the characterful, somewhat imperious Edie there was a deeper  rapport.
As Minton's letters reveal, he chatted with her about his visits to Bristol to make advertisement drawings for the Imperial Smelting Corporation (Colour Plate VII), about Michael Ayrton's ‘maddening’ article, ‘Picasso, Master of Pastiche’in Penguin New Writing and about Geoffrey Grigson's Samuel Palmer: the Visionary Years which the students at Camberwell gave him when he left in December 1947: What is absent in Minton's letters to Edie Lamont is any hint of his riotous social life.
They suggest that the territory the two friends shared was restricted.
It was perfectly acceptable for Minton to take Vaughan down to ‘Marshalls’, as he did in December 1946, and the following year Edie sent them both nuts, port and a Christmas log, as a result of which, Minton thanked her, ‘English romanticism will flourish again'.
But when he asked to bring Bobby Hunt he was careful to explain why: ‘He's quite talented and would enjoy making drawings so enormously, as he never seems to get out of town: please don't hesitate to say no if it would be akward [sic], he's only about eighteen and quite manageable, and we will bring some food…’
Edie was the kind of lady who understood far more than she was prepared to discuss.
On two occasions Minton accompanied her to Sissinghurst where they had sherry with Vita Sackville-West, whom Edie had met whilst making drawings of the house and garden.
Though Edie became Vita's final lover, and was with her when she died, she is unlikely to have treated homosexuality with anything more than tacit acceptance.
If this supposition is correct it would explain Minton's gratitude to her, for she was among the list of close friends to whom he left a small financial benefit.
With the money she received after his death she had an outbuilding converted into a studio and into one wall inserted a memorial plaque, giving Minton's name and dates.
In Edie's company Minton had drinks with H. E. Bates in 1949, at his home at Great Chart, in connection with the illustrations he was designing for Bates's The Country Heart , a revised compilation of his two  previous books,O More than Happy Countryman and The Heart of the Country .
Some of the designs, including the wrought-iron flower stand at the end of Chapter 10, were based on objects and views found in Edie's garden.
Bates's gentle, brooding descriptions of the English countryside, especially that of Kent, his unobtrusive style and his nostalgia, regretful yet accepting, won Minton's admiration.
He found Bates's landscape ‘very suitable for illustration’, and he adopted a style which, like Bates's prose, is ruminative, serene, celebratory and welcoming.
The ingredients are familiar, reminiscent of the pastoralism of Bewick and Palmer, but they are patterned in such a way as to avoid the cosily picturesque.
The illustrations, like those he subsequently did for Reginald Arkell's Old Herbaceous (1950) are printed not in black but in a softer sage green.
But it is The Country Heart that best represents an aspect of Minton which his increasingly frenetic metropolitan life was gradually to erode.
ILLUSTRATION FOR THE COUNTRY HEART
IN spite of his determined flippancy and his furious pursuit of the passing attraction, Minton could not disguise his underlying seriousness nor the depth of his cultivation.
Martyn Goff was repeatedly amazed by his knowledge of books and recollects him quoting from Shakespeare and Moby Dick at length, whilst simultaneously rolling his eyes in parodic style.
On those young men who had a capacity to respond, his interests had a constructive influence.
Bobby Hunt was one who accompanied Minton on his weekly tour of the galleries and who found himself reading books he might not otherwise have read.
Minton was also alert to developments in contemporary art.
In the early  1950s, soon after Michael Andrews' diploma exhibition at the Slade, he predicted that of all the talented young artists then emerging, Andrews was the one who would last.
He also followed developments in Graham Sutherland's art, critically.
‘I looked in at Sutherland's Northampton crucifixions,’ he told Edie Lamont in 1947.
‘There is a ‘deposition’ which seems an awfully good beginning for something: they're all a bit like that: you know: awfully good beginnings.
But interesting.’
A year later, when Sutherland exhibited paintings of gourds and grasshoppers in Mediterranean colours Minton remarked that they ‘looked a bit like hectic weekends at Antibes with Pablo’.
A more open revelation of his thought was broadcast on the radio, on 22 May 1947.
This was a talk on William Blake, timed to coincide with an internationally touring exhibition of this artist's work.
Minton began by asking: What makes an artist?
There is nothing original in Minton's perception of Blake's driving passion to translate a poetic and mystical vision into art, nor in his essentialist belief in tradition.
Nevertheless the urgency of his conviction impresses and as his appreciation of Blake proceeds he reveals the extent to which his own preoccupations drew inspiration from this artist's work.
In the summer of 1948 Minton terminated his association with Central School of Art after only two terms.
He had moved from Camberwell to Central with William Johnstone and at his request.
At Central Johnstone's increasingly autocratic manner began to anger some of his staff, among them Rodrigo Moynihan who, like Minton, was drawn away by an invitation from the Royal College of Art.
In Minton's case the attraction was the opportunity to do one day less a week than he had done at Camberwell or Central.
At the Royal College, as an assistant in the School of Painting he earnt £425 per annum for two days' teaching a week.
Aware that he had been taken on by the college  as part of a programme of reform, Minton told Edie Lamont: ‘They have inaugurated a drive to bring it in line with what they call Contemporary Trends.
I think they have got me in as Comic Relief.’
The man responsible for instigating change was Robin Darwin who had taken over as Rector on 1 January 1948.
Though differences of opinion exist on the rationale behind Darwin's reforms, there can be no doubt that he radically transformed a weak and backward-looking organisation into an internationally renowned art school.
He stamped his authority on the college to such an extent that this period in the College's history is now labelled ‘the Darwin era’.
He was particularly keen to establish contacts between the college and what was happening elsewhere in post-war Britain.
To this end he reintroduced a school of industrial design, sacked the Professor of Painting, Gilbert Spencer, who had advised students not to visit the 1945–6 Picasso and Matisse exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum, appointed the former fashion editor of Vogue , Madge Garland, as the first ever Professor of Fashion and invited Allan Walton, who died before he could take up the post, to head the textile department.
Darwin was himself a painter (also the great grandson of Charles Darwin) and he positioned himself in a red-damasked office in the Painting School, yet gave a fair crack of the whip to both art and design.
The sensitivity that is evident in his paintings was concealed in his person behind an authoritarian and at times belligerent manner.
Nor was there any hint of the Bohemian in his double-breasted suits, his heavy spectacles and walrus moustache from beneath which emerged his loud, peremptory voice.
Utterly determined on success, he adopted a dandyish nonchalance and seemed to run the College from his armchair in the Senior Common Room when in fact he frequently undertook paper work late into the night.
Within a year of his appointment he had managed to sever the College from the Ministry of Education and had established it as an independent foundation with its own College Council.
As a mere formality, Minton, like others, was then reappointed on to the staff.
He very quickly became embedded in the Royal College.
‘I've started at the College,’ he told Bobby Hunt, ‘— it's very nice there as I don't have to do anything: the paintings though are past belief.’
He had always taken a strong interest in his students but, compared with Camberwell and Central, the College, having more pretensions, had a social side that created greater togetherness.
This became pronounced in 1949 when the College secured a long lease on two houses, 21 and  23 Cromwell Road, into one of which they moved the Senior and Junior Common Rooms, formerly housed in a hut in Queensgate.
At Cromwell Road the students made use of the first floor which had a magnificent music room and a ballroom which they loaned to the Senior Common Room for the purposes of the annual Royal College Charity Ball which rivalled the Chelsea Arts Ball.
Downstairs the Senior Common Room occupied two large rooms ornamented with marble and gilt columns and eighteenth-century fireplaces.
Its restaurant provided good food, reasonably priced.
Darwin was himself something of a gourmet, also punctilious in his insistence that ties were obligatory.
He always sat at ‘the Painters’ table' which was regarded with envy from other quarters, in part because of the noisy laughter engendered by Minton's wit.
In addition the Senior Common Room prided itself on its Extraordinary Members, opening its doors to leading figures in the arts and industry, and in this way created the atmosphere, less of an educational institution than of one of London's most interesting private clubs.
In the Painting School Minton worked with Rodrigo Moynihan who had replaced Gilbert Spencer as Professor of Painting.
Moynihan had emerged into the limelight after the war on the strength of his portraiture, in particular that, done as a War Office Commission, of an ATS girl in uniform,Private Clarke .
The result had been as fresh-faced and direct as Hogarth's Shrimp Girl and when the Queen was persuaded to choose Moynihan as the portraitist of Princess Elizabeth, she wanted the same quality as that found in Private Clarke .
A year after he took up office at the College, Moynihan began a group portrait of the staff of the Painting School.
Minton had already sat for his portrait to another member of staff, Robert Buhler, for a sensitive, restrained likeness, but, with hindsight, it is Moynihan who fashioned the more telling icon (Plate 15).
Like Baudelaire in Courbet's painting of the artist's studio, Minton is set apart from the central group both compositionally and by his introspection.
Initially, Moynihan's intention was to use Minton's striking looks to counterbalance the interest elsewhere.
But the melancholy and isolation conveyed by his pose is also suggestive of a person beyond reach.
Throughout much of 1948 Minton had been working up oils based on his drawings and watercolours of Corsica for an exhibition at the Lefevre, initially promised him at the end of that year but not mounted until February 1949.
He feared that another show, arranged for him  through the Lefevre Gallery, at Durlacher Bros, 11 East 57th Street, New York, would also have to be delayed as by the end of the summer he had not done enough work.
However, the New York exhibitions went ahead, opening in October 1948, but with thirty-one drawings and only eight oils, of Corsican and Kent scenes.
‘As for painting — I don't know where I'm going though steadily downhill, I expect,’ he told Edie.
When Keith Vaughan left for a holiday in France in July 1948, he had momentarily found himself alone at Hamilton Terrace and again reported to Edie on his progress.
He was also working on Cornish subjects based on drawings made the previous March when he, Eric Verrico and Bobby Hunt had gone down to Mevagissey, where Nessie Dunsmuir was living alone whilst Sydney Graham was in America.
In August 1948 he again left London, on this occasion at the urging of Bobby Hunt and Peter Dunbar who were in Paris.
They had found Montparnasse and had installed themselves unwittingly in the brothel, the Hôtel Select, making friends also with the girls who haunted the nearby Café Ambiance.
At first Minton felt he was too involved with things to get away: ‘As for Dimbulb Verrico,’ he told Hunt, ‘he has taken out a licence to marry his motorbicycle, and I have not seen him since you left…
I'm glad you're getting around, this chapter in your autobiography will doubtless come under the heading Foreign sex, as opposed to all the other chapters which just come under the heading sex.
Anyway it's nice to know that no time has been wasted though I don't imagine there will be much energy left for the Finer Things.
London is miserable, rain and boredom and I have been drinking steadily in an attempt to instil some gaiety into my apathetic mind…
O well, I'll see you podge, when you get back.
Have frightful larks — I remain, as ever, your frustrated china, John.’
In another envelope he sent Hunt two pounds, repeating this act a week or so later.
By then, however, having sent off his pictures  for his New York exhibition, and faced with having to paint more for his Lefevre show, he thought a visit to Paris in order.
‘Dear Fudge,’ he wrote to Hunt, ‘by this time the frightful fact will have dawned upon you that Plastercast and I are really coming out to see you.
A hurried hiding of skeletons in closets will be no use, the truth will be discovered, and Judgement made.’
He felt a need to get out of London, Eric Verrico was keen to see Paris and the £40 Minton brought with him fuelled the ‘larks’ all four now had.
‘Why are you living in a brothel?’
Minton asked on arriving, proving this revelation with the thousand-franc notes he produced and which enabled his young friends each in turn to take Mimi or Fifi upstairs, Hunt having previously thought that these girls, whom they drew and took dancing, were secretaries.
This year Minton also began to practise lithography.
Through Colquhoun and MacBryde, who were receiving patronage from two sisters who lived in Lewes, Mrs Frances Byng Stamper and Caroline Byng Lucas, he became associated with the Society of London Painters-Printers which set up in 1948, in conjunction with the Redfern Gallery.
The two sisters had converted the stables attached to their home, Miller's House in Lewes, into a studio which during the war had become a kind of arts centre, where exhibitions, lectures and concerts were held and which received support and encouragement from eminent names.
They had published a book of artists' lithographs in 1945, inspired by the example of French peintres-graveurs .
At their encouragement Duncan Grant, Vanessa Bell, Ceri Richards, Colquhoun, MacBryde, Vaughan and Minton began working on specially prepared lithographic paper which was afterwards sent, either to a well-known lithographic printer in Paris, Louis Ravel, or to the Chiswick Press.
The aim was, through the conjunction of good quality paper and inks, to eliminate a certain deadness and flatness inherent in the lithographic process and to replace it with a velvety depth and richness of colouring often lacking in English lithography.
Though lithographs by Minton are few in number, he became fascinated by the medium, and on 24 November 1948 took part in a Third Programme broadcast on the subject, timed to coincide with the Victoria and Albert Museum exhibition, ‘150 Years of Lithography’.
In this Minton admitted that lithography for him remained ‘a business of surprises, hazards and disasters’.
It attracted him, he said, because it was closer to painting than any other graphic medium, and because he enjoyed the business of building shapes that interlock, overlap and interplay.
‘It has a certain softness and richness,’ he concluded, ‘which  is both its charm and its danger.’
Instancing Lautrec, Vuillard, Bonnard and Picasso, he argued that painters rather than graphic artists have made lithography flower.
One of Minton's lithographs,Jamaica , was printed under the auspices of the Artists' International Association and sold at four guineas, with discount for schools and institutions.
Those that he produced for sale through the Redfern Gallery were usually printed in editions of fifty and include Thames-side, Bull Fight, Spain, Tropical Landscape, Horse Guards in their Dressing Rooms at Whitehall and Working Men's College , this last relating to his association with the Working Men's College in Crowndale Road, Mornington Crescent, where he gave a lecture, ‘The Painter's Intention’, in 1952, taught lithography and also acted as Art Adviser.
One of Minton's lithographs,Thames-side , was included in his exhibition of new work at the Lefevre Gallery in February 1949.
In addition to this print and the colour lino-cut Quayside and Lighthouse , he showed twenty-nine oils and thirty-seven drawings and watercolours.
Cornish harbour scenes and fishermen jostled with the more exotic terrain of Corsica.
There were also a cluster of Picassoesque still lifes, including Fish in a Glass Tank (Leeds City Art Gallery) in which tessellated areas of rich colour were marshalled into position by a harsh linear framework.
One entire wall was filled by The Harbour (present whereabouts unknown), a painting eleven feet in width, the scene offset by a large seated figure shown drawing in the left foreground.
When painting Cornish scenes Minton had been aware of the precedent set by Christopher Wood and The Times rightly saw in The Harbour an attempt to translate a Christopher Wood theme ‘into the tragic idiom of modern painters’.
Michael Middleton, reviewing the exhibition in The Spectator , found Minton's looser touch and greater directness welcome after the near-academic portraits of the preceding years.
But he admitted finding Minton's facility suspect and thought ‘the restlessness with which he is still casting about for fresh novelties of manner suggests a certain instability.’
But he also noted that Minton's determination to effect a balance between subject matter and pictorial construction, between heart and head, opened up wide possibilities.
Still more guarded approval came from Patrick Heron and Geoffrey Grigson.
Heron's obsessive concern with pictorial space determined his Observation that in several of Minton's paintings objects were ‘strung out across a dull plane’.
He argued that Minton's desire to describe  outweighed his impulse to compose; objects too literally reported were not sufficiently re-created.
He also observed: ‘In the minute monotonous complexity of this Sutherlandish detail of dots, blobs, circles, spikes or sickle-shaped leaves…the logic of the spatial theme…breaks down, dissolves into the consistent texture of the good textile designer.’
The decorative insistence, to which Heron objected, can be interpreted as a visual expression of Minton's loneliness, of his desire to charm and seduce, to be accepted and to belong.
Grigson, writing in The Listener , was equally forthright: he found in Minton's work interesting prose but not a poetry of interpretation.
‘I did not enjoy the insufficient and coarse relation of shapes,’ he wrote.
‘I found a hardness of nerve, a criss-cross of trip wires but no particular bliss, no particular revelation, or stimulation or irritation of the enlargening, fertilising, satisfying kind; although as well no inclination towards toffee.’
He ended on a more respectful note: ‘adverse opinion is not going to elbow out this assured, intelligent, unlyrical artist.
He has driven himself a long way in a short time (abandoning, for example, the naïve); he will drive on, and we shall have to see how he uses this hardness, emphasis, energy and comprehensiveness, how much more power he has of development.’
The exhibition was only a partial success, the watercolours selling better than the oils.
Still Life with Electric Heater reappeared in a Summer Exhibition at Gimpel Fils later that year, when it was reproduced in The Listener (1 September 1949).
In October it bobbed up again, still unsold, at a mixed exhibition at the AIA Gallery.
Likewise, Minton's huge harbour scene, returned from the Lefevre, was sent off to the Royal Academy's 1949 Summer Exhibition where it attracted the ridicule of Sir Alfred Munnings.
He is said to have derogated the picture as ‘just juggling about’ and ‘copying others’, and that the picture would not even serve as a good poster.
His remarks made the press and Minton's response was sought.
Munnings, he told reporters, was a better judge of horses than paintings.
This same year Munnings made his controversial attack on modern art at the Royal Academy dinner and afterwards resigned as its President.
Minton, meanwhile, was answering further questions from the press.
Why had he used a herring-bone sea in one of his Cornish scenes and painted the sky lemon-green?
‘One might as well ask a tree why it grows,’ Minton is said to have replied.
‘You search for colours until you find one that sings.’
Next it was reported that The Harbour had sold, for £250 to an Eastbourne hotel which planned to hang it in its ballroom.
The sale, however, fell through when the hotel  requested Minton's presence in Eastbourne for a presentation connected with the painting.
Minton, by now tired of publicity and fuss, refused and the hotel withdrew its offer.
The frequency with which his name appeared in the press, in Art News and Review where he appeared in ‘Portrait of the Artist’(also contributing a drawing of S. John Woods for the same series), in The Leader and Picture Post , confirmed his role as celebrity.
Yet at the same time his work began to display doubts and uncertainty: the oils produced in 1949 are uneven, their coarseness at times less deliberate than despairing.
He began to remark to others that he could not make the necessary synthesis, perhaps referring to a marriage of his romantic inclinations with the aim, inculcated in him by Colquhoun and MacBryde, to make it ‘tight’, to achieve the kind of fully integrated compositional resolution often associated with classical art.
For the moment his reputation was still high, as yet uneclipsed by that of Francis Bacon and Lucian Freud.
But his ‘aesthetic humanism’ which, according to Art News and Review , ‘has brought man back into the world of visual experiment’, was already being challenged by a revival of interest in non-figurative art.
Michael Middleton might argue ‘that Minton is aware of man,…in relation to nature, to his self-constructed civilisation, to the passing moment,’ but his failure to establish for his figures a setting that is anything more than a backcloth, limited the humanism inherent in his work, as well as its social or political relevance.
Though he might jibe at the London Group, his own work was sufficiently acceptable to this conservative exhibiting society for him to be elected a member in 1949, the same year that he was represented in ‘The Art of the Book Jacket’ which, after being shown at the Victoria and Albert Museum, went on tour at home and abroad.
LINKED as it was to the constantly shifting world of Soho, Minton's personal life during these years underwent continual change.
Some of his Camberwell friends were conscripted, Eric Verrico into the RAF, where he altered his name to Verrier to avoid anti-Italian feeling.
On one of his periods of leave he visited Hamilton Terrace and, at his parents' instructions, terminated his association with Minton.
Another Camberwell student, Mary Scholten, recollects how Minton's weeping saddened them all.
Bobby Hunt, owing to Minton's advice, managed to escape from the  army after only a matter of months.
From 1949 for a period of around four years he was a regular figure in Minton's life, performing as his illustrative assistant whilst also doing free-lance work and other odd jobs.
He found a girlfriend in Yvonne Marsh, from Beckenham, who adopted her surname as her Christian name.
She laughed easily, took a great liking to Minton and he to her.
‘Come off it!’ she would exclaim, her tough realism bringing the boys back to earth.
On one of her first visits to Hamilton Terrace in Bobby's company she was told that ‘the Roberts’ were coming to tea.
People came and went, including Colquhoun and MacBryde, but not the middle-aged couple that the name ‘the Roberts’ had led Marsh to expect.
Only on her way home with Bobby did she learn of her mistake.
In order to stay the night with Bobby at Hamilton Terrace Marsh would occasionally lie to her parents.
Her stepfather, discovering this, rang Minton, demanded Marsh's return and threatened to thrash Bobby.
‘Oooh, you lucky thing,’ Minton said to Bobby, ‘— thrashed too!’
It was around the time of Eric Verrico's disappearance that the three Bernard brothers — Bruce, Oliver and Jeffrey — came into Minton's life.
Their father, Oliver P. Bernard, the theatre designer who had worked at Covent Garden and the Boston Opera House and who had also designed Art Deco interiors for Lyons restaurants, had died insolvent, thereby terminating his sons' education and obliging them to look for work.
Though all were to achieve success, Oliver as a poet, Bruce as picture journalist and Jeffrey as sports journalist and author of The Spectator's column, ‘Low Life’, they were at this time a little like characters out of a Chekhov play, searching and bewildered.
Minton was fond of all three, but it was the seventeen-year-old Jeffrey, thin, nervous, articulate and funny, who caught his fancy.
When Minton first met him he had already discovered Soho and, whilst telling his opera-singer mother that he was off to the Science Museum, would take the tube to Tottenham Court Road to wash dishes in the Budapest run by Victor Sassie (later the proprietor of the Gay Hussar).
He moved from job to job, for a period boxing in a fairground booth and also trying his hand at acting, whilst also posing for Minton in his studio in return for ten shillings a week.
‘I was a very pretty boy,’ Jeffrey Bernard admits, adding that being picked up by Minton was a little like becoming Long John Silver's parrot.
He joined the list of heterosexual men associated with Minton for whom the term ‘prick teasers’ has been aptly coined.
But unlike Eric  Verrico, Jeffrey could exchange chat with Minton about theatre and books, sharing, too, an admiration for Nye Bevan.
For a period they went to the cinema together, two or three times a week, afterwards eating at the Venezia in Great Chapel Street, also drinking in the Black Horse, or the Highlander (now called the Nellie Dean) or at the French (originally known as the York Minster but renamed after its association during the war with the Free French).
Minton's largesse was attractive: Bernard still recollects how, at a time when he was earning £2 10s a week, in a timber yard off Greek Street, Minton astonished him with a gift of £10, in effect a month's wages.
With Jeffrey Bernard Minton returned to Paris and the Café Ambiance.
Mimi and her red-haired friend called ‘Tiger’ who looked like Rita Hayworth, had developed the habit of referring to him as ‘Monsieur le Professeur’, for they knew that Jeffrey's thousand-franc notes came from Minton.
On another occasion when Bobby Hunt returned to his old haunt, the Ambiance, in the company of Marsh, the cry went up, ‘But where's Johnny?’
Bernard also accompanied Minton to Spain in the summer of 1949.
They travelled south, to Granada, Andalusia and the Levante, visiting Barcelona, Alicante and other places.
On subsequent visits to Spain Minton did reveal enough knowledge of Spanish to engage locals in conversations in bars, but in 1949 the only Spanish Bernard heard him say was ‘No, melón !’ to a waiter.
Together they went to bullfights, to watch Chamaco and Ordonez perform, Minton's interest in this art having been fired by Hemingway's Death in the Afternoon , by its colourfulness, sense of theatre and by the focus it gives to male idolatry.
He also could not visit Spain without recollecting that last romantic horizon, the Spanish Civil War.
One of his views of Alicante (reproduced in Arena [September/October 1950]), was of the spot where a massacre of the Republicans took place in the early days of the Civil War.
He afterwards told a journalist that on his visits to the cinema he was impressed by the audience's reaction to the newsreels (invariably concerned with Franco officiating at the launching of a battleship, the opening of an airfield or a barracks).
The complete silence was made more striking by the occasional inarticulate cry of some old Phalangist.
Crucial to Minton's life was the role played by money.
In the hard-pressed post-war years, when there was relatively little money around, it gave him a potency and significance that was easily abused.
He also knew that his grandmother's death would bring him additional  wealth.
‘Granny is still alive (at least I haven't heard),’ he told Edie Lamont in July 1948, ‘so no inheritance.
Well, not yet.’
Edith Mary Davies Webb died in January 1949.
Her will makes no mention of Minton, but it is likely that her death released the trust which her late husband had set up on behalf of the Minton children and of which John now remained the sole heir.
Increased wealth makes possible a more relaxed attitude to work and the need to get things done.
It is a measure of Minton's professionalism that he continued to meet deadlines and to produce an abundance of work.
But in the long term financial ease fostered his reputation in Soho at the expense of his art.
He expended more energy on others, aware that his flair for living, combined with his money, enabled him to give others a good time.
As the hangers-on increased, he became bitterly aware that his inheritance, far from liberating him, had trapped him in a role he could not forsake.
The photographer and author, Daniel Farson, recollects Minton surrounded by sailors and fussing over his latest infatuation as if he were a chorus girl, whilst simultaneously complaining, ‘I'm only liked because I'm rich.
I can buy anyone I want.’
Money also facilitated the expansion in his social life encouraged by his association with the Royal College of Art.
He frequently accompanied Rodrigo Moynihan and his wife, Elinor Bellingham Smith, to Soho and, according to Elinor, it was they who introduced him to Wheeler's in Old Compton Street, the expensive fish restaurant, famous for its oysters and its excellent cooking of fresh seafood, served simply with boiled potatoes and salad and without any form of dessert.
It became one of his regular haunts, as did the Gargoyle, the club founded in the 1920s by David Tennant and run by him and Hermione Baddeley as a meeting-place for society and the arts.
It was entered by a narrow door in Meard Street and reached by a tiny, rickety lift situated at the far end of a gloomy passage.
The club was situated on the top two floors of the building.
Matisse had been responsible for its decoration.
But the antique mirrors, which at his direction had been cut into squares in order to line the dining-and-dance room, were now tarnished and occasionally flew off the wall; and the two murals done by Matisse had been sold to Americans.
Nevertheless drawings by him still lined the hall which led into the bar, and for a period a mural by Minton, with some assistance from others, hung in the dining-room where visitors could dine simply or expensively, eating plates of goulash or a champagne supper, seated at scrubbed oak tables and benches.
Music was provided by an old-fashioned ragtime band led by Mr Alexander who, as Daniel Farson describes, conducted his musicians ‘with a brightness that was indefatigable’.
Whenever Minton entered Mr Alexander greeted him by leading the band into one of his two favourite songs: ‘My Very Good Friend the Milkman’ or ‘I'm Gonna Sit Right Down and Write Myself a Letter’.
Minton would repay him by sending over drinks in generous quantities.
Here Rodrigo and Elinor Moynihan would jive until the sweat poured down their faces.
The clientele, endlessly reflected in the shattered grandeur, might include Cyril Connolly, Philip Toynbee, Angus Wilson, Francis Bacon, Lucian Freud, Michael Wishart and Colquhoun and MacBryde.
Here, more than elsewhere in Soho, the atmosphere was tough and testing, with rudeness and wit the norm.
Fights frequently broke out in the course of which gilt chairs got hurled across the room.
At other moments Minton, detaching himself from his sailors, might dance alone, as Ruthven Todd has described:
Minton could also be found at another club in the same street, the Mandrake.
Situated in a basement, it had been founded originally by its owner Boris Watson as a chess club, a place where those with a fanatical interest in the game could ponder the next move in peace.
Owing to its underground atmosphere, it advertised itself for a period as ‘London's Only Bohemian Rendezvous’ and before long the business of drinking took over from chess.
Mary Scholten remembers that there was one bottle on the bar, labelled ‘élixir d'éléphant ’, around which many jokes were made but none dared drink.
Soho was predominantly a male environment: women, to be tolerated had to be either very beautiful, girlfriends or wives.
Few were taken seriously as individuals in their own right, one exception being the painter, Prunella Clough.
Another was Henrietta Law, the young wife of the film director, Michael Law, who, at thirty-six, was sixteen years  her senior.
Together they moved into an attic in Dean Street in 1951 and soon knew every shopkeeper, pub and club in the district.
Henrietta was striking, both in looks and manner.
Two of the Bernard brothers first saw her seated at a bar drinking, whilst apparently listening to her male companion who was talking to her, quietly and seriously and in an unobtrusive manner.
Suddenly, and without any forewarning, she turned to face him, and in a voice, classy and resounding, said, ‘Oh, piss off darling.’
The Bernard brothers were so struck by this that for some weeks afterwards Henrietta was known to them as ‘Piss-off darling’.
All too easily Soho could become less a way of life than an unbreakable habit.
The easy sociability which it offered was fostered by the fact that all its pubs, clubs, restaurants and delicatessens were squeezed into an area no larger than a square mile.
All kinds of people mixed together in its pubs where the common interests were drink, talk and talent.
It was accepted at this time that if you had talent you could sponge and exploit, as Colquhoun and MacBryde did when they abused Elizabeth Smart's hospitality at Tilty Mill, a house belonging to Ruthven Todd and where they created havoc.
The only vice not tolerated in Soho was the capacity to bore.
As a result it was also a place where much could be learnt and where people went, not only in need of a drink, but in search for something or someone.
Much of the distraction on offer lay in the talk and behaviour of its queens.
A few pubs were specifically associated with homosexuality, notably the Fitzroy Tavern in Charlotte Street and Dean Street's Golden Lion, whilst St Anne's Court housed a lesbian club, the West End Rendezvous.
Servicemen flocked to the area.
‘Sailors were the élite,’ Daniel Farson observes; ‘guardsmen were less popular because they were known to be out for the money.’
Before the arrival of the sex shops that dominate the area today, Soho, with its small shops and delicatessens and its cast of well-known proprietors, characters and cranks, had a village quality.
Not until the evening did it come into its own, with the opening of its restaurants.
Nevertheless those who frequented Soho during the war years found its post-war existence disappointing.
Anthony Cronin felt that the Bohemia and anarchy that had prevailed during the war afterwards vanished and the purpose of the area altered.
For him it now became less a place of protest than a refuge for failures, free-loaders and misfits.
Alan Ross was another who could not recover his earlier infatuation with the area, even though he still occasionally visited it in the company  of Minton or Vaughan.
‘It seemed a dead, seedy place now, peopled by hangers-on and time-wasters…
It certainly wasn't fun any more, and efforts to make it appear so seemed hollow.’
Nevertheless for Minton, as for others, it remained a meeting place where friends could always be found and its usefulness had not been superseded.
It became Minton's second home, to such an extent that on one occasion when he walked into the Caves de France, a long, dark, rather Spartan bar which had a club licence and stayed open during the afternoons, he confronted a crowd of around fifteen of his friends, a throng he himself had largely created through introducing one to another.
‘Oh god,’ he was heard to say.
‘Here's everybody I've ever known in my life.’
And with that he turned and rushed out.
The Caves de France was next door to the Colony Room, the club run by Muriel Belcher above a trattoria in Dean Street.
It had first opened in December 1948, sporting leopard-skin covered stools and a bamboo-festooned bar.
Very quickly the leopard-skin seat covers disappeared, the carpet grew threadbare and the room turned brown and tarnished, retaining an atmosphere of faded glory.
However, in this small, shabby, smoke-filled room visitors could be sure of finding someone they either knew or wanted to talk to.
Muriel Belcher had previously run a club called the Music Box in Leicester Square and which during the war had become a theatrical rendezvous.
At the Colony Room she herself provided dramatic focus for, perched perennially on a bar stool, she was given to unrelenting abuse.
Having been born in Birmingham, where her parents, Portuguese Jews, ran the Alexander Theatre, she freely slated the provinces.
Like Rosa Lewis of the Cavendish Hotel, she too worked on the principle that the wealthiest person present should foot the bill; payment was extracted by the command, ‘Open your bead bag, Lottie.’
Middle-aged men were automatically addressed as ‘Miss’ for her persistent use of gender inversion helped disorientate visitors and created an upside-down world in which all accepted standards and values had no place.
Her closing call was not ‘Time, gentlemen, please,’ but ‘Back to your lovely cottages,’using the homosexual term for public lavatories.
And if she took a sudden dislike to a client, or observed one member behaving badly to another, her command, ‘Out, cunt!’, sent them packing.
A butch lesbian with motherly tendencies, she maintained her dignity and in some lights could look beautiful.
Her uncertain temper made a  trip to the Colony Room always an adventure.
And though rude, crude, vulgar and philistine, she also had an abrasive sense of reality that made her attractive to artists.
Francis Bacon, who drank free at the Colony Room in its early days in exchange for introducing rich punters, has remarked on Muriel's ‘tremendous ability to create an atmosphere of ease’.
The ease it offered was primarily a freedom from conformity.
We find Muriel Belcher pictured as ‘Mabel’ in Colin MacInnes's England, Half English :
Sleazy and exhilarating, the Colony Room dissolved inhibitions.
For George Melly it was in the late 1940s and '50s ‘the antidote to the grey and worthy austerity of the post-war world’.
Not all its visitors shared this opinion, some finding Muriel's autocratic manner and rudeness intolerable.
‘She's not a vision of loveliness today, is she?’ she would say of some man, in a deafening aside.
The club was prevented from deteriorating into a post-decadent state by the presence of the pianist, Mike Mackenzie, who kept the thread of respectability throughout.
Having a clubfoot, he walked with the help of two steel sticks, but sat smiling behind the piano, always unruffled and courteous, and greeting clients by playing their favourite tunes.
At some point a juke-box was also installed.
John Rothenstein occasionally visited ‘Muriel's’, as the Colony Room was often called, in the company of Bacon or Freud.
He has described how everyone present would be sitting at the bar or a small table, sipping drinks and engaged in quiet conversation.
IN the Black Horse, Soho, Minton met Ricky Stride during the winter of 1949–50.
Ricky was not long out of the navy, training as a body builder, doing carpentry, and also working on the door at clubs, as he was saving for a motor bike which Minton helped him to buy.
Soon after their meeting Minton wrote to Martyn Goff, in response to an invitation extended to himself and Jeff Bernard:
Ricky Stride's amiable presence at Hamilton Terrace assuaged Minton's personal loneliness which no amount of frenzied sociability could disguise.
He had frequently encouraged others to doss down simply because, as he admitted, he could not bear what he thought about at night.
His loneliness had recently been underlined by the fact that Ramsay MacLure, having been kicked out by the painter and critic Robin Ironside, had moved in with Vaughan, forming with him a steady relationship that caused Minton to talk of finding his own house.
Francis Bacon predicted to Michael Wishart that Minton would invite him to share it, as Wishart was then living with relations in the country and sleeping occasionally on the sofa in Bacon's studio.
There had also been talk of Wishart and Minton visiting America which, like Oscar Wilde, they hoped to take by storm.
Wishart frequently saw Minton in the company of his cousin Anna, the daughter of the poet Roy  Campbell.
Pretty, vivacious and also a Roman Catholic, she delighted in Minton's company, partly because his homosexuality left her untroubled by the passes she received from other men.
Wistfully, Minton thought of marrying her for he could envisage the beautiful children that her looks and Ricky's sperm would produce.
With the arrival of Ricky, Minton lost interest in the notion of a trip to America.
Wishart, on his visits to Hamilton Terrace, began to realise that Minton never listened to wise advice and seemed almost frightened of intelligent people.
If Wishart began talking about painting, he attended for five minutes, then deflected the conversation with ‘Do tell me about last night's sailor.’
His evident need to be in constant pursuit spoke frustration to Wishart who suspected that Minton was never sexually fulfilled.
Nor did Ricky's appearance lessen the drinking that went on.
If Wishart stayed the night at Hamilton Terrace his cup of tea the next morning was laced by Minton with the dregs from the night before.
On some occasions when Bobby Hunt or Mary Scholten was present, Minton would remark jokingly, as he clutched his tea laced with whisky in a shaking hand, that his sensitive line was too sensitive that morning.
He would then ask them to map out whatever design or illustration needed to be done.
In January 1950 his exhibition, ‘Paintings of Spain' opened at Lefevre's.
Nevile Wallis in the Observer drew a parallel between Henry James's labyrinthine style and the intricacies that result from an acute anxiety to communicate with delicate precision and Minton's oils, crowded with ingenious patterning and curious detail.
Equally perceptive was Bernard Denvir's remark in Art News and Review that though Minton is quintessentially an English artist, the quality of his work was now more suited to ‘the rigidly defined planes, the harsh metallic colours and the linear simplicity of the Mediterranean landscape’.
The show attracted much publicity.
Minton's The Two Bullfighters (present whereabouts unknown) appeared on the front cover of The Listener .
Inside was a praising review by Wyndham Lewis who, like Denvir, thought Spain ‘most congenial’ to this artist's vision.
The New Review ran a profile on Minton in which he is quoted as saying: ‘I love taxis, and the cinema, especially musicals in Technicolor, and I am very keen on jive [sic].
I go to the Jazz Club in Oxford Street every Monday and Thursday night.’
To celebrate the opening of the exhibition Minton held a party at the Mandrake, giving Boris Watson £200 over the bar with the insistence that it had to be spent.
Students from the Royal College  knocked back lethal concoctions and the party quickly became chaotic.
Even so the sum of money Minton had donated was so large that drinkers had to be brought in from the street.
The next week Minton wrote to Wishart:
Minton's letter to The Listener was published on 12 January 1950.
In it he attacked Marie Stopes who, in a previous issue, had protested at Herbert Read's denigration of Lord Alfred Douglas in a review of a new biography of Wilde, based, as she saw it, on ‘the hysterical and deranged outpourings of Oscar Wilde in prison’.
Wilde, she argued, was in a state  of insanity owing to the shock to his self-esteem of prison, ‘and the exposure of the abnormal and filthy practises which he had been indulging in with stable boys’.
‘In her letter concerning Wilde and Douglas,’ Minton's dignified reply begins, ‘it is indeed distressing that someone of Dr. Marie Stopes's eminence should refer to Wilde's homosexuality with such bigoted moral fervour.
The enormous contribution made throughout history — particularly in the arts — to society by homosexuals should surely make for a more tolerant and sympathetic understanding than to refer with such scorn to Wilde's ‘abnormal and filthy practises’.
In this country where the same vicious law which imprisoned Wilde still operates one looks to those with pretensions to a scientific approach not to be victims of prejudice and intolerance but to give a lead for at least a saner and more comprehensive attitude towards the homosexual in society.’
Despite the hectic pace of his life, Minton maintained his professionalism as an illustrator.
He would adapt his style according to the commission, returning, for example, in 1949 to a neo-romantic style for the Grey Walls Press anthology,New Road , or adopting a dryer, more factual approach for his portraits of Karl Rankl, Marjorie Shires, Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, drawings reproduced in the April 1950 issue of Opera .
For the Contact Book,Who Runs Britain ?, published September 1949, he produced five illustrations to accompany Marius Dick's article, ‘The Day of an Oxford Don’.
With their combination of brisk movement and weighty shadows, they richly evoke the ambience of the city and of college life.
Still more impressive is his cover design, continuous on front and back, for the Autumn 1949 issue of Progress , the Unilever House Journal (Colour Plate XIII).
Based on a solvent extraction plant in the Unilever oil mill at Erith, Minton deliberately adopted a style of drawing, physical and direct, that invites the viewer imaginatively to travel through and around the fantastical scene.
The combination of photolithography and the new Plastocowell process used in producing the cover did Minton's colour sense full justice.
There was apparently no commission, however small, to which he refused to turn his hand.
He contributed small humorous illustrations to Circus: The Pocket Review of Our Time when it began in April 1950.
Whilst painting a large decorative panel,Bullfighters , in a semi-cubist style for a Society of Mural Painters exhibition, he knocked off dustjackets for John Lehmann and also for Rupert Hart-Davis.
It.
Col.J.
H. Williams's Elephant Bill (1950; Hart-Davis) became a Book Society Non Fiction  Choice, partly because of the attention drawn to it by Minton's animated cover.
Though the book was illustrated with photographs, Minton made drawings for the extracts published in The Leader (13 May 1950).
Not all Minton's dustjackets were first class.
When it came to things he did not know how to draw, he often asked Bobby Hunt to do them.
The dolphin in Minton's design for Ralph Bates's The Dolphin in the Wood (1955; Hart-Davis) is not only poorly integrated with the drawing of the wood but is also drawn by a different hand.
Whenever a loss of finesse occurs, the hand of an assistant can usually be detected.
His dustjackets for John Lehmann remain the most impressive, chiefly because in most cases Minton designed not only the image but also the lettering, the title, author's name and publisher's imprint appearing in his own seemingly casual but richly decorative script.
His productivity and avidity for life could not obliterate an inner malaise.
In February 1950 John Lehmann noted in his diary: Minton was still working on Lehmann's large table, which he ornamented with figures and baskets of fish, fruit and flowers, on the theme of the seasons in rich reds, greens and yellows, in April and May 1950 (Colour Plate XV).
When finished it aroused ‘wonder and excitement’ in Lehmann's guests, as his diary records.
Minton, himself, still attended dinners and parties given by Lehmann, even though his interests were now drawing him away from the kind of society that Lehmann represented.
In October 1950 when Lehmann had a reconciliation lunch with Keith Vaughan at the Ivy restaurant after some disagreement, the two men found themselves discussing Minton and Ricky Stride ‘and the morality of letting a friend ruin himself if that is his deepest impulse’.
Outwardly Minton personified success.
He was one of the best known living artists in England, as yet uneclipsed by Pasmore, Bacon or Freud.
In June 1950 the Daily Express described him as ‘at 32 the Royal College  of Art's youngest teacher, a brilliant exhibitioner in London and New York, and one of our most sought-after magazine illustrators’.
This was by way of introduction to Minton's contribution to a regular column on hobbies.
He encouraged others to paint by describing his own method: sketch books taken on his travels were filled with ‘small drawings of things that hold the eye’.
Colour notes were added and the final picture worked up at home.
‘It is rather like copying the squirrel who collects nuts all through the summer when he can and then has a good store for the lean winter months.’
His most useful piece of advice concerned what to draw or paint.
‘Do choose interesting subjects.
A house, because it is lived in, a boat, because men sail it and live by it.’
The following month Minton was quoted in World Review , in an article by Alan Ross entitled ‘Travel Notes’.
‘As a traveller making drawings from which to make paintings, I am attracted to places where there is a strong individual flavour of climate and living.
For example, anywhere which derives its existence from the sea is likely to be good to draw —marine architecture, quaysides, boats, fishing — all the complicated mass of detail and shape which surround the activity of going to sea.
Ports in Corsica, Cornwall and the Spanish coast.
Industrial towns for the same reason, having some reality and authenticity which, for instance, seaside resorts and the London suburbs have not.’
He did less sketching than usual that summer, whilst travelling France in the company of Ricky Stride and his friend Roy Vincent, an acrobat at the Shepherd's Bush Empire and who, like Ricky, belonged to a crowd of friends who met by the river at Runnymede to swim, sunbathe, exercise and do acrobatics.
Ricky had recently received a small legacy and with this had bought an Opel car with a convertible roof.
When he and Roy had the idea of touring France, Minton decided to go along too.
They drove south to Cannes, putting up at hotels en route and also camping.
They made a rendezvous with Anna Campbell, who was also staying in the south of France, and passed much of the holiday in a mad drunken haze.
Minton drove only two yards, into a ditch, and encouraged Ricky and Roy at seaside resorts to pursue the girls, sitting glumly alone in cafés while they did so.
His greatest desire, Ricky Stride felt, was to be ‘one of the boys’.
The difficulty was that he could not enjoy this camaraderie without also falling in love with one of the boys, and by doing so he once again cast himself in an outsider position.
Then, too, the pleasure he took in Ricky's well-trained physique  left him painfully aware that in swimming trunks he looked ‘like a matchstick with the wood shaved off’.
They had not been back in London long before he and Ricky left for the West Indies.
The story that one of them must have told a Daily Sketch reporter a year later was that sitting in a West End club and finding the cold unbearable they had decided to go somewhere warm.
‘What about Jamaica?’ asked one and they bought tickets the very next day.
The story is apocryphal and an instance of the way Minton's life took on the quality of myth.
He had been planning a trip to Jamaica before he left for France.
In May 1950, whilst two of his pictures — a bullfighting scene and a portrait of Ricky Stride — hung at the Royal Academy, he wrote to Martyn Goff: ‘We leave England on September 9th by a banana boat for the West Indies for the winter at least; perhaps he said, with a faraway look, Forever.
I shall totter like a decaying bastion of English culture, right out of Somerset Maugham, rum-soaked and crumpled from bar to bar trying to remember What It Was All About!’
Minton had also to forewarn the Royal College of his intended absence.
With College authorities he reached an unofficial arrangement whereby for a term he gave his salary to Francis Bacon whom he had asked to fill his place.
Bacon did not want to teach but liked the studio that was offered him, and so replaced Minton, less as a tutor than as an honorary visitor.
Minton's intelligent responsiveness, to the character of people and places, was in operation the moment he stepped on to the SS Bayano of the Fyffes Line.
His first day at sea he wrote to Oliver Bernard who occupied Minton's share of 37 Hamilton Terrace during his absence:
Never one to opt out, Minton starred at the boat's fancy-dress ball when he appeared as the Mysterious Guest in female dress.
He and Ricky made friends with Captain Peter Blagrove and his wife Alice, wealthy, white Jamaican landowners who invited them to stay at their home.
The invitation was accepted, though on docking at Kingston, the two friends spent their first month at Dudley Lodge, Half Way Tree, just outside Kingston.
‘Well it's all here,’ Minton wrote to Bobby Hunt and Marsh, ‘all they said and more, the coral sands, the swaying palms, moonlight and glamour and all that stuff.
Luxury hotels at £10. 0.
0.
a day and VD any minute.
Some of it is wonderful, a lot of it is awful.
Poverty, the colour-bar, the English (oh god the English ), the rich, and a whole lot of Coloured Bores as well…
Everyone sits on verandahs endlessly and drinks.’
He wrote, sitting beside a swimming pool, with a rum and ginger to hand, whilst Ricky lay in bed with a hangover.
‘Our hotel is 2 minutes walk from a nightclub called the Glass Bucket — I am not sure this is a v. good idea.
But there — its done now.’
From Kingston they crossed the island to stay with the Blagroves whose mainly spice plantations Minton drew whilst Ricky exercised polo ponies.
The Captain and his wife proved so hospitable that Ricky stayed on for a few days after Minton left to stay with Paul (‘Odo’) Cross and Angus Wilson at their home Rio Chico at Ocho Rios.
It was here that Minton, whilst sunbathing out at sea on a lilo narrowly escaped the shark which, tempted by a lump of goat meat on a steel hook, was hauled in the next day.
When he and Ricky returned in December, Minton had with him a considerable mass of drawings and watercolours.
At intervals throughout the next months he worked on this material, in preparation for his show at the Lefevre Gallery in September 1951 and for other exhibitions.
At the Lefevre there were only four oils, including Fishing Canoe (Colour Plate XVII) and Banana Plantation (Colour Plate XVI), both priced at forty guineas, twice the sum asked for most of the thirty-eight watercolours.
The glowing tropical colour, the jagged patterns created by palms and the listless figures in streets and bars built towards a mood of heavy sadness and potential violence (Colour Plate XVII).
The Manchester Guardian critic noticed that Minton's figures were becoming less formalised and that he had ‘fastened on the banana tree almost as tightly as Sutherland had clasped the more uncomfortable  thorn-tree to his bosom’.
However, Minton's most appreciative critic on this occasion was the Marxist John Berger: ‘One senses Jamaica as a definite place in these pictures — the alternating dryness and dampness of the vegetation, the nights of unreal moonlight, the false animation of the people in the wooden cafés beneath Coca Cola advertisements and naked light bulbs.
And at the same time one is aware of the painter's sympathy, of the validity of his human values; two of the best (no 17 and no 28 — both market scenes) are surprisingly moving.’
Eric Newton, in Time and Tide (22 September 1951) likewise declared that Minton had never so surely caught the essence of a place, and in general the reviews were excellent.
That Minton had responded on many levels is evident not only from his paintings but also from an illustrated article which he wrote for Vogue .
At one level Jamaica had provided him with an intense visual experience.
The island's strange beauty, however, was set against a background of racial and political conflict.
It left him sharply aware of the dichotomy Jamaica represents: between travel-folder romanticism and pleasure beaches and a watchfulness peculiar to the tropics, ‘a disquiet that is potent and nameless’; between colonial elegance and the dusky faces lurking inside dark doorways, the sudden low laugh or flash of teeth.
Elsewhere, he was made acutely aware of the contrast between the colonial regency houses and the ugly jungle bungalows and villas.
Small villages, markets, sudden bitter squalls, white sands and banana boats are vividly described and the complex whole adroitly summarised in his final paragraph.
Minton had returned from Jamaica with several pairs of shoes, made in Manchester for the Jamaican market, and a host of ideas.
These he translated into murals in gouache on paper which covered the walls of the Colony Room for some months and were later replaced by a Jamaican oil painting and a portrait of Ricky Stride which Muriel Belcher owned.
Jamaican material also fed the large and complex decoration which, with help from others, he painted for the Festival of Britain's Dome of Discovery.
He had been given the topic, ‘Exploration’, and Keith Vaughan the theme of ‘Discovery’.
The Dome itself, designed by Ralph Tubbs, looked as if it had descended from Mars.
Its awe-inspiring interior space was to an extent destroyed by the exhibition display demonstrating how the urge to discover and explore had been expressed throughout the ages.
Minton also contributed to the Arts Council's ‘60 Paintings for ‘51’ exhibition, for which sixty artists had been commissioned to produce a painting at least 45″ × 60″ in size.
The present whereabouts of Minton's Jamaican Landscape is unknown and it was probably destroyed.
Sir Colin Anderson, patron, collector and for a period Chairman of the Tate Gallery's trustees, visited this exhibition and noted ‘flop’ beside the catalogue entry for Minton's work.
Other of his remarks prove how influential Minton was at this date, for beside Bryan Winter's Blue Landscape he noted: ‘Not such a good Minton as No 10 (Prunella Clough's Lowestoft Harbour ]— but better than No 37 [Minton's Jamaican Landscape ].’
Still larger than his Jamaican Landscape was the Jamaican Village which he sent that year to the Royal Academy's summer exhibition.
Painted in rich harmonies and discords with reds, purples and the acidic yellows created by electric light, this night scene, with its figures loitering outside bars, catches a desultory sense of disquiet.
Its vast size probably explains why it did not sell and, as it cluttered up his hallway for some time afterwards, Minton later gave it to the Royal College student and animal illustrator John Norris Wood.
1951 had been a good year for Minton.
His contract with the Royal College, due to end in September 1953, was renewed for a further five years after that date.
Aside from his Jamaican paintings, this was the  year that Minton produced his London Transport poster as well as the lithograph Apple Orchard, Kent for the second of three series of artists' prints which J. Lyons & Co. commissioned as wall decorations for their tea shops and which were also made available to the public at 15s 9d each.
As well as three dustjackets for John Lehmann and another for Collins, he illustrated Leaves of Gold: An Account of the Ancient Craft of Goldbeating and its development into a Modern Industry , an account of the Whitfield Street factory run by George M. Whiley, Ltd.
Minton's sober and workmanlike drawings instance his delight in registering rhythmic activity and industrial shapes.
When 1951 ended he could justifiably let rip in more frivolous fashion on ‘Huntin', Shootin' and Fishin'’ decorations for the Chelsea Arts Ball at which he saw in the new year.
7
THE HOPKIN MYTH
MINTON had a gift for clowning; he knew how to employ mimicry and extravagant gestures, maiden-aunt intonation and camp humour to uncover the risible in everything, thereby denuding uncomfortable feelings of their power.
It was a welcome gift, especially in Soho where the habitual tough, brazen stance often overlaid doubts, anxieties and unhappiness.
Even the seemingly unassailable Henrietta Law grew to adore Johnny Minton partly because she felt, in his company, that things were all right.
For Ricky Stride, association with Minton was like being in the presence of an exploding star: anything might happen, for he created around him an exciting and excitable atmosphere.
He could not walk into a room without arousing a response.
Some hated him, envying his success and finding his whole manner anathema.
Among a certain type he invited violence but was protected from this by the proximity of Ricky Stride whose physique gave him the appearance of a bodyguard.
A regular attender at body-building clubs, Ricky kept himself in good shape and his hair blond (‘you were falling over bottles of peroxide at every corner,’ Leslie Todd-Reeve recalled).
This stocky Apollo, in Robert Buhler's phrase, could be easily provoked.
In addition, Minton's intermittently hysterical behaviour and desire to shock brought out in Ricky the exhibitionist who would undress at parties and was game for any prank.
Underneath his impudent and occasionally violent behaviour lay a fundamentally nice, simple, easy-going, exceptionally warm-hearted character, in whom Minton took much pleasure.
Because Ricky was the first boyfriend to live openly with Minton, he attracted comment.
Along Minton's homosexual friends there were those who liked to dismiss Ricky, perhaps out of jealousy, as a dumb blond tart, a male Betty Grable, a powder puff on the make.
Michael Wishart thought that, apart from his looks, Ricky had ‘no point’ for Minton.
Some tell how, even in front of Minton, Ricky would make  passes at others.
But though Minton, in turn, often treated him like a mere house-boy, giving him money to go off and buy the food which he afterwards cooked, Ricky carried out his duties with considerable charm.
His dedication was further shown by intermittent attempts to curtail Minton's drinking.
His physical appeal was overwhelming.
When asked her opinion of Ricky at this time Marsh Dunbar described him as ‘a vision’.
Another Sohoite, Jenny Mortimer, found him ‘meltingly attractive’.
When Ricky began taking Jenny out she was surprised to learn that Minton paid him money and had taken him to the Caribbean.
Minton, on the other hand, was not pleased to learn that Ricky was seeing Jenny regularly, and, despite her vivacity and love of fun, never liked her.
He accepted, as a necessity and as a form of self-punishment, Ricky's need for women, but when Ricky returned from a weekend away he would ask rather bitterly, ‘Was she worth it?’
The tension in his relationship with Ricky was made worse when he began to needle him, to run him down in front of others.
Towards the end of their time together fantastic scenes would erupt.
‘Shut up or I'll hit you,’ Ricky would yell.
‘Go on, be a big man, hit me!’
Minton would retort.
A punch would be delivered and Ricky, thinking this had ended the row would take himself off to bed only to find the next minute that Minton was emptying a bottle of water over him.
And so these schoolboy fights went on.
On another occasion Ricky knocked Minton out on the platform of the Underground, afterwards propping him up on a bench until he recovered sufficiently to be walked home.
Minton's ebullient energy remained unimpaired.
In normal spirits he seemed to need only two steps to cross a room.
Tall, lively and springy, he characteristically flung his elbows about, his gait reflecting an angular gawkiness like that found in his drawings.
He remained keen on jiving and would throw himself all over the place, hair wild and eyes sparkling.
Another characteristic was his habit of prodding people.
In conversation he could, if encouraged, be elaborately fluent on a subject and in any exchange was naturally warm-hearted and responsive.
His vocabulary was curiously outdated: he went, not to a film or the cinema but to the ‘movies’, and ha'penny was always by him pronounced ‘half-penny’.
He also studded his talk with lines from humourists he admired — James Thurber, Charles Addams and the Canadian Stephen Leacock in particular.
‘It's all up with me, Maud,’ was a much repeated line from Thurber.
The element of wildness in his behaviour had originally been brought to the fore by Colquhoun and MacBryde, as a protest against repressive convention.
As the pace of his life increased, this wildness became ingrained and its Purpose more obscure; it became harder to understand what he was pursuing or being pursued by.
Michael Middleton has argued that Minton's search for stimuli in exotic places and his febrile manner of living reflects a longing to escape self-consciousness and to live in the moment: ‘He was for ever dashing off, afraid he might be missing something round the corner — another party, an evening at the Jazz Club, a drink on the Soho circuit.’
But the compulsion behind this need remains unexplained.
Black holes of discontent, which suddenly and horribly punctured his frenzied sociability, suggested that his ulterior motives remained unfulfilled.
No amount of friends and laughter could disguise the loneliness and sadness that dogged his life.
When asked what caused his melancholy he would refer to his dread of getting old.
He continued to assert that he would not live beyond the age of forty and even implied that he would take steps to ensure this.
At the same time he was prone to a feeling of guilt that his art was not what it ought to be.
Visible expression of his anxiety could be found in his fingernails which were so savagely bitten that his sheets were often stained with blood.
Owing to his strength of character, he could quell despair and, in public, continued to exert a potent spell over his audience.
Towards the end of 1951 he undertook a Sketch-Club criticism at St Martin's School of Art where his liveliness and way of talking impressed the young David Tindle, who, though not a student at St Martin's, was sitting in among the audience.
Tindle was then working as a commercial artist in Soho and living in a room in Portobello Road.
When early in 1952 he held an exhibition of his work at the Archer Gallery in Notting Hill, he rang up Minton and invited him to see it.
This Minton did, afterwards taking Tindle back to Hamilton Terrace where his large picture,The Death of Nelson , still in progress, was hanging on one wall.
After this Tindle saw a lot of Minton, either at Hamilton Terrace or Portobello Road where Minton did a drawing of the younger man in April 1952, afterwards painting a half-length portrait of Tindle which now hangs in Pallant House, Chichester.
Gradually Tindle also got to know Keith Vaughan whom he visited regularly on Saturday mornings after Vaughan had moved to Belsize Park.
Despite his liking for  Vaughan, Tindle could not help noticing that his seriousness was veined with self-importance.
Once, when angered, Vaughan without any trace of humour told Tindle, ‘Well, that strikes you out.
You won't go into my book!’
It was, Tindle reflects, a remark unimaginable on Minton's lips.
From Tindle's exhibition at the Archer Gallery Minton bought a small self-portrait (Plate 16) which Lucian Freud also wanted to acquire.
Painted very much under Freud's influence but with a neo-romantic hangover, this portrait incorporates a considerable amount of emotive distortion which serves, not to break the realist mode, but to enhance the immediacy of the sitter's presence, so that Tindle's face seems to press forward from within the picture space with almost mesmerising effect.
Whilst looking at this picture Minton told Tindle: ‘You're the first to see something in Lucian.’
Prior to this Minton had not been altogether convinced by Freud's painting, which he had tended to regard as cranky and a bit naïive.
But as Freud, with his own particular brand of madness and insistence, pressed on into a more realist style, Minton was obliged to recognise the power of his intensely probing vision.
His acquisition of Tindle's self-portrait amounted to an admission of Freud's relevance: from now on Minton's own portraits, however romantic in feeling, were to be dressed in a realist style.
Tindle never became a boyfriend of Minton's but once, when he stayed the night at Hamilton Terrace, he woke to find Minton's long face beside his, his big eyes staring as he remarked, ‘Sex happens before seven!’
As he got to know Minton well, Tindle could not help admiring the older man's flair for living and the way his response was never dense or dead.
He also noticed a certain rectitude, a tight primness, at odds with his easy sociability.
He was, for instance, punctilious about paying his models the agreed amount and would work out the precise sum owed to the last quarter of an hour.
After this, however, the young man might find himself taken off to Soho, where Minton's prodigality contrasted with his former carefulness.
‘I know you're frightfully heterosexual,’ Minton once teased Oliver Bernard when he stayed the night at Hamilton Terrace.
On another occasion he remarked to Bernard that though he enjoyed flirting and foreplay, he found sexual intercourse unsatisfactory.
When one of his young men buggered him, he admitted to Bobby Hunt and other intimate friends that he did not like it.
Minton belonged to the kind of homosexual whose ideal is manly  because their temperament is feminine.
Time and again he fell in love with young men who had nothing effeminate about them and who, though temporarily involved in a bisexual life, did not share Minton's inversion and could not on any long-term basis return his love.
Money procured for Minton the kind of men he needed, but his inability to possess them left him with  insatiable desire, to such an extent that his relentless pursuit of young men began to intrude into everything he did.
Love, for him, became like an incurable malady.
Frustration sometimes gave his mocking playfulness a malicious edge.
David Tindle observed him suddenly turn on his young men in a deliberate attempt to wind them up.
Aware of their vanity and dread of baldness, he would reach over and lift up a lock of hair, saying, ‘A little more brain showing today?’
He also liked playing one person off against another, mischievously involving a young man with the girl-friend of a boy he himself fancied.
He could also be more bluntly manipulative: on one occasion he walked up to a sailor, with his girlfriend at the bar, saying, as he gave him £20, ‘When you've finished with her, come and see Auntie Minton, she's got plenty more.’
At the other extreme he sometimes pushed his boys into bed with girls in order to make himself suffer, though a part of him may also have enjoyed the proximity or heterosexual life.
Frank and unremorseful about his homosexuality, he never fully resolved his attitude towards it, in part because it denied him the family he would have liked to have had.
And as the romantic in him began to despair that his dream would never materialise, his promiscuity increased.
Driving round Piccadilly Circus in a taxi he would screech out of the window, ‘I'm the Queen of England but I can't remember which.’
Meanwhile, in place of his ideal he substituted ‘rough trade’, favoured by other homosexuals of his class partly because it is easily discarded.
Some of his boys he treated like kept poodles, thereby displacing the scorn he felt for himself.
The film director Michael Law whom Minton met in Soho at this time has provided a vivid metaphor for his condition: ‘Johnny was really like a clock with the machinery hanging out.
The whole thing was exposed and vulnerable and terrible…he couldn't put it back into his system.’
‘Get you, Kate,’ he was fond of saying, harking back to the musical Kiss Me, Kate .
But no amount of camp humour could banish the bitter awareness that every time he gave way to his sexual needs he became a criminal.
He was also aware that homosexuals in Britain at this time  not only lived under the threat of illegality but were also regarded by many as deeply offensive.
After three or four casual meetings with the critic Mervyn Levy, Minton took him on one side at the Chelsea Arts Club and informed him of his homosexuality, not wishing to implicate Levy unwittingly with a man who, from a certain point of view, was beyond the pale.
At Hamilton Terrace Minton's relationship with Vaughan remained frosty.
In the kitchen Vaughan continued to insist on a careful separation of each other 's ingredients, labelling his and Minton's initials on their respective sides of the cupboard and refusing also to share his salt.
The situation was such that even Minton could become fussed if Vaughan made first use of Ricky's Daily Mirror .
In turn Vaughan continued to complain of Minton's riotous life for if he felt like it he would start jiving in the middle of the night.
Socially, they were rarely seen together except at John Lehmann's.
When he held a farewell dinner for Christopher Isherwood, who was returning to America, in February 1952, the guests included Minton, Vaughan, William Plomer, and John Morris, E. M. Forster joining the party after the meal had ended.
If Minton, however, visited Lehmann at his country cottage for Sunday lunch, he did so in Ricky's company.
After a meeting with Minton, Lehmann usually commented in his diary on his mental state.
When they dined together at the Perroquet in March 1951, they talked among other things about ‘British painting and what had happened to it since the high hopes of the war’.
Lehmann noted that Minton was ‘at his happiest and most intimate — and less hysteria underneath it all than often of late’.
Two months later Minton visited him in the country, pale from a pub crawl in Ipswich, and seemed to Lehmann ‘more settled with Rickie [sic[ off the booze’.
On other occasions he could be irresistibly frenetic.
‘A night out with John Minton,’ Lehmann recorded in his diary in October 1951, ‘for which he arrived with a bunch of carnations in the wildest, gayest form, having been on a jag for three nights — and continued it that night in spite of my attempts at restraint (which were spoiled by laughing all the time), flinging his arms about, shouting shrilly with highly risqué asseverations at the White Tower (at which Tennessee [Williams]appeared for a hallucinatory moment), becoming embarrassingly affectionate and enthusiastic about me, and pouring money out for champagne in the Caribbean and another unidentified night club.’
When recounting this incident in his published memoirs Lehmann added, ‘But in later years  these demonstrations became painful rather than exhilarating to take part in.’
In the early summer of 1952 Minton and Vaughan left Hamilton Terrace.
The decision to relinquish the lease may have been forced upon them: story has it that their landlord, Colonel Lindsay, had been angered by tales of a young man spitting out of a window into a frying pan held by Minton in the garden below.
Minton went to apologise and by the end of his visit both he and Lindsay are said to have been very drunk and reconciled.
But the Hamilton Terrace days were now over, Vaughan moving to Belsize Park, Minton to 5 Shaftesbury Villas, Allen Street, a small Victorian house in Kensington.
The decoration of 5 Shaftesbury Villas surprised many.
Whereas at Hamilton Terrace Minton had lived and worked in a large, more or less empty room, with peeling wallpaper, bare floorboards and an overwhelming smell of turpentine, at Allen Street the house, except for his studio room, was carpeted throughout and furnished in a modern style.
Leslie Todd-Reeve thought it ‘a great strip of a place’, but other of Minton's friends were aghast at its near-suburban taste and suspected that Ricky had played a dominant part in its making.
As Minton was fond of saying, ‘Don't possess anything, because if you do it will end up possessing you,’ he himself not surprisingly felt uncomfortable in this Home Beautiful and, never really liking the place, was to move again after only two years.
As at Hamilton Terrace, Minton created an ambience at Allen Street that attracted visitors.
On moving in he threw a huge house-warming party.
Even a small arbitrary gathering of friends or sailors took on a party atmosphere owing to Minton's knack of having a good time.
The day often began with people dropping in for breakfast, as they had done at Hamilton Terrace.
Minton's willingness to extemporise applied not only to his wit but also to practical matters.
Finding he had an inadequate amount of carpeting and the shop could no longer supply the same colour, he simply ordered another shade and was oblivious to the clash of reds this created half way up the stairs.
Soon after moving in Minton drew up a will in which he left the house to Ricky.
It was, however, Minton's habit to tire suddenly of young men he had previously made a fuss of, and Ricky was no exception.
There was one row too many and Ricky was eventually obliged to leave.
Whilst he remained at Allen Street he had a bedroom in the basement, Minton occupying the middle floors and the flat at  the top of the house being let to Paul Danquah, the son of a Gold Coast politician who had come to England from Ghana to study law and had had an affair with a Lyons Corner House waitress, Paul's mother.
Paul had been brought up by his mother with whom he had lived in a flat behind Broadcasting House.
He had been apprenticed to the kitchens at the Ritz and had simultaneously developed a theatrical bent, performing as a dancer at the Players' Theatre.
Then his father returned to England, sought out his son and deemed that he, too, should study law.
He provided the money to make this possible and it was at this time that Paul moved into Allen Street.
After repeatedly failing his examinations, he was eventually called to the bar in the Inner Temple.
He maintained an interest in acting and adopted his mother's name, Walcott, when he appeared as the black merchant-navy boy in the film A Taste of Honey .
The direction of his career, however, was finally determined by Sonia Orwell who helped him obtain a job with the World Bank in Washington.
For a period the Dutch writer Gerard Reve also had a room in Allen Street.
Minton introduced him to Denis Wirth-Miller and Richard Chopping with whom he formed a lasting friendship.
But at Allen Street, where he lived in considerable poverty, he insisted on his independence, cooked all his meals on a gas ring in his room and refused to accept any hospitality from Minton.
Paul Danquah, on the other hand, was a more ubiquitous presence.
Outrageously camp and very witty, Paul was an habitué of the Colony Room where he and Minton may have first met.
When Minton brought back to Allen Street a Party of sailors, it was Paul who fried the chips Minton knew they liked to eat.
Paul also openly flaunted his affair with the wealthy fighter pilot Peter Pollock, who was often present at 5 Shaftesbury Villas, a house which in Ruskin Spear's memory was always full of young men with no clothes on.
One ex-sailor whom Minton met at the Mandrake was Joshua (‘Mike’) Avery, then just embarking on his discovery of Soho and sharing a room with Daniel Farson.
Though not a homosexual, he mixed easily with gays, laughed readily at Minton's jokes and made a good audience.
Once when dancing with Minton at the Gargoyle and hearing some Guards officers making snide remarks he walked up to the table, laden with food and champagne, where they were sitting with their ladies and overturned the lot, and was barred from the club for about two weeks.
Avery sat to Minton for a couple of portraits and for  a period saw him about once a fortnight.
Whilst painting Avery, Minton scarcely spoke, but as soon as he stopped would say, ‘Let's go for a drink.’
Avery observed how completely Minton's face dropped if anything was said that pained him, but that he would as quickly recover.
With a humorous quip always at the ready, Minton was well-practised at dodging critical enquiry.
At Allen Street there appears to have been no loss of productivity in his output.
He continued, willingly, to undertake a mass of commercial work.
Book jacket designs by him were now in demand from almost every London publisher, including Lehmann, Methuen, Putnam, Secker & Warburg, André Deutsch, Heinemann, Cassell, Chatto and Windus, Rupert Hart-Davis, Derek Verschoyle and Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
His name was instantly associated with subjects requiring dockland scenes, images of blacks or jungle effects.
His paintings of Spain also made him an apt choice of artist for V. S. Pritchett's The Spanish Temper (1954) and for Cedric Salter's Introducing Spain (1953) for which he reworked an earlier drawing of Alicante.
One of the most attractive designs that he did at this time was for Kay Dick's novel,An Affair of Love (1953).
His view of the Seine provides an evocative setting for her tale of triangular love.
These seemingly effortless designs were the cause of much exasperation, as Minton describes in the satire ‘Doing the Book of the Film or ‘How I Ruined My Life’ which he contributed to the Royal College's magazine,Ark .
One small story that made the newspapers in 1952 gives an indication of his current popularity.
A Mrs J. Minton, who taught conventional art, claimed that owing to the similarity of their names in the London telephone directory she was plagued at least three times a day with telephone calls for John Minton, whose art she did not like, and that open cheques would arrive for him in the post, commissioning pictures and with the note ‘fill in your own price’.
Minton wrote her an apology.
On 10 March 1952 his mother died.
According to Ricky Stride, he did not greatly grieve.
He had always been pleased when she had called on him in London but made little effort to visit her in Carshalton.
He was at this stage in his life too disinclined to indulge in retrospection and perhaps too self-absorbed to consider his mother's life and death in the context of his own life.
After his own death the Daily Sketch made reference to a large three-quarter-length self-portrait which Minton painted this year and which he afterwards destroyed.
From the photograph of it which still  exists (Plate 16), it would appear that the reason Minton destroyed it was that its use of stylisation was no longer acceptable after Tindle's self-portrait had converted him to a more realist approach, in part inspired by Freud.
But with the memory of this three-quarter-length in mind, the Daily Sketch critic repeated a remark made fifteen years before: ‘The self-portrait has the melancholy expression Minton invariably gave his features when he used himself as a model.
But he once explained that this was due merely to prolonged gazing at himself in a mirror.’
AN invitation from Birmingham College of Art and Crafts to deliver a formal lecture, which was afterwards published, encouraged Minton to voice his artistic credo.
He delivered ‘Speculations on the Contemporary Painter’ on 25 June 1952.
It contains the assertion ‘that all art forms create and fight for order out of chaos, and it is in this lies their supreme social value.
This is the artist's place in society and always will be: to preserve order.’
Having countered the notion that the artist is an anti-social creature, he proceeds to argue: It follows from this premise that subject matter in art must play a crucial role.
It is with the subject in mind that Minton restates his belief that unless a painter paints with love, he or she is like a blacksmith hammering away with appropriate tools but no fire.
Looking at contemporary art he discerns ‘an attempt to reinstate the object not as a tonal equation or as a decorative symbol, but as the thing itself’.
The aim, he avers, is to develop an idiom from the necessity of the thing itself: ‘This shows itself possibly in an urban romanticism, and a concern with characterisation, attitude and atmosphere.’
He ends by dismissing abstract art as leading, by its own logic, back to the blank  canvas which once again requires the painter to put something on it: ‘but with the knowledge that the greatest painting has always been made from a real love of the object’.
David Tindle gained the impression, from conversations with Minton, that for him the central concern was the structuring of human content into form.
This explains why Minton was so fascinated by portraits which during his time at Allen Street more or less dominated his oeuvre.
The first picture that he painted on moving into 5 Shaftesbury Villas was a portrait of the Observer art critic Nevile Wallis (Plate 15).
Close to Minton in age, Wallis lived with his mother in Roehampton and had an old-fashioned politeness and charm.
He was not only widely respected as a critic but also regarded with affection for the genuine humility which made him always interested in others' opinions.
He first met Minton in a top-floor club in Wardour Street and they became firm friends.
Minton found Wallis's criticisms of his work thoughtful and constructive.
On one occasion the two men went on a private cruise from Blackfriars, stopping for an hour or two at Greenwich before going on to Southend where, in its fun arcade, the real purpose of the visit was achieved: Minton, careering wildly in a dodgem, was at last able to bump a critic.
It was on their return to London that both friends planned the portrait of Wallis.
In this he is found wearing the outfit that Minton approved (blue pin-striped suit and white collar).
He sits sideways on, in a Pose distantly related to that adopted by Whistler for his portrait of his mother, and holds a furled umbrella in one hand, a hat in the other, as he bends forward to peruse an Etty oil sketch, a copy of the Observer at his feet.
The arrangement sets up a circular movement that keeps the eye moving around the picture and reinforces the tension of the gaze, between the sitter and the picture on the easel.
Behind it on the wall hangs a painting by Robert Colquhoun which Minton bequeathed to the Royal College.
To the left of this are various reproductions of work by Chagall, Toulouse-Lautrec, Palmer and one by Holbein whose relevance is further underlined by the monograph on his work on the floor.
Despite the careful orchestration of the parts, this picture, which has been praised as ‘a fine and flatly medallioned portrait of London's best-loved art-critic’, has a convincing naturalness, a quiet seriousness which conveys both homage and respect.
Wallis never forgot how Minton, whilst painting this portrait, skipped to and fro across the floorboards at Shaftesbury Villas ‘like some lean fencer with his long brush stabbing at the canvas’, all the while throwing out the liveliest sallies.
The Portrait of Nevile Wallis instances Minton's decision, made earlier that year, to paint on a large scale.
Prior to this he had painted The Death of Nelson (Colour Plate XIX), again on a big format and based on a reproduction of the central group in Daniel Maclise's mural of the same subject for the House of Lords.
It was an image that must have haunted Minton for he told Nevile Wallis: ‘I remember it since I was fourteen as it used to hang in my schoolroom.’
His decision to use it as the basis for a grand narrative painting can be aligned with the revival of interest in Victoriana which the Festival of Britain had stimulated and which was especially noticeable in the graphic section of the Design School at the Royal College.
It was, however, only a brief-lived aberration if compared with the more complete Victorian revival which happened later.
Soon after completing The Death of Nelson Minton asked Ronald Searle to sign David Tindle's application for money from the Artists' General Benevolent Institution.
When they met Minton asked Searle if he had been to the Royal Academy where The Death of Nelson was hanging in the Summer Exhibition.
Searle remembers Minton saying: ‘From now on I'm going to work big.
I've discovered that one can paint anything so long as it's BIG!
It gives a subject an importance that little paintings don't have.’
Searle was not the only person at this time to conclude that since the Lefevre Gallery had told Minton ‘Moons are out’, he had been searching round for new solutions which visits abroad solved only temporarily.
Ruskin Spear when he saw The Death of Nelson remarked that Minton had painted the deck like an upright fence.
‘I know what you're thinking,’ Minton teased Tindle when he saw the painting in the studio at Hamilton Terrace, ‘but it's too late to change the floorboards now.’
Tindle had in fact recognised in the flattened-out planks a standard trick whereby the decorative nature of the composition is reinforced.
The disorientating effect of the upward-tilted deck encourages the eye to rove over the scene.
‘I had some sort of idea about a telescoped vision,’ Minton told Nevile Wallis, ‘like those newsreel films taken with a magnifying lens of state functions and so on, where you get that curious distortion.’
In creating this tableau Minton reinterpreted Maclise's composition very freely, adding figures of his own invention and omitting others.
He also introduces a semi-cubist patterning in the masts and sails which is then echoed in the modelling of some of the figures.
The threnody begins and ends with the two figures, either side  of the picture, lying wounded on the deck, one horizontally aligned with the picture surface, the other in a near vertical position.
Between these two stable points the composition tilts and weaves through the various clustered groups and knots of interest, reaching its climax in the prostrate figure of Nelson.
Almost certainly Minton's involvement with this subject was coloured by Benjamin Britten's opera,Billy Budd , first performed in 195 1, which, owing to his fascination with Peter Grimes , Minton would not have missed.
In The Death of Nelson , as in Billy Budd , tragedy is distilled through the juxtaposition of stillness with harsh activity, communal effort and individual particularisation.
The Death of Nelson is the most successful of Minton's large-scale narrative paintings, yet it invites an ambivalent response.
It demonstrates Minton's illustrative talent at its most dramatic and is compositionally a tour de force .
The sombre light, evoked through the use of half-tones, creates a brooding melancholy, binds together the complex figure groups and at the same time subdues the havoc surrounding the spotlit Nelson.
The marvellously fluent, complex design is admirable, yet at the same time the painting feels self-conscious and contrived.
At a time when realist painters were focusing on the urban landscape, the routine and everyday, Minton's decision to rework another artist's evocation of a grand historical event seemed to his students puzzling and eccentric.
With hindsight, one ex-Royal College student asserts: ‘You could see the panic.
He was striking out in all directions, trying to be a painter.’
After completing The Death of Nelson he concentrated on portraits.
As well as those of David Tindle, Nevile Wallis, Mike Avery and others, he painted a likeness of John Lehmann which he felt unsuccessful and destroyed.
Stylistically, the self-portrait in the National portrait Gallery can also be dated 1952 — 3.
Like all his work of this period it is very deliberately painted, the matt colour delicately shaded.
The dishevelled hair and open-necked shirt signal his bohemianism, but any inclination to romanticise himself is denied by the remorselessness of his gaze, the terse expression of the mouth and the severity of the draughtsmanship.
Though this portrait has a haunting sadness, it also conveys the sensation of something held firmly in check.
There were aspects of himself that Minton could not look at but Lucian Freud did.
In 1952 after Freud completed his small but outstanding portrait of Francis Bacon, Minton commissioned a portrait of himself.
There were many sittings at Freud's studio in Delamere Terrace, during which the artist, for the purposes of intimate study, sat almost right up against his  subject.
But it is not only the intensity with which Freud has assimilated external appearances that makes the picture unforgettable.
Subtle distortion, most noticeably in the exaggerated size of the eyes, the almost sickly, livid colouring of the flesh and the strangely open, vulnerable expression, combine to make this one of this century's most emotional portraits.
It captures a desperation that few of Minton's friends at this time, when he was successful and sought-after, were prepared to face.
Story has it that when Minton hung this portrait at Allen Street it so offended an art critic that he spat at it.
Susan Einzig can also recall the shock and anger she experienced on first seeing this picture.
Only in time did this portrait of an angst-ridden, emotionally harried man prove tellingly accurate.
Minton must have recognised its truth for he bequeathed it in his will to the Royal College of Art where it hangs as a memorial to him.
When Freud learnt this he felt sure that Minton, by nature methodical and not narcissistic or vain, had commissioned this portrait with his death in mind.
At the Royal College Minton's association with Rodrigo Moynihan, Robert Buhler and Ruskin Spear would have further strengthened his interest in portraiture.
With all three of these colleagues he was on terms of warm friendship but with Spear, especially, he enjoyed huge laughs.
If he accompanied Buhler and Spear to the Colony Room, the latter would upseat Mike Mackenzie at the piano in order to play, for Minton, ‘It Had to Be You’.
From Muriel's they would progress to the Gargoyle, and from there, in the early hours of the morning, to a nearby coffee stall where Francis Bacon and others might be found.
With Bacon, Minton was familiar but never close.
They frequently inhabited the same Soho haunt but at Muriel's, where they vied with each other in buying bottles of champagne, they often occupied different ends of the room.
The friction that others noticed in their exchange probably rested on unspoken criticism of each other 's work.
Bacon had little interest in English neo-romanticism and Minton would have been unable to accept Bacon's nihilism, his insistence that man is a futile being who has to play out the game dependent not on reason but chance.
Minton's irritation with Bacon found outlet in quips about ‘Ferdie Ham’, and to David Tindle he on one occasion remarked: ‘It's no good you trying to do Francises, dear: he can hardly manage to do them himself.’
In turn, Bacon could be equally dismissive of Minton who was unhappily made aware, as Bacon gradually emerged as the colossus, that he had a power and dedication which Minton could not  equal.
Moreover Bacon's anti-humanism and emphasis on despair threw into question the very basis of Minton's art.
In public both men liked to perform.
At the Painters' Table in the Royal College's Senior Common Room both could be uproariously funny.
At other times Bacon turned his wit on Minton, with a seemingly deliberate desire to provoke.
David Tindle recounts:
Minton was further exacerbated by the groundswell of interest in abstract art forming at this time.
He would have been aware of Victor Pasmore's conversion to abstract art in the late 1940s and of his leading role within the Constructionist movement.
Visiting the West End galleries as he did, Minton would also have remarked the interest among certain British artists in tachisme , a French abstract style on which attention focused at an exhibition at the Institute of Contemporary Art, where tachiste painters were shown alongside the work of the American Abstract Expressionists, Jackson Pollock and Sam Francis.
Philosophical and aesthetic arguments justifying non-figurative art left Minton unconvinced.
He once found David Tindle experimenting with abstraction and, pointing at one picture, sneeringly asked: ‘Well, what is it?
Turn it upside down and you still can't see what it is.’
His ridicule was such that Tindle destroyed the painting there and then.
He was also surprised at a later date to find on one occasion an abstract in Minton's studio.
Minton claimed he had sent it to an exhibition under the name ‘Francis Smiling’ and that one critic commented that Francis Smiling had been influenced by Minton's colour.
Another of Minton's friends, the Kingston School of Art lecturer Paul Holmes, was taken by Minton to see two abstracts by ‘Francis Smiling’ hanging in a Young Contemporaries show.
He recollects Minton saying: ‘I've proved it.
I can do them just like that.’
The extent of his disaffection with the contemporary art scene became evident when he wrote the satire ‘The Hopkin Syndicate’ for Ark .
In  this a group of friends form a syndicate to create the Hopkin myth, inventing biographical details (‘a near genius living in the country with a romantic proletarian background, possibly a dipsomaniac mother and so on’) for a painter who does not exist but whose paintings they churn out in a fashionable style (‘with dots, crescent shapes and bright colours’) and exhibit in a sensational first exhibition.
The success of the venture depends on Hopkin remaining elusive, difficult to trace, for, as the narrator avers, ‘you can get away with almost anything in the art racket (for a while), if you try.
Murder, I should think.’
Everything goes smoothly, the syndicate collecting their financial reward, until one day a man appears in the gallery where the first exhibition was held claiming to be Hopkin.
This is the picture-faker Grisby Flatpattern who, having got wind of the syndicate, has begun producing his own Hopkin pictures.
Flatpattern bargains with the syndicate, agreeing to continue in his role as Hopkin in return for half the profits.
So things proceed until Flatpattern (as Hopkin) becomes lionised and his social life begins to get out of hand.
The syndicate decides to hold a second Hopkin exhibition at which they hope to gain enough money to pay Grisby Flatpattern to disappear.
‘So we set to work on the pictures, enormous ones and little gems which would all go in the modern interior, and made them full of off-white and near-pink.’
But at this second exhibition Flatpattern's ex-wife, who has been trying to track him down for alimony, appears, denounces him and the syndicate and mayhem breaks out.
In itself ‘The Hopkin Syndicate’ is a light-hearted satire.
But the motivation behind it was an earnest bitterness at the hollowness of success.
Minton repeatedly jibed at the art business.
At a time when critics were fond of describing artists as ‘emerging’, he would say: ‘What's all this about emerging?
It must be rather nice to emerge.’
He became friendly at the Royal College with Ted Dicks who, owing to his liveliness and ability to play the piano (he took over at the Colony Room when Mike Mackenzie left) soon found himself in charge of student entertainments.
Minton not only accepted invitations to dinner, in the digs Ted Dicks shared with another Royal College student who later became a famous thriller-writer, Len Deighton, he also shared a desire to participate in the revues Dicks mounted in the Common Room in Cromwell Road and which were so renowned that the entrance queue often tailed all the way back to South Kensington tube station.
For Ted Dicks, Minton wrote the sketch ‘Uncorking Cork Street’, the tide  referring to the street dominated by art galleries in London's West End.
Some of the lyrics were sung to familiar jazz songs; ‘I'm gonna sit right down and paint myself an abstract’ went to the tune of ‘I'm gonna sit right down and write myself a letter’.
The humour was topical and apt.
In satirising the art world Minton was in effect expressing anger at his own role within it.
It was a subject he returned to again and again.
Among the few papers in his possession at the time of his death were some manuscript notes in which he was evidently attempting to develop his earlier skit, ‘The Hopkin Syndicate’.
The style is less brittle, and characters and incidents are described in more detail.
There is, for instance, a recognisable description of Muriel Belcher, as ‘mabel’, and of the Colony Room.
Another character-sketch is based on Nina Hamnett, the Bohemian, alcoholic painter who wrote an autobiography entitled Laughing Torso : Minton has her staggering in, waving a string bag, as Clarissa Mountjoy, author of the autobiographical novel Fit to Bust .
Equally recognisable is Francis Bacon as Ferdinand Delicious.
In the last month of his life Minton contacted Ted Dicks, who had by then left the College, with the idea of collaborating on a musical play.
From the manuscript notes which remain it is evident that Minton was again reworking ‘The Hopkin Syndicate’, into a musical play entitled ‘The Hopkin Myth’, which incorporates some of the lyrics he had originally composed for ‘Uncorking Cork Street’.
Though fragmented and incomplete, the play reveals the extent to which Minton identified with Hopkin, for the story acts like a parable on his own loss of identity within the creation of a myth.
The fact that his figures often have a wooden tightness and that one of his major pictures represents a homosexual's death may reflect the stasis and lack of vitality he felt within the contemporary art scene and within himself.
Hopkin sings: ‘My blues are my own, /My blues are my own, /What is reaped, /Is so easily sown, /What is reaped, /Is sown, /Alone.’
Elsewhere he remarks ‘too much fun is tragic’.
He also warns: ‘Never create a myth: it may come to life’(at this the trumpet theme from Petrushka shrieks loud and clear)‘and it will only end in sawdust.’’
A similar bitterness underlines Hopkin's words to the syndicate: ‘You wanted to play with something which has been attempted with the most desperate suicidal  intent of others.’
However the mood that emerges from this reworking of the Hopkin tale is not anger but sadness.
‘But my loneliness is my own,’ Hopkin says at the end of the play.
And Minton, like Hopkin, traduced by myth, may likewise have begun to feel by the end of his life that this was the only thing in him, too, that remained inviolate.
‘A spontaneous generosity of spirit is the thing I remember most about John Minton.’
So Derrick Greaves has testified in a conversation about Minton's influence on himself and other students at the Royal College of Art.
Greaves was to become part of the Kitchen Sink School and his early realist paintings, with their vibrant outlines and taut modelling, acknowledge a debt to Minton.
When Minton painted alongside students in the life class (‘That was a marvellous adrenalin shot,’ recalled Greaves) he taught by example that a picture has to have a lively activity right up to the four edges of the canvas, and that if the background is treated merely as a secondary constituent to the model, areas of the canvas will become inert.
In Minton's paintings, Greaves recalled, there were always sudden flashes of green and mauve even in the corners of this burnt-umber coloured room.
Ruskin Spear, on the other hand, thought Minton's decision to paint in the life room a mistake.
Though Minton did not begin until the class was all set up and working, the forcefulness of his example meant that at the end of the day there were eight Mintons instead of one.
Minton himself saw what was happening and abandoned this practice around 1951 — 2.
Thereafter the difference between his life class and that run by Ruskin Spear was that in Spear's the students painted naked ladies, in Minton's, naked men.
‘You make all your discoveries on the canvas.’
David Ufland, a student at the College between 1948 and 1951, remembers Minton making this remark in a talk to the Painting School.
It came as a shock, not just to the students but also to some of the older members of staff, such as Charles Mahoney, who belonged to an era when a member of staff would even vet the colours to be used before a student began to paint.
This and other traditions were swept away during Darwin's regime and Minton played an important part in introducing change.
He was good at acting the part necessary for the communication of his ideas and would dramatise his talks by pacing up and down or by flinging his jacket onto the floor.
David Ufland also tells how Minton on one  occasion walked into a composition class and after two minutes left without saying a word.
The students wondered if something had offended him, but later understood that he had been very depressed and had been still further depressed by the sight of everyone's work.
Minton did not consciously try to impose his style on others, but respected the individuality of his students.
When Frank Auerbach entered the College in 1952 Minton, his personal tutor, recognised that here was a student whose sense of direction was already pronounced.
‘I think you know what you want to do,’ Minton announced, ‘I shall leave you alone.’
Auerbach had previously heard Minton give a Sketch-Club criticism at St Martin's School of Art.
‘He was very articulate, lively and funny, and the standards he adduced were those of great painting,’ Auerbach writes.
‘…I was left in no doubt that he had an incorruptible conscience about art.
When he felt that one might after all be no good he said so.’
Once when Auerbach had no money, Minton gave him £40 to help him buy paint.
When Auerbach held his first solo exhibition at the Beaux Arts Gallery in 1956 Minton affirmed his confidence in this artist by buying a small painting of a head.
Towards the end of his time at the College, Auerbach, like others, witnessed a deterioration in Minton's person.
He recalls:
Another student whose period at the College coincided with that of Auerbach was Bridget Riley.
Arriving from Goldsmiths', where the teaching had been disciplined and informed, she encountered in the more haphazardly run Royal College ‘an overpowering sense of vacuum’.
She also attests that, though she found a friend in the painting tutor Colin Hayes, ‘the warmth and heart of the school was John Minton whose compassion, sophistication and wit were immensely necessary’.
Equally forthright is the testimony of Carel Weight who taught with Minton in the Painting School and who took over the Professorship after Rodrigo Moynihan left.
According to Weight, Minton was ‘everybody's  sort of pin-up person’, an ‘eclectic and marvellous personality’.
‘To hear a criticism by him was really something.
He had a tremendous gift, some of it a little theatrical but we all loved him very much and he was a great popular success.’
In conversation Weight also attests that he knew nobody he liked sitting alone with more than John Minton.
He repeatedly told students ‘Painting is made out of a love for the subject.’
He detected an absence of love in the art student's tendency to Parrot fashionable styles.
Once when giving a criticism at the College he found himself standing beside a cold radiator.
‘This radiator,’ he is reported to have said, ‘gives out more warmth than I can find in your work.’
He insisted that experiment in painting is not trying to do what others have done but an attempt to paint what one sees.
In some handwritten notes, which he must have used as the basis for a talk, he urges: ‘It is all here in London — a wonderful city.
Someone has got to throw a great many things out of the window and get on with it.
I have my pile of objects, paintings, books, critics to throw out — and I dare say so have you — THROWING THE WRONG ONES OUT IS BETTER THAN THROWING NONE — CLUTTER — BETTING ON EVERY HORSE IS WHAT THE ART STUDENT DOES.
DON'T, BET ON ONE.
PAINTING IS AN ACT OF FAITH.’
His views on painting were determined by his own position within the contemporary art scene.
Though he was in some ways a traditionalist, interested in painting epic scenes in a continuation of the grand European manner, he was also a modernist, an admirer of Picasso from whom he had learnt to analyse the rudiments of representation in order to embellish them, to make them rich or austere.
Derrick Greaves thought Minton was very much opposed to flaccid impressionism or complacent anti-modernism, of the Munnings variety, and saw that he wanted his students to examine brutally and fully what kind of vocabulary suited the needs of the day.
Minton's notes on painting underline this need for persistent enquiry.
In order to catch and hold students' attention, Minton was not above resorting to certain tricks.
Jack Smith remembers one lecture Minton gave during which he made riveting use of a hip flask, saying ‘Excuse  me one minute’ as he drank from it.
In his second year at the College Jack Smith had Minton for his tutor and was impressed by the way he took pains to find out a student's intentions.
Smith also remembered Minton's advice that if a picture was going badly he should sit back, view it coldly and decide which bit he really liked.
That is the bit to destroy as it is stopping the development of the picture.
Even at the initial interview for entrance to the College, Minton was able to give the sensation that, whilst the rest of the staff asked difficult questions, he was the potential student's ally.
Peter Blake turned up from Gravesend for his interview after a recent accident: whilst bicycling at night a man had suddenly crossed in front of him with a pram, causing Blake to land on his face on a newly made road.
Thirty-seven stitches were needed to sew back a flap in his face which went from the side of his nose and tore the corner of his mouth.
To this day he thinks that he was accepted into the Royal College chiefly because Minton felt strong sympathy with the macabre apparition he presented.
Minton's reputation as a lecturer was not confined to the Royal College.
Denis Wirth-Miller attended a talk he gave at Goldsmiths' College and observed how he galvanised the audience.
Occasionally, however, his more formal presentations could disappoint.
When invited to lecture at Cheltenham Art Gallery he merely read aloud from a printed copy of his talk,Speculations on the Contemporary Painter .
W. N. Terry, then on the staff of the gallery, thought it unimpressive and mercifully brief, but he also tells how, afterwards, Minton sat on the edge of the platform and talked and talked, completely informally and with great brilliance, entrancing his listeners.
When criticising students' work, both at the Royal College and elsewhere, he was never afraid to turn on the heat and could be harshly critical.
What made his criticisms acceptable was the care with which he assessed work and the genuine intimacy this created between student and teacher.
At Sketch-Club meetings his witticisms were regarded as part of the fun.
According to Nevile Wallis, talk was Minton's natural medium of expression: ‘One moment his sallow lantern mask was set in rigor mortis : then at a cue it became animated, and his marvellous gaiety and affectionate raillery would flow unchecked.
His impromptu art lectures — one hilarious fancy begetting another, and tossed off like carnival balloons — were guaranteed to draw packed audiences festooned round his dais.’
He readily accepted invitations to talk at other colleges or to teach at weekend courses for amateur artists.
At one of these, organised by  a local sketching club at Wallington Hall, Northumberland, Minton was billed as the guest tutor, along with the ex-coal-miner Norman Cornish.
Though the latter was at this time a much celebrated amateur artist he was surprised, on arriving, when Minton detached himself from the crowd he was talking with in order to cross the room and greet Cornish by name.
Minton explained that he had recognised him from a self-portrait that had been exhibited at the AIA Gallery in London.
Later that evening both men were invited to sit on a Questions Panel.
Minton, perceiving Cornish's shyness, made him answer most of the questions and listened attentively to his replies, thereby forcing Cornish through the shyness barrier, an experience he ever afterwards felt stood him in good stead.
One of Minton's strengths as a teacher in Ruskin Spear's view was his refusal to be taken in by fashion.
‘What's going on here?’ he would ask, setting to work a critical apparatus that left his students impressed.
His conscientiousness was respected.
But in addition to his qualities as a teacher he had undeniable glamour.
At a time when fashion, like much British culture, reflected predominantly middle-class values, and to escape these students were tapering their trousers and doing everything they could to make dull clothes more interesting, Minton's stylish Bohemianism was much admired: he pioneered a taste for donkey jackets and had a flair for combining well-cut cast-offs and bow ties with eccentric items bought from Carnaby Street which had not yet become fashionable.
He mixed socially much less with Royal College students than he had done at Camberwell.
Owing to his involvement with Darwin and other staff in the Senior Common Room, he may have wished to avoid any liaison with a student that would have embarrassed College authorities.
He was still prone to falling head-over-heels in love with young men, and through his friend, Paul Holmes, who taught painting at Kingston, he met Peter Date, a student at Sutton Art School.
It surprised Date's tutors to see someone as famous as Minton coming all the way out to Sutton to wait for one of their students.
Date, whose name is included among those to whom Minton left a small financial benefit in his 1952 will, was pursued with presents.
But according to Paul Holmes, Date could not return Minton's affection and seemed always a little embarrassed to be the object of such attention.
Though Minton's interest in youth fuelled his teaching, he could not escape the bane of its repetitiveness.
He never lost his ability to fire  others with a passion for great painting of the past, but he began to weary of the College and was often found with his students, not in the studios, but in the nearby pub, the Hoop and Toy.
The limitations inherent in student work became overly familiar and he would ask, despairingly, ‘How can I make them good?’
The expectations on him to perform as a wit at the Painters' Table further drained his energy and if feeling jaded or bored he drank a lot.
In the afternoons he would occasionally zig-zag his way across the studio towards a student's donkey in a near speechless state.
His behaviour did not go unremarked.
Once, as Minton walked past a queue of students waiting to enter a Royal College dance, Richard Chopping heard one remark, ‘What he needs is a good kick up the arse.’
But if drink lost him respect, he never lost the admiration of one College porter who said you had only to watch him cross the street to know he was a genius.
In the Painting School the dominant ethos upheld by the work of such tutors as Rodney Burn, Robert Buhler, Colin Hayes, Moynihan and Spear, acknowledged the continuing relevance of Sickert and the sober realism revived in the late 1930s by the Euston Road School.
In such company Minton stood out as the tutor with a more Continental outlook.
Edward Middleditch, whilst a student at the College, regarded Minton as an interpreter of the more Mediterranean world of Picasso and Braque.
In this way Minton can be seen to have had an influence on the tougher and more abrasive realism that first emerged at the ‘Young Contemporaries’ exhibition at the RBA Galleries in January 1952.
Writing of Middleditch, John Bratby, Derrick Greaves and Jack Smith, John Berger noticed ‘a deliberate acceptance of the importance of the everyday and the ordinary’.
Minton himself visited this show and in the visitors book left the comment, ‘Fair to Middleditch’.
These ‘Kitchen Sink’ painters, as the critic David Sylvester dubbed them in 1954, owing to their preference for painting not tasteful still lifes but the debris left on the kitchen table or the image of a child being bathed in a sink, enjoyed overnight success.
They began to show regularly at Helen Lessore's Beaux Arts Gallery and also appeared in international exhibitions.
In 1955 Minton was asked by Ark to contribute an article on Greaves, Middleditch and Smith to accompany illustrations of their work.
Minton's zestful response not only captures in vivid terms the quality of these artists' work, but it also reveals his own anxiety about what contemporary art should do and be.
Minton was also on friendly terms with the fourth ‘Kitchen Sink’ painter, John Bratby, whom he got to know whilst acting as his tutor.
Bratby had obtained permission to paint in the roof area of the Victoria and Albert Museum and there Minton visited him for tutorials.
Bratby was intrigued by Minton and soon after he got to know him painted a huge picture on paper, entitled ‘Homage to John Minton’.
Some took it as a satire on Minton's sex life and the tutor Colin Hayes was so angered by it he ordered it to be torn off the wall.
Hayes may have been protecting Minton from hurt, but Bratby saw in his action the kind of censorship that accompanied then anything to do with homosexuality.
Bratby's fascination with Minton also determined the portrait he created of him after Minton's death as Rocky Minetown in the novel,Brake-Pedal-Down (1962).
The book's hero, Peter Carr, meets Rocky when he enters King Vernon's College of Tarts and Dafts.
Though Minton encouraged the Kitchen Sink painters it is possible that their rapid success unnerved him.
His distrust of the power of critics made him ready to jibe at David Sylvester.
He had first met Sylvester during the early years of the war; whilst in the Army he had sent him a letter (now lost) which Sylvester claims was one of the funniest and most brilliant he has ever received.
By the early 1950s Sylvester, writing for The Listener and elsewhere, had become a highly influential critic, also a tireless supporter of Francis Bacon and Giacometti among others.
It is customary for artists to feel antagonism towards critics, and though Sylvester was welcomed at the Royal College's Senior Common Room, the painters sometimes joked that they found their ideas a week later in the pages of The Listener translated into the very different language of the critic: Minton, accordingly, coined the term ‘pre-Sylvestration’ to refer to this process.
There is also evidence to suggest that Minton was a little embittered by Sylvester's promotion  of Bacon.
Once when Sylvester was lecturing on modern art at the Victoria and Albert Museum, Minton, in a spontaneous outburst, interrupted him, challenging his remarks on Bacon.
As his outburst proceeded it became vulnerably autobiographical as he began to talk of certain European traditions which, he said, Bacon was not extending but leading into a cul-de-sac.
MINTON'S involvement with the Royal College extended far beyond his formal teaching requirements.
He would walk in a day before a College hop and say, ‘Good heavens: We must tart the place up a bit.
It must be different from what it ever was before.’
And he would set to work to cover reams of paper with still lifes, boats, fishermen, figures, birds and clouds, completing a sixty-foot decoration in one day.
On one occasion he is said to have decorated the whole of the College in three days after which he could still outlast anyone on the dance floor.
There, often with Susan Einzig as his partner, his nervous energy became concentrated, dervish-like, into a trance-like state.
Within the College's Senior Common Room he was a noticeable figure.
He became good friends with the theatre designer Jocelyn Herbert and her husband, the lawyer and friend of Robin Darwin, Sir Anthony Lousada, who became a member of the Royal College of Art Council in 1952.
He visited their house in Chiswick once in 1953, soon after Lousada had inherited paintings from his father's collection.
Among these was an Utrillo which Minton remarked looked a little grubby.
Insisting that all it needed was a little Lux, he put the painting on the floor and began scrubbing.
Within a few minutes the picture was effervescing as part of it had been painted on gesso.
Through the Lousadas Minton was to an extent drawn into a Hammersmith circle of artists which included Victor Pasmore, Julian Trevelyan and Mary Fedden who once danced with Minton at a New Year's Eve party until she literally dropped, whereupon he gently laid her down on the floor.
His association with these Hammersmith artists was a little resented by Elinor Moynihan who felt that, in comparison with the Soho painters, the Hammersmith set were artists with their claws pulled out.
When Minton had first arrived at the College he had seemed to Elinor a rather shy individual.
Very quickly this initial impression vanished as she recognised in him a dazzling personality, a person who had only to enter a room and the pace of things altered.
Their friendship began on a bus when he, standing with some students in the gangway, caught her eye and both began laughing.
Thereafter she marvelled continually at how animated and funny he could be.
She also noticed how excitable he was and how at times too much was expected of him.
Elinor Bellingham Smith had married Rodrigo Moynihan whilst she was still at the Slade.
She spent seven years working for Harper's Bazaar as a fashion illustrator, also producing book illustrations, and did not really begin to concentrate on painting until during the war, whilst living near Regent's Park which inspired the spiky pastoralism which often served as a poignant background to her paintings of children.
When Minton became friends with her and Rodrigo, they were living at 155 Old Church Street, not far from the popular Queen's Elm pub in the Fulham Road.
At Church Street the Moynihans kept open house, entertaining a wide range of artists and writers, including Ben Nicholson, Colin MacInnes, Louis MacNeice and the novelist Elizabeth Taylor.
Whilst at the Slade the Moynihans had belonged to a high-spirited group which included Nicolette Macnamara and who describes Hinor in Two Flamboyant Fathers as a ‘vivid, witty personality’, with red cheeks, black hair and ‘a Mona Lisa smile’ in which an ‘uplift of humour’replaced mystery.
But another aspect of her personality, frequently brought to the fore by alcohol, was a morbidity and love of moaning.
‘Oh, Ruskin!’ she would sigh to Ruskin Spear.
‘Rodrigo's socks!
I've washed the lot and now I have to darn them.’
She regularly bent Minton's ear with her problems and he in turn as regularly did take-offs of her doing this.
Despite this they were very fond of each other.
Her voice could be heard at three in the morning at the Gargoyle solemnly announcing to Minton, ‘We Capricorns must stick together.’
To others it seemed that there was a special spark between her and Minton, and they often danced together at parties.
Elinor felt privileged to be one of his girlfriends for she was aware how little he cared for women and how he would sometimes wince when sitting next to one.
Minton became a regular visitor to the Moynihans' house in Old Church Street.
There Elinor held court, dispensing gallons of soup and not a little whisky, playing Frank Sinatra records as she presided over get-togethers, often crazy and hilarious.
Partly because she spent much of the day alone in the house painting, she welcomed company in the evenings and would press Rodrigo into more visits to Soho than he  wished to make.
Though a home-loving person and devoted to their son, John, Elinor needed the ambience of the Gargoyle Club and Wheeler's in part because their marriage, to be dissolved in 1957, was already under strain.
The Moynihans' presence in Soho attached Minton still more firmly to the area for he was often in their company.
He enjoyed talking about art with Rodrigo and, respecting his resoluteness (it was said of him that he was the only Sohoite to be arrested for being drunk and orderly ), asked him to act, with Anthony Lousada, as his executor.
Rodrigo was very fond of his Spanish mother who, though she had lived in Britain a great many years, spoke scarcely a word of English.
She lived near by in Chelsea, as did their son John.
He first got to know Minton through his parents while studying painting at Chelsea Polytechnic.
National Service sent him into the Army, as he has described in Not all a Ball , and it was then, whilst on leave, that Minton's ‘irresistible, magical aura of ebullience and joie de vivre ’ offered such a liberating contrast with the high-pitched orders of NCOs and the brutalising routine of Army life.
Once out of the Army, John Moynihan, after a couple of false starts, began his career in journalism, before long landing a job with the Evening Standard on their ‘In London Last Night’ column.
Most evenings, before setting off for work, he would call in at his parents' house in Old Church Street.
The Moynihans accepted that sailors had become a regular part of Minton's entourage.
One especial favourite was David Mitchell who had joined the Navy in 1948 at the age of fifteen.
Born in Aberdeen, he got on well with Colquhoun and MacBryde, was physically the smallest of all Minton's boyfriends, but also the most aggressive; after his periods of leave Minton often had a black eye.
Allied to his fighting instinct was an innate charm, a quiet responsiveness and light manner.
He was one of many sailors who, when they disappeared to sea for a year or more, would receive letters from Minton, most of which were torn up or thrown away.
Mitchell appeared on the scene shortly before the arrival of Norman Bowler, a friend of Ricky Stride and one of the young men who used to meet at Runnymede on Sundays to exercise, camp or swim.
Bowler's father had a watchmaking business in West Hampstead.
He also had drains that were in a terrible state and therefore wanted one of his sons to become a plumber.
Norman, who left school at fourteen, did around a year as a plumber's mate before running away from home and working  on a Norwegian ship bound for Persia.
He stayed away two years and soon after he returned found that, as an eighteen-year-old, he faced National Service.
When told that his two years at sea did not count, he resignedly attended his medical only to discover that his hearing was impaired and he was declared unfit for military service.
He returned home and was sent by his father to a technical college to learn watchmaking.
In need of money, he agreed to take on work as an artist's model when Ricky Stride said he knew of an artist who would employ him, for Minton had seen photographs of Bowler and had remarked what a good model he would make.
In the summer of 1952 Norman Bowler arrived at Allen Street, on a motorbike, late, wearing sandals and his hair tousled.
Minton took him upstairs to his studio, where his portrait of Nevile Wallis was in progress, and set to work on a small canvas.
Before ten minutes had passed he had rejected this in favour of a 50″ × 40″ canvas that made possible a full-length portrait (Plate 19).
He also asked Norman to remove his sandals which he said were hard to draw.
The desire that he felt for Bowler, and which he admitted to David Tindle while this portrait was in progress, is made palpable in the finished work through the gentle, even pressure of the dusky light as it falls on the sitter's head, hands and feet.
The use of a shifting viewpoint spreads out the seated figure with the result that the genital area is prominently positioned at the centre of the canvas.
It also allows Minton, without breaking the realist mode, to manipulate scale so that, by academic standards, the feet are too large in relation to the head.
Bowler's likeness is rendered with precision and delicacy and his good looks are offset by the painterly handling of his white shirt.
But his eyes are averted and this combined with the sudden dwindling of scale conveys the sense that the sitter is both immediately present and unobtainable.
Bowler's head is framed by pictures and prints attached to the wall behind.
Among these is a reproduction of Daniel Maclise's The Death of Nelson , an image perhaps alluding to Minton's identification with this famous naval martyr.
He had no intention of selling this portrait and in his 1952 will he bequeathed it to Bowler.
Bowler felt an immediate accord with Minton who chatted easily with him during this and subsequent sittings.
Like others, Bowler noticed how meticulous Minton was about paying what he owed him, entering the amount in a notebook.
Bowler posed for many drawings as well as a second major oil,Painter and Model (Plate 18) which Minton  undertook at the invitation of the Contemporary Art Society for their ‘Figures in their Setting’ exhibition shown at the Tate Gallery in 1953.
On this occasion Minton made no pretence of not being able to draw sandals.
Bowler also wears a white T-shirt, an article of clothing which, if freshly boiled, Minton found irresistible.
Though the picture again promotes Bowler's husky good looks, it is a less openly sensual work than the earlier Portrait, its greater formality giving it the air of a grand public statement.
In imitation of Velasquez, Minton shows himself at his easel reflected in the mirror behind.
His stiff pose throws into contrast the dance-like arrangement of Bowler's limbs.
Yet despite the flow of movement from one form to the next, the structure of the painting lacks profundity.
The likeness of Minton in this painting is curiously wooden.
It images that ordered side of his character, jokingly referred to by him in a letter to one of his sailors.
‘And I continue briskly with my artistic career, Breaking Out at weekends it must be admitted — but in the main being the severe and collected Minton that you have come to expect.’
His apparently unflagging zest for life impressed Bowler.
‘It was a really good energy,’ he avows.
‘It deteriorated later.
His energy just left him and he became slowly more and more bitter.’
Bowler now frequently accompanied Minton on his social round and at cocktail parties noticed how quickly he livened things up.
He also saw how drained he could become after playing the court jester.
Towards the end of his association with Minton, Bowler realised: ‘He didn't want to play this role, but there was nothing else left to play.’
Though Bowler came from a similar background to Ricky Stride, he was more responsive to what Minton had to teach him and their conversations opened for him new areas of interest, in art, books and theatre.
Bowler also made his way in Soho among Minton's educated friends on the wave of interest in the working class that was currently infiltrating culture.
He was amused to discover that, despite two years in the merchant navy, he was regarded as an unspoiled youth by those who, like Minton, resented the de-naturalising effect of privilege and the public school system.
Minton was surprised when the young man revealed an already developed interest in the opera, but it was perhaps this that first made Minton recognise in Bowler possibilities that were not in Ricky.
Minton now looked to Norman Bowler as his companion on trips abroad.
They went to Morocco over the 1952 Christmas period, partly because Paul Bowles' The Sheltering Sky had made Morocco and especially Tangiers the place to go.
In addition Minton was attracted by the colours of Morocco and its rampant homosexuality.
Soon after this Minton bought a jeep with the idea that he and Norman should drive to India.
The project was abandoned when it proved too complicated and instead they drove to Spain at Easter in 1953.
Minton was obliged to register the jeep in his own name as Norman as yet had only a provisional licence.
On reaching the Spanish borders where officials gave them a hard time, Norman thought it advisable if Minton drove off.
This was the first time Minton had sat at the wheel throughout the entire journey and his ineptitude was such that, after repeated jolts and much stalling, Norman saw they would get nowhere unless he took over.
‘It's a sort of drug, travelling,’ Minton wrote to a friend in July 1953, ‘which seems to prevent me thinking — I feel vaguely irresponsible and peer at historic monuments.
In five days I'm off to Scandinavia, and that should be a new thing.’
In order to reach Norway the two men took the jeep to Ostend and drove through Belgium.
They stopped at Antwerp where one evening they got so drunk in a bar that when Minton decided to return to the hotel, Norman followed him as he doubted whether he would find his way.
Whilst there Norman had his twenty-first birthday, a fact he announced to a girl he met in a café and who took him off around Antwerp in celebration, on a journey of discovery that lasted two days.
When eventually he returned to the hotel, wearing a complete set of clothes none of which were his own, Minton asked where he had been.
Norman replied, truthfully, that he did not know.
They both found Norway dark and rather monotonous.
Minton, though he rendered them with a Chinese delicacy, despaired at the sight of so many fir trees and did less sketching than was usual on his trips abroad.
Nevertheless Scandinavian watercolours, together with paintings of Morocco, appeared in his exhibition of recent work at the Lefevre Gallery in December 1953.
All the oils in this show were portraits of young men, sensitively painted but uninventive in design.
The Jewish Chronicle critic found them ‘laconic and able’; Merlyn Evans, writing in Art News and Review , thought them ‘quiet, deliberately ‘edgy’, pale in colour and paper thin…
The sitters, subjected to a flat, clear, hard light, are modelled in low relief, but not in the round.’
Minton's sharpest critic was David Sylvester who, having admired his Painter and Model at the Contemporary Art Society exhibition earlier that year, damned the portraits at the Lefevre for their lack of reality; Minton, he argued, had not come to grips with appearances because he had failed to detach his faculties of observation from his interest in the sitters' personalities.
He was equally critical of the watercolours of Morocco and Scandinavia: It was generally remarked that Minton seemed deliberately to be stripping his art of mannerism, bravura and gaiety.
Even Michael Middleton, in The Spectator , felt obliged to admit: ‘This is not Minton full out but it is impressive coasting.’
The warmest praise came from John Berger, who the year previously had included Minton in his ‘Looking Forward’ exhibition at the Whitechapel Art Gallery.
Unlike David Sylvester, Berger found the watercolours convincing: ‘His imaginative insight is proved amongst other things, by his exact evocation of temperature.
One feels very precisely the sunlit coldness of the water in the fjords, the absorbed ancient warmth of the walls in Morocco.’
At the Royal Academy Summer exhibition that year Minton exhibited two Moroccan paintings, each dealing with an antique cannon placed on light-coloured battlements.
One of these two pictures,Portuguese Cannon, Mazagan (Plate 17), was after his death presented by the Royal College of Art to the Tate, in memory of him.
At one level the painting invites pleasure in the abstract patterning created by the triangular shape of the old gun against the tessellated stone floor and wall.
But the starkness of the imagery also surrenders symbolic overtones.
The sombre threat of the cannon is contrasted with the distant view of buildings at which it is aimed, its potential destructiveness negated by the stasis of the rigidly controlled composition.
It is as if Minton saw in the gun a portent of his own artistic impotence.
He must already have begun to be aware that his dependency on alcohol was weakening his creative drive.
Royal College records show that the only disorder in his health noted in 1953 was an attack of VD from which he quickly recovered.
Nevertheless a deterioration had begun which his friends were powerless to halt: in conversation he continued to side-step any possible approach to the deeper realities of life by resorting to frivolity.
He had also become prone to sudden  changes of mood.
Once when Denis Wirth-Miller was staying at Allen Street he set out for Soho in a cab with Minton who had four sailors in tow.
Suddenly Minton stopped the taxi, handed Wirth-Miller some money saying ‘Excuse me, would you take these sailors to lunch’ and got out.
‘Breaking out at weekends’ had now become a pathological habit.
An insight into his state is provided by Michael Wishart, now married to the painter Anne Dunn and living in a studio in Paris, and whom Minton visited in the autumn of 1953.
To Wishart, Minton said that in a hangover state he sometimes felt as if his eyeballs had been pulled out, tied in a very complicated knot and pushed back with the knots intact.
Wishart later recognised in this a very good description of a certain kind of hangover.
In Wishart's opinion Minton, despite the gaiety he stimulated, was never happy: he did not complain or evince self-pity but he conveyed a bitter acceptance that, owing to some gross farce on the part of creation, happiness had eluded him.
In its absence he continued to pursue ‘Fun’ which was the theme for the 1953–4 Chelsea Arts Ball.
Minton, assisted by students from various London art schools, supervised the decorations.
As usual the Ball, which was one of the biggest New Year's Eve attractions in London, took place in the Albert Hall.
Music was provided by four orchestras and the revellers danced beneath clown-like faces and other mobiles suspended on high.
It was the custom for various floats with tableaux to be wheeled in at midnight, and on this occasion, in an attempt to prevent them from being broken up, the organisers employed large numbers of rugger blues, dressed in white flannels and T-shirts, to act as stewards.
From the box which Minton was sharing with the Moynihans and others, Richard Chopping saw a steward begin to beat up a reveller.
He went down to protest and himself began to receive blows.
Next Norman Bowler went down and also got embroiled, receiving a kick in the face  that broke his jaw.
He was taken to hospital by ambulance, but later returned to the Ball and went on with the rest of the party to the Moynihans where he was photographed, with others, his jaw visibly swelling.
The next day Minton, in marvellous form and coruscating with wit, took a crowd of friends to the Gargoyle for a New Year's Day lunch.
Bowler had been persuaded to join the party, though unable to eat, and was reduced to agony by constant laughter.
8
NOW CRACKS A NOBLE HEART
IN 1954, after only two years at Allen Street, Minton moved to 9 Apollo Place, a two-storey building in a short cul-de-sac at the end of Cheyne Walk, in close proximity to the river.
Outside, the house looks small, but on entering you step down into high-ceilinged rooms that stretch far back.
Money inherited from his mother enabled Minton to exchange his cramped working space at Allen Street for the vast purpose-built studio situated on the first floor at Apollo Place.
There may also have been other reasons why he decided to move.
One or two ugly scenes had occurred between him and Paul Danquah and though they remained friends Minton did not offer him the use of the self-contained flat at the back of the ground floor in his new home.
At Allen Street both men had been in the habit of going on the cruise and the regular traffic of sailors and ‘rough trade’ had caused comment among their neighbours.
‘We Queens must stick together,’ Minton had once told John Norris Wood who had expressed surprise at Minton's devotion to the Queen Mother.
But underneath this camp humour lay the constant dread that he might one day incur conviction and imprisonment.
What made the situation dangerously hot was the decision on the part of the Home Secretary, Sir David Maxwell Fyfe, to undertake a drive against ‘male vice’.
In August 1953 Sir John Nott-Bower took over as the new Commissioner at Scotland Yard and was reported as saying that he would ‘rip the covers off all London's filth spots’.
He encouraged the police to step up the number of arrests for homosexual offences, as part of a political manoeuvre to allay American fears, fuelled by the Burgess and Maclean episode, that there were people susceptible to blackmail occupying high positions in Britain.
At the same time Sir David Maxwell Fyfe persistently refused the requests of Sir Robert Boothby in Parliament that a Royal Commission should be set up to enquire into the nature and treatment of homosexuality.
The situation grew worse after the arrest of Lord Montagu of Beaulieu in 1953 followed by the famous Montagu case which ended in 1954 when three  of the five men convicted were sent to prison, two being allowed to go free as a reward for turning Queen's evidence against the other three.
The Montagu case left homosexuals in Britain nervous and more inclined to circumspect behaviour.
Minton is said at this time to have destroyed some of the erotic drawings which he had begun making after seeing those by Fuseli which Wan Ross had acquired from Ruthven Todd.
Bobby Hunt recalls that after seeing Fuseli's, he and Minton began inventing their own, each following a different vein.
Bobby Hunt is certain that some of Minton's erotic drawings were either given or sold to the Director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Carl Winter, who occasionally invited Minton to stay with him and his Burmese boyfriend in Cambridge.
That none of Minton's erotic drawings have resurfaced, even today when erotica has become much sought after, does, however, suggest that most were destroyed.
In the circumstances, this is not surprising.
John Walcock, a friend of Paul Danquah, recollects that Danquah was visited at Allen Street by MI5, shortly after the disappearance of Burgess and Maclean.
Minton therefore had good reason to worry that the police might one day arrive to search the house, for one of the notorious aspects of the Montagu case was the disclosure that the police had done this without warrants.
The move to Apollo Place brought Minton to an area long associated with artists; through a circular window half-way up the stairs he looked down on to the next door studio which had once belonged to Turner.
The house was also associated with death.
Minton bought it from a friend, the painter David Bevan, whose wife had recently committed suicide, and this fact, so Minton told George Barker, had influenced his decision to acquire it.
‘I love the presence of death,’ he remarked when Barker visited in the company of Colquhoun and MacBryde.
It is possible Minton also knew that the house was built on the site of former warehouses where some of the first slaves brought to Britain were unloaded and where many died.
Norman Bowler remembers Minton talking a lot at this time about death and dying.
And though he more than once declared suicide a selfish act, he must also have foreseen that there are certain states of mind in which sensitive consideration of others becomes impossible.
For a man who courted extreme behaviour, suicide had a horrible fascination.
Bobby Hunt never forgot the agitation with which Minton told him how, on visiting the house of a friend whose wife had recently shot herself, his eye fell on a piece of skull left unnoticed under the piano.
At 9 Apollo Place Minton occupied the bedroom which, together with a small bathroom, was situated behind the studio on the upstairs floor.
Downstairs, as well as the self-contained flat, was another bedroom and bathroom and the kitchen.
The self-contained flat was eventually let to Raymond Ray, a dancer who also had a talent for making costumes and produced a couple of skirts for Elinor Moynihan.
Minton had first seen Ray in the musical Guys and Dolls .
After watching several performances he approached Ray and asked to paint his portrait.
His request was initially cold-shouldered, Ray recognising Minton as one of a drunken, rowdy crowd who had several times filled a box in the theatre.
They met again by chance in a club and Minton passed Ray a note: ‘I'm a married man with four children, but I want to paint you.’
Thereafter they became briefly lovers and lasting friends.
Ray's unambiguous homosexuality could not satisfy Minton's complex needs, but as a lodger, he proved to be easy and independent.
Minton frequently ended the day at Apollo Place with a strange collection of individuals for his sympathy with outsiders led him to pick up strays or the obviously lonely.
He could also make an error of judgement in his choice of sailors, at least one of whom turned on him the moment they were inside the door and threatened to beat him up if he did not hand over money.
Norman Bowler witnessed the vagaries of Minton's existence at this time, but the older man also revealed to him a tender side which his performance in public obscured.
Bowler felt that Minton was happiest when painting and would have been content with a quiet life had he not been driven by a need for others and by the fact that he could not bear to be on his own.
Norman's companionship was something he valued.
Others noticed that the younger man treated Minton as a superior person to himself and that when things got difficult he did not complain.
When Norman gave him some canvases as a birthday present, Minton was astonished for he was unused to having his generosity returned.
Small things delighted him; when Bowler's mother knitted him a sweater he wore it for a period continuously.
In addition Norman's capacity for enjoyment made him an excellent companion on their trips abroad.
In the summer of 1954 he drove Minton around northern Italy, stopping at Toulon on their return where the Moynihans were staying in a house that belonged to Pissarro's granddaughter.
To Bobby Hunt, Minton wrote: ‘We've done and been done by Venice, Padua, Rome, Florence and now on the Côte, dare I say d'Azur.
It's hell here really let's face it so make all  speed to the Moynihans at Toulon.
Rome and Florence were really extraordinary.
We are both very healthy and grinning wildly.’
It was Norman who in 1954 drove Minton, John Moynihan, Denis Wirth-Miller and Richard Chopping to Ashington in Northumberland where they attended Fred Patterson's wedding.
Patterson, with his ebullient North Country temperament, had been a welcome visitor at Allen Street.
Having entered the Merchant Navy at the age of fifteen, he had jumped ship into the US Navy and ended in the Royal Navy for whom he played seventeen seasons of rugby.
Minton bought him a motorbike and he was travelling on this to a match with the All Blacks when he had an accident.
Whilst he was laid up for six weeks in Middlesex Hospital, Minton visited him regularly and kept his family in Northumberland informed as to his progress.
Badly lamed and afterwards only able to walk with the help of a stick, Patterson was no longer of use to the Navy.
With Minton's help he obtained work at the Royal College as an artist's model until he decided to return home where his future was secured for him through marriage and the management of a pub.
To this day his marriage remains lodged in local memory chiefly because of the arrival of his London Bohemian friends.
They arrived late at night at the colliery house where Patterson's parents lived, put up at a nearby hotel and the next day toured the working-men's clubs before attending the wedding where Norman's good looks made him the talk of all the women present.
Despite his love of distraction, Minton in his career as yet showed no loss of impetus.
He produced advertisement drawings, some in watercolour, for Brooke Bond Tea, Westminster Bank, Crittal Windows, Murphy Radio and Television, Isabelita Sherry and for the chemical manufacturers Brotherton & Co.
Some were only slight, but others, like his York Minster with Bootham Bar for Brooke Bond Tea, were extremely popular.
This, combined with widespread reproduction, helped maintain his position within the field of commercial art.
In 1954 the publishing firm Methuen approached him for a Christmas card, as did the National Marriage Guidance Council, the latter printing 6,700 copies of his design.
Since 1952 his illustrations for plays had regularly appeared in the Radio Times where, as Rigby Graham has argued, Minton's knowledge of costume, his sense of period and locale, made him invaluable.
But Graham was also the first to observe a decline in Minton's illustrative work in the 1950s.
Certainly his designs had become more uneven and in some instances, such as that for William Wood's Manuela (Rupert  Hart-Davis, 1955), can seem pedestrian if compared with his earlier work for John Lehmann.
A refusal to linger is often characteristic of the true professional.
Minton imparted a sense of urgency to his students, advising them: ‘You mustn't ever turn down a commission.
You mustn't feel you are above earning money and doing a serious painting at the same time.’
Though he occasionally complained that his agent pushed too much work in his direction, he appears to have turned nothing down, accepting even very slight commissions from the Penrose Annual or the Complete Imbiber .
He was one of several noted British artists approached for work by John M. Gates, Director of Design to the American firm, Steuben Glass, and who visited London in the early 1950s.
Minton's two figure designs representing ‘Day’ and ‘Night’were engraved in Corning, New York, on a pair of glasses.
Three sets were made, one of which has been bequeathed to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
He had not designed a poster since 1949 but in 1954 his interest in this art form revived.
On 16 June he attended a dinner held at the Imperial Hotel, Blackpool, during the British Poster Advertising Conference, possibly in connection with the GPO's decision to commission artists' posters as part of their ‘Please use your correct address’ scheme.
Minton produced three for this series, one of Iverne Minster, Dorset, another of Eilean Donan Castle in Wester Ross and the third of the Royal Naval College at Greenwich.
His skilful use of coloured wash, ink and wax crayon enabled him to combine topographical accuracy with a marvellously apt rendering of mood.
But if these designs tapped a familiar vein, he proved his adaptability by accepting an invitation from John Line & Sons to design wallpaper for their ‘Limited Editions’ series, the first British set of screen-printed papers.
His three designs, ‘Troy’, ‘Tuscany’ and ‘Arcady’, all of which made use of classical motifs, achieve variety without disturbing the overall flat pattern.
Their restraint grew out of Minton's insistence that a wallpaper design must have an affinity with architecture.
In 1955 Minton agreed to take part in a radio programme,Designing a Wallpaper , as part of a series called ‘Looking at Things’.
In this he recollected lying in bed as a child and counting the enormous red flowers in the wallpaper.
In his own wallpaper designs he had been determined to avoid anything that commanded attention the moment a person entered a room.
He argued that the simplest designs were  best.
‘If you use recognisable objects, such as heads or vases…you immediately create from the picture quality a certain special meaning as a picture itself would — it has associations outside itself.’
He continues: ‘I started off putting all sorts of things into the first rough attempts, birds in one, Greek columns in another, Victorian oil lamps; I even tried buildings and finally helicopters and an aeroplane, but gradually came to see that the designs were hopelessly confused.’
He also admits in his talk that when designing his John Line wallpapers, only two of which (‘Troy’ and ‘Tuscany’) were used, he had in mind small rooms, possibly in an eighteenth-century house and which have ‘the simplicity and dignity enough to suit the classical atmosphere of the design’.
Despite the pleasure it gave Minton to walk into a friend's house and find his own wallpaper, purchased without his friend knowing he had designed it, he did not take his interest in this area much further.
‘I have made various other attempts to design wallpaper,’ he told his listeners.
‘Being very lazy by nature, I enjoy making the first sketches, but the practical precision, the mathematical measuring necessary to carry out the design and the extreme neatness required, both of which I am very bad at, I find irksome.
I long for my canvas and easel where I am my own master and the world is my own.’
AS a painter, Minton found outlet for his work not only through the Lefevre Gallery, but also through the London Group, the Royal Academy Summer Exhibitions and other group shows.
His work was frequently illustrated, not only in magazines but also in books; in William Johnstone's Creative Art in Britain (1950), in Herbert Read's small but significant survey,Contemporary British Art (1951), and in Wyndham Lewis's The Demon of Progress in the Arts (1954) where his large painting of the dice-playing soldiers in the Crucifixion scene,The Gamblers (Colour Plate XX), was reproduced with the observation: ‘The symbolic power of John Minton's picture requires no comment.’
As with The Death of Nelson, The Gamblers , though it has no specific source, is a pastiche on Italian Renaissance art.
Its huge scale apes the French notion of the grande machine , the kind of large figure composition, intended for public display, in which various elements are synthesised into one great composition.
It is possible that Minton chose this subject, in which the relevance of the Crucifixion is cancelled out by the attention given to a game of chance, as an expression of his own despair at the  malignancy of fate.
But whatever symbolic power this picture has, it is diminished by the suggestion that, stylistically, the picture is merely playing with tradition.
The Gamblers hung in the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition in 1954.
Despite its bid for attention, it failed to obtain Minton an ARA, a disappointment that may have been enhanced by the fact that this year Rodrigo Moynihan was made a full Academician.
Undeterred, Minton began work on another machine inspired by Géricault's The Raft of the Medusa .
David Tindle had recently returned from a visit to Paris where he had seen this painting for the first time.
His passionate involvement with it had been sharpened by the realisation that owing to Géricault's heavy use of bitumen the picture was in a very poor condition.
After listening to Tindle talking excitedly about The Raft , Minton began work on The Survivors (National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa), in which he wisely makes no direct allusion to Géricault's masterpiece, the experience of which had caused Delacroix to run through the streets like a madman, as any attempt to retranslate this powerfully emotive image would have resulted in failure.
Even so,The Survivors is less convincing as a portrayal of a dire predicament than as a formal arrangement set up by the figures as they stretch and strain over the raft.
If Minton was striving to produce a figurative subject far more ambitious than the café scenes associated with the Euston Road School, he was again defeated by his inability to find a style that was more than a pastiche.
Nevertheless he thought The Survivors sufficiently important to send to the Whitechapel Art Gallery's survey, ‘British Painting and Sculpture’, held in the autumn of 1954.
He also sent it to the Royal Academy's Summer Exhibition in 1955 together with his portrait of Elroy Josephs and another pastiche,Coriolanus (Colour Plate XXI), based on a Signorelli in the National Gallery.
‘Follies are in their way heroic,’ William Feaver has commented on these grand narratives, aligning them with the epic paintings by the vainglorious diarist, Benjamin Robert Haydon.
It could also be argued that Minton's large figurative compositions exactly satisfied the Academy's need to exemplify the continuing relevance of past traditions in modern terms.
Yet each year Minton's hopes of being elected an associate of the Royal Academy were disappointed.
There were at this time close links between the College and the Academy, but this alone does not explain why this Bohemian hoped to be honoured by an institution that many leading artists, among them Henry Moore, Bacon and Freud, regarded with scorn.
One of the contradictions in  Minton's character was that the anti-authoritarian rebel remained wedded to a person who needed to belong and who, schooled by his grandmother, was in certain situations an upholder of convention and correct form.
Edward Bawden was one of those within the Academy who fought to have Minton elected, a fight which, as Bawden said, ‘was to no avail there being a strong prejudice against his painting of the Death of Nelson’.
It is generally thought that homophobic prejudice kept Minton out of the Academy, Munnings especially having a dislike of both him and his art.
Nevertheless each year on election day, as Carel Weight observed, Minton sat near the telephone in the Senior Common Room in the hope of acceptance.
When confronted more directly with homophobic reactions, Minton retaliated with spirit: once at the Chelsea Arts Club he sent back a note, passed along the bar, rudely objecting to the sailor he had in tow, with the remark: ‘You wouldn't mind if it was an Admiral.’
Lack of acceptance by the Royal Academy contributed to his depression which was deepened further by complications in his private life.
At a party at 9 Apollo Place, Norman Bowler had spent much of the evening dancing with Henrietta Law who was still living with her husband Michael in Kensington though their marriage was by then over.
After the party she stayed the night, beginning an affair with Norman which, according to Henrietta, enraged Minton from the start.
Norman, however, recollects that at first Minton did not take it very seriously; but one evening, when the two men had arranged to meet in a pub before going to the opera, Norman arrived late, having spent the afternoon with Henrietta, and realised on seeing Minton that he had begun to feel left out.
The situation was complicated by Minton's affection for and affinity with Henrietta who has been compared with a Suffragette in her absolute determination to defeat the pressures of convention.
She had been born in India, where her father was stationed with the Air Force, but after her parents separated she was brought up by her mother, who lived with another woman in Northampton.
A public-school education led to a secretarial college where she suddenly rebelled, sought work as an artist's model, entered Soho, quickly becoming an habituée and one of the stars in Muriel Belcher's galère .
Though young, her strength of personality was imaged in her face which, with her pale skin and strong features, was made additionally striking by her dark hair.
Acco John Moynihan, she sailed through Soho like a Queen, hailing her  friends in a voice assumed for the public ear, her rude, unabashed outbursts lifting ‘waiters off their heels as she mocked her party or destroyed an admirer with a sidelong glance’.
Behind her attention-demanding façade lay the insecurity of a person who has endured an unhappy childhood, as the poet, Dom Moraes, later to become her third husband, discerned.
When deprived of a large audience she was quiet and rather unsure of herself.
In Soho, hell-bent on a good time, her tremendous vitality made her the female counterpart of Minton.
Attraction was mutual.
‘I absolutely adored Johnny,’ Henrietta attests.
‘He was incredibly good company; he used to make me laugh all the time.
We were very close in the sense that I could ask him anything at any time, and we took great pleasure in each other 's company.’
Yet even she had little access to his inner life.
‘I think he was very secretive and never told even his closest friends that he was obviously frightfully unhappy.
I suppose if you are always breaking the law it creates a lot of pressure.’
Both Henrietta and Norman tried to manage their affair so that it would cause Minton the least hurt.
‘You are my two favourite people,’ he would fling out, gratitude mingling with resentment.
Bitterness often erupted.
To Norman he would behave in contrary fashion, agreeing to certain things and then turning on him, affronted, with the remark, ‘How could you do this to me?’, together with accusations of selfishness.
The confusion in his attitude to Norman was helplessly exposed: he liked Norman for not being, like Raymond Ray, a congenital homosexual, yet when Norman danced with a girl Minton would remark with spite, ‘Oh, it's her tonight.’
Like a ping-pong ball he bounced from one emotion to another, knowing what he wanted but knowing also that it did not exist.
As the affair between Norman and Henrietta progressed and showed no sign of being short-lived, Minton began increasingly to make scenes and when drunk would physically attack Norman.
Aware that the situation was getting out of hand and unable to cope any more with their triangular relationship, Norman took himself off to Cornwall.
Left alone together, Minton and Henrietta also felt a need to escape London.
Paris was mooted but when Henrietta could not find her passport they eloped to Edinburgh.
Minton's intention, it seems, was to establish a sexual relationship with Henrietta and thereby reorder the balance in their triangular friendship.
That he had on previous occasions overcome his antipathy to women is suggested by remarks he  made to others.
Paul Holmes remembers Minton saying, ‘Oh, it's so easy with women.
Why do they make such a fuss about it?’
David Tindle also tells how once he visited Minton at Allen Street and found him, in very good mood, getting out new laundry.
‘What's all the singing about?’
Tindle asked.
Minton replied that he had had a girl the night before.
‘Oh, we are changing!’
Tindle exclaimed.
‘What does one do?’
Minton asked.
‘Does one write and thank them?’
In Edinburgh attempts at sexual relations proved disastrous.
Alone with Henrietta, the woman he came closest to loving, Minton must have confronted more forcibly than ever before the nature of his condition.
Both resorted to drink and felt an overwhelming need for Norman.
Minton, guessing correctly that whilst in the West Country Norman would revisit the family with whom he was evacuated during the war, sent a wire asking him to join them.
On receiving it, Norman returned directly to London and caught a night train to Edinburgh.
He was met on the platform in the early hours of the morning by Minton and Henrietta, both looking very ill and both clutching bottles of whisky.
They returned to the hotel where Norman overheard one porter say, ‘My god, he's with them .’
Upstairs in the bedroom he found empty whisky bottles littering the floor.
As everyone was by then in a state of complete exhaustion they did little for the next two or three days except sleep.
When they boarded the train back to London all were still emotionally exhausted: throughout the long journey little was said.
For a while afterwards their Edinburgh trip was the talk of Soho: Elinor Moynihan was shocked by it; others were puzzled.
It did nothing to improve the situation and still more distressing scenes occurred.
This brought their relationship to a climax and Minton, in front of Henrietta, told Norman to choose between them.
‘My heart fell to my boots,’ Henrietta told another, ‘for I dreaded that he was going to choose me and he did.’
Norman, however, insists that this is a fabrication — Henrietta was by then with child by him, and at that date there was no question of a man leaving a woman whom he had made pregnant.
Whilst waiting for her divorce, Henrietta moved with Norman to rooms in Belsize Park.
It was agreed that they would not see Minton for a while.
Friends noticed an increase in Minton's drinking at this time.
He was inclined to make vicious remarks about Henrietta and Norman, some of which Norman got to hear.
One night, after heavy drinking in Soho Minton turned up at the house where they were living, broke a  window, and climbed in, saying, ‘I just want to be part of you.’
The break-up of their triangular relationship left him sadly altered: he had noticeably less energy; his sharpness deteriorated and when drunk he could become uncharacteristically maudlin.
Sudden changes of mood left him rattling sarcasms like a snake, and he fell easily into disputes with others, including the Moynihans and Muriel Belcher.
‘Johnny was completely all over the place by then,’ Bobby Hunt recalls: ‘the wit had gone.’
AFTER the débâcle with Norman and Henrietta, Minton began dashing around like a hunted person.
Alan Ross noticed that if he encountered Minton, in street or bar, he seemed unwilling to talk unless surrounded by a bevy of young men who made serious conversation impossible.
When Judith Hollman, whilst working at the Royal College as a model, saw Minton again, she sensed that there was now between them very little rapport.
She met him again by chance on a train, after he had been lecturing at Bromley, and found him strangely excited, laughing like a manic-depressive and unable to sit still in the carriage.
She was wearing a large muff and as they left the train Minton remarked, ‘I thought you were going to smuggle me through the barrier in that.’
He then kissed her on the cheek and said goodbye.
She did not see him again.
‘What's it all about?’ he would quip, this phrase becoming his unanswerable leitmotif.
Even among those now no more than peripheral spectators in his life he occupied a poignant hold on the imagination.
‘The recollection of his presence remains sharp and clear,’ Michael Middleton has written, ‘and comes easily to mind: the scarecrow figure with its loping, fevered stride, head down, chin stuck into chest, every fibre intent on getting wherever he was bound; the lantern face under the shock of hair, its extraordinary gravity in repose and its total re-creation in gaiety; the exuberant clowning into which was channelled, increasingly and defensively, a perpetual crackle of nervous energy.’
In April 1955 Bobby Hunt moved into the downstairs bedroom at Apollo Place which Norman had previously occupied.
Hunt had recently been down on his luck and one day, whilst trying to interest publishers in his drawings, had been walking the streets with a portfolio under his arm when a taxi drew up with Francis Bacon inside.
Guessing correctly that Bobby was hard up, Bacon gave him £5 and told him to get a meal  at Wheeler's.
This Bobby did, and was cautiously treating himself to oysters at the bar when Minton came in with some sailors and bade him join them.
A little later Bacon appeared, walked up to their table and asked Minton why he did not look after his back numbers.
This one, he said, pointing to Bobby, he had had to pick up in the street.
This stung Minton into action.
He took Bobby back to his digs, paid off the rent owed to the landlady, and helped remove all his belongings to Apollo Place.
He promptly re-employed Bobby as his assistant and gave him money in advance so that Hunt could, in turn, pay a nominal rent.
Soon after moving in Hunt began reading Minton's copy of Delacroix's Journals .
He so enjoyed them that Minton suggested he should write his own.
The diary Bobby kept over the next few months usefully logs many of the characters and landing stages in Minton's frenzied circuit.
A visit to Wivenhoe that month, to stay with Richard Chopping and Denis Wirth-Miller, ended disastrously.
Whilst drinking with them in a pub Minton had become very attracted to one of Wirth-Miller's friends, a sailor called Hogey Carmichael.
He made an Open pass at the young man only to meet with a rebuff.
He was already jealous of the easy friendship between the sailor and Wirth-Miller and was wounded by the remark that what Denis could have free he would have to pay for.
‘Thank you for returning my sponge-bag and for your letter,’ Minton afterwards wrote to Wirth-Miller.
‘I do not see why you should apologise to me in any way, it is I who behaved like a little monster.
I shall I daresay finally learn that he who wants to be loved by everyone and wants more than it is his right to have ends up with Nothing.
I'm sorry, though, I ran away.’
He ran back to another sailor, Alf Sparkes, son of a Grimsby fisherman, who stayed at Apollo Place whilst on leave.
Minton occasionally hung around Victoria railway station, waiting for the boat train to come in, and in this way had picked up Sparkes.
‘Hullo,’ he had said, pointing to a badge on Sparkes's uniform, ‘are you an electrician?’
‘Are you a poof?’
Sparkes retorted.
Minton nodded.
‘I've never met a poof before,’ Sparkes said.
‘And I've never met an electronic sailor.
Would you care for a drink?’
Several drinks had been ordered in a nearby bar before the two men reached Apollo Place, both very inebriated.
Though Sparkes was game for his first homosexual experience, his thick Yorkshire accent and  humorous attitude to life left Minton undone with laughter and not very much happened.
But a mutual trust and liking had been established and thereafter Alf Sparkes became a regular visitor, often arriving from Chatham at weekends on the motorbike that Minton bought him.
He became very protective towards Minton and was quick to deliver a Grimsby left-hook if anyone was rude to the older man in his presence.
He played the role of bodyguard more visibly than any of his predecessors, to such an extent that Minton began to complain his sex life was ruined.
Likeable and amusing, Alf Sparkes also had a neurotic side to his nature.
On one occasion he announced to all those assembled at Apollo Place that he had had enough of life and went downstairs to put his head in the oven.
After a few minutes had passed a loud scream was heard, for it was an electric oven; and Alf, with singed hair, ran out of the house, down the street and round the corner where he vaulted the Embankment wall, intending to drown himself in the river but forgetting that it was a low tide.
A large crowd of spectators from the corner pub helped drag him out of the mud.