

The Basque Country
Mountain ranges make sensible national frontiers and despite one or two kinks along the way, the Pyrenean watershed divides France neatly and conclusively from Spain.
At the two ends of the chain, however, the border between nations is not a border between peoples.
At the Mediterranean end, the inhabitants on either side of it are Catalans and very aware of the historical and linguistic bonds which transcend the national frontier; while at the northern, Atlantic end they are Basques, similarly aware of their distinctiveness as a people.
In the 1980S the Basques have had much international publicity because of the passion and all too often the excesses of their campaign for separatism.
But the politicking and the violence have nearly all come from the Spanish Basques; French Basques have remained relatively quiet.
Ask a French Basque about the violent activities over the border in Navarre and he or she will in my experience be unsympathetic, not towards separatism as such but towards the sometimes murderous way in which it is being sought.
French Basques seem happy to go on being French as well as Basque.
And because the French Basque country, unlike the Spanish, is thoroughly rural, it is very much a tourist region; it would stop being so were terrorism to cross the frontier.
A true separatist movement on the French side would be bad indeed for the local economy.
As a people, the Basques are the oddity of Western Europe, because of their language, the eskuara as it is called, which is one  of the great linguistic mysteries, being the only language of Western Europe not of Indo-European stock.
Scholars assume that modern Basque derives from the original tongue of the Celtiberians, the ancient people of Spain who were eventually overcome by the Romans.
It has never been a strong language because it has produced little or no literature, so that it has seemed to have more of folklore about it than utility.
Nowadays, especially in Spain, Basque is being defiantly flaunted as an alternative to the national language; but in France it is at risk, spoken at home by Basque families but discouraged in schools, as a lesser, marginal language likely to hold its speakers back economically.
The one concession to it you see a lot of in the French Basque country is on the road signs which now duplicate the French place-names with their Basque equivalents.
The strangeness and sometimes the beauty of Basque is soon apparent in its frequent resort to the less mentionable letters of our shared alphabet, to z, k and x.
I do not mean to stray off here into the history of the Basques; all Pyrenean history is complicated, that of the Basques very complicated.
In the Middle Ages, when the French adjudged them to be alien, difficult and heathen, they were held to have descended from Scotsmen transported to Spain by Julius Caesar.
Their true ancestors were the Vascons, a people of northwestern Spain who spread very successfully into and over the Pyrenees and occupied much of south-western France.
These more ambitious Vascons lost the use of their distinctive language, however, and turned eventually into Gas cons, the inhabitants of Gas cony, whom it takes a second or two these days to recognize as cousins of the Basques.
The Basques with a B were those who stayed behind, closer to their ancestral lands, either side of the mountains, and who preserved their language.
So there is a genuine and moving continuity between Basques and the Vascons.
The Basque Coast
For a people long famous as navigators and seamen, the French Basques have a remarkably short coastline, running for not more than twenty miles from the estuary of the river Adour, three miles ocean wards from the port of Bayonne, to the Spanish frontier at Hendaye.
But if it is short, it is also dynamic and various, altogether more refreshing than the endless dunes of the Landes, north of the Adour.
The Basque Coast starts off flat, at the top end, with sand and pine trees, then acquires first, shapely beaches prized by athletic visitors for their peculiarly surf able Atlantic waves, and next, low but spectacular rocks and promontories, which are at their best along the curious Corniche Basque, to end in the handsome bay of Hendaye-Plage.
It also has three good, markedly dissimilar towns in Bayonne, Biarritz and Saint-Jean-de-Luz; and a little inland, mercifully, a motorway from France into northern Spain which drains off from the coast the nuisance of merely transient cars and people.
This is not the most Basque part of the Basque country because it is too built-up and, in the case of Biarritz, too chic; but everyone should go at least to Saint-Jean-de-Luz, emphatically a Basque town and still in living touch with the ocean of which, as fishermen or on occasion as pirates, the Basques were for long leading citizens.
It is cheating a bit, I fear, to think of the Basque Coast as Pyrenean, because at this end of the chain, unlike at the other, the mountains fight shy of the water and make a decisive turn to the west some miles inland, to enter Spain; so you can see the most northerly or westerly Pyrenees easily enough from points along the coast, but you can't feel you are among them.
You can see above all — literally above all — the somewhat flattened summit of La Rhune, the Basque mountain par excellence , 3,000 feet high and only seven or eight miles due south from Saint-Jean-de-Luz.
That is an upstanding promise of pleasures to come, further into the range.
But because it is beside rather than in the Pyrenees, the Basque Coast has a gentler climate than you might expect, with an average temperature over the whole year of nearly 14° Centigrade — almost as good as you will find in Portugal.
In the coldest month, January, the average is about 8°, in the hottest, August, between 20° and 21°; so this is a very equable place, hospitable at any season.
It is naturally quite wet, being an Atlantic region, even in summer and especially in the spring.
There are on average some 150 days a year when rain falls, and this goes up as you move inland into the Basque country proper, whose climate gets a little more extreme as the land rises.
The early autumn is the time to be in the Basque country, because it is usually drier then than in the summer, but still blessedly warm, and wonderfully ‘luminous’ as the French like to put it.
The logical place to begin on the Basque Coast is Bayonne, which is a port, but three and a half miles from the open sea down the navigable channel of the river Adour.
It is an old and rather like able town which, standing where it does, so near to the edge of France and commanding the coast road into Spain, has had an agitated history with numerous episodes of war.
The Romans built a town and lodged their cohorts here, when what is now Bayonne was called Lapurdum; a slight corruption of that name, Labourd, is still used, to refer to the most westerly and maritime of the three distinct provinces into which the French Basque country is split, of Labourd, Basse-Navarre and Soule.
The name Bayonne itself comes from the middle Middle Ages and meant ‘good river’ in Basque.
This was a mistaken choice, because the Adour was actually a bad river, which kept on finding different ways out into the Atlantic and abandoning Bayonne altogether.
Only at the end of the sixteenth century was this nomadic watercourse properly recaptured for the town and its outlet fixed by some determined engineering.
For a long time Bayonne was an English possession, having been part of the extensive territorial dowry of Eleanor of Aquitaine when she married into the Plantagenet family in the middle of the twelfth century.
It was three centuries and the Hundred Years War indeed before the English lost it, in which time Bayonne did well, not least as a centre of the wine trade with England equal in prosperity to Bordeaux.
Indeed, these were, according to some local historians, Bayonne's very best years, when it became a trading centre of European stature.
It was then that they scooped out for the storage of goods the extensive vaults and cellaring that still run beneath the old town today.
And then too that the Bayonnais became overbearingly careful of their wealth and success, which they protected by placing chains across the river mouth to keep out marauders and by imposing stiff customs duties that enraged the local Basques.
The French writer Hippolyte Taine, in the not on the whole very friendly account he published of a journey to the Pyrenees in the middle of the last century, tells, all too vividly, an unpleasant story of a fourteenth-century mayor of Bayonne who tried to extend his jurisdiction up-river as far as the tide went, so as to stop Basque smugglers from defrauding him, and who tied a number of local Basque gentry to the arches of a bridge and watched the tide come up and slowly drown them.
King Charles VII won Bayonne back from the foreigners in 1451 after a siege and, if a plaque set up in the cathedral has it right, with a little supernatural help.
For at seven o'clock in the morning of 20 August in that year, the inscription has it, just as the citadel was about to fall to the besiegers, a white cross was seen in the sky ‘above and to the right of the town’, which then became a crucifix whose crown turned encouragingly (for the French) into a royal fleur-de-lis.
Since the English and their local supporters wore red crosses, their cause could be seen, meteorologically, to be a lost one; they decided that ‘God wanted that they should be French’, and French they became.
The  portent in the sky was taken to be the outcome of a timely intercession by Joan of Arc, at that time a quite recent martyr.
In 1813–14 the English were back in Bayonne, this time as the besiegers, when the Duke of Wellington's army drove Napoleon's troops out of Spain and back within their own borders.
There were a number of small battles in Labourd and eventually, in February 1814, one large one, further to the east, at Orthez, recorded as one of Wellington's deftest victories, and as an ultimate defeat for Marshal Soult and his army from Spain.
The citadel of Bayonne, on the right or northern bank of the Adour, stood out against the English for three months, by which time Napoleon had abdicated and the war was over.
Not far from the citadel, should you choose to cross over to that less appealing side of Bayonne, is a small English war cemetery that dates back to the siege.
The passage of Wellington's soldiers through the Basque country, when they were deemed to have behaved with greater decency and correctness than their French opponents, was in some degree the origin of the considerable fashion for this part of France among the English throughout the nineteenth century.
The winter weather they had fought in was atrocious but some of Wellington's veterans took kindly to the region and came back to settle there; others presumably publicized it in Britain.
Its reputation for salubrity spread and drew numbers of both healthy and unhealthy emigrants from the north.
Bayonne has known many other military episodes than these; moreover, you need only to drop one of the two n s from its name to recognize it as the birthplace of that sinister weapon, the bayonet.
But nowadays it tries hard and gracefully to live down the ferocities of its past.
There are fine ramparts on the south and west of the main town, built, as so many fortifications in France seem to have been, by Louis XIV's ubiquitous and tireless fortifier, Vauban.
They no longer strike you however quite as ramparts because they have been planted with grass and shrubs and are in places penetrable on foot or even by traffic; they are now a pleasance more than a deterrent.
On the south of the town 
I even came across one stretch of the old defence works which has had a rugby pitch squeezed into it, with a glacis for a touch line.
From which peaceful act of recycling, you can tell also how extremely keen they are on rugby football in this south-western corner of France, which is where nearly all the country's most gifted players and successful teams are.
The best part of the town is on the south bank of the Adour, where it is divided into two by Bayonne's other river, the Nive, which enters from the south, from the mountains.
The two rivers are very different to look at, or at least they have been whenever I have seen them.
The Adour, which is much the wider, is also the clearer, approximately water-coloured, you could say; the Nive is the rich colour nearly of chocolate, which is appropriate enough given that Bayonne was long famous for the chocolate that it made and in which it traded.
The part of the town on the left bank of the Nive is known as Grand or Greater Bayonne, the part on the right bank as Petit or Lesser Bayonne.
Both are of quality.
Greater Bayonne has most of the town's shops, the covered market, and the cathedral.
The shops fill the area between the cathedral and the point at the bottom of the town, the Place de la Liberté, where one river meets the other.
In the most stylish shopping street (though Bayonne is not a smart place), the Rue du Port-Neuf, there are vaulted arcades which, for arcade addicts like myself, means that the shops are doubly inviting.
And something I have not seen anywhere else, though it makes good sense, is that in these mainly narrow streets, the shops have their signs strung out at right-angles across the way so that you can stand at one end and read their names from there, without having to go down to look at them one by one.
But as a town to shop in, Bayonne is sound, not magnetic; its covered market, beside the Adour, is a disappointment, with none of the style of good French markets.
The cathedral of Bayonne is another disappointment if, like me, you travel south in order to rest eyes sated with the Perpendicular and Pointed on the rounded splendours of the Romanesque.
This large church is northern, and Gothic.
Perhaps we should blame the English for this, because it started to be built early in the thirteenth century, when Bayonne was ours, and the English royal arms of the day are apparently to be found, alongside those of France, emblazoned on some of the keystones of the very high vaulting in the nave.
In the last century, the cathedral was made more northern still, when a second tower was added to the one which already existed, and two spires for good measure.
The best of the decoration is certainly the stained glass in some of the side-chapels.
But better still is the delightful Gothic cloister which opens on the southern side of the nave, an asylum all the more praiseworthy for opening on the far side on to the street, and with an admirable fig tree standing in one corner to remind you that, northern Gothic or no, you are in the south.
There are five bridges, no less, by which you can cross the Nive into Lesser Bayonne.
The main road bridge is at the bottom of the town, facing the theatre, which has cafes outside and is an airy if also raucous place to sit and have coffee.
The theatre is a more enterprising place of entertainment now than it was in the days, early in the last century, when, as a small boy, the great French writer Victor Hugo stayed in Bayonne for a month, on his way to meet his father, a general in the Napoleonic army in Spain.
Young Victor, a Romantic from birth, was excited when the family was given free seats for the theatre for every night of its stay, less excited when he found out that the programme never changed, so that it meant sitting through the same melodrama every night for a month.
Lesser Bayonne is bourgeois and compact, and contains the town's two unexpectedly good museums, the Musée Bonn at and the Musée Basque, which are only a hundred yards apart.
The Musée Bonn at is an art gallery and an exceedingly good one for a provincial town.
It is good because Léon Bonn at, a loyal son of Bayonne, first collected these pictures and then left them to the town, which responded by building a small palace in which to show them.
Bonn at (1833–1922) made his name and  his money in Paris, where he was a painter of the salon -haunting kind and also an influential director of the École tea Beaux-Arts.
He knew the grantees, and sometimes painted their picture.
Hence his own fine collection of oil-paintings and drawings.
Indeed, if you want to find out how it was that Bonn at grew wealthy enough to buy the many works of art that he did, you need only go into the room reserved in the museum, on the ground floor, for his society portraits.
Here are the famed Parisian hostesses of the age, all looking sumptuous, darkly beautiful and, I'm afraid, rather alike, the standardized objects of the artist's skilful flattery.
But Bonnat's gallery is well worth going to.
It is a comfortable size, circumnavigable inside an hour, various in its contents, and pleasantly arranged.
Surprisingly, he did much better as a collector of pictures from earlier centuries than of the works of his own contemporaries or friends.
There are in the Musée two memorable and characteristic El Greco portraits, of a duke all in black and a cardinal; some excellent Ingres, including a full-length portrait of the depressing King Charles X, looking depressing, and an ample-backed Baigneuse or Woman Bathing ; a Goya self portrait, among other pictures by him, making him look mild and harmless; some British pictures, by Constable, Lawrence, Reynolds and Raeburn; a Géricault and an agitated Delacroix showing Job tormented by Demons ; and some fine drawings, of which Bonn at had a most notable collection, too large to be displayed in toto, by artists from the early Italians onwards.
One small room shows a splendid set of Rubens sketches, of scenes from the Metamorphoses of Ovid, done mostly for the King of Spain's hunting-lodge.
Only the later nineteenth-century works are a let-down; Bonn at obviously lacked pull with the great Impressionists and bought generally insipid work.
If the Musée Bonn at is plush and metropolitan, the Musée Basque round the corner is local and very homely.
I write, I have to say, as a folklorophobe, but this is an endearing and instructive collection, kept in a fine sixteenth-century Basque  town house.
It makes an intelligent compendium of this mysterious people's history and culture, compressed into a serpentine and bewildering suite of quite small rooms and exhibits: their furniture, their costumes, the trades they have practised, the things they have manufactured, their art and religious objects, and so on.
As in all good local museums, there are some fine trouvailles here.
Like the makhilas or elaborately worked sticks made of medlar, with a sharp goad concealed in the handle; these look decorative enough but they were weapons before they became art forms and Basque men always carried them when they went to markets or cattle fairs and often fought with them.
Or, among much robust, dark furniture, the zuzulu , a wooden settle part of whose back let down to make a table.
Or the little portable sundials which shepherds used to carry up into the mountains to tell the time by; or, a last reassuringly bucolic reminder that Bayonne's fighting days are over, an English bayonet from the Napoleonic wars converted for stripping corn-cobs.
The Musée Basque has rooms also devoted to the game of pelota, which is a more various one in terms of the equipment its players either do use or have sometimes used than you would otherwise guess; to the centuries of Basque whaling; to witchcraft, for which and for its vicious suppression there was a vogue in the Basque country in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
There is a cramped, faded little room given over to the recognition of the literary achievements of the region, in homage to writers who were not themselves Basques but who settled here: the playwright Edmond Rostand, author of the extraordinary Cyrano de Bergerac ; the exotic novelist Pierre Loti, who lived and died in Hendaye; the sentimental poet Francis Jammes, pictured here in a charming naive portrait, impossibly bearded and together with his wife and their wildly staring dog.
It will be a generation or two no doubt before this determinedly old-fashioned room acknowledges one of the most remarkable of post-1945 French writers, the critic Roland Barthes, who was the complete  Parisian intellectual but was brought up in the Basque country, went to school in Bayonne and all his life kept his house along the Adour, at tire.
Barthes's was a very modern mind but he would have liked the idea of being one day accepted into this tiny pantheon of local literary notables.
Coming out of the Musée Basque, and as you turn right to recross the Nive by the Pont Marengo, you can see facing you, a little upstream, a short sequence of the best, by which I mean the most distinctive, houses in Bayonne, narrow, half-timbered, six storeys high and standing none too straight.
You can see also, alas, the appalling riverside car park created on top of the covered market, which is the sort of planned ugliness one had thought only English town councils capable of.
There are various roads that you can take to get from Bayonne to Biarritz, which is about five miles south-west of Bayonne.
The two roads that go by way of Anglet, a suburb which has accumulated to fill in the gap between the two towns, are no better than functional.
One has the odd title of the Boulevard du B.A.B., revealing that it has taken over the line of the old tramway, the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz; the other, further back from the coast, is the N10, once the crowded highway along which French motorists hurtled into northern Spain but now a gentler place to drive, the motorway having supplanted it.
But the more civilized route to take to Biarritz is via the mouth of the river Adour; this stretches the journey by four kilometres and makes it twice as enjoyable.
The road from Bayonne leads right out past the prolonged installations of the port to the end of the estuary, at La Barre.
Here, in bad weather, there are reputed to be spectacular collisions between the seawater coming in on the westerly winds and the fresh water trying to get out.
And here too, you can see how sturdily the once-wandering river Adour has been walled in, to keep it in place.
Just before La Barre, the road for Biarritz bends to the left and you can drive peaceably into that still glamorous resort, with the racecourse, the pine trees and beyond them the sands on one side, and more pine trees, the little Lac de Chiberta and the best known of Biarritz's golf-courses on the other — the Basque Coast is very good for golf, with four courses all quite close to one another; this is the English influence once again , creating links out of some auspicious dunes.
The last beach along here before you come to the first of the rocky headlands that are so prettily characteristic of Biarritz's coastline, is called the Chambre d'Amour or Chamber of Love, after an old depression in the sand where two lovers are said to have put themselves well and truly on the map by being surprised in their amours by the Atlantic tide.
Entering Biarritz by the coast road like this, you end by driving along the Avenue Édouard VII, which leads down into the centre of the town and sets the tone for a resort that was for a while Europe's princeliest.
Fashionable Biarritz was the creation of the mid-nineteenth century.
Before that the village's only successful days had occurred back in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, when it was a centre of the Basque whaling trade.
But then, as today, the Atlantic whales were over-fished and grew scarce; the last one was caught locally in Biarritz in 1686, by when this was just one more failed fishing village.
The first tourists to come to it were the townspeople of Bayonne, who traditionally made their way to Biarritz to bathe, by donkey.
But it was the Empress Eugénie who remade Biarritz.
As a girl in Spain she had gone there with her mother and when later she became Empress of France, as the wife of Napoleon III, she made him go there too.
In 1854, three years into that very pompous and sybaritic period of French history known as the Second Empire, Emperor and Empress established Biarritz as a fashionable place to go by their own well-publicized visits there.
They built a house, the Villa Eugénie, which eventually grew into the present Hôtel du Palais, a vast building close to the lush sands of the Grande Plage (formerly known as the Plage tea Fous, because only the reckless, if not the insane, were thought likely to risk swimming there), very monumental and with a  tricolour flying above it, as if it were some government department rather than merely a hotel.
Royalty likes to go where royalty has already been, and in the second half of the last century Biarritz became the resort of monarchs from all over.
Queen Victoria went there for the first, very influential time in 1889, though even before that the surprisingly large English community in Pau had begun to colonize it, to such an extent that by the 1870s not only did the Church of England have congregations in Biarritz but they were already schismatic and the Archbishop of Canterbury had to travel out on a pastoral visit to try and stifle the factionalism.
And with Anglicanism had come fox-hunting and golf.
In the early 1890s, in loyal imitation of the Queen, Gladstone made the first of a number of visits.
The evidence of the English occupation, apart from the golf-courses, is preserved in some of the street-names.
The patrician Avenue Édouard VII on one side of the town is matched on the other by the Boulevard du Prince de Galles, this Prince of Wales I take it being Edward VII in his younger days.
But although Biarritz still has a statue of Queen Victoria, that of Edward VII was blown up during the Second World War, on political rather than aesthetic or moral grounds it is said.
Biarritz remains a tremendously solid, lordly town, far wealthier than anything else in this part of France.
As a resort it has changed though, having passed out of the possession of the royals and their followers and into that principally of the world's surfers, who come to this coast for technical reasons, because it has by all accounts the best waves in Europe on which to perch for the ride into town.
This sea change is neatly embodied in the name of one Biarritz hotel which I noticed, the Victoria-Surf, whose owners are evidently hedging their bets, looking to the democratic future but not yet prepared to give up the blue blooded past.
Surfers are said to be as exclusive in their manners as the upper classes they have replaced, talking only among themselves and inevitably spending a good deal of their time incommunicado offshore.
Biarritz spreads amply out from its heart, at the Place Clemenceau, but its attractions lie by the sea, above all around the small, domesticated promontory that juts out into the froth and swirl of the Bay of Biscay between the Grande Plage in the centre of the town and the rather humbler Plage de la Cote tea Basques to the south.
You can look down on this very attractively from Biarritz's nicest small square, the Place de l'Atalaya, reachable from below up paths dense with the wispy tamarisks of which the town is so fond.
Below are the linked toy basins of the old fishing port, so small they are almost lost in the rocks, and a reminder that Biarritz was not always so big and so prosperous as it is now.
The Atalaya itself, or watch-tower, stands on a rock as a solitary relic of the town's whaling days.
From it, the look-out man would send a smoke signal up through the chimney whenever a whale was offshore, and the fishermen would then take to their horrifyingly flimsy boats.
When whales were still plentiful, the king and the clergy had the right to what was, very literally, their cut; in the case of the canons of Bayonne, to the for some reason much prized tongue.
The promontory itself dissolves on the seaward side into rocks and inlets, including the delightful cove of the Plage du Port-Vieux, a sheltered bathing place recommended ‘for persons who are weakly or unaccustomed to the sea’ as my old Baedeker considerately puts it.
By going down to sea level, you can walk out on to the Rocker de la Vierge, reached by a short gangway, which has a statue of the Virgin on top and the beginnings of a jetty planned by the Emperor Napoleon III but never finished because the sea kept demolishing it.
Facing the Rocker de la Vierge, there is a Marine Museum, with a very presentable aquarium.
It is not always easy to find the old, late nineteenth — or early twentieth-century Biarritz amongst the new.
Stone has given way to glass and concrete.
But small and choice corners of the town, like the Place Sainte-Eugeńie (a different Eugénie this from the empress) and the nearby Place de l'Atalaya, have kept a lot of the older.
more imaginative domestic architecture, with  that freakishness in the way of turrets, balconies and other appendages familiar to those of us who were raised, as I was, in seaside towns in southern England.
Bits of old Torquay and bits of old Biarritz are almost interchangeable, as the inhabitants probably were too, eighty or ninety years ago.
But even in Biarritz the high-fantastical style is under threat, swamped by the aggressive and severe towers of the 1960s and 70s.
If you choose where to sit or loiter carefully, however, avoiding the principal sea front by the casino, it is just possible to have an illusory few minutes of the old Biarritz.
As a suitable last image of the town, I offer the sky-blue onion domes of the Russian Orthodox church at one end of the promenade, an exotic remnant of old, moneyed Europe cohabiting with the brutal new culture of wet suits and fast food.
The Basqueness that is in abeyance in Biarritz returns in full as you drive south from there towards the frontier.
Royalty finally peters out in Ilbarritz, a resort that is barely distinguishable from Biarritz proper, where King Alfonso XIII of Spain apparently got engaged and where Queen Nathalie of Serbia, hardly the best-remembered of Europe's lost monarchies, had a home.
Between the main road and the sea are the small, cliff side resorts, first of Bid art, which has a delightful town square, very Basque, with church, pelota wall and hotels gathered affably together, and excellent beaches to walk down to; and then of Guéthary, which is smaller, lower down and less of a village than Bidart, but has the better coastline.
Past Guéthary and fifteen kilometres in all south of Biarritz is Saint-Jean-de-Luz.
This is an eminently Basque town and the one I would choose to stay in of the several alternatives along this coast; it is more intimate than Bayonne, less pompous than Biarritz and livelier than Hendaye.
Luz being the Spanish for ‘light’, you might think this was a place famous for its luminosity, but Saint-Jean's Luz has a grimmer origin, in the Basque word meaning ‘marsh’, because the estuary of the river Nivelle on which the town stands was once a swamp.
Saint-Jean-de-Luz is a working town as well as a holiday place, for centuries past and still today a very active fishing port.
It has the only real harbour you can find on the Atlantic side of France south of Bordeaux, a good sheltered anchorage that is also the entrance to the river.
This is a resource for fishermen and a boon for tourists, because the port is the ideal place to sit once you have made your way down to the bottom of the town.
What was long ago fished for from Saint-Jean, as from Biarritz, was whales, from as early as the eleventh century and as far away as Newfoundland.
It was a skipper from here called Sopite (he has his street named after him in the old town), who made one of the great technological advances in whaling, when he found a way to render the blubber down on board the whaler instead of having to sail all the way back home with it.
After whaling died out, there was cod fishing and, in the eighteenth century especially, piracy, when the Atlantic corsairs of Bayonne and Saint-Jean made mighty profits for the local burghers who put up the money to fit them out.
In the 1750s, seven thousand sailors from these two small towns were living from piracy, and an exceedingly well-organized affair it sounds to have been, with the Crown, as ever, coming in for its share.
Nowadays, Saint-Jean deals chiefly in the large if unappetizing tuna and the extremely appetizing but, compared with the whale, somewhat trivial catch, of anchovies; but it is a town that smells very satisfactorily of brine and can be loud with the engines of trawlers if you go down to the harbour at the right moment.
It is not, architecturally speaking, such an old town as it might have been, because there is only one house still standing built before 1558, when invading Spaniards burnt the whole place down.
But there is an old part to the town, running east from the harbour, and a delight it is to walk through: Basque urbanism at its most attractive.
The bigwigs of Saint lean were the ship owners and they built themselves fine, ostentatious houses.
One of these, which you can go round, is known now as the Maison Louis XIV, because that remarkable king lodged there in 1660  when he came to Saint-Jean to be married to Maria Theresa, the Infant a of Spain (the bride stayed across the road in a charming pink brick and stone house known ever since as the Maison de l'lnfante).
The marriage, which was a political one, took some time to complete, since bride and groom passed a whole month in Saint-Jean before the ceremony; but when it happened it was very splendid, with much bestowing of jewels, especially by the wealthy minister, Cardinal Mazarin, whose niece Louis had originally been most anxious to marry but who was opportunely exiled by her uncle in the interests of the nation.
Saint-Jean-de-Luz is built along a bay which makes an unusually regular, shallow curve, from a headland to the north, where the lighthouse is, to the harbour entrance to the south, facing the small, equally bright and characteristically Basque town of Ciboure, which has some really good old houses overlooking the harbour it shares with Saint lean, and where the composer Ravel was born.
The bay of Saint lean is a noble, open prospect, though it has been a dangerous place too in its time.
Between the admirable houses in the so-called Quartier de la Barre, which goes down to the harbour mouth, and the sandy beach, a dike has been built up, twelve or fifteen feet high, to protect the town from the waves.
There is a path along the top of it to which the houses nearest the sea are joined by individual wooden gang ways.
The dike is there because in 1749 a particularly intrusive tidal wave swamped and destroyed some 200 houses in this otherwise favoured quarter of the town.
The alternative focus to the harbour in Saint-Jean is the church of Saint-Jean-Baptiste, which must be the largest of all the Basque churches.
When I first went into it, I knew nothing about Basque churches, so this one was a great and splendid surprise.
Outside it is severe, with only a few small windows and most of those grilled.
But the interior is remarkable: a single aisle with a high barrel vault of painted wooden panelling looking rather like the timbers of an inverted ship's hull.
On three sides are the dark oak galleries which make Basque churches both distinctive and  extremely attractive and which are, in principle, reserved for the men.
In Saint-Jean-Baptiste, because it is a large church, there are three tiers of galleries along the sides and five tiers, no less, at the west end, facing the altar.
The effect is of a theatre, and the topmost gallery, which it makes every sense in a church to call ‘the gods’, is so close to the ceiling as to make you ask how comfortable it might be up there during mass.
So much dark wood, quite simply carved, gives a good, plain effect in the nave, but this is garishly offset, typically again for a Basque church, by the hugely ornate altar and its baroque reredos, which is set high up, at the top of a flight of steps.
Saint-Jean-Baptiste is the culmination of the Basque style, being on a larger scale than other churches in the Basque country; it shows that what, in villages such as Sare, or Itxassou, or Ainhoa, is a warmly communal style of decoration, can also be a majestic one.
From Saint-Jean-de-Luz it is only seven miles to the Spanish frontier.
Should you decide to go that way, it is imperative not to take the main road, the N10 (let alone the adjacent motorway), but to turn sea wards, to the right, in Ciboure, once you have crossed the Nivelle, and drive along the Corniche Basque.
The road turns to follow the cliffs at the nice little village of Socoa, whose old fort once defended the entrance to the harbour of Saint-Jean.
Here the strange, tilted cliffs of the Corniche begin, layers of schist or of limestone that slide off into the water at an angle of 45 degrees and there make starkly visible ridges on the seabed.
From here too, you can have huge views of the coastline, northwards beyond Bayonne to the Landes and southwards past the frontier into Spain.
At the end of the Corniche is Hendaye-Plage, which is the seaside Annexe to Hendaye and a resort of some substance, full of big, neo-Basque villas, apartment blocks and tamarisks; it has a luxuriously curved, soft and seductive beach too.
Between Hendaye-Plage and its parent of Hendaye, there is much water side, because Hendaye is hidden defensively away a mile from the sea, on the wide estuary of the river Bidassoa.
Hendaye  is not a town to dwell on, being easily outdone for charm by its partly walled Spanish equivalent of Fuenterrabia, facing it on a slight rise across the water.
The frontier between France and Spain runs along the estuary of the Bidassoa and then for some little way along the river itself, until it turns at right-angles to the east, leaving the Bidassoa exclusively to Spain.
In the middle of the river, a little upstream from Hendaye, is the Île des Faisans, sometimes known also as the Île de la Conferênce, famous for belonging to neither France nor Spain but to both.
It is an undistinguished spit of land, barely afloat so far as one can see, but it has in its time hosted some very high-level exchanges of civilities and even persons between the two countries.
In 1469, King Louis XI of France conferred with King Henry IV of Castile here; in 1526 the captive King Francis I was exchanged for his two sons, who stood in for him as hostages with his great enemy, the Emperor Charles V; in 1659, the Peace of the Pyrenees between France and Spain was negotiated on the island; and a year later, the contract of marriage was signed which consolidated that epoch-making treaty, between Louis XIV and the Infant a (it was while helping to decorate the Spanish pavilion for the occasion that the painter Velázquez is said to have caught his death of cold).
And in what might have proved a momentous extension of this diplomatic sequence, it was at Hendaye that in 1940, after the fall of France, Hitler met Franco, to try and talk him into joining in the war on the German side against the British.
But Franco was tougher than expected and the interview failed; after it Hitler is supposed to have said he would rather go to the dentist than meet Franco again.
Labourd
It is hard to divide up the Basque hinterland in any manageable way in order to describe it; here, I shall stick to the three provinces recognized in it by the Basques themselves, of Labourd, Basse-Navarre  and the Soule.
These are ancient divisions of the territory, recognized for centuries past as distinct pays , but you are unlikely to find them entered on a modern map, so I should apologize for introducing what will seem like obsolete names.
However, they are names freely used by the locals and they are a great convenience, because they split the Basque country into three geographically distinct regions, from the coastal and no more than foot hilly Labourd, through the higher but still not fully mountainous Basse-Navarre, to the genuinely mountainous Soule, adjacent to the High Pyrenees.
There are a number of ways by which you might start inland from the Basque Coast.
I would begin myself from Saint-Jean-de-Luz, from where there are at least three pleasant roads going south into the heart of Labourd.
The large, cheerful village of As Cain is an excellent first taste of this lushly rural hinterland and, although still almost at sea level, a possible place to stay, because it has good hotels set where village hotels ought to be, in the main square.
It also has its frontôn or outdoor pelota wall.
This particular form of the game is not that old, having come in in the middle of the last century, when changes took place in the technology of pelota.
Before that, it had been a game more like tennis, played ‘direct’ between the players with a clumsy woollen ball which did not bounce.
Then indigenous wool gave way to exotic rubber, with the result that the ball now rebounded very happily off stone walls, and new, ‘indirect’ varieties of pelota were invented.
The pilotari or players took to wearing more elaborate gloves or other prosthetic aids in propelling the ball, and what had once been a lo wish wall at the end of the playing area was built higher and higher to contain the far greater velocities, while the courts themselves became longer, until some of them are said to have reached 100 metres.
The smooth, high back-wall of the local frontôn , often painted with a pink or ruddy wash, and sometimes framing the dark blocks of stone of the lower, narrower wall it has replaced, is the most striking of all evidences of Basqueness; you know you  have left the real Basque country when you realize the villages no longer have a frontón in the middle of them.
There are also indoor pelota courts, called trinquets , which, to the lay eye anyway, can look like royal tennis courts, and where yet other forms of pelota are played, usually professionally (I well remember, from my youth, that the then world real tennis champion was a Basque, a celebrated player who no doubt grew up democratically playing pelota and then switched easily enough to the very exclusive game of real or royal tennis).
Pelota is a confusing and various game, and before going to watch it being played it is worth reading up on the technique and the scoring, if you want to follow it.
Outdoor pelota you can hear long before you can see it, because the sharp crack of the ball on the end-wall carries all through or even outside the villages.
This is something to bear in mind when choosing your hotel room in a Basque village: it is picturesque assuredly to have a view of the frontón from your window, but it might not seem such a good idea if they start playing when you want to go to sleep.
At Ascain you could turn left, or eastwards, and take the road through Saint-Pée-sur-Nivelle and Espelette, to Cambo.
This is good country, with good villages in it, giving you a full exposure to the dark green or red-brown paint, on window shutters or exposed timbers, that creates such a decorative unity among Basque houses — so much so that I recall a feeling of outrage along this road, when I passed one traditionally built house whose paint work was the vilest turquoise.
Alternatively, you could carry on south out of As Cain, down a more minor road, to the village of Sare.
Between As Cain and Sare you go over the Col Saint-Ignace, a very modest affair of some 500 feet.
From the Col there is, in summer, a rack railway that will lift you, if you are so minded, to the conspicuous because lonely summit of La Rhune, which is far and away the most prominent mountain at this Atlantic end of the Pyrenees, even though it is no more than 3,000 feet high.
To the Basque this is something of  a holy, or at least legendary mountain.
Today, inevitably, like all too many high places, it has far from legendary radio and television installations on top of it.
But in more robust days, you would have been more likely to come upon a coven up there, since the summit of La Rhune was one of several places in the Basque lands where witches were held to convene during the very ugly years of persecution early in the seventeenth century — then it was, according to the local inquisitors, that English and Scottish travellers arriving by sea in Bordeaux saw veritable armies of devils making their way towards south-western France.
It is with La Rhune that the Pyrenees make their final turn to the west, and the views from on top are immense.
It is straightforward enough to climb up there on foot, if the railway is not working; the guidebooks say to allow three hours.
My own ascent on foot, following the track of the railway, dwindled, I have to admit, to a halt on a warm afternoon, and to a comfortable seat on the mountain turf.
You do not have to climb too high to earn yourself splendid views over the country on the French side as well as a close-up sight of raptors perched or circling amongst the rocks.
Sare, which is three kilometres beyond the Col Saint-Ignace, is another of the traditional Basque villages, with a lovely galleried church, an imposing frontón in the centre, and some fine old houses.
A placid and leafy place indeed, except that it has also the local nickname of Enfer des palombes or ‘The wood pigeons’ hell', because nowhere are these migrating birds more vigorously hunted on their autumn flight south than around Sare.
The chasse á la palombe or pigeon-shooting is a custom of the Basque country which takes you by surprise, so intense is it.
In October the hills around here are alive, to the sound not of music but of shotguns.
Nor is shooting the only manner of the birds' destruction, because they are also trapped, by being driven into defiles and then caught in nets stretched between the trees.
Their next appearance will be on the menu of the local restaurants, probably submerged in a rich salmi .
The hunting  season for the palombe is short but deadly, and if you go up into the hills while it is on, the local men will be crouched there in their camouflage jackets, or lined up at stands along the roads, their shotguns aimed hungrily out over the valley.
It is not a very demanding version of the chase, especially on Sundays, when you may well see rows of gunmen in position only a few easy yards from the hotel where they mean to have lunch.
And the shoot is for men only, you see no women with guns.
In Sare itself apparently, on Sundays in October, a special mass is said in the church at 3 a.m. for those who are going out shooting, and the celebrant is later repaid for his early rising by a gift of live palombes .
Sare also has caves, but dolled-up, tourist ones, and since there are stupendous caves elsewhere in the Pyrenees I shall ignore those of Sare.
After Sare, if you are still collecting Basque villages, the place to make for is Ainhoa, to the east, along a particularly agreeable wooded road.
Ainhoa is smaller than either Sare or As Cain, and simpler.
It is basically a single very wide village street, with some sturdy and impressive old houses in it, dating from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Ainhoa is just the place to study the picturesque Basque tradition of inscribing the lintel stones above their doorways with the names of those who originally built the house.
This is a much more significant practice than you might at first think, because the etche or house is the fundamental unit of Basque society, symbolizing the continuity of the family line and of the patrimony.
The Basque house is an idea as much as a building.
Sometimes the lintel has a brief homily, to go with the ancestral names, on the lines maybe of ‘Biciac, orhoit hilciaz ’, or ‘You who are alive, remember death’.
Above one doorway in Ainhoa there is an inscription longer than most which is a history lesson in miniature.
It reads: ‘This house known as Gorritia was bought back by Marie de Gorriti mother of the late Jean Dolhagaray with the sums sent by him from the Indies which house cannot be sold nor pledged.
Written in the year 1662.’
Here there is recorded an old custom that is still not extinct in the Basque country, of emigration to the Americas, and especially South America.
Young Basque men emigrated because no patrimony could by custom be divided, leaving younger sons to fend for themselves.
They went in great numbers; in a period of sixty years in the last century, some 80,000 French Basques are estimated to have gone from the region, out of a total population at any one time of 112,000.
The birthrate could only just keep pace.
But the loyalty of those who left to their ‘house’ and their village was such that when they were able to they sent money home, and many eventually came back in person, to die where they were born.
Those who had grown rich abroad got the generic name of ‘Indian oaks’, on the assumption that they had gone to seek their fortune in the ‘Indies’.
One such Basque emigrant, who became a consul in Ecuador, even left his native village in his will one of the smaller Galapagos Islands, as an attractive if rather academic addition to its territory.
From Ainhoa the only road that will keep you on the French side of the Pyrenees runs more or less north-east, back towards Espelette.
This is one of the best Basque villages, twistier than others in its layout, and the home of the red pepper, a fiery vegetable that now has an annual festival in Espelette in the autumn.
As well as the pimiento, Espelette also trades in the pottoks or small, tough, shaggy horses which live half wild in the Basque hills and mountains.
At one time pottoks were sold to Britain, and put to work pulling wagons in the pits; today, they are most likely to be used, if at all, for carrying tourists on safe, low-slung pony rides.
Cambo or, more fully, Cambo-les-Bains, is one of only two real towns inland in Labourd, the other being Hasparren.
Cambo is on both the river Nive and the main road from Bayonne to Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, and you might call it a centre.
It is a small but spread-out, almost incoherent town, the pleasantest part of which stands up above the river and has a row  of modest hotels.
Given that it is only half an hour from the coast and has charming country to both west and east, Cambo is a place to think perhaps of staying in, even if my own instincts would lead me to prefer one of the Basque villages.
It is in fact the first of the great many spas you meet with in the Pyrenees, when coming from the Atlantic coast, good, so one aged guidebook has it, for ‘nervous people, the neurasthenic, the scrofulous, the lymphatic, the dyspeptic, the rheumatic, the enfeebled, the asthmatic…
‘. It remains a valetudinarian place, with baths a mile out of town to the east where plenty of people still go for treatment.
The first words I ever heard spoken in Cambo were ‘A coffee please, not too strong,’ which seemed to sum up this mild and cautious little town.
Cambo's most illustrious resident, attracted there by its salubrity, was the playwright Edmond Rostand, a florid  Marseillaise who built himself an extraordinary house just outside the town to the north.
This is the Villa Arnaga, open for visits from April to the end of October, and curious enough to put on your visiting-list.
Rostand had grown rich on the royalties from his astonishing verse drama,Cyrano de Bergerac , which was first performed in 1897 and so successfully that its author was reportedly made a knight of the Légion d'Honneur on the opening night in between the fourth and fifth acts.
Since then Cyrano is estimated to have been put on more times than any other French play and to have been General de Gaulle's favourite theatrical work.
The plot is the most extravagantly and sentimentally romantic it would be possible to imagine, the story of brave, generous, broken-hearted Cyrano, who loves but can never win the girl because his nose is so grotesquely large.
But with his incomparable fluency, he woos her gallantly and lavishly in rhyming couplets on behalf of another.
Rostand wrote other great successes also, though nothing quite on the memorable scale of Cyrano .
Given that its hero's fatal handicap was the size of his nose, it seemed to me most tactless that there should be a ‘pneumological’ institute named after him in  Cambo, when the last thing he can have suffered from was breathing problems.
The Villa Arnaga is appropriately and massively theatrical: a traditional, asymmetrical Basque villa with pitched roof and balcony but inflated to several times the orthodox size for such buildings.
At the back there is a long, formal garden, stretching away past ponds and flower beds to an ample pergola, and on the other three sides park land, with a great many hydrangeas.
The interior of the villa one can only lamely describe as southern art nouveau; there is a great deal of panelling, made out of exotic and in some cases aromatic woods, a great deal of marble, of gilt, and of inlaid flooring.
There are also some, but not too many memorabilia of Rostand's life in the theatre: playbills, photographs of actors and actresses associated with his work, autograph letters.
The Villa Arnaga is an eccentric, ornate memorial to the man, a rare and engaging touch of the histrionic in this otherwise sincere part of the Basque country.
To the east of Cambo there is some very pleasantly hilly country, with plenty of woodlands but some moor land too, notably above Hasparren.
Were you to want to travel truly scenically from Bayonne to Cambo, or from Cambo to Bayonne for that matter, then you would take the road very magnificently known as the Route Impériale tea Cimes, or ‘Imperial Route of the Peaks’, which lies east of the main road and is many times more beautiful.
The Route Impériale was laid out by Napoleon, the First this time, for strategic rather than aesthetic purposes, but it is a delight, a quiet, curly road along a ridge with long vistas of farms and moor land to the east, and of more farms, villages and cultivation to the west.
It gets its name from what you can see in the far distance, provided the weather is right, which is the first peaks of the real Pyrenees.
These are to the south, which means that it is better to travel the Route Impériale starting from Bayonne, rather than enjoying the mountains only In your rear-view mirror.
It comes out on the road that joins Cambo to the small town  of Hasparren, a Roman foundation but a nondescript place today.
Beyond Hasparren is the more picturesque small village of Labastide-Clairence, which has some shabby but distinguished old house fronts, deeply arcaded, in its square.
This was, as you can tell from the name, a bastide , or one of the new towns of the thirteenth century.
There are some 300 such places in south-west France, the finest of them a little north of here, in Gas cony, and they were built largely to a rectangular pattern of intersecting streets with a sometimes very generous town square in the centre.
Labastide-Clairence is a minor example, founded in 1314.
A little to the north of it, I was delighted to discover, is a monastery by the name of Belloc, as if in honour of the English Catholic writer and Pyrenean devotee, Hilaire Belloc (I was gratified to find later that there is at least one other Belloc or Bellocq in the Pyrenees).
One misty autumn morning I drove out to the monastery for a look, crunching along lanes covered in empty chestnut husks, which are already an indication of Benedictines ahead, since Benedictines always plant chestnut trees by their buildings.
Hilaire Belloc would not I think have liked his eponymous monastery; it is modern and spruce, with sacred literature in showcases and a monk sitting at a reception desk.
A spiritual Holiday Inn, it seemed to mc, not at all to the taste of that irascible writer, for whom the Pyrenees were so refreshingly medieval.
From Labastide-Clairence, I would strongly advise making your way eastwards, along the beautiful little road for Saint-Palais.
But not to go all the way to Saint-Palais; rather, after eight miles, turn to the right, over a crest, along a very minor road that goes down to the hamlet and caves of Isturits.
These are caves you should see, for the good reason that they were lived in.
And here I state my prejudice over caves: I like those that have cave art or artefacts to show, I like much less those exhibited only for their concretions, their stalagmites, stalactites and other natural forms.
Isturits has both art and artefacts, and is one of the most inspiring of the Pyrenean caves.
There are  actually two levels of cave here, one on top of the other, the upper level being called Isturits, the lower Oxocelhaya.
Isturits was the residential cave, a very large chamber continuously inhabited, the prehistorians say, for many millennia in the Upper Palaeolithic period, up until to 10,000 years ago.
The little museum at Isturits shows some of the great many animal bones uncovered there, of bears, reindeer, mammoth and the rest; as well as examples of the flint, horn and bone weapons and tools which the generations of cave-dwellers made.
But the art is the thing.
In the cave itself, bas-reliefs sculpted close together on a stalagmite cone, hard to make out for the most part, except for an obvious and memorable reindeer some three feet long, in the museum, animals graphically carved or engraved on bone, many of them heads of horses, but fish too, and pieces of bone, antler and ivory carved quite elaborately into abstract patterns of diamond shapes, chevrons or spirals.
No one knows what these carved objects might have been for, so perhaps they weren't for anything, but a heartening prehistoric example of art for art's sake.
The chamber of Oxocelhaya, some fifty feet below Isturits, does not seem to have been occupied for long.
This is the place for lovers of stalagmites and stalactites, of which there are some noble specimens and which the guides, true to their kind, will insist on likening to some human or animal shape, as if it were wrong to allow rocks to look only like rocks.
There is also a third level of caves at Isturits, below the others and with much good cave art, prehistoric hearths and other attractions in it.
This was first found in the 1970s but can be entered only by expert cave-divers, able to negotiate underground waters.
Strictly speaking, the caves of Isturits arc in Basse-Navarre, a mile or two on the wrong side of the invisible boundary of Labourd, and so belong in my next section.
I have trespassed and will retreat back to Cambo and to the country just to the south of it.
Spare a diversion here for the village of Itxassou, two miles upstream from Cambo along the Nive.
It is a charming place, a village with two centres, like others in the Basque  country.
It also has cherry trees, which are far from common in a part of France that grows less fruit than one would hope to see.
The village square has a fine pink and grey frontón , and promising-looking hotels.
From it you can walk to Itxassou's other half, which is clustered round the church, about a kilometre away and within sight of the defile known as the Pas de Roland, an opening in the rock said to have been made by the hoofs of this luckless paladin's horse (but more of Roland in the appropriate place, when we come to Roncevaux).
The church is lovely, both in itself and for its bucolic setting.
The graveyard especially is a good place to examine the strange and beautiful gravestones characteristic of old Basque burial grounds.
These stéles discoïdales are formed of a roughly engraved stone disc on top of a sturdy, tapering base and you find them either buried well into the earth so that little shows above the ground except the disc or else standing clearly up above it (see Plate I).
Only since the sixteenth century have dates been carved on these stones, but many are older than that, perhaps by as much as three or four centuries.
As well as in the Pyrenees, you may see them further north in the Landes, and in Spain and Portugal, which have lots of them; given which, it is possible that they are another survival, or tradition, of the Celtiberians, like the Basque language.
The decoration on the discs, which seldom have names on, is usually either a variation of the Christian monogram IHS, or else the so-called ‘Basque cross’, which is a little like a four-leafed clover and has sometimes been argued, in an attempt to find an origin for the Basques in the East, to derive from the old Hindu symbol of the swastika.
At Itxassou there are numbers of these simple memorial stones set in a fringe along the church wall, where they make an affecting counterweight to the overblown and ugly modern gravestones and monuments all around you.
These last bear looking at for one thing only, and that is the rich, exquisite Basque family names carved on them: Iharour-Lascagne, Uharretuko  Elissalde-Olaizola.
Those are names it would be a pleasure to bear and that are good to hear: a minute or two spent saying them out loud should be part of any visit to the church of Itxassou.
The Basques, who took so inordinately long to be christianized in the early Middle Ages, have been conspicuously devout Roman Catholics ever since.
This made things difficult for them during the aggressively secular phase of the French Revolution, when Itxassou in particular fell foul of the regime.
(In common with many other local villages, it was then renamed, as Union which is at least happier than the new name found for the village of Ustaritz downstream, which temporarily became Marat-sur-Nive.)
During the Terror, forty-seven young men of Itxassou deserted from the revolutionary army.
The response to which act was terrible: all the inhabitants of this and other Basque villages nearby, including Sare, As Cain, Espelette and Ainhoa, were arrested and deported into the Landes.
Several thousands went and by the autumn, six months later, when they were allowed to return to their pillaged homes, almost half had died, of disease and malnutrition.
Like other frontier peoples, the French Basques have not always seen eye to eye with Paris.
Basse-Navarre
South from Cambo-les-Bains, between the villages of Louhossoa and Bid array, the province of Labourd graduates into that of Basse-Navarre.
Basse-Navarre, or Lower Navarre, was originally the French end of the kingdom of Navarre, the larger part of which lay on the far side of the Pyrenees, in Spain.
As a trans-Pyrenean kingdom, Navarre lasted from its foundation in the ninth century until the sixteenth century, when it got broken in two, Spanish Navarre becoming Spanish in 1512 while French or Basse-Navarre was incorporated into the French crown in 1589, when its current king became king of France as Henri IV.
In Basse-Navarre the land starts seriously to rise; there is more sense of being in the Pyrenees here than in the merely undulating Labourd.
It starts to get rockier too, as you soon realize driving along the valley road past Bid array, which has been cut through the often quite garish sandstone.
Bid array itself is a secretive village, more or less hidden from the road in the hills to the west.
It is nicely ringed on three sides by colourful high hills or else low mountains, and has a delightful old humpbacked bridge.
It is a quiet and comfortable village to stop in, as I know from having stopped there, with good walks up into the hills and good fishing — for trout, which begin to come into their own around here as the mountain fish.
Indeed, it was on the road just outside Bid array and beside the Nive that I once came close to running a fish over, a glossy trout that seemed to be flipping its way desperately to the roadside and to safety.
I wondered for a moment about this strange near-miss, and what a trout might be doing crossing the road, until I saw a fisherman standing aside, who can only have dropped his slippery catch on the roadway and was waiting to recapture it.
Bid array also has an odd local cult, or did have, for I am not sure that it is still practised, in the worship of a headless and anonymous saint in a cave nearby.
This particular intercessor is in fact a vaguely humanoid stalagmite, which I suppose bears out what I was saying about our common need to find resemblances between rocks and persons.
After Bidarray there is no call that I know of to stop again before the small town of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port.
This, I suspect, is everyone's favourite town in the top half of the Pyrenees and where many of us would always choose to stay.
It is both a pretty and well-organized place in its own right and one from which you can drive profitably off in every direction, up a whole sheaf of good valleys and into some ravishing high country.
Saint-Jean is not a mountain town, because it is only 500 feet above sea level, but it has the feel of a mountain town, because the hills close in tightly around it, especially to the south  and to the east.
It is a compact place, spreading out extramurally a bit these days into the basin to the north of the river, yet basically contained on the other three sides by its fifteenth century walls.
And the river Nive, which is a good deal slimmer and perfectly limpid up here, near to its source in the watershed, flows discreetly through the middle of the town, dividing it into two quite equal parts.
Saint-Jean's history is above all that of a pilgrim halt, a celebrated resting-place along the great medieval pilgrim route to the shrine of St James in Compostela, in the far north-west corner of Spain.
A little outside Saint-Jean to the north-east, in fact, near the village of Ostabat, three of the main pilgrim routes across France met up, to advance as one towards the mountain passes, so that through Saint-Jean there went the pilgrims who had travelled from Paris, from Vézelay in Burgundy, and from Le Puy and Conques further to the south; only those who had come through Provence took a different route into Spain, over the Col du Somport.
Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port they traversed from top to bottom, coming into the town through the Porte Saint-Jacques and leaving it again some four or five hundred yards lower down, through the Porte d'Espagne.
This cobbled route is still a joy to follow; the top half of it, as it curves down to the church and the river, lined with sober houses built from the local cocoa-coloured stone and dating from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries — datable precisely in some cases from the inscribed lintel stones; then the church, seventeenth-century and disappointingly dull; the old bridge over the Nive, which is the place to look up — and downstream, at the houses built along the banks with their projecting wooden galleries; and then on towards the Porte d'Espagne, past the shops and more very decent old houses.
The part of this street above the church is known as the Rue de la Citadelle, because up to the right is the large classical citadel, built in the seventeenth century and reshaped soon after, along with the town walls, by the inescapable Vauban, whose job it  was to make south-west France for ever safe from incursions from across the mountains.
The citadel is not open to visitors, but the hill it stands on is a good spot to zigzag your way up to, to look out over the town, the river and its basin, and the valleys that go off from it north, south, east and west.
This upper part of Saint-Jean also has sections of the old ramparts, which are quite tame as these things go and now thoroughly civilian, overlooking as they do the main street or else the minute gardens of the houses of the old quarter.
This main street has almost all the town's hotels, and is filled by an admirable street market on Mondays.
Although I have said I do not mean to commend particular hotels or restaurants, I am compelled to break that rule here, just once, and say that Saint-Jean does have the only restaurant anywhere in the Pyrenees to which the Guide Michelin invariably gives two rosettes for its food.
This is the Hôtel des Pyrénées.
I have eaten there; it is wonderful, and not ferociously expensive.
And something else I learnt in Saint-Jean is that where there is one superior restaurant there will be other good ones, not rivals so much as supporters; this in my experience is a particularly good town to dine in.
It also has one sad literary connection with England, as the place where the excellent late-Victorian novelist George Gigging died.
Gissing was an unhappy man who wrote best about emotional disappointment and urban poverty, as in his splendid novel of the lower reaches of literary London,New Grub Street .
But he had longings at the same time for the Mediterranean and travelled there.
He died in the Pyrenees, quite young, of pneumonia, attended at the last by the officious H. G. Wells, who describes his mercy mission to the bedside of his friend in his autobiography.
In Wells's eyes and day, Saint-Jean was ‘a lonely frontier town’ in which, at night, the ‘deserted streets abound in howling great dogs to whom the belated wayfarer is an occasion for the fiercest demonstrations’.
A sadly suitable accompaniment for the last, delirious moments of what Wells, in a chillingly unsympathetic phrase, calls ‘all that flimsy inordinate stir of grey matter that was George Gissing’.
The Port in the name of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port relates to the passage over the mountains to the south-west of the town, the most famous in all the Pyrenees.
It is one of the ‘Ports de Cize’, the collective name for the several cols to be found in the mountains here and once the Summus Pyrenaeus of the Romans, who also chose to cross them above Saint-Jean.
Today it is reached by the main road, up the valley of the Petite Nive, through Arnéguy, which is the French frontier post, to the first Spanish village of Valcarlos and then Roncesvalles or, in its more familiar French form, Roncevaux.
Here is one of those places, then, where the frontier does not follow the ridge of the mountains, but takes a sudden dive down on the French side.
This was the route that the Compostela pilgrims took out of Saint-Jean, not because it was the easiest but because of its heroic Christian associations — though the present road, created in the 1880s, climbs a little to the west of the paths traditionally followed before then.
Here, in the summer of the year 778, the rear guard of the army of the Christian King Charlemagne, on its way back into France from Spain and from warring with the paynim hordes of Islam, was set upon and routed.
This was the one resounding defeat of Charlemagne's campaigns, recorded in the ninth-century life of the king by Eginhard.
It became subsequently a very celebrated and gallant defeat indeed, as the subject-matter of the great Anglo-Norman epic of the Chanson de Roland , composed at least 300 years after the event.
In that work it is Roland and Oliver, friends and paladins, against the Saracens, or a handful of impossibly valiant Christian knights against a whole army of miscreants.
But the Song of Roland has it wrong; all that is epic licence.
In sober fact it was not the Saracens who ambushed and humiliated Charlemagne's army in the mountain pass, but the Basques, who thus confirmed for the chronicler Eginhard their already long-standing reputation for treachery.
Nor was Roland in reality  quite the great man and imperial favourite he is presented as in the poem, but a fairly obscure governor of Brittany.
Never mind, it is a reckless, bloodthirsty tale, with Roland ultimately being punished for his hubris in refusing until it was too late to blow his oliphant, or horn, to summon back Charlemagne and the rest of the army to help his vastly outnumbered rear guard.
The historical col of Roncevaux is an essential excursion then, especially for those like myself who as undergraduates long ago wrestled bad-temperedly with the obscure medieval French of the epic.
This is the first really high pass of the Pyrenees, 3,500 feet up, and a suitably stark spot once you have risen above the trees of the valley.
The Song of Roland does not have much local colour in it, except of a perfunctory ‘high are the mountains and dark the valleys’ kind, so there is no particular call to read the poem before visiting the scene, in hopes of recognizing the poet's descriptions.
There are reminders of it, however, on the ground.
The village of Roncevaux is a short way beyond and a little way down from the col; it consists mainly of the very military-looking monastery and attendant Gothic church created there in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries for the service of pilgrims.
On the col itself, there is a small modern chapel and a memorial stone, which faces back down into Spain, Roland having heroically asked that he should be buried facing not his homeland but the enemy.
There is an unusual road sign here also, which must be a puzzle for those ignorant of the Roncevaux story, reading: ‘Traveller stay, and hark en to the oliphant…‘
Moving clockwise on the map from the Valcarlos road, you soon come to another road leading due west from Saint-Jean.
The first little place of note you pass along here is Irouléguy, a hamlet at the foot of a prominent hill by the name of Jarra.
Irouléguy is unique: it has given its name to the one wine that is still produced in the whole of the Basque country.
The other vineyards were all wiped out in the phylloxera epidemic of the last century and never replanted; but lonely though it is on the  local wine lists, Irouléguy will do nicely; I have never got much beyond the stage of dividing wines into nice and nasty when it comes to describing them, so all I shall say is that Irouléguy is nice.
A short way further on is the handsome village of Saint-Étienne-de-Baïgorry, most fetchingly set amidst the hills and so long-drawn-out as to be really two villages, with the river in between them.
These two half-villages were at one time in rivalry and even now, I noticed, each has its own war memorial even if the names carved on it are the same for both.
It is a prosperous-looking place, either because there is wine money here, made from the vineyards of Irouléguy, or because well-off Basques have retired to this very calm and convenient valley, to renovate the old houses or build themselves shiny new ones, reminiscent but hardly imitative of the lovely old style of Basque domestic architecture.
Either way, a successful village like this has a very different look from those Basque villages which have not so far been resettled.
In the centre of Saint-Étienne-de-Baïgorry, crossing the torrent of the Aldudes, is a gorgeous old humpbacked bridge (a ‘donkey's back’ bridge the French say), that is no longer of much use to anybody except to make you ask whether modern bridges need to be quite so drably horizontal as they invariably are.
There are two roads out of Saint-Étienne, both of them leading to the Spanish frontier and both delightful to drive along.
If you don't want actually to enter Spain, then the small road which follows the course of the river, the Nive tea Aldudes, is the one to choose.
It passes through villages that become increasingly small and simple as you get deeper into the high hills: through Banca, in the eighteenth century a centre of the local copper-mining industry, then Aldudes itself, which has a very nice small square and a Basque-style church, and finally Urepel, reached by a turning off to the left from the road that continues into Spain.
Urepel is the end of the line, since here the mountains close in and the road ends.
Above Urepel is what is  known as the Pays Quint, a small territory of upland pastures and woods that is another of the anomalies of the Franco-Spanish frontier.
Originally it was competed for, often bloodily, by the inhabitants of the valleys on either side of the watershed.
Then, in 1856, the Empress Eugénie, well suited for the work of conciliation as the Spanish wife of the French Emperor, arranged a treaty whereby the territory was recognized as Spanish but was rented out perpetually to the inhabitants on the French side; so these are French citizens who farm in Spain.
The lovely valley of the Aldudes is another great centre, be warned, for the chasse aux palombes , which means that in season, that is in late October, it is certain to be loud with trigger-happy locals and visitors, from over in nearby Spain as well as from France, blazing passionately away towards the magnificent beech woods in which the harassed wood-pigeons are presumed to be sheltering.
The valley of the Aldudes is beautiful, but the best country of all around Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, I think, is that which you find to the south and south-east.
Here at last you are in the real mountains, with the highest peaks going up to some 5,000 feet.
And you get the reality too of mountain roads, some of which are permanently rough and excitingly narrow, with fierce gradients and many blind bends.
An up-to-date Michelin or other detailed road-map (number 85 is the Michelin sheet you need) is absolutely necessary, and the smaller your car the happier you may well feel, when trying, let us say, to squeeze past an opposing motorist or an unyielding sheep or cow on a track designed obviously for one.
Michelin road-maps mark genuinely arduous or dangerous stretches of road with a broken red line, and though the roadways themselves quite often turn out to be less awkward than you expect from such warnings, less awkward does not mean altogether easy.
One road out of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port leads along the valley of the Nive, now grown quite a trifling stream, at least in the dry season.
This road I recommend.
You can turn off very soon to the right, and climb up to make a wonderfully airy and  spectacular circuit of the very open, grassy high ground, before hair pinning down the other side on to the Valcarlos road at Arnéguy.
Or, you can carry on up the narrow and beautiful Nive valley to the village of Esterençuby.
This is only five miles from Saint-Jean, but it feels like fifty — a village hideaway, with nowhere beyond it.
It has three plain and decent hotels, an attractive church on the hillside, with a complicated grey slate spire and spire lets, and, out of all proportion with the rest of the village, a most luxurious, roofed-over pelota court where you can even play by floodlight.
From Esterençuby you can press onwards and upwards, towards the frontier, and then either branch right, back into the complex of mountain roads to the west that would take you eventually down again to Arnéguy, or else left, along a narrow, lonely, but not totally nerve-racking road which climbs high up on the north flank of the watershed, before relapsing into the next valley to the east.
On the right here is, first, the summit of Occabé or Ok Abe, the biggest to date, at 5,000 feet, and known for its many Iron-Age burial sites and standing stones (see Plate 2), and then the immense, noble beech forest of Iraty, which is one of Europe's largest, covering thousands of acres on either side of the frontier.
Desperately remote though it seems, this forest has in its time been much worked, beech wood having been prized for making oars for ships and sent off in great quantities to the coast.
But Iraty has survived gloriously, unlike other local forests, which were exploited half to death.
Deforestation, whether to clear the ground for pasture or to produce timber and fuel, was a worry in these parts of the Pyrenees as long ago as the seventeenth century, when the prescient minister Colbert sent an eminent forester from Paris to report on the local resources in wood; but it is only quite recently that felling and replanting have been properly controlled.
To the visitor, as opposed perhaps to the natural historian, these mountains still appear most luxuriantly and healthily treed.
But they are pastoral at the same time, as you are constantly made aware, and nowhere more so than up here on the lofty Plateau d'Iraty, where several roads meet.
Large numbers of animals — a particularly aristocratic breed of sheep, with black heads and legs, and long white coats that look to have been draped over them, like wigs, rather than grown naturally; sleek, monochrome cattle; and pottoks as well as full-grown horses, all seem to spend an agreeable and nutritious summer on these high pastures.
They are cared for by the shepherds, who would once have come up for the summer along with the animals, and slept in their traditional, bleak little cabins; nowadays, they are for the most part motorized and can commute genteelly to the livestock from their homes below.
Something else you become very aware of all over the Basque country is the bracken.
In the autumn, the sweeping tracts of it on the lower, treeless hillsides are the colour of rust, and it is then that it is scythed down, to provide bedding for the animals during the winter and, once suitably impregnated, fertilizer for the fields the following spring — in a neat ecological cycle.
The beehive-shaped stacks of cut bracken, sometimes held down on top with an old tyre, thrown like a successful quoit around their axial poles, are a great feature of the valleys.
At the meeting-place of roads on the Plateau d'Iraty there are four things you can do: go unadventurously back the way you came, to Esterençuby; carry on due east over the Col Bagargui along a tolerable but not always reassuring road into Larrau and the valley of Mauléon; turn sharp left along a somewhat hazardous stretch of track rather than road towards the village of Men dive (I funk Ed this route myself, after a short trial run, but bad roads do get mended or improved in the Pyrenees, so one year's experience may be different from the next); or turn to the right along the very scenic road into the Forêt d'Iraty itself.
This last choice is desirable but it only delays things so far as getting home is concerned, since the forest road stops on the frontier some three miles away, and there you can but turn round.
The  boldest and the best way to take is directly to the east, because there are some splendid sights to see in the valley of Larrau and beyond.
But these must wait, because they are no longer in Basse-Navarre but in the third Basque province of the Soule, to which I shall be coming in a moment.
If you are still greedy for high, pastoral places to spend the day in, there is one other exhilarating excursion you can make from Saint-Jean, to the south-east, up the valley of a stream called the Laurhibar.
When you get to the small conglomeration of villages called, variously, Lecumberry, Men dive and Béhorléguy, you make half-left for the Col d'Aphanize and beyond it Ahusquy.
There are two roads up to the col, the more beautiful being the corniche road leading out of Men dive; the other starts up from Béhorléguy.
(The little road going off to the left here, towards Host a, I certainly don't advise; it scared the wits out of me one afternoon, so steep, narrow and broken was it).
Near Ahusquy itself the road is not good, but uneven only and never frightening.
Ahusquy is, in its minuscule way, a spa, because on the hillside above it, a healthy kilometre's walk from the road and the small hotel, is a source you can drink from — it is held to be good for kidney and bladder sufferers.
But you can also settle happily for the sublime views that you have from this generously turf Ed upland.
To the south and south-east are the mountains on and beyond the frontier — not the major Pyrenean peaks as yet but five — or six-thousand-footers — and many dark, completely wooded valleys; on the other side, to the north, better seen by carrying a bit further on along the road for Mauléon, there is another of the wonderful Pyrenean beech forests, the Forêt tea Arbailles, which masks a notoriously craggy, deeply perforated limestone plateau.
There could be no grander nor more characteristic view of the mountains capes of these Atlantic Pyrenees than the one you see from the road or the slopes around Ahusquy.
This is a drive to loiter over, a spot or series of spots to invest a fine day in.
The country to the north and north-east of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port is much lower and for that reason more cultivated.
There are some excellent villages, like Iholdy, where the church and the frontón are so close together they seem to be one building, and the church has an unusual, very charming wooden gallery attached to the side wall.
And a short way off the main road leading from Saint-Jean to Saint-Palais, past Ostabat, where the pilgrim routes long ago converged but which today is nothing, is the hamlet — it is hardly even that — of Harambels.
This was once a reputed halt for pilgrims.
A tiny dilapidated chapel remains, built in the eleventh century, with a chrisme , or Christian monogram inscribed in a circle, sculpted over the doorway and a miniature example of the strange, three-pronged ‘bell-walls’ you see so many of in this region.
If you can find someone with a key to let you in, the interior of the chapel is said to be interestingly decorated, but the one time I was in Harambels I could find cows but no people.
Indeed, never was I anywhere so idyllically drowsy.
The Compostela pilgrimage was, according to such first-hand accounts of it as there are, a robust and pretty indecorous enterprise, but there could be no more placid memento of it than Harambels.
I only hope they don't spoil things here by over-restoring the chapel.
The small town of Saint-Palais, up the road from Harambels, was once the chief town of French Navarre and it still has its moments architecturally, though it is a little character less overall.
It stands (just) on the river Bidouze, or between the Bidouze and a stream called the Joyeuse.
The Bidouze marks very roughly the boundary between Basse-Navarre to the west and the third Basque province of the Soule to the east, and because Saint-Palais is, additionally, very close to where the Basque country ends and the region known as Béarn begins, it is something of a transitional town, neither one thing nor the other.
Twelve kilometres to the north-east of it is somewhere better: Sauveterre-de-Béarn, an interesting old place sat up above the Gave d'Oloron.
If I were pedantic I would have to exclude it from  my description of the Basque country, because Sauveterre is definitely a Béarnais and not a Basque town; but it is close to the edge of Basse-Navarre, and worth a visit, so I shall rope it in here.
You can tell soon enough in Sauveterre that things have changed architecturally when you look at the church.
This is powerful-looking and Romanesque, and was built mainly in the twelfth century.
It has a fine, strong square tower above the crossing, with a pointed roof, slender arched windows and a row of apertures at the top clearly added for defensive reasons.
Inside, to right and left of the altar, are two apsidal chapels vaulted with those delectable half-domes that in French are called, and how rightly,culs-de-four , or literally ‘oven-ends’.
Outside, the apse-end of the church is tall and decorative, while at the west end there is a good three-arched portal and a simply sculpted tympanum.
The church is built close to the edge of the bluff, which falls an overgrown eighty or ninety feet down into the wide bed of the gave or river; and the view up or downstream is dignified further by the curtain wall of the medieval Tour Monréal, that stands at one corner of the small square in front of the church.
The tower, like other of the medieval remains of Sauveterre (all of them numbered and labelled by the tourist authorities, as if they were clues in an architectural treasure hunt), is alive with pigeons and with palombes , wisely sitting out the shooting season in town.
It is an easy walk down from the church of Sauveterre to the riverside, where the stump of the old fortified bridge still stands, starting hopefully out from one bank but no longer reaching to the other — a disappointed bridge, to borrow James Joyce's perfect description of a seaside pier.
This bridge has a good legend to go with it.
In the year 1170, Sancie, the widow of Count Gaston V of Béarn, was sentenced to trial by water here, having given birth to a child rather too long after her husband's death.
Bound hand and foot, she was thrown into the gave on the orders of her brother, the King of Navarre, watched, it is claimed, by a crowd of 3,000, who will not have found it easy all to fit safely into this  constricted spot.
Needless to say, Sancie had no trouble surviving; she was, according to the commemorative plaque you can read by the bridge, cast ‘gently’ ashore from the ‘furious’waters at a place ‘three bowshots distant’from where she had been thrown in.
Had her ordeal come a century or two later than it did, the unsinkable Sancie would have had an uplifting view during her brief immersion, for the church and the tower of Sauveterre look especially well from down below here by the river.
The Soule
And so into the last, and smallest, of the three Basque provinces, La Soule, itself divisible into two parts, of the Upper and the Lower Soule, the first hard against the barrier of the high mountains to the south, the second relatively flat and bordering on Béarn.
By now you are well and truly into the region of the great valleys that run off at right-angles from the watershed, the ‘Pyrenees of the saves’, as geographers have tended to name it, to distinguish it from the configuration of the mountains further east, where the valleys are mostly more orthodox and run cross-ways or parallel with the frontier.
The Soule has as its axis the Gave de Mauléon, which flows pretty precisely through the middle of it, though dividing into a number of tributaries south of the province's one real town, of Mauléon.
In human terms, the Soule, and especially the Upper Soule, is far emptier than either of the other Basque provinces and economically, by the look of it, quite a bit more backward.
But one of the unkind truths of tourism is that backward places are more appealing because they have changed much less; the Upper Soule, in its more inaccessible parts, is just what many who come to the Pyrenees want: rawly natural.
I have already mentioned two ways by which it is possible to travel eastwards out of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port and into the Mauléon valley, both of them remote and somewhat tortuous: the mountain roads through Ahusquy or over the Col Bagargui a little further south.
If you are shifting your base as opposed to just your body, these might seem demanding routes, and there is instead a far easier but still pleasing route over the Col d'Osquich.
For this you turn sharp right off the road from Saint-Jean to Saint-Palais, about half-way between those two towns.
The Col d'Osquich is lucky you might think to be called.
a col, because it is no more than I, 200 feet high, but from it in fact you can see a great distance to both north and south, over the low hills and wide, cultivated valleys in the direction of Orthez and Pau, or into the forests and middling mountains towards the frontier.
Mauléon-Licharre is a historical town, but without very much history that you can actually see.
It was the chief town of the ancient viscounty of Soule, both a seat and a strong point, and as such had a stormy time during the protracted wars hereabouts with the English occupiers and during the religious wars of the sixteenth century between Catholics and Protestants.
The inhabitants of Mauléon remained pro-English rather longer than most, for the good reason that they found that to be governed from England was the nearest one could then come to being autonomous.
They fell foul, on the other hand, of Simon de Mont fort, who was sent to the south-west of France by King Henry III in 1248 to curb the unruliness there and ended up assaulting the Viscount of Soule in his castle in Mauléon.
The suggestion has been made before now that it was among the Basques that this future rebel against the king of England learnt his what were, for the time, dangerously democratic principles.
The ruins of the castle in question are still there, on a small rise to the east of the town.
It is the only castle I have been to which has a front doorbell, which you need to pull on if you want to see round since it is not automatically open to visitors.
For the rest, Mauléon is a manufacturing town, unusually for these parts, being the centre of a large espadrille industry.
If you have travelled this far into the mountains without espadrilles, but  want some, then buy them here, where the choice is incomparable.
Mauléon also has a rather wonderful Renaissance chateau in the centre of the town, with a roof to remember, a good thirty feet high and pitched at an angle of 75 degrees.
South of Mauléon at some point the Gave de Mauléon turns into the river Saison, famous for its destructive spates.
It is worth following southwards.
When you do, the first notable sight along the road is the small church of Gotein, two miles below Mauléon, which has a particularly good clocher-calvaire or saw-toothed bell-wall with, at the foot of it, a porch which is actually wider than the nave of the church itself and a covered wooden staircase going up the side.
On from Gotein is the little town, or alternatively the large village, of Tardets-Sorholus.
This is an old place, indeed a Roman place, as is known from an inscription which has been built into a chapel on top of the highest of the surrounding hills, and which is dedicated to a local Romano-Iberic divinity of the name of Herauscorritsehe, which cannot have tripped too easily from the pious tongue.
Tardets has a good, arcaded square but an air of being very run-down, as if no one now loved it.
Some five miles further south, the road beside the Saison forks, which is the same as saying that the valley of the Saison divides.
If you have time to pursue only one of the two alternatives, then you should take the left fork, along a tributary of the Saison called the Uhaitxa, to the Gorges de Kakouetta and the valley of Sainte-Engrâce, two prime sites, or sights, of the Pyrenees.
The road to them is (or was, in 1985) marked on the Michelin map with the forbidding broken red line, but do not be put off; here Michelin's mapmakers are exaggerating, it is not too bad at all, narrow but perfectly secure.
The Gorges de Kakouetta are five miles or so from the turning, on the right, and a clammily spectacular experience they are, because the micro-climate you enter one.
you are truly inside them is moist to say the least.
The rock here, naturally, is limestone, and prodigiously fissured, while the walk through the Gorges is  hard-going in places, and rough, continuing for almost a mile until the prepared path, such as it is, peters out.
The defile itself continues but you, unless you are hardy and ambitious, do not.
The Gorges are narrow, in places improbably so, not more than ten yards across, and deep, with the walls either side rising anything from two to eight hundred feet.
And though they are close to the vertical much of the way, they are thick with a stubbornly adhesive growth of trees and bushes, as well as, on the lower reaches, with the most exuberant coating of mosses you could ever hope to sec.
The end-point of the walkable, or sometimes scramble-able section of the Gorges is at a waterfall, where the water shoots out from a hole in the rock on the left and falls sixty or seventy feet into the stream.
Here, if you have managed to carry your food so far, there are picnic tables.
The waterfall is a part of the enormously extensive and complicated subterranean water system that has been traced now through this limestone mass if and which links up with the astonishingly deep fissures or gouffres that the speleologists have explored in the mountains to the east.
The system is lucidly and interestingly displayed on the wall of the small café where you buy tickets for the Gorges.
The Gorges of Kakouetta are not the end of the road, for a little further on down this valley is the exquisite site and church of Sainte-Engrâce.
Here, rather than by the splashing, sunless cascade of the Gorges, is where to have your picnic, in a greenly Arcadian valley in the heart of the mountains.
Sainte-Engrâce was until very recently a remote settlement, because the road into the valley was also the only road out; as a consequence it had a fine tradition for smuggling, since the last thing Basque smugglers ever wanted was good roads along which they might be pursued by excise men far less agile or locally knowledgeable than themselves.
In 1987, however, Sainte-Engrâce got its road out, at the far, eastern end of the valley, over what suddenly became the Col de Soudet; it was inaugurated one day and used on the next by the toiling cyclists of the Tour de France, as part  of one of their horribly taxing mountain climbs.
Oddly enough, a few weeks before this road was opened, a fine, informative film was shown on British television describing the lives of the Basque shepherding community of the Sainte-Engrâce valley.
It was a film in a series called Vanishing Peoples , which was discouraging.
People have vanished from high valleys in the Pyrenees like this one, and continue to do so, to live different and economically more ambitious lives in the towns.
One of the ways in which French governments have tried to stem this depopulation is by building new roads, as now at Sainte-Engrâce, in a process they speak of as désenclavement or literally ‘unwedging’.
The remoteness that tourists value has long been officially recognized in the mountains as an affliction.
Sainte-Engrâce, however, was also a place of pilgrimage and its glory is its mainly twelfth-century church, one of the most moving Romanesque buildings in the Pyrenees.
Sainte En grace the saint was in fact Portuguese, and said to have been martyred in Saragossa in the fourth century.
Her remains were stolen and hidden at the foot of an oak tree in this valley, to be eventually found, in the familiar manner of such discoveries, by an inquisitively rooting ox, whose horns at once lit indicatively up.
The religious community that subsequently formed here was at its apogee in the twelfth century, when the present church was begun.
It is an odd building, when you look at it from the front, because it is very asymmetrical.
There is a plain and severe bell tower to the right, which is later than the main part of the building, and a projecting, half-roofed porch to the left; the nave of the church is between the two, with its tiled roof sloping steeply down unilaterally from the tower to the porch.
The effect is to make you think for a second that the church is only half there, that there must once have been a second side to it, to the right of the tower.
But the imbalance grows on you, even if structurally it may not be such a good idea, since some very squat buttresses on the left-hand or north wall had to be built on  during a partial restoration of the building in the last century.
It is now being restored again, one can only hope not too thoroughly, given its overpowering simplicity.
There is a badly eroded sculpted tympanum and Chrisme above the doorway, here supported by angels, and some splendid capitals in the interior, one of them showing an elephant (at a guess) with a tongue that reaches to the ground; as well as candy-striped, cruciform piers.
At the back of the church is a deep, roughly worked wooden gallery, as a last reminder of the Basque style.
In the graveyard outside is a crucifix of the kind known as a ‘Cross of the Outrages’: it is roughly hewn out of wood, with the instruments of the Passion fixed to it, a ladder, nails, pliers, hammer, a crown of thorns, all in iron.
Having walked the Gorges of Kakouetta and then rested up in the benign landscape of Sainte-Engrâce, you may feel you have the legs back to inspect another of the spectacular limestone phenomena of the Upper Soule.
These are the Crevasses of Holçarté.
To get to them you need to go back to the fork in the road from Tardets where before you turned left, and this time take the right fork, for the village of Larrau and the Col d'Erroymendi (yet another road into Spain, though one that is open generally for no more than five months in the year — these are snowy parts).
The Crevasses are a little before you come to Larrau, on the left; and you have to park the car and walk to them.
It is a reasonably steep walk up between the trees and the outcrops and takes about forty-five minutes.
Your reward, which you may decide to turn down when eventually it is offered to you, is to stand on the vertiginous suspension bridge which was strung between the two sides of the gorge here in 1920.
The drop is dramatic: a straight five hundred feet into the torrent below, and as the bridge sways under your weight it feels like several thousand feet more than that.
I made this ascent on a lowering afternoon that turned thundery, and I stood only momentarily I will admit on the bridge, as the storms brewed noisily up in the mountains all around and the lightning began.
It was a lonely and Wagnerian moment, made no better by my noticing that a few of the wooden planks I was standing on had been replaced.
Why?
I couldn't help but ask myself; and made for terra firma.
Béarn
Béarn comes between the Basque country to the west and the part of the central Pyrenees known as Bigorre to the east.
Like the other Pyrenean divisions, Béarn is medieval; this was once the largest of the furiously independent mountain states, a viscounty which came into existence as early as 820, was at different moments of its history the vassal of Aragon and England, became joined by marriage with the powerful viscounty of Foix and with Basse-Navarre, and finally, when Henri IV, ‘le grand Béarnais ’, became king of the whole of France in 1589, was integrated with the Crown.
As a tourist region, Béarn is made up of two of the classic Pyrenean valleys, of the Aspe and of the Ossau, plus, to the north, the city of Pau.
The Aspe Valley
I shall come into Béarn from the Soule by way of Tardets and through a small, thoroughly bucolic bit of country known as the Barétous.
This lies between Tardets and the main road running due north and south down the Aspe valley, below its head-town of Oloron-Sainte-Marie.
The maize or Indian corn is what you may well be most conscious of here, a crop introduced into the western Pyrenees in the 1600s and long a staple there, occupying now nearly half the cultivated space.
When it is green, and growing, maize improves the landscape; but when, in autumn, it is tall and dried out, it is no longer so inviting, looking the more like so many thickets of brown paper.
A harvest which removes the cobs but leaves the dead plants standing is not like a harvest at all.
The old capital of the Barétous was Aramits, which is eight miles due east of Tardets, and which once had an abbey but today has nothing very much.
Except for a name that ought to look familiar to readers of Alexandre Dumas, because as Aramis it is that of one of the Three Musketeers.
It was from round here indeed that pumas got many of his names: Tréville, the captain of musketeers, seems to be a version of Trois-Villes, a hamlet outside Tardets, while Porthos, a second musketeer, was named after Porthau, once a prominent family in Lanne, a village between Tardets and Aramits.
As for Athos, the third musketeer, there is a very small place of that name just outside Sauveterre-de-Béarn, on the river.
At the head of the Aspe valley is the town of Oloron or, in full, Oloron-Sainte-Marie.
This is an attractive and historic place, and very much a river town, having formed around the point where two dynamic Pyrenean torrents, the Gave d'Aspe from high up on the Col du Somport, and the Gave d'Ossau from even higher up on the ruggedly distinctive Pic du Midi d'Ossau, flow together.
But because there are only modest hills to the north of it, and nothing too high close by on the south, Oloron is an open, not a mountain town.
The greater part of it lies to the south of the confluence of the two rivers, which therefore split the town into three distinct parts.
But you don't walk far in Oloron without coming to one or other river; both flow over weirs and both are well below street or house level so that there is the sound of water and a feeling of modest elevation everywhere, as well as regular riverside prospects from the various bridges as you cross from one part of town to the other.
Oloron has always been a successful market town, right from the days when it traded mainly across the mountains, with Aragon.
It is a good place to shop in still.
I have to report, though, that it was here my own trust in the French as the most obdurately literate of all nations was dented when I went into a bookshop and asked if they had a copy of the Song of Roland .
The girl on duty said no, she was sure not, why didn't I try the music shop.
In Roman times, Oloron was already a place of substance, by name Iluro, but after the Romans went it was much attacked, by invading Vascons from Spain, by Arabs, and by Vikings; only in the eleventh century did it recover, under the counts of Béarn.
The oldest, steepest and pleasantest quarter of Oloron is that between the rivers, the Quartier Sainte-Croix.
Here, finely placed, above what is left of the old ramparts, is one of the town's two quite splendid churches, the church of Sainte-Croix.
This is a rough, powerful-looking building of the fortified kind, begun in the year 1080 on the site of a vanished basilica, with a ruined porch, a tall ‘rustic’ tower over the northern portal and a tiled tambour above the crossing — but the outside of Sainte-Croix is too complicated for an architectural amateur to describe, a beautiful jumble of roofs, slates, tiles and corbels.
The inside is unified and austere, apart from an egregious baroque reredos, with a barrel vault, tremendous piers, and some excellent floral or narrative capitals.
The curiosity of Sainte-Croix, however, is a small dome over the crossing (inside the tambour that is), the ribs of whose vaulting are interwoven to make an eight-pointed star pattern; this unusual work was done by Spanish stonemasons in the thirteenth century, on the model of the Great Mosque at Córdoba.
As well as this lovely, uncompromising Romanesque church, the Quartier Sainte-Croix has some good old houses and is easily the pleasantest part of Oloron to walk in.
Oloron's other remarkable monument is the church of Sainte-Marie, in the quarter of that name, on the other bank of the Gave d'Aspe.
This was once Oloron's cathedral, in the centuries up until 1790, when the French Revolution did away once and for all with the bishopric.
The outside is the thing at  Sainte-Marie.
It is gentler in appearance, and more finished than Sainte-Croix, but still military-looking, with three square, almost aperture-less towers, two at the east end and one, the largest and finest, at the west.
This last would look altogether like a castle keep but for the fantasy of its roof, which has a large slate cone perched, candle-snuffer fashion, on top of an already pointed lower roof.
At the bottom of this tower is the porch of Sainte-Marie, and in the porch the magnificent sculpted portal for which Oloron is chiefly visitable.
It was created early in the twelfth century and in local marble, with the consequence that, far from being eroded, it has become smooth and polished, making a strong contrast with the worn stonework in which it is set.
The portal was commissioned by Gaston IV, the then Count of Béarn, when he came back from the First Crusade.
On his return from the east, he found Arabs in the local Pyrenees also, Saracen raids from Spain having been a regular affliction here since the eighth century.
Gaston, however, disposed of the latest invaders and then commemorated his double success over the heathens by incorporating into his portal the figures of two Saracens in chains and oriental costume, to be seen still hunched submissively at the foot of the central pillar of the doorway as if having to bear all its weight.
The Count himself appears on horseback on the right-hand side of the portal, above a capital, while counterbalancing him on the left is a monster devouring a man (only the bottom half of him remains to go down).
In the tympanum is sculpted a fine Descent from the Cross with, below it, contrasting symbolic scenes of the Church persecuted and the Church triumphant.
The figures decorating the deep-set arch above the doors are a joy.
There is an outer half-circle of the twenty-four old men from the Book of the Revelation, holding long-necked jars of perfume or playing on early musical instruments: this is Heaven.
Then there is an inner half-circle of local people going about their medieval business, catching and smoking the salmon of which the Gave d'Oloron was once notably full, hunting wild boar, making cheese, and so on, a  different activity for each of the twelve months of the year.
This is Earth, a place clearly of more varied and more mundane occupations than Heaven.
An oddity of this glorious portal is that the eyes, of both men and monsters, are picked out in white with black dots for the iris.
The effect is a little intimidating.
The inside of the church of Sainte-Marie is oppressively ornate, and it is hard to imagine anyone who responds to the simple exterior of the building responding to the interior as well.
Pillars, walls, ceiling, all have been painted, and there are even paintings hung on the upper walls of the nave above the arches, which are a mixture of round and pointed.
The Renaissance pulpit and the extremely grand organ above the west door have much to be said for them, but the overall effect of the interior is to drive you straight outside again to the restorative severity of tower, porch and portal.
There are some fine trips to be made out of Oloron, in all directions; and to start with, naturally, to the south, towards the mountains, along the valley of the Aspe.
This is an ancient road, the middle one of the three Roman roads which went over the Pyrenees, though it is worth pursuing all the way to the frontier, in my view, only if you want to enter Spain (the small, walled town of Jaca, half an hour or so's drive down the other side, is extremely attractive).
At one time you could have travelled up the Aspe valley by railway, and entered Spain through a tunnel five miles long under the final ridge.
The track remains in position but rusty with disuse, the car having put the train almost completely out of business in the Pyrenees.
This was the railway which the churlish Beachcomber, back in the 1930s, prayed might never bc finished, because its only use would be ‘in order that a herd of bored fools may get more quickly from one cosmopolitan cesspit to the other’.
Well, now our preferred conveyance between cosmopolitan cesspits is the car, something Beachcomber reckoned to be only for ‘milk-sops.
There are some places to know about between Oloron and the Col du Somport, at the valley's southern end.
First, after about twelve miles and just after you have driven through the limestone defile of Escot, there is Sarrance, a colourless, silent village these days but an old place of pilgrimage and of literary inspiration.
Its most celebrated visitor was Marguerite de Navarre, the grandmother of the future Henri IV and a royal author.
In Sarrance she is said to have written a part of her celebrated Heptameron , which is the French equivalent, even if frankly not the equal, of Boccaccio's Decameron , a collection of seventy-two intermittently salacious stories.
And Sarrance is the setting in which her group of competing story-tellers gather, after they have been driven out of the spa of Cauterets, up in the mountains, by bad weather.
This neglected village has not done much to draw attention to its grand literary connections, though it has quite a prepossessing seventeenth-century church with a delightful octagonal tower and a two-storey cloister.
Next, on past the villages of Bedous and of Accous, the old ‘capital’ of the valley, until you come to the occasion for a most desirable short digression.
Go up at all costs to Lescun, three steep miles from the main road in the mountains to the right, at a height of 3,000 feet.
The village as such is ordinary perhaps but its setting is sublime, in one of the most pastoral of the cirques or rings of mountains of which there are some dramatic examples in the high Pyrenees (see Plate 4).
This one is gentle enough, because Lescun's valley is so green.
There is a point just outside the village to the east (i.e. the direction you have come up from), from where everyone tells you the views are best.
And so they are: a valley view looking across and up at — a great arc of high peaks.
These are still not the very highest of the Pyrenees but sufficiently massive and compacted to make a truly mountainous backdrop.
The most prominent, due west of the village of Lescun as you look up the valley, is the more or less pyramidal Pic d'Anie, of 8,200 feet, the first or most westerly of the major Pyrenean summits; it is claimed by the Basques as their one high  Pyrenee, the home of wild goats and the legendary source of storms.
Eastwards from the Pic d'Anie runs the half-circle of other peaks almost as high, towards the valley of the Aspe on your left.
Lescun is a valley to drive up into for your picnic lunch; in winter it is shut in, and a centre for long-distance skiing; in spring, exquisitely vernal; in summer or early autumn drowsy and majestic, waiting for its famously late, September harvest.
After Lescun, the valley of the Aspe grows increasingly tight and stony, a forbidding landscape well epitomized by the manmade fortress of Le Portalet, built high up in the cliffs on the left just before you come to the final French village of Urdos.
This unpleasant structure merges well with the rocks cape around it and was used, during the Second World War, as a prison.
To keep prisoners so near to a frontier on the far side of which they would be free, could seem a casual or risky policy, but it is hard to imagine anyone actually escaping from Le Portalet, whose grated windows you can see from the road, with a nasty drop of a good 100 feet straight on to the rocks beneath them.
Rather than inciting its detainees to try and get out, Le Portalet probably taunted them with the impossibility of such a thing.
If you want a view altogether grimmer and more inhuman than the one you have just relished in the easeful valley of Lescun, then drive on up to the top of the Col du Somport.
This is a high pass, above 6,000 feet, but a busy one, which is kept open by snow-ploughs all through the winter.
It is a bare and also remarkably red place, much of the rock on the col being  argillite and the colour almost of fresh salmon.
Officially, Spain starts just over the top, but this is a Spanish landscape, dry and rough compared with most of what you see on the wetter, French side of the mountains.
Even in summer there may be smudges of by now off-white snow or icc to be seen on the slopes round about.
The Spaniards have managed to build a supreme ugly restaurant-cum-souvenir-shop on their side of the frontier, in a style of architecture suggesting its easy conversion, should border warfare ever one day replace tourism, into a defence post.
The Col du Somport and the upper valley of the Aspe are at the western end of the Pyrenean National Park — to be exact, a narrow tongue of this extends across on the other, western side of the valley into the ring of mountains forming the Cirque of Lescun.
The Park was created in 1967 and runs along the watershed in a strip never more than twelve kilometres wide, from the Aspe valley to the mass if of Néouvielle more than 100 kilometres to the east.
It is a nature reserve, with not a single permanent human inhabitant.
Red and white signs, showing an izard's head, are the only indication that you are entering it, the izard being a sort of chamois native to the Pyrenees which is now doing well there again after having earlier been hunted almost out of existence — its survival has been put down to the First World War, when men turned to killing one another and the animals had an armistice which enabled them to breed again.
Everything in the National Park is protected: conservation here is absolute, you are not allowed even to pick any of the 400 species of wild flowers that grow in the Pyrenees.
And if you are ever going to see one of the genuine though attested rarities among the local fauna, a bear, a lynx, or an eagle, the Park is the only place you might do so, though there are thought to be fewer than twenty bears still living in the Pyrenees, and only eight pairs of eagles.
More common are vultures, especially in summer when they fly up from Spain to taste the carrion on the high pastures, and marmots, of which there are now more than 200 colonies after they were reintroduced here in 1948.
And a final word about the National Park: it has its ‘Maisons du Parc ’ in some of the small towns on the fringes of the Park, which are excellent places to go for information about walks, wildlife and flowers.
And now, a splendid piece of country to the west of the Aspe valley which I have been leaving out: the valleys, forests and mountains south of the village of Arette.
Arette is a particularly  neat, new-looking village, for the sufficient reason that it needed to be much rebuilt after an earthquake there in the summer of 1967.
These days it has also a dependency in the mountains beyond, a winter-sports and high-summer Annexe, called Arette-Pierre-Saint-Martin, at 5, 500 feet.
The road that has been made to carry visitors up to it is wide and smooth, the valley of the Arette that you start by following is beautiful, and the scene once you reach the top is by turns surprising, interesting and panoramic.
Once the climb begins, the road winds steadily higher through the splendid beech trees of the Forêt d'lssaux, forever pointing you in a new direction and forever seeming to have no ultimate outlet upwards.
Near the top the trees die out and the landscape which replaces them is a shock, for here the rock enters into full possession, turbulent acres of it, broken and jagged.
These are the limestone arres , and as unwelcoming a site as you could think of for a new resort.
But turn a corner and there the resort is, one of a number which have been built in the Pyrenees since the start of the 1960s at greater altitudes than the old, so as to lengthen what would otherwise be a brief and uneconomic skiing season.
When I saw it, in 1985, Arette-Pierre-Saint-Martin was far from finished and still, in part, a building site high in the mountains, which is an even stranger spectacle to come across.
One does not expect, nor I trust want, to find shiny wooden chalets, let alone tall concrete apartment blocks standing arbitrarily up in this fascinating landscape, and phrases about ‘cosmopolitan cesspits’ can easily come to mind as you stand looking at them.
On the day I came up here, there were no workmen and the deserted new village was occupied only by horses, wandering at liberty between the half-finished buildings, the machinery and the piles of materials — hardly the setting for which they had been intended when set loose for the summer to forage for themselves.
The hostile rocks cape in the midst and partly on top of which Arette-Pierre-Saint-Martin has been built also made me wonder whether skiers ever think about what might be underneath the snow they  are skiing on.
Looking back, I fancy that when I went skiing I always hoped that the snow was covering some kindly grass, certainly not something as hard and painful as the arres of Pierre-Saint-Martin.
The resort village is not the end of the road; indeed, it is possible to ignore it as you drive on up to the Col de la Pierre-Saint-Martin beyond.
This is a high pass, and closed for seven months in the year.
It is one of those informal and cheerful places to change from one country to another, unlike the lower, busier frontier posts, with bureaucrats who will more likely wave to you rather than ask to see your passport.
Just across on the Spanish side of the col is the opening of the fearsome gouffre in the limestone that has given the name Pierre-Saint-Martin a certain resonance.
This is a prodigiously deep fissure or cave system in the mass if which has still not been fully explored but which by 1979 had been traced by speleologists to a depth of 4,400 feet.
Its entrance was discovered in 1950 and two years later this deepest of all gouffres acquired a sad celebrity with the death there of Marcel Loubens, a Belgian speleologist, who was badly injured deep underground but could not be got to the surface quickly enough to save his life, a story I dimly remember reading at the time in newspapers.
In the following year's explorations, the cavers came into a chamber of staggering size, 250 yards long, 200 yards wide and 500 feet high.
The full extent of this system is yet to be established, but the gouffre Pierre-Saint-Martin is only a few miles as the Pyrenean crow flies from the Gorges de Kakouetta and forms part of the one vast hydrological network.
The entrance to it is now covered over, and beside it there is a memorial inscription to Loubens and to another speleologist who has been killed there since.
Higher up the col, almost indeed on the very top, there is the mouth to another gouffre, with a frail wooden fence around it, into which you can with difficulty peer.
This one has been sounded to a depth of a mere 1,000 feet, but peer into it is as far as I would ever want to go; such crevices are no doubt thrilling to explore  when they widen out into great chambers, but the thought of the narrow places I for one find exceedingly off-putting.
At the roadside on top of this col there is a boundary stone, the original Pierre-Saint-Martin itself, where a small ceremony takes place every 13 July.
You will be told that it has taken place every 13 July since 1375, and perhaps it has.
On that day a delegation of mayors from the Barétous, on the French side, comes up and hands over three white heifers to their counterparts from the Roncal, the valley on the Spanish side; in return they get money.
This is now a symbolic exchange, but it is a relic of the numerous treaties that once were made in the Pyrenean valleys to regulate the use of the high, communal pastures and put an end to the age-old practice of trespass or holding to ransom of intrusive livestock.
These treaties were often impressively strict and cunning: in some cases, for example, shepherds bound by them were obliged to walk ahead of their flocks in the mornings, so that they were unable to drive the animals to where they knew the best grass to be.
On the way home to their folds, in the evening, they could of course walk which ever end they liked.
Coming down from the Col de la Pierre-Saint-Martin there is no need to drive back the way you came, through Arette, because five miles from the top you can fork off to the right and come down in sylvan splendour through the very heart of the Forêt d'lssaux, before either turning sharp left down the valley of the Lourdios and a not very good road to Issor, or carrying straight on to follow one of two better, more or less interchangeable roads back into the valley of the Aspe near Bedous.
The Ossau Valley
You can get painlessly if unimaginatively from the valley of the Aspe into the next great valley, of the Gave d'Ossau, by  making straight from Oloron to Arudy and there turning south.
But Arudy has little to be said for it; it is a small, mildly industrial town, best known for marking the spot where the glacier that once ground its way down the Ossau valley built a wall of debris, so causing the present-day Gave to make an abrupt swerve to westward.
Better, then, to start off down the wrong valley and take the road along the Gave d'Aspe as far as Escot; you can do this avoiding the main road, because there is a minor road out of Oloron going all the way along the eastern side of the valley as far as Escot.
Here you turn left and drive up the scenically splendid road to the Col de Marie-Blanque.
For more than half the road up you climb between more beech forests — the beech flourishes in these parts because it likes the moisture — and in spring or autumn you get that seasonal effect, whereby the trees that are only starting to turn brown at the foot of the pass are already losing many of their leaves at the top, or alternatively are still half-wintry at the top when already fully greened lower down.
Once over the col, the beeches give way to pine trees and on the Plateau de Bénou the view opens up hugely to the south, to the Pic de Sesques and beyond that to the remarkable double hump of the Pic du Midi d'Ossau, the highest of the Pyrenees so far, and one of those forceful contours you soon learn to pick out and name, however slow you may be, as I am, at the confident identification of peaks.
From the pastoral comforts of the Plateau de Bénou, the road twists abruptly down past the villages of Bilhères and of Bielle, another valley ‘capital’ this, with some fine fifteenth-and sixteenth-century house fronts, but particularly commendable as a slated roofs cape seen from higher up the road — this is Béarn, and grey slates arc what you expect on roofs, no longer Basque tiles.
Bielle is where you join the main valley road, and four miles to the south of it is Laruns, a neat and pleasing little town with a real town square which I have more than once thought might be good to stay in.
At Laruns the valley divides or, if that description is demeaning to the Gave d'Ossau, another, smaller valley joins it from the east.
The main valley, and the main road with it, goes straight on, up to the Col du Pourtalet, which is actually a higher pass into Spain than its near-neighbour, the Col du Somport, though one that is closed throughout the winter and well into the spring.
Hereabouts you are entering the true spa region of the Pyrenees, the sulphurous haunts of the ‘curists’ who for a long time were the principal visitors to these mountains.
On this road, for instance, you quickly come, after you have left Laruns, to Eaux-Chaudes, one of a pair of local resorts, which Beachcomber refers to grumpily as a ‘hell-hole’.
This is a little hard: Eaux-Chaudes is a gloomy place, but not hellish that I know of.
Though the thermal establishment itself is quite stately, in the normal style of these amenities, the village is tightly shut in by the mountains on either side and is not much more than a ribbon of dark houses strung out along the main road.
It must want for sunlight.
On the other hand, like all French spas, it advertises the wonderful things it can do for your health progressively as you approach, by way of graduated signs fifty yards apart, each of which singles out an affliction or an organ that you might have treated here.
In Eaux-Chaudes, as I recall, the list begins with Asthma and progresses through Bronchitis and Rheumatism to Arthritis, before, in a sudden switch of strategies, continuing with Nose, Throat and Ears.
Upon which, the prognosis over, you are in the spa village.
And promptly in this case out of it again.
South of Eaux-Chaudes the valley opens out somewhat and becomes more invigorating as it rises.
A little way past the village of Gab as you can turn to the right off the frontier road and drive up to the lake of Bious-Artigues; the signs at the bottom may say that this is a narrow, dangerous road, but it isn't.
The lake is on the edge of the National Park and, like many of the accessible Pyrenean lakes, part of the vast hydroelectric network of the region, which may mean that by late summer, if it has been dry down  below, the waters have been piped off and the lake has shrunk.
There is a very basic hostel here, for serious, long-range walkers, and in summer you can hire horses or ponies to ride about on the surrounding, pine-covered hillsides.
You can also walk round the lake, or, more ambitiously, follow for a stretch up to the even higher Lacs d'Ayous, the red and white marked stones of the GR10, the magnificent high path that leads from one end of the Pyrenees to the other and which you keep meeting up with at these altitudes.
Hard by to the south of the lower lake is the huge upstanding molar of the Pic du Midi d'Ossau, grimly handsome with, on its eastern slopes, what is by all accounts one of the Pyrenees' largest populations of izard.
This is a mountain that can be climbed, but not casually.
Less than a mile from the turning for the Lac de Bious-Artigues, but on the other side of the road, is a lazier way of gaining real altitude and tremendous views, by taking the cable-car (it goes regularly only in summer and during the skiing season) up to the Pic de la Sagette, at almost 7,000 feet.
On this robust eminence you can walk, climb about on the slopes or the scree, or look in amazement across at the Pic du Midi d'Ossau and down into the pale green waters of the Lac de Fabréges in its harsh, glaciated valley directly below.
You can also take the train: a mini-train, billed as Europe's highest small railway (it could just as well be smallest high railway), which coils for no less than ten very lofty, lonely kilometres around the spurs of rock to a distant terminus from which you can walk to the Lac d'Artouste, nearly 200 acres of it, in a stonily unforgiving ring of granite mountains.
This is one of the Pyrenees' most Spartan panoramas, and a torrid place to be, as I know from having been there, on a day of high summer sun.
From Laruns you might also travel east, up the smaller valley of the river Valentin, which is enormously lush because it gets unusual amounts of rain.
Up here is the companion spa to Eaux-Chaudes, called Eaux-Bonnes, or Good Waters as against Hot.
It is a more bracing place to be than its rival, but much  faded none the less from its days of greatest success in the last century, when it formed one end of the Route Therm ale, a new road system, decreed by the Emperor Napoleon III, which was to link Eaux-Bonnes with Bagnéres-de-Bigorre to the northeast.
Eaux-Bonnes is mainly built around an oval public garden with bandstand, and of solid, four or five-storey Second Empire buildings that make a strange contrast with the thickly wooded hillsides behind them.
The contrast between nature and architecture here was too much indeed for the ungenerous Hippolyte Taine, who came here on his Journey to the Pyrenees in the middle of the last century and wrote that ‘One finds it grotesque that a bit of hot water should have brought cuisine and civilization into these declivities.’
The names of Eaux-Bonnes's hotels still have the old pompous ring to them, the Hôtel d'Orient et d'Espagne, the Hôtel Richelieu, the Hôtel tea Princes (the ‘dearest’ in a ‘very wealthy little modern town’in Hilaire Belloc's day, but up for sale and miserably vandalized the last time I saw it, in the mid-1980s), but their clients are not what they once were.
The curists still come, it seems, to drink, gargle or bathe in the baths at the top of the town, but since the end of the last war the cure has been democratized; in an age of health insurance many can afford it who before could not, and contemporary spa-goers both demand less and live less expensively than their more frivolous predecessors.
Spa towns, though, are all the better for looking somewhat passé and Eaux-Bonnes is more passé than most.
Above Eaux-Bonnes is the ski resort of Gourette, which has been created in the kind of setting ski resorts ought to have, in pasture-land but at the foot of the formidable mass of the Pic de Ger to the south.
From Gourette you can continue to climb, bending now sharply to the left on the way up to the Col d'Aubisque, though pausing above Gourette at a viewpoint called the Crêtes Blanches, where there is a hotel and, more to the point, a wonderful view back down over the ski village in its cirque as well as westwards to the peaks on the far side of the  Ossau valley.
This beautiful high road, which passes over two superb cols before eventually going down into Arrens and the Val d'Azun, is one of the most exalting in the Pyrenees.
It would be a crime not to take it when you want to go eastwards out of the Ossau valley.
But that movement to the east also takes you out of Béarn and into Bigorre, so any further description of it had better wait.
Pau
Before going into Pau, there is a brief visit decidedly worth making to the north-west of Oloron.
Leaving the town by the road that runs along the left bank of the Gave, you come after seven or eight miles on the left to the D25, marked for Mauléon.
Three easy, rural miles down here to the west is the little church of L'Hôpital-Saint-Blaise, which is an exquisite oddity.
This tiny hamlet, which has less than 100 inhabitants, was once a stopping-off-point on the pilgrim route and the church, though restored from a state of picturesque dilapidation early in this century, is still rough-and-ready twelfth-century, squat in shape and only about twenty yards long from doorway to apse.
The first peculiarity is over the crossing, which has a stumpy octagonal tower and pointed roof with, on the inside, a dome built in a style similar to that of Sainte-Croix in Oloron, that is, with the ribs of the vault forming an eight-pointed star (without artificial lighting you can see almost nothing of this decoration, and the artificial lighting comes expensive at L'Hôpital-Saint-Blaise; you need ten-franc coins to work it).
The church has other features too that come from the Moorish Spain of the Middle Ages: above all, the queer openwork stone screens that are set into the window embrasures, hewn crudely but winningly into geometric patterns.
It is also the centre of a men-only pilgrimage in February, when local farmers bring in handfuls of hair cut from the tails of their animals and burn them  before the sanctuary as an offering to St Blaise, as the patron saint of stock-breeders.
And as if that were not enough, the church bell is also, by ancient repute, therapeutic: place inside it if you can whatever part of your body is troubling you, get the bell ringer to go about his business and you will, with luck, be cured.
Be that as it may, this ancient building is a delight both inside and out, set about by old, galleried village houses (and by a small hotel bang opposite the portal), with lizards flickering over its walls and flowering plants clinging airily to the bell-tower.
And if you are already at L'Hôpital-Saint-Blaise, you could take in Navarrenx too, five miles down river.
This is a small town of some character, a historic strong point standing up above the Gave, in which there are competitions in summer to catch the surviving salmon, no longer so abundant here as in the good medieval days.
Navarrenx was refortified on Italian lines in the sixteenth century, so that its defences might be proof against the new artillery, and the ramparts and towers designed then are still largely and imposingly intact.
In 1828, a plaque tells you, they were visited by the romantic Abbé Liszt, in the company of one Caroline de Saint-Cricq, who would hardly have expected to be thus immortalized for performing so brief a duet with the pianist composer.
But now to Pau.
Coming to it from below like this, from the direction of Oloron or from Laruns, it is a sound idea to leave the main road to the left and inspect the modest countryside in which the estimable wines of Jurançon are made.
The turning is a little after the village of Gan, where there is a tastery and a large cave coopérative where you can buy your Jurançon on trust, without troubling to check on the nearby vineyards.
It is excellent wine, in either its white or its red versions, and said to travel well.
The road to follow up into the low hills is marked with the sign ‘Coteaux de Jurançon’, though it is also quite easy to lose once you are up there; but when vineyards are so thin on the ground as it were in this part of the country, there is every reason to get briefly lost amongst them.
Together with Perpignan at the Mediterranean end, Pau is one of only two large towns in the Pyrenees: a departmental capital and a university town.
It is also a historic town, after 1460 the capital of the viscounty of Béarn in succession to Lescar, Morlaas and Orthez.
But its modern standing owes a surprising amount to the British, who gave Pau a great lift in the nineteenth century.
The British connection dated back to the time when Jacobite refugees settled here in the eighteenth century, but it was after Wellington's victories in the region early in the 1800s that it became serious.
In 1814 indeed, after his triumph over Marshal Soult at Orthez, Wellington himself was made much of by the local Royalists, who greeted him as their ‘liberator’ and gave a great ball in his honour.
And retired soldiers from his army were among the first of the century's numerous British settlers in Pau.
These northern immigrants soon set about reinventing the climate here, which is on the damp side, and investing it with therapeutic properties it hardly possesses.
Wealthy consumptives made their way down to Pau, in search of cure, a fashion set by the Earl of Selkirk, who wintered there in 1819–20.
The fact that he died in the following April does not seem to have put anyone off or taken away their faith in Pau's  salutariness .
Later, the vogue for the now growing town was consolidated and much expanded by Dr Alexander Taylor, who recuperated there from the typhus he had caught serving with the sottish, mutinous and incompetent ‘Spanish Legion’ sent from England to help the Queen of Spain in her war against the Car lists of Navarre.
Dr Taylor plugged Pau's ‘curative influence’ for all he was worth, and the Victorian visitors flocked there, many to become residents.
With them eventually came dashing British sports, like steeple chasing, cricket, golf and fox-hunting, the last of which had runs in the nearby countryside called ‘Old England’, ‘Leicestershire’ and, best of all, as a concession to the French, ‘Have Leicestershire’.
Not that Taylor had things all his own  way.
One must not overlook the ‘crisis of 1858 ‘, when scurrilous anonymous letters appeared in the London Times complaining about the sewage in Pau, and the high price of lodgings, while a few years later another medical man, Dr Madden, publicly attacked the climate as pernicious for pulmonary cases.
But Pau survived, and in the late 1860s was at its most popular with British and, by this time, some American winterers, with up to I, 500 of them registered yearly as staying or living there.
That Anglo-Saxon connection slowly dwindled, undermined more than anything by the rise of Biarritz and the widening belief in the seaside as the better source of good health.
Yet right up until the Second World War, I suspect, Pau was looked on by a certain kind of English middle-class family as a safe and congenial southern town to which one might retire, or where, if need arose, the socially disgraced might comfortably hide.
Readers of Dornford Yates will not have forgotten that somewhere outside Pau was The House that Berry Built .
The incomparable asset of Pau is the Boulevard tea Pyrenees, which runs for more than half a mile along the southern edge of the main town, between the chateau at one end and the casino and the Parc Beaumont at the other.
It was Napoleon — the First, not the Third — who established this tremendous promenade from which, in clear or even clearish weather, you get what is prized, and rightly so, as the finest of all long-range views of the Pyrenees.
The table d'orientation on the parapet enumerates eighty-three individual peaks to be picked out, from one extremity to the other of a sixty-mile horizon.
The main summits each have a blue plaque attached to the railings at an appropriate point, so that as you walk the pavement, head turned to the south, you can put a name to your favourite mountain.
This, obviously, is the place from which to inspect the western Pyrenees for a first time or, given the summary quality of the prospect, from which to take leave of them before driving north.
Remember, though, that since the valetudinarian English gave Pau up the climate has reverted to what it was, so  you need to be there on a day of reasonable weather, otherwise the Boulevard will not be tea Pyrénées at all, but only of the closer and less pleasing scene.
For to the question: has Pau protected the magnificent view from the Boulevard tea Pyrenees, the answer has to be, no it has not.
There are excrescences one could do without on this side of the town.
Below the boulevard is the river, the Gave de Pau, and on its northern bank, the railway station, with its attendant installations — you can get up and down on this side by free funicular.
And no doubt because that is where the railway was long ago made to go, other uglinesses too have intruded between Pau and the Pyrenees, on the far bank of the Gave.
Indeed, when you want to identify a particular peak from the boulevard, you are told to line up a white mark painted on the balustrade with ‘the lightning-conductor on the tram factory’, which is the most prominent landmark in Pau's southerly suburb.
So here, if anywhere, it pays to lift up your eyes unto the hills.
The high bourgeois architecture of the apartment blocks on the town side of the Boulevard tea Pyrénées is worth turning about to see.
Do not miss no.14, a rare mix of pilaster Ed neoclassical and twiddly art nouveau, which is just the sort of building you hope to come across in Pau.
But architecturally, this is a bland, rather than a distinguished provincial town, and the residential flavour, if you want it, is best to be caught on the north and east sides, where the bourgeois villas are.
The Parc Beaumont, at the eastern end of the Boulevard tea Pyrenees beside the casino, is a little perfunctory, hardly worthy of the names of the French poets that have been given to the roads leading through it.
The château however, at the other, western end of the boulevard, is much better.
On this spur once stood the stronghold of the viscounts of Béarn from which the town of Pau got its name: from the palisades by which it was protected.
The chateau of today is a successful hybrid, with the stonework  and style of one century sitting happily with those of others.
To the left of the entrance, at the town end, is its most military aspect: a splendid keep, built of brick in the fourteenth century by Gaston Phoebus, a vainglorious, bad-tempered (he killed his only son in an argument) but also tasteful princeling who was an early ornament of the house of Foix-Béarn.
(The two towers at the north-east and south-west corners of the chateau are in fact older than Gaston Phoebus's noble addition, but less noteworthy.)
The lower part of the corps de logis on the southern or river side was built at the same time as the keep, but later raised, when a northern wing was added to it.
Then, in the sixteenth century, what had been a military building was converted by the Albret dynasty, who were now the rulers here, into a sophisticated civilian one, suitable as a home for courtly pursuits — there are some fine Renaissance doorways and windows dating from that conversion on the left and at the far end of the very irregular courtyard into which you first go.
In the nineteenth century the chateau was altered further, with some ham fisted restoration and the addition by King Louis-Philippe and the Emperor Napoleon — the Third, not the First — of a sixth tower to go with the five earlier ones.
A triple archway in white stone was also built across the entrance to the courtyard; this is no improvement to the chateau but it is not, to be fair, quite disastrous either.
The chateau of Pau was the birthplace of King Henry IV of France, who has been edging his way into my text all along.
His is the great name in Béarn, as the local king who became king of all France.
His statue stands in the delightful Place Royale, above the possessive caption of ‘Lou Nouste Henric ’, or ‘Our Henry’ in the local Gas con patois.
Henry was the son of Antoine de Bourbon and, more important as it turned out, of Jeanne d'Albret, a very alarming woman who became, first, Queen of Navarre, and then, having abjured her Catholicism, a bloodthirstily militant Calvinist.
The religious wars of the later sixteenth century.
between Catholics and Protestants, did much  damage to people and to places in the Pyrenean region, Pau included, and Jeanne d'Albret's army commander, Montgomery, who recaptured Pau from the troops of King Charles IX, achieved an especially nasty reputation for the reprisals and pillagings he carried out.
Henry became King of France in 1589, having turned Catholic in order to do so.
He called himself ‘King of France and of Navarre’ so as to demonstrate the continuing independence of the inhabitants of Béarn, an independence indeed which was not entirely removed until the French Revolution, though Béarn became part of the kingdom officially in 1620.
Of relics of ‘Our Henry's’ birth, the chateau of Pau keeps a single, peculiar example: the large turtle-shell supposed to have served him for a cradle, once his grandfather had christened him by rubbing his lips with a clove of garlic and a dab of Jurançon wine.
No one will explain why he should have had a turtle-shell to lie in instead of some more orthodox cradle, but during the anti-monarchical excesses of the French Revolution this venerable carapace is said to have been saved from destruction by a naturalist of Pau, who was able to switch it for one without any such incriminatory associations from his own collection.
There are regular guided tours of the state rooms of the chateau, whose contents and decoration were mostly arranged during the restorations of the nineteenth century and are not very remarkable, with the exception of the tapestries.
To either side of Pau are old places which were once the capital of Béarn.
To the west is Lescar, which is close enough to the expanded, present-day Pau to count as its suburb.
Lescar stands on a rise and below it, on the flat ground between it and the river, was the Roman town of Beneharnum (whence, fairly obviously, the modern form of the name Béarn), which is mentioned in a travel guide of the third century AD.
It became Lescar only in the eleventh century, after having been devastated, like other sites in these desirable and prosperous pre-Pyrenean regions, first by the Moors and then by the Vikings.
The old citadel remains; a fortified entrance gate, a ruined keep, some fine slabs of wall.
Inside the walls is the cathedral of Lescar, and this is splendid.
It is basically a twelfth-century building, though sadly damaged later on by the iconoclastic Protestants of Jeanne d'Albret in the sixteenth century, and by the fanatical rationalists of the French Revolution who converted it into one of their Temples of Reason.
It took much restoration, in the remarkably enlightened years in the middle of the last century when conservation took hold in France, to give the cathedral of Lescar its present air of authenticity.
On the outside, the finest thing about it is the Romanesque triple apse, best seen by stepping into the graveyard (and turning your back on the unpleasant modern monuments).
The decoration around the windows and along the string-course is delightful, the corbels especially having been sculpted into a strange and compelling variety of animals, monsters and more or less human figures.
There is some memorable decoration inside the church too.
The capitals are not all genuine, but a fair number of those in the nave and side-aisles surely are.
As so often, it is the monstrous ones that stick in the mind: two gross, splayed pairs of legs about to join the rest of the body they belong to in the maw of two amiable-looking man-eaters (reminiscent of Oloron); two horribly bent captives, their feet tied by a cord and their heads looking as if they are propped upright on sticks — strange motifs, yet motifs all the same, because they are not unique to Lescar.
But the most beautiful things of all here are the mosaics in the floor of the choir.
These were made almost certainly in the twelfth century, by Bishop Gut, founder of the cathedral, as a Latin inscription asserts, though there has been argument that they must be Gallo-Roman since the subject-matter is profane and improper for the patronage of a Christian bishop.
Like almost everything else in Lescar, the mosaics have been restored, having at one time indeed been paved right over; but they are extremely decorative.
The profane topic is the chase.
There are three scenes.
In one a hunts man, his hunting-horn swinging free  from his neck, is sticking a stake into a wild boar, which also has a dog sinking its teeth into its neck; in another, two lions, one very heraldic and standoffish, are attacking a gazelle, helped by a bird of prey; in the third, which is decidedly curious, a mule leads a lolling-tongued, wolf-like animal captive while ahead of it a hunts man is tensing his bow to fire at some unseen target.
But this huntsman, for all the energy and élan of his posture, is maimed: his crippled right leg is bent back at the knee and supported on some sort of crutch.
This again is not unique to Lescar, because there are similarly maimed figures to be seen sculpted on churches in the French Pyrenees.
The assumption is that these were wounded veterans, from the wars with the Saracens in Spain, rather than victims of hunting accidents, and that it was Arab, not Christian surgeons who were adept at fitting these early attempts at an artificial limb.
A short way out of Pau on the opposite side to Lescar, to the north-east, is Morlaas, a small town that tends to get left out of the local guidebooks as not somehow belonging to the Pyrenees.
But between the middle of the ninth century and the end of the twelfth, when it was supplanted by Orthez, Morlaas was the capital of Béarn.
The modern town is scarcely worth a detour but the church is distinguished for having a very fine and elaborate Romanesque portal; it has been heavily restored but it remains worth seeing.
Bigorre
The next of the old medieval divisions of the Pyrenees eastwards from Béarn is Bigorre, which had its own counts from the eleventh century, was nominally an English possession in the fourteenth, passed to the house of Foix-Béarn and was finally incorporated into France in 1607.
The chief town of Bigorre is Tarbes, out on the plain to the north; but its chief beauty is the high mountain country to the south, for Bigorre contains many of the greatest peaks on the French side of the Pyrenees, as well as such geological splendours as the Cirque de Gavarnie.
This is where the High or central Pyrenees truly begin.
The Gave de Pau
The key to Bigorre, geographically, is Lourdes, which stands at the head of the valley of the Gave de Pau, at a point where the river makes a sudden lunge to the west having long ago found its way north blocked by moraine.
For this valley was scoured out by the most potent of the Pyrenean glaciers, which was fed from the big valleys to the south, of Gavarnie, Cauterets, Gédre and Baréges, and penetrated beyond the point where Lourdes now stands, shaping the topography as it went.
But it is not via Lourdes that I would choose to enter Bigorre.
That would be dull.
The spectacular way to leave Béarn for the east, as I have already indicated, is through Eaux-Bonnes, up along the  ‘Thermal Route’ to the Col d'Aubisque and then to its companion pass, a little further east, the Col du Soul or.
The Col d'Aubisque is high, at 5,600 feet, and the views that you have from it are sumptuous, both back the way you have come, and now to the east as well, across to the prominent peak of the Pic du Midi de Bigorre, once thought to be the highest in the chain because it stands rather apart and closer to the plain, and before people took to actually measuring altitudes, the nearest peaks were mistaken for the tallest.
Between the Col d'Aubisque and the Col du Soul or, six miles further on, the road is a quite dramatic corniche , clinging hard to the southern slope of a deep valley, always close against the rock and on occasions passing through it, in brief tunnels.
This is an exciting piece of road-making.
Some people may find it too exciting; certainly, there is something to be said for being on the side of the road away from the steep drops into the valley, which means driving eastwards by this route and not westwards, or into Bigorre not out of it.
On both of these high cols there are bars which serve also — I hope they have not been smartened up — as ill-favoured souvenir and junk shops.
Some of the goods on sale are enticing Juranc, on wines, local sausage, the ubiquitous Pyrenean fromage de brebis or ewe's-milk cheese, worth trying if only out of local piety though hardly one of France's great cheeses — others look likely to have a long shelf-life.
The café-cum-shop up on the ravishing Col du Soul or in particular has been a wondrous mess on my two ascents there: very dark, immensely cluttered, low ceilinged and lit as much as warmed by a large log fire.
The owner fitted the place ideally, one of nature's rascals, the very model for a resourceful Pyrenean smuggler or minor desperado.
Apart from toys, walking-sticks, postcards and other such tourist necessities, he was also hoping to sell antiquités and the old things he had gathered lay about in an indescribable miscellany.
The altitude is not very good for some of them: a box of old books that I found had congealed together with the  damp and had I dared to try and pull one out from the row of upturned spines, to identify it, all the others would have risen too.
One thing you hardly expect to meet with on top of a mountain pass is a choice of roads; but at the Col du Soul or there is one.
Off to the north here is a road that plunges with an astonishing directness down into the valley of the Ouzon and out on to the flat, south-east of Pau.
Take it, and in the space of only twenty miles you pass through a rapid summary of all the Pyrenean landscapes: high pasture first of all, nowhere richer than near the Col du Soul or, with a backing of the fearsome granite of the Cirque de Lit or; then, after the village of Arbéost, dense woodland and the gorge of the river; then suddenly open, more or less flat country, well cultivated, and you are out of the mountains for good.
There could be nowhere better to experience the suddenness of the Pyrenees here on the French side.
But then, why give them up so abruptly?
Rather, carry straight on from the Col du Soul or.
The road now goes down sharply into Arrens and the delectable Val d'Azun, a quite short, lateral valley, of rich grass and pleasant, grey villages.
Southwest from Arrens there runs another valley, with a minor road up it, to Aste and a little clutch of high lakes.
Above them, and on the frontier, is the granite peak of Balaïtous, a real first division mountain, meaning, in the Pyrenees, that it tops 3,000 metres.
To be exact it is 3,146 metres or 10,480 feet high; but what is distinctive about Balaïtous, when you see it from here, is that to the left of the summit is one of the few significant glaciers still surviving in the Pyrenees.
In all the chain there are less than ten square kilometres left of glacier, or about a fortieth of what there is in the Alps, though, after many years of shrinkage, the Pyrenean ice-fields are said to have spread themselves a little since 1950.
The Val d'Azun will take you down at its eastern end to the town of Argelés-Gazost, which stands in a wide basin of the Gave de Pau, some eight miles south of Lourdes.
Argeĺes is  undeniably a centre, near enough to the towns to the north and the great valleys and mountains to the south to suggest itself as a place to stay.
But it is rather charm less I think, and there is at least one far more enticing place nearby if you plan to stop in this valley.
Argelés is a spa town of the middling kind, neither rich nor poor: a creation, by the look of it, mainly of the later nineteenth century.
Some of it, notably the spa buildings and the generous park that goes with them, is down on the floor of the valley, the rest of it up on a terrace to the west, so that from the little square in the middle of the upper town you get quite large views of the mountains.
The first direction to think of driving out of Argelés is of course to the south.
But not, for the time being, very far, because two miles below Argelés, on the western slopes of the valley, is the little place where I would always choose to stay when coming to Bigorre: the village of Saint-Savin.
This is small, delightful, and richly historical, perched high enough up on its fertile hillside to dominate the valley to both north and south.
Saint-Savin today is small, even for a village, but at one time it was the centre of power in this valley.
It began as a monastery founded here by the Benedictines in the Carolingian age, at a spot sanctified by the edifying life and death nearby of St Savin, the son of a Barcelona nobleman.
The monastery may have been sacked by Vikings or it may have fallen down through neglect, but either way it needed reviving.
In the Boos it was revived and became very powerful on the temporal side.
In the eleventh century a particularly entrepreneurial abbot began the exploitation of the curative waters of Cauterets to the south, and the monks built roads and bridges and cleared the woods in their expanding domain.
Thus did the monastery come to run the valley and to create a classic example of a Pyrenean ‘pastoral state’.
But the locals did not always tolerate government by monks — perhaps suspecting what in this century has been established as a fact, that the abbey's legal title to the authority it claimed was a tenth-century  forgery.
In 1317 the communes in the valley forced the Benedictines to sign an agreement to share power and for several centuries thereafter local affairs were managed jointly by the abbey and by the ‘Republic of Saint-Savin'.
The monks had the reputation, as monks generally did, of good living more than of holiness — a scurrilous couplet written by an early Pyrenean traveller speaks of ‘Le long dîner, la courte messe /Dv bon abbé de Saint-Savin .’
But the long story of how this valley more or less governed itself, and in a profoundly communal spirit, is typically Pyrenean.
The abbey church of Saint-Savin still exists, and very fine it is.
It is twelfth century and built of a pale honey-coloured stone.
It has had over the years to be much restored, having been damaged three times by earthquakes and also outrageously neglected by the community of monks, who seem to have had an unnatural taste for litigation — one lawsuit between them and the locality lasted almost throughout the eighteenth century.
By the time of the French Revolution there were in any case only three monks left in Saint-Savin and even though the church was spared the vindictive demolition which removed the adjacent monastery buildings, by 1840 it was more than ready to be rescued by the growing movement for the Conservation of ancient monuments.
It was among the first buildings in France to be listed as in need of help, even if none came for some fifteen years.
Today the church looks robust; and it is even intended to rebuild the long-vanished cloister on the north side.
This is a fortified church, because during the Hundred Years' War the walls were raised and a chemin de ronde or covered battlement was added all the way round the building, deducible from outside from the row of arched apertures for the defenders set close together under the roof-line, like large pigeon-holes.
The octagonal tower over the crossing, with its slated, candle-snuffer spire, is Gothic and was put on when the walls were raised, after 600 years the mild incongruity of this belated infidelity to the 
Romanesque style has worn off.
Saint-Savin has the makings of a fine portal at the west end, but because most of the decoration is illegible for one reason or another, and not least because of the impious mutilation it suffered during the Revolution, it is nothing to dwell on.
To the left of this doorway, right down on the ground, is an arched opening known as ‘The Cagots’ window', this having been, so one story claims, the window through which the Cagots, who were not allowed into the church, could hear the mass.
While inside the church, there is a splendid holy-water basin, supported by two bent, sculpted figures, known in its turn as ‘The Cagots’ stoup'.
So who were the Cagots, other, similar allusions to whom you will also come across in the western Pyrenees?
And why could they not worship with everyone else?
They were in fact social outcasts, to whom documentary references can be found going as far back as the thirteenth century.
The agreed version of their origins is that they were lepers or the descendants of lepers, whom no local community would accept as neighbours.
The Cagots lived a peculiar life outside society, without rights but exempt from taxes, wearing a badge on their clothing to indicate their standing, forbidden to walk barefoot, unable to hear mass with their fellow Christians.
If they married outside their own caste, they could be put to death.
But, debarred from owning land as they were, they became the great craftsmen of these regions, as carpenters, builders, and weavers.
Their exclusion from the normal commerce of local society was perpetuated long beyond the time when leprosy had been controlled; indeed, it was not until the nineteenth century that some Cagots finally became authentic citizens.
There are some unusually good things to see inside the church of Saint-Savin: a ‘Eucharist tower’ twenty feet and three storeys high, Gothic in style, and made of gilded wood; two primitive fifteenth-century panels, each containing nine scenes from the life of the church's name-saint; a Renaissance organ carried on what is left of a wooden gallery that once ran right across the  church, from transept to transept — on the front of the instrument are three articulated mascarons, which moved their eyes and tongues as the organ played, in representation of wretched earthly sinners, grimacing at the intolerable sound of joyful, heavenly music.
Opposite the organ, on the north side of the church, is the salle capitulaire or chapter-house, which is also a small museum.
This is a beautiful, small twelfth-century room, used as a stable for many years after the depredations of the Revolution but carefully restored in the 1850s.
It is part Gothic and part Romanesque, with pointed vaults but round arches.
The smooth pillars which support it in the centre have capitals of a style that has made some art historians suppose that they may originally have come from the Roman villa or palace presumed to have existed on this site in the fourth century.
The double windows, divided by twin columns, are the most pleasing thing in the room, with simply sculpted capitals, of a demon, the head of Christ, animals, birds, stars and flowers; these, like the door between them, once gave on to the cloister, and it is nice to know that they will do so again, once that vital adjunct has been rebuilt.
Saint-Savin, the village, is a particularly well-kept little place, with much mown grass, much fresh paint and much quiet doing-up of old houses.
From it you can look across to the well-occupied slopes on the other side of the wide river valley, where there are numbers of small villages and some fine agricultural land, because these glaciated valleys are celebrated for their fertility.
There is also a highly scenic road which you can take up on to the open ski grounds and expansive prospects of Hautacam.
Beaucens, which is almost exactly facing Saint-Savin on this eastern slope, though at a lesser altitude, has the ideally romantic ruins of an old towered castle plus keep, where the local chieftains, the viscounts of Lavedan, lived in the days of their prosperity.
It is still lived in, though not any more by humans, because the castle and its grounds have been turned into a home, and a sort of theatre, for birds of prey: vultures, falcons, buzzards, eagles, which in the afternoons (I'm not sure why it has to be only after lunch) are allowed to fly free and which you can pay to visit.
It is in its way no bad use for a building once inhabited by predatory grantees.
Cauterets
Two miles to the south of Saint-Savin is another of the double barrelled towns in this valley: Pierrefitte-Nestalas.
For the tourist, Pierrefitte is a pity, being mainly the site of a large and obtrusive works where ammonia and phosphorus are produced.
So you do not feel like stopping in Pierrefitte.
It is, however, the point where the valley comes apart, dividing into a western and an eastern branch.
Here indeed, is the entrance to the two most celebrated high valleys of the Pyrenees.
At Pierrefitte you have the choice: right for Cauterets and the Pont d'Espagne, or left for Luz, Baréges and Gavarnie.
I say the choice, but since any even half-curious visitor to the High Pyrenees will want to go up both valleys, it comes down only to deciding which to visit first.
Here it will be the valley whose opening is to the west, of Cauterets.
And where the road goes up, the Gave de Cauterets comes ebulliently down, first among chestnut trees and then through a much sterner landscape as the valley contracts into a defile.
The spa and resort of Cauterets itself is six miles only from Pierrefitte, but at double the altitude.
It is a real mountain town, though for all its remoteness one of the oldest and best patronized of the Pyrenean spas, once, as I have said, managed by the monks of Saint-Savin.
Its reputation was lifted in the sixteenth century, when Marguerite de Navarre came here and (perhaps) wrote some of her Heptameron , as a respite from the rigours of the cure, before the atrocious weather — in the prologue she quickly complains of the rainfall in Cauterets — drove her down to Sarrance.
In her wake, mud or no, came  another French author, even more broad-minded, in the person of François Rabelais, while in the nineteenth century the spa's literary connections became more exalted still when the great Romantic writers, Alfred de Vigny, Chateaubriand and George Sand all visited it.
There were now reinforcements from England too, because in 1830 the young Alfred Tennyson came to Cauterets with his doomed friend Arthur Hallam, on a visit that was a cross between a vacation and a secret mission.
The pair arrived with money and dispatches written in invisible ink that were to be handed over to one of the leaders of the insurrectionary party in Spain, currently conspiring to get rid of the autocratic King Ferdinand and currently enjoying the support of idealistic and poetical young Englishmen.
Their small mission accomplished, Tennyson and Hallam sank back to being tourists, and Tennyson never forgot the scenery around Cauterets, which he associated for the rest of his long life with the happiness he had felt when travelling there with the beloved but now dead Hallam.
He came back twice, and in 1861 wrote his poem ‘In the Valley of Cauterets’:
All along the valley, stream that flashest white, Deepening thy voice with the deepening of the night, All along the valley, where thy waters flow, I walked with one I loved two and thirty years ago.
Actually, it was one and thirty years ago, but according to Tennyson's recent biographer, Robert Bernard Martin, the poet deliberately put euphony before mere factuality.
Cauterets claims to have a more plentiful supply of sulphurous waters than any other spa on earth, to the tune of a million and a half health-giving litres a day, and this is a claim you will not wish to dispute once you have pushed open the swing doors to the neo-Roman ‘Baths of Caesar’ and breathed in the warm and all too recognizably sulphur-laden air.
Cauterets in fact has more healing waters than it knows what to do with, for on the  roadside outside the town you pass small, steaming escapes of water as yet untapped.
At one time the thermal sources on which the fortunes of Cauterets rest so securely were also claimed, as were those of other spas, as being especially radioactive, but this is, understandably, not a claim you find in the contemporary brochures, even though the radioactivity is presumably still there.
But diagnostically speaking, Cauterets is not so particular: its slogan, in the local dialect, reads ‘A Cautares, tout que garech ’, or ‘In Cauterets, we cure the lot’.
By the time Tennyson revisited Cauterets, in 1861, what he thought of as a village he now found to be, in his less poetic moods, ‘an odious watering-place’, and that is a transition you can readily enough trace in the architecture today.
Cauterets stands on either side of its Gave, with the older, more villagey quarter on the east bank and the newer, more upstanding parts on the west.
Now that it no longer seems so shocking that the town should have grown as it has, the newer half is in fact the more attractive, a fine example of what you might call the Thermal-Imperial style, imposing even in its incongruity, up here in the mountains, with its tall bourgeois hotels framed against the surrounding woods and crags.
There is some excellent wrought iron to be seen in Cauterets, in the balconies of the hotels along the handsome Boulevard Latapie-Flurin.
Cauterets has a number of walks of the undemanding sort, designed for spa-goers, through woods and to viewpoints or waterfalls.
It is also the launch-pad for one of the classic Pyrenean excursions, up to the Pont d'Espagne and the Lac de Gaube.
And because this is a classic excursion, remember that others may be making it too; in summer I can imagine it becoming exceedingly crowded up here and the path to the Lac de Gaube an ant-trail of pedestrians bumper to bumper.
The road from Cauterets to the Pont d'Espagne, five miles away to the south, is all waterfalls — there are four or five of them, spectacular and profuse even in summer.
The Pont itself is a fine place to imbibe the water effects, an old stone bridge built  at a spot where three cascades come seething down to make one and create an ideal confusion of water, spray and rocks.
At the Pont d'Espagne the road ends, but you can then take a reasonably comfortable path, for about three-quarters of an hour, up through the tumbled rock and ailing pine trees — they seem to be fighting a losing battle against the colonies of grey lichen — to the Lac de Gaube, at an altitude of a trifle under 6000 feet.
The lake is a wild, bare place, certainly not a serene one, with scree and pine trees running down to water that is clear and dark.
At the far end is the great mass of Vignemale, at 10, 820 feet the highest of all the peaks on the actual frontier, though a little less high than some of those in Spain.
Vignemale has the best and most photogenic of the Pyrenean glaciers, on its eastern or left-hand flank, a genuine tongue of ice, reaching downwards.
Like all mountain lakes, the Lac de Gaube used to be thought impossibly deep.
Even when Victor Hugo came up here, in I 843, he was still able to declare, on no known authority but his own that you could pile six cathedrals of Notre-Dame in Paris (the subject of one of his novels) one on top of the other ‘before the balustrade on top of its towers would reach to the surface of the water’.
That was a strange and beautiful exaggeration; the lake's actual depth is about 130 feet.
But as a corrective to the excitable Hugo, let me quote another great French writer of the nineteenth century, a formidably astringent one this time, who likewise tramped dutifully up to the Lac de Gaube: the novelist Gustave Flaubert.
He enjoyed the salmon trout he ate at the small inn there but was mighty scathing about the visitors' book (as well as about the notion that the lake might actually be beautiful): ‘You will see only two kinds of exclamations in it: one about the beauty of the Lac de Gaube, the other about how good the trout are…which means that only fools or gluttons have picked up the pen to sign their names and their thoughts.’
The Lac de Gaube was the scene too of one of the Pyrenees' best-known accidents.
In 1832, an English couple, the Pattisons, married for just one month, were drowned in it; according to the  local sub-prefect's report, because Mr Pattison was amusing himself sounding the depth of the water with a pole and fell overboard, dragging his bride in after him.
This drably official account of the matter was not welcomed by the media of the day, who looked for more exciting explanations, such as a double suicide brought on by the well-known English affliction of ‘spleen’, or a murder of Mrs Pattison by Mr following his discovery that she was pregnant by a young ‘Milord’.
These were the sorts of stories to be read in the pamphlets sold beside the Lac de Gaube for years after the event by the promoters of the tourist trade.
Anti-English slanders they were held to be by the genteel Victorian travellers who continued to come to the Pyrenees.
Monckton Milnes, a good memorialist but a forgettable poet, visited the lake in 1838 and later wrote a poem about the tragedy, taking a more honour ably sentimental line towards it than had the morbid locals:
One moment, and the gush went forth Of music-mingled laughter — The struggling splash and deathly shriek Were there the instant after.
Luz, Gavarnie and Barèges
The more easterly of the two valley roads which combine at Pierrefitte takes you first to the charming town of Luz-Saint-Sauveur, which may look like one place but is really two, with more than just a hyphen dividing them.
For much of the distance between Pierrefitte and Luz you pass through the splendid defile of the Gorge de Luz, which then opens amply out into the brilliant, grassy basin of Luz, full of ash and poplar trees.
Luz is green less from the rain — it is actually one of the drier valleys in the High Pyrenees — than from the water it gets from the mountains all around, from the lakes, the glaciers and the seasonal ‘melt’.
This is a peculiarly steep region, so much so  in fact that the snow finds it more than usually difficult to stay where it has fallen; there have been some sadly famous avalanches near Luz, the hamlets of Chéze and Saligos which you pass as you come in from the north both having been smothered and destroyed in their time.
It is also a famously independent place, for long the capital of this little region of Baréges, and sufficiently cut off to administer itself as another of the remarkably enlightened mountain ‘republics’.
Luz had its passeries or local treaties, signed with the corresponding valleys on the Spanish side of the mountains, which guaranteed that they would continue to trade with one another even at times when the nations they were nominally part of might be at war.
As a consequence, this was one of the towns that prospered in the golden age of cross-Pyrenean trade in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, even though at that time there was no road to Luz from the north, only a mule track through the gorge.
Let me now separate Luz from Saint-Sauveur.
Luz is a small resort town, these days with its ski extension up in the mountains to the west, at Luz-Ardiden; Saint-Sauveur is a spa a mile and a half away, in a gorge.
Luz I very much like; it is a bright, airy place straddling the river Bastan and unified by the pearl-grey paint you see everywhere, on doors and shutters.
In the heart of Luz, touching no other building but moated about by tarmacadam, is its extraordinary fortified church (see Plate 5).
This was the work originally of the military order of Hospitallers, who established themselves here, at this confluence of the two valleys of Baréges and Gavarnie, in the twelfth century and built a miniature citadel, fortifying it as a defence against raids from across the mountains by Aragonese brigands.
The defensive aspects of the church of Luz are more interesting it has to be said, than the ecclesiastical, because inside the church is a disappointment, small and scrappy.
Outside, it is different.
A roughly mortared, battlement Ed wall, some fifteen feet high, rings the church and its old graveyard completely round, with, on each of its merlons, a thin slate weighted down by a stone.
The church has a rugged, rectangular tower, known as the Arsenal, where the weapons were kept, and opposite that, a tall, gabled bell-tower, formerly a look-out, that dominates the ensemble and quite unbalances it.
But what you notice most of all about this astonishing arrangement are the mitre-shaped apertures high up on the walls of the nave and the apse, where, as at Saint-Savin, the old chemin de ronde runs .
The church has an excellent Romanesque portal, near the west end, made from some marble-like stone hard enough not to have eroded.
It is a suitably simple affair, with just two sculpted capitals of indeterminate subject and only one sculpted arch or voussure out of the four; the tympanum is the best thing, a Christ in Majesty decisively sculpted in uncommonly high relief.
There are numbers of Latin inscriptions here, from two of which, on stones set into the wall to the left of the doorway, the completion of the porch and the dedication of the church can be dated to 1200 and 1240 respectively.
At the other end of this same wall of the church, beside the old graveyard, the movingly small sarcophagus of a child is set into a niche, with a heavy stone on top of it, under its own small arch and with some variously worn decoration of the stonework.
The inscription crudely cut into the sarcophagus is in the old langue d'oc of southern France and reads ‘Here lies Ben a /Obat daughter of En Ram on of Baréges and of Madame Na Hera.
She died in the last week of April 1236.
Gile de Sere made this.’
Luz is unquestionably a town it would be pleasant to lodge in.
There is in particular one very small hotel, the Hôtel des Rem parts, whose rear windows look straight out on to the church and its battlements, and beyond them to the woods and escarpments rising sharply behind.
Rooms with a view indeed.
I'm not breaking my stated rule here and recommending this hotel, just saying that it is there and that if you could get the back bedrooms you would have a most remarkable scene to look out on.
Of Luz's other, lesser half, the spa of Saint-Sauveur, there is little to say.
Like other Pyrenean spas, it is basically a single street of high hotels or ‘residences’ strung out between the mountainside behind and the river below.
The speciality of Saint-Sauveur is gynaecological complaints, and it is known as ‘the ladies’ resort', having been brought to a modest celebrity by the two-month stay here in 1859 of the Imperial couple, Napoleon and Eugénie.
One good thing that their patronage led to was the Pont Napoleon, which spans the torrent just outside Saint-Sauveur to the south and is a lavish piece of bridgework, a single arch some 200 feet above the water at its highest point.
There is no call to go through Saint-Sauveur, because the road for Gavarnie is on the other bank of the Gave.
The Cirque de Gavarnie, be it known, is even more today what it has long been,the place in all the Pyrenees for tourists.
You should get there at all costs, because it is an absolutely astonishing place, but the nature of the spectacle is such that it can only work on you properly if the cirque is not being mobbed; it demands a certain loneliness, and on afternoons in July and August, for instance, the coaches are said to have to queue before they can get into the village of Gavarnie.
But I have been to the cirque in early June and in October, and found it almost deserted, so it is not too hard to pick your moment.
The road up from Luz to Gavarnie is a pleasure in itself, tightly enclosed by rock walls in places, before it broadens out into another of those lovely high Pyrenean basins at the resort village of Gèdre.
From here you can already start to see the rim of the mountains that enclose the cirque.
Past Gèdre, the landscape reverts again to its harsher, more primeval mode, as you drive through what is known as the Chaos de Coumély, a wilderness of massive boulders that have rolled down from the mountain on the left.
This is the point where ascending Romantic poets began to feel understandably Romantic: ‘a black and hideous path’ declared Victor Hugo, ‘the original chaos, a hell’said George Sand.
On the modern carriageway such  feelings are not to be fully recaptured, but the chaos is a fit preparation of the spirit for the profoundly rugged experience of the cirque.
Gavarnie is a single-minded, ungainly village, bent on its one charge, of dispatching visitors, on foot, by donkey or on pony back along the track to the cirque, an hour away.
It has a small, not very interesting church, founded by the Knights of St John, with a cemetery in which there are the graves of a number of ‘Pyreneeists’, or guides and climbers killed in these mountains.
For Gavarnie is the old headquarters of mountaineering in the Pyrenees, a centre not only for excursionists but for the hard men, aiming for dangerous ascents of the rocks.
There is a statue in the village to the most endearing Pyreneeist of them all, Count Henry Russell, Irish on his father's side and Gas con on his mother's, who climbed obsessively and made so many ascents of Vignemale — thirty in all — that in 1889 the authorities granted him a concession to it.
Russell was what you might call a social climber, inasmuch as he specialized in fitting out rock shelters for himself at various altitudes and if possible receiving his friends in them.
Mountaineering in the Pyrenees began, early in the nineteenth century, with the very practical ascents made by the mappers and surveyors, but it continued, in climbers such as Russell, with something of the flair and eccentricity with which it was also evolving at much the same time in the Alps.
The track which you follow from the village of Gavarnie to the cirque is necessarily a good, well-worn one, almost a road for much of the journey, through beech woods and then across open grasslands, before the last rough and rocky stretch up into the mouth of the cirque.
Rather before half-way, where the path actually goes down, instead of up, into a gentle, turfy basin, the authorities of the Parc National have made a ‘botanical garden’.
I put this description in quotes because it is an informal garden, discreetly signposted.
It is simply an area of mountain country full of pine trees with up tilted tips to their branches, of bushes, boulders, pasture and wild flowers; and the longer you wander  about there the more flowers you find, unassuming yet plentiful, in an incomparable variety, as well as exquisite fist-sized mushrooms, like polished stones.
And all the time you are close enough to the mighty cirque itself to enjoy that too, with a sight of its gigantic waterfall.
Once you are wrapped around by the cirque you realize that it is not beautiful but what in the eighteenth century they knew as ‘sublime’.
Fearsome that is, without being dangerous.
From end to end, the curve of mountain wall which faces you occupies a full 180 degrees, and measures all but nine miles along the crest; but even more than the width it is the depth that awes one at Gavarnie, because the cirque is very deep, with an average drop from crest to valley floor of 5,500 feet.
The wall is not in fact vertical though it is easy to misremember it as such, because it rises in three distinct layers of limestone, to heights of 6,900, 8,500 and finally some 9,000 feet, with a filling of ice and snow on the slopes that divide one layer from the next.
The cirque was made, it seems, even before the period of glaciation, by water finding its way out from the mass if of the Monte Perdido behind and undermining the cliffs, though it was the glacier, shreds only of which are left, that eventually cleared this gigantic bowl of its debris.
If you want, you can walk right into the cirque from the mouth, over grass first of all, but then across the stone-strewn floor; it is just about a mile to the furthest rock face.
To the left is the great waterfall — the cirque has numerous supporting ones — which comes down in one huge leap of 1,400 feet when the snows are melting or in two rather more modest leaps once they are finished.
This waterfall is the origin in fact of the Gave de Pau, which starts life off here through channels made in the packed snow at the foot of the sunless rock wall.
To the right of the cirque there is a large indentation or cleft in the rim known as the Bréche de Roland (see Plate 3).
This is a much more imposing witness to that paladin's strength of arm than the Pas de Roland near Itxassou.
It was made by the furious last sweep of his indestructible sword Durandal, when he struck  it against the rock in a vain effort to break it and so stop this epic weapon from falling into the hands of the Saracens:
He brings it down harder than I can say.
The sword grinds, it neither bursts nor breaks.
It rebounds heaven wards.
The cleft that Roland made is 300 feet deep, half that many long and from 130 to 190 feet wide.
To climb up to it takes time nine or ten hours to get there and back — but no special skill or nerve.
Indeed in 1828, as an inscription on the Spanish side of the Bréche records, the reckless Duchesse de Berry, widow of the assassinated second son of King Charles X, ascended to it, not under her own power but under that of her hired porters, who carried her to the top in a chair.
She arrived back down in Gavarnie, ‘still merry and confident’ according to the Anna lists, as well she might be for all the effort she had had to make.
Juliette Drouet, the mistress of Victor Hugo and his companion on his travels, was put out that a woman other than herself should have been able to make this ‘difficult ascent’ and claimed that the Duchess had needed the services of thirty guides and helpers; less jaundiced reporters speak only of two.
Just over the other side of the Bréche, one of the great delvers into the Pyrenees, the speleologist Nor Bert Caste ret, discovered in 1926 an underground glacier, the highest ice-cavern known.
Gavarnie is not alone up here in having a cirque.
At Gédre, you can turn off the Gavarnie road to the east and drive up to the alternative Cirque de Troumouse.
This road takes you through what I would say was the most savage landscape you are likely to see in the Pyrenees without actually setting off into the mountains on foot, a valley which has rocks where other valleys have trees.
It passes first through high, increasingly thin pastures and then between tremendous rock-falls to the small settlement of Héas, the highest it is said anywhere in the Pyrenees, at 5,000 feet, swamped by an avalanche in 1915 and made up today only of a chapel and two or three houses.
Past He as, there is a toll-road, very steep, extremely tortuous and liable to be strewn with rocks, which goes way, way up, close to the centre of the cirque at an altitude of 6,600 feet.
If the toll-road is not manned, that will almost certainly be because the road is closed by snow, as it normally is for a good seven months out of the twelve.
In early June, I got close to the top, and to the cirque, before having to stop the car at a snow-drift; but if that happens you can simply enough walk the rest of the way or, indeed, walk directly into the cirque along the valley to the left out of He as.
As you climb by the road, you see a ring of mountains to your right which you might easily take to be the Cirque de Troumouse, but this is in fact yet a third cirque, that of Estaubé, intermediate between Gavarnie and Troumouse, imposing in its own right if too withdrawn properly to enclose you, as a good cirque should.
Troumouse is magnificent, if not quite with the sublimity of Gavarnie because there is more grass here and the ring of mountain wall is more open.
It is on a vast scale though: Franz Schrader, the first great cartographer of these mountains, estimated that it would hold twenty million people; modern guidebooks have cut this number churlishly, and for all I know realistically down to three million.
And so, back to Luz.
The river of Luz, the Bastan, enters the town briskly from the east, along the deep lateral valley of Barèges.
I shall now go some of the way up this valley, as far as the Col du Tourmalet at the end of it — what lies on the far side of the col must wait for the section of this chapter on the valley of the Adour.
The Col du Tourmalet is the highest pass in the Pyrenees which you can cross by car, its altitude being almost exactly 7,000 feet; for this reason it is early to close, in November, and late to open again, in May or sometimes early June.
The name Tourmalet means literally ‘bad way round’, but that was a billing which the col earned in more demanding times than the present, when there was no proper road over the pass but when you could hire porters to carry you from one valley to the next by chair.
It was no doubt the carriers rather than the carried who gave the Tourmalet its nickname.
On the way up to the col from Luz you come first to the small resort and spa of Barèges, one street wide and squeezed tightly in in true spa style between the mountains to the south and the river to the north.
But small though it is, Barèges was one of the first Pyrenean spas to make its name, mainly because Louis XIV's sick son was sent there to be treated in the 1670s.
It was above all the place to which you were advised to go if you had for some reason been shot, in either war or peace.
In 1742, an Englishman, Christopher Meighan, published an analysis of the waters which he described as ‘A Treatise of the Nature and Powers of Barège's Baths and Waters.
Wherein their Superior Effects for the cure of gun-shot wounds…‘, but in those years it was still an uncouth place, better fitted to receive the injured soldiery than sickly, comfort-loving bourgeois.
Nowadays, the spa doubles as a ski resort, having been developed along with its winter Annexe, Super-Barèges, higher up the road near to the col.
These slopes have the reputation of being the best you can find in the Pyrenees.
For all its great altitude, the view from the top of the Col du Tourmalet is much less open and memorable than many, blocked as it is to the south by a row of peaks and overpowered immediately to the north by the bulk of the Pic du Midi de Bigorre, which is a most assertive mountain.
If it is a view you are after, then better to go to the top of the Pic du Midi than remain down on the col, for from there the prospect has for long been famous, especially to the north over the plains and, on a good day, westward to the Atlantic.
So relatively accessible is it, that the Pic du Midi has become a thoroughly domesticated mountain; as Belloc noted with distaste early this century, ‘No other of the great mountains of Europe have been put more thoroughly in harness,’ and since Belloc was there it has been harnessed more thoroughly still.
You can get to the top by cable-car from La Mongie or up a rough but bearable toll-road from the Col du Tourmalet, which is open only in July, August and September.
From where you park, there is another, minor, two-minute cable-car ride to the summit, or you can zigzag up on foot in about forty minutes.
Although you are here, on the summit, at 9,400 feet, well above the permanent snow line in the Pyrenees, which starts at about 8,500 feet, there is seldom any snow in the summer, because the sides of the mountain are too steep, especially on the north side, to keep it in place.
The Pic du Midi has long had an observatory on top, a very substantial structure indeed and occupied since I 88 I, after the scientists who started it had got into the arduous habit of spending their winters up here in a small hotel.
The summit also now has a television mast, which can but be one of the most visible of its kind anywhere in the world, serving at once both to identify and to pollute the poor Pic du Midi.
Lourdes
North of Argelès-Gazost, at the point where the Gave de Pau finally leaves the mountains, stands the best-known town in the Pyrenees, Lourdes.
Lourdes has had two histories.
For 500 years, until Bigorre was finally absorbed into the kingdom of France in 1607, it was the capital of the county of that name, and for a part of that time was in theory an English town, being recaptured by a French army, after two sieges, early in the fifteenth century.
Its fallow years were between 1607 and 1858, when the second history of Lourdes began, with the eighteen appearances of the Virgin Mary there in a grotto beside the river to a miller's daughter, Bernadette Soubirous, which turned the town quite rapidly into the greatest pilgrimage centre of Roman Catholicism.
That aspect of Lourdes is now of course utterly dominant: this is a place of pilgrimage and little else.
More than four million people come to it every year.
But pilgrimage too is seasonal and not to be marked off too strictly from tourism any more nowadays than it could have been marked off in the great centuries of the sacred trek to  Compostela.
It is possible to go to Lourdes as a tourist without being a pilgrim, and that is all I can decently do here.
I would not care to go there as a tourist in the season of pilgrims, however, because then the sense of one's impertinence would surely be too strong.
As it is, going to Lourdes out of season, in the late autumn or winter, brings one even more starkly face to face with what the Catholic Belloc calls this supernatural place's'  detestable earthly adjuncts'.
They are the more detestable for having temporarily lost their reason for existence: that is to say, shops full of a disastrous religious trinketry no longer have any customers to sell it to, and whole street-fuls of hotels and pensions are all of them closed until the following spring, making parts of the town seem gloomily abandoned.
The whole point of Lourdes comes out as you walk down from the centre of the town towards the river and the Cité Religieuse on the far bank.
The architecture of the Cité Religieuse is disagreeable.
At the end of a long esplanade, which opens out Into a concourse, there are two churches, one above the other.
The lower of them is large, circular in its effect if not in its outline, and imitation Byzantine in style, shinily reliant on marble and mosaics.
Inside, the circumference of the church is occupied by elaborate chapels and the marble facings are everywhere inscribed with thank-offerings.
The upper church is tall and narrow, neo-Gothic in style, and in fact a little earlier than the lower church, having been finished in 1871.
It too is filled with inscriptions, with banners and with a multiplicity of framed thank-offerings.
To the right of the two churches, down near the water, is the grotto itself, a humbler place though naturally not spared the apparatus of the cult: a statue of the Virgin, an altar, seats, a small and poignant row of crutches that have been discarded and now hang against the rock wall.
Here too are the baths where the crippled are immersed, and a line of taps providing water from the source that Bernadette was told by the Virgin to drink from.
And dispensers full of candles, to be set when lit into iron trolleys — so many that even on a  relatively deserted day when I was there, you could hear their crepitation.
The sight later of these hundreds of flaring candles, from across the river, as the light faded on a grey evening, was as near as I was able to come in Lourdes to any sense of holiness, so oppressive otherwise is the sense of the business of holiness.
Architecturally, the most acceptable element of the Cite Religieuse is the enormous underground ‘basilica’ consecrated in the shrine's centenary year of 1958.
It is scooped shallowly out on the left of the esplanade, and forms an oval more than 200 yards long; 20,000 people can be in it at any one time.
Because it is so plain and built entirely of concrete, the car-park effect is instantaneous, yet once get clear of the large struts that support the roof, and this becomes a compelling structure, more stadium than church even now but reassuring to the puritanical visitor after the orgy of nineteenth-century frippery elsewhere in the Cité.
Looking back at the town of Lourdes from the esplanade, you have an excellent view of its one historical monument: the fortress, set high on a rock above the river.
This was for centuries a strong point and later a prison; among its prisoners, during the time of the Revolutionary Wars, was Lord Elgin, he of the marbles, who was held hostage in Lourdes on his way back to England from Turkey.
The military parts of the fortress have been thoroughly restored and it is possible to walk all round the battlements.
But the main point of going up to it is to look at the Pyrenean Museum that has been created inside.
This has some intriguing exhibits, even if they are not always quite Pyrenean.
Astonishingly ornate decorations which were set on top of the yokes of working oxen, for example, in the form of painted wooden ‘towers’ anything up to two feet high, partly hollowed out and fitted with small bells.
Or the lovely, curved local milk jugs made of some very dark wood.
Or the curious dentelle de cire or literally ‘wax lace’: mourning candles resembling strings of pasta which could be wound tightly into packages or else extended and draped.
There are other rooms in the  Museum showing furniture, costumes, prehistoric remains, wildlife, tools, porcelain, and so on.
A good exhibit is that which commemorates the Pyrenean climbers and their notable ascents, such figures as Count Henry Russell or Ramond de Carbonnières, who was the first into the field and made thirty five separate ascents of the Pic du Midi de Bigorre between the years 1787 and 1810.
(Ramond's still very readable Voyage dans les Pyrénées was published in the unpropitious year of 1789, but it did well and was translated into English in 1813, so it could claim to have helped to draw English travellers to these unknown mountains.)
There is a display also of various types of mountain refuge or cabin, from which you can judge how extremely uncomfortable it must have been for those invited by Count Russell to share his quarters on his favourite mountain of Vignemale, for the so-called ‘Russell’ is quite the most Spartan of shelters, little more than a hollow scooped out under an overhanging rock.
It does not even come up to the extremely modest levels of convenience that the shepherds expected when they took to the hills for the summer with their animals; also on show in Lourdes's museum is a portable wooden cabin, with handles at either end, like a horizontal sedan chair.
This has sleeping-room for one, even though it would have taken two shepherds to carry it, leaving you to wonder how the odd shepherd out spent the night.
The caves of Bétharram, a short way out of Lourdes on the main road to Pau, are not my sort of caves but I will at least mention them.
They are large, covering several kilometres of galleries, and very well organized.
At one point of the journey through them you can take to a boat, and to carry you back to the daylight there is a miniature railway.
What you mainly see are stalactites, stalagmites and other rock formations, excellent of their kind.
For myself, I would let the others go on to the caves and pass the time instead above ground in the large riverside village of Saint-Pé (the Gascon form of Pierre) -de-Bigorre, which has a nicely arcaded square and a few pleasing  remains of its old abbey church, once the grandest religious building in the Pyrenees but now part in effect of the dull parish church that later replaced it, after it had been fired by Protestant arsonists in the Wars of Religion.
The Adour Valley
It is a mild puzzle at first, to come across the young river Adour flowing from south to north down its valley, when you last saw it flowing from east to west into the ocean at Bayonne.
But the rivers of south-west France flow very indirectly, and the Adour makes a strange horseshoe of a tour through lower Gas cony before it gets to the sea.
Its Pyrenean valley is known as the most fertile of all, thanks to the kindly work of the local glacier, which laid down its moraine to a depth and at an angle that produced grasslands of great repute.
When Ramond de Carbonnières came to Campan, in the later eighteenth century, he saw it as an Arcadia, both for the excellence of its pasture and for the independent spirit of its peasantry, whose self-sufficiency seemed a model to this fundamentally democratic man.
The proper way to enter the Adour valley from the west is via the Col du Tourmalet, provided it is open.
The road down from the col goes through the modern, high (6,000 feet) ski resort of La Mongie, which is a neat curve of tall buildings opening to westward on to some promising-looking pistes .
The long descent on this side of the Tourmalet ends in the village of Sainte-Marie-de-Campan, where you can either turn left up the valley of Campan, or else pursue your way east over the next high pass, the Col d'Aspin.
For now, I shall turn left.
Not far up the road here is the town of Bagnères-de-Bigorre, a spa known to the Romans and envisaged by Napoleon I as the ‘capital’ of a Pyrenean confederation of health resorts — for a while it was given the title, which it can never have begun to merit, of ‘the Athens of the Pyrenees’.
Admittedly, Bagnères  has captured some notable intellectual clients over the centuries: Montaigne back in the sixteenth century, and the whimsical Laurence Sterne, author of Tristram Shandy , in the eighteenth.
Though I have also to say that English visitors have had their episodes of hooliganism in these parts, especially in the post Napoleonic years, when, understandably, they were not always popular.
In the 1830s they were being criticized for despoiling ‘the crystalline beauties’ of the local caves, or in other words bearing off as trophies the stalactites and stalagmites.
And around this same period, an Englishman reading in the public library at Bagnères came upon an account of the battle of Toulouse in the Napoleonic wars which he thought too favourable to the French, and annotated it accordingly in the interests of accuracy.
He was called out by an offended patriot of the town, but killed his opponent in the consequent duel, one of the few duels that can ever have been fought for the sake of a marginal note in a book.
Bagnères-de-Bigorre is an agreeable town, on the river; at its best on the western side, where the main spa buildings are and where the streets are older, crookeder and, over a very small area, somewhat Parisian.
It has an especially fine flower market.
Bagnères was and is still, seemingly, the home of the Chanteurs Montagnards, or Mountain Singers, who sang Pyrenean songs all over Europe in the 1840s, in the years when these mountains were at their most romantic.
The country to east and west of the Adour valley below Bagnères is particularly good.
On the western side, below the caves of Médous — discovered only in 1948 and spared, therefore, from the loss of their ‘crystalline beauties’ to the English vandals of the last century — there is a lovely quiet road along the valley of the Lesponne, an ideally leafy cul-de-sac, leading to the hamlet of Chiroulet close under the northern face of the Pic du Midi; from there you can walk up to another of the more visited Pyrenean lakes, the Lac Bleu (though this is a longish, moderately gruelling climb, involving an ascent of nearly 3,000 feet).
To the east of Bagnères is a really lovely piece of country, not to be ignored.
It is known as the Baronnies and fills the top half of a triangle formed by the main roads which run south from Bàgneres and from La Barthe-de-Neste and which cross the mountains to the south at the Col d'Aspin.
You can get into the Baronnies very easily from the north, the east or the west, but not from the south, which is closed off by forests and by mountains.
It is a blissful little region through which to coast, preferably without aim, along the serpentine country lanes which link one modest cluster of grey-roofed houses to the next.
And because the Baronnies are full of deep valleys, the prospect keeps changing from near to far, with enormous views to the south when you are in some of the high places.
In short, the Baronnies are beautiful.
But they are also depopulated.
The roads and the settlements are there all right, as you can tell from looking at the map, but many of the people are not; they have left this blessed landscape for the towns, for Tarbes or for Toulouse.
Here you come up against the problem of the modern Pyrenees.
Young people do not want to live in them, when as often as not work means agriculture or nothing.
Town jobs are easier and make more money, so it is off to the north and let the country go hang.
In the Baronnies you can see where the country is going hang, and very pretty it looks of course, with wild flowers flourishing where there were once crops or grazing animals, and the woodlands taking over cleared hillsides.
But it does no harm to remember while you are there why this is such graceful countryside.
The depopulation has been frightening: between 1856 and 1975 the population of the Baronnies dropped from just over 10,000 to just under 3,000, and those who are left are not prosperous.
On the other hand, here, as in other parts of the Pyrenees, those who are left are now being joined by others who have retired or who have bought a second home in the foothills.
Some of the villages on the edge of the Baronnies look all too spruce, as if the locals had by now given way completely to immigrants wealthier than  themselves, who are buying up the old houses and adding new, sometimes crassly intrusive ones.
This process is not going to stop, so the time to plunge into the Baronnies is surely now before they are reclaimed for the retirement bungalow.
Tarbes
North from Bagnères and still on the Adour is Tarbes, the chief town of Bigorre.
I grant it here a section on its own, though I don't know that I like Tarbes very much, or would especially recommend anyone to go there.
For a southern French town, still very much in the ambience of the Pyrenees, it is graceless, with less to show than it should have for its history as a local capital, having twice been laid waste in the sixteenth century by Protestant raiders.
But Tarbes does at least have what must be one of provincial France's most charming parks, the Jar din Massey, which is on the north side of the town alongside the road for Bordeaux.
It was created and then given to the town in the last century by Massey — first name, and how fittingly, Placide — who had previously been the gardener in charge of the orangery of Versailles and at the Jar din tea Plantes in Paris.
His garden in Tarbes has its orangery too, a small one, of wrought iron and glass, as well as some superb trees, both exotic and native.
It has peacocks, which like to sit on the seats when visitors are scarce, a compound with a few docile wild animals in, a small lake, a free-standing part of a Gothic cloister from the ruined abbey of Saint-Sever-de-Rustan which was removed and re-erected here, and, if you can find them among the shrubbery, busts of two French poets, one of whom was born in the town while the other went to school here: the native was the arch Romantic Théophile Gautier, whose bust in the Jar din Massey was sculpted by his exotic daughter Judith, the outsider Jules Laforgue, the strange, consumptive young poet who so influenced T. S. Eliot and died at twenty-seven.
I scoured the  greenery of the Jar din Massey unsuccessfully for signs of yet another literary genius with local connections: the bizarre Isidore Ducasse, alias the Comte de Lautréamont and author of the surreal Chants de Maldoror , who was born, like Laforgue, in Montevideo, but went to school in Tarbes and died even younger than Laforgue, at twenty-four.
Tarbes has done well by its poets then — indeed, there is a broad avenue in the middle of town named for Laforgue; it is more discreet, and understandably, about its one serious contribution to the political history of France, in the person of the peculiarly unprincipled Revolutionary terrorist, Bertrand Barrere, who, in the judgement of Macaulay, ‘approached nearer than any person mentioned in history of fiction, whether man or devil, to the idea of consummate and universal depravity’.
Barrère has not been admitted to the Jar din Massey in any form, but he does get a plaque on the house where he was born, in the same street as the genial Gautier.
There is a strong military side to Tarbes also.
It was the birthplace as you soon find out of Marshal Foch, supreme commander on the western front in the later stages of the First World War, who has here an equestrian statue, a main street named after him and a small museum in the house where he was born in 1851.
And in the Jar din Massey there is a museum tracing the history of the regiment of Hussars over the five centuries since its first formation in Hungary.
Finally, you can also visit the extremely elegant First Empire stud-farm, in the middle of the town, where the Tarbais horses, ridden in the old days by French cavalrymen and today more often by tourists, have long been bred.
These horses are part-Arab, part-Basque and part-English, the English blood having been mixed in on the orders of Napoleon 1, while the Arab strain has been traced, perhaps fancifully, to the horses left behind by the Saracens, who were badly defeated near here in the eighth century.
But if it is military evidences that you are pursuing, then I would leave Tarbes and go instead to the splendid castle of  Montaner, a few miles to the north-west — not quite Pyrenean I will admit, but near enough and certainly good enough to be brought in here.
This was commissioned by the thrustful chatelain of Pau, Gaston Phoebus, from his distinguished military architect, Sicord de Lord at; and was built some time in the 1370s.
It is cited as the very type of contemporary fortification, the last fling of the traditional style before the onset of serious and effective artillery changed the rules of defensive building; and it makes today a magnificent as well as an instructive ruin.
Montaner is simple, just a huge keep and a walled enclosure; this, in fact, is a regular polygon of twenty sides, though the angles are so gentle with that many sides that the feeling you have once you are inside is that it is circular.
It was built largely from bricks baked on the spot, though because it was also built in haste the kilns, designed to produce 100,000 bricks a year, could not always keep up and instead of bricks the masons settled for stones in the upper part of the walls.
The keep, which is 120 feet high, has been slowly and accurately restored in recent years, but the rest of the castle is a shell, with the outlines of the rooms that ran inwards from the walls alone visible and a single stairway up one of the buttresses on to the crumbling battlements.
Montaner was built to defend Gaston Phoebus's lands from attack from the north, and not against raids from the direction of the Pyrenees; so it seems to face towards Gascony.
Its time of usefulness was relatively short, though it lasted as a fortress until 1621, when some local Protestants used it as their strong point in an attempted uprising against the new, official Catholicism of the region.
The rising was put down and so was the castle, which then became a source of building materials, a man-made quarry.
From 1627 almost to the French Revolution, what was left of it belonged to the local family of Montesquiou-d'Artagnan.
The village of Artagnan, indeed, lies only a few miles from Montaner, to the north-east; and it was one of the seventeenth-century counts of this Artagnan whom Alex Andre pumas, once again, took and elevated into his fictional hero.
The Aure Valley
The high road linking the valley of the Adour to that of the Aure starts from the village of Sainte-Marie-de-Campan and crosses the Col d'Aspin.
This col is not enormously high, at 5,000 feet, but the view which it gives you is the vastest and most satisfying of any Pyrenean pass that I know of.
The col itself is a soft, open place of pasture, with, if you are lucky, more cows than people to share it with you.
The view is more stunning yet if you take the trouble to climb up a little from the road, on to the grassy hill behind, so that you can see over the top of the slightly obtrusive forested spur to the south-west; or if you follow the path through the woods to the south of the road for about half an hour you come out on a crest which dominates the country in the direction of the watershed.
Immediately to the west of the col is the Pic du Midi de Bigorre, then, to the left of that, the granite mass if of Néouvielle, with beyond it the rim of the Cirque de Gavarnie, and the Monte Perdido on the Spanish side; and so on round to the south-east, in a wonderfully three dimensional arrangement of crests and hollows.
Nearer to hand, you can also see steeply down 2,500 feet from the Col d'Aspin into the broad valley of the river Aure — the Neste d'Aure as it is called,neste here replacing gave as the local designation for a river.
The road drops down from the col into the valley with an exhilarating suddenness and you are then in Arreau.
This is a charming small town, or perhaps overgrown village, with just the right kind of simple hotels to tempt you to stop off here.
It is a place of confluence, quite noisily so I imagine in winter or during the melting season, for rivers splash down into Arreau from east, west and south, at least four of them, with the Neste d'Aure here taking on more water for the journey north.
This fertile region, hollowed out and enriched so far as the soil is concerned by glaciation, was once known as the Pays tea Quatre Vallées, and Arreau was its capital, being another of the  small centres which flourished in the years when the trans-Pyrenean trade with Spain was at its height.
It is not an architectural town, for it has no real monuments, bar a sixteenth-century house facing the vaulted market-building in the centre whose exposed timbers are carved all over with fleurs-de-lis.
There is also a tiny eleventh-century chapel on the far bank of the Neste de Louron, the river that enters Arreau from the east and flows parallel with the main street; this chapel is admirable on the outside only, with a nice octagonal tower and a battered Romanesque portal.
It is dedicated to St Exupère, a saint of Toulouse who began life in this valley as a plough boy.
South from Arreau the main road runs along the wide valley of the Neste d'Aure to the resort town of Saint-Lary-Soulan, and then curves to the south-east as the valley narrows and the mountains get higher.
There are a surprising number of villages between Arreau and Saint-Lary, but curiously, only the first of them, Cadéac, is on the river, all the others, on either side, standing somewhat back from it, towards the high ground, on terraces deposited there by the glacier.
Cadéac, though you would never know to look at it, is in actuality a mini-spa, an example of the purely local spas you can find in the Pyrenees, whose reputation extends only through one valley and which attract as a consequence almost exclusively local people.
The road out of the village, southwards, shrinks in a quite unforeseeable manner in order to pass under the porch of a small chapel; this could be distracting, and were something coming the other way lead perhaps to a rare collision on what is no doubt consecrated ground.
Saint-Lary-Soulan is a small resort, in summer and winter alike, an ancient Pyrenean village lost definitively to sight amidst the apartments, shops, hotels and other impositions of tourism.
It is the place to go if you are staying in the valley and want a swimming-pool or a tennis-court, but hardly recommendable for anything more serious.
The ski resort as such is not down in the valley at all, would that it were; rather, it is perched to  devastatingly conspicuous effect on the side of a mountain to the west, up to which you can go either by car along a new road or by cable-car from the centre of Saint-Lary.
By day or by night, when its lights so insolently interrupt what ought to be the dark solitude of the mountains, this extension of Saint-Lary is an offence; only when the weather closes in, and the clouds hang low, returning the high ledge on which it stands to a very satisfactory invisibility, is the valley's honour temporarily saved.
If the weather does close in in the Aure valley, and you crave sunlight, remember that Spain is close and that you can simply enough try the other side of the mountains.
I have done this myself, to ideal effect, getting into the car on a sunless July morning and driving up to the road tunnel of Bielsa, some dozen miles beyond Saint-Lary.
This is a lovely climb in itself, up what quite soon turns from a valley into a defile.
To the left is Tramezaïgues, a hamlet said because of its position on a northern slope to get no sun at all for three months in the winter and from where a very bad road leads up through the pine forests to the Hospice de Rioumajou, and one of the numerous old mule tracks into Spain.
At Fabian, three miles further on, a road turns off to the right up into the mountains: I shall come back to this in a moment.
The road for the tunnel here bears off to the left and rises up along the glorious valley of Aragnouet, half pasture, half pine woods, past a road leading off to another new ski station, at Piau-Engaly.
The tunnel is a novelty: three kilometres of roadway underneath the frontier ridge.
It is new but it does not seem as yet to have taken on in terms of traffic.
In the very middle of it you change countries and, more important, change climates.
Entering on the French side still wrapped in cloud, you have a good chance of exiting on the Spanish side, as we did on the morning in question, in flawless sunshine and restorative heat.
There could be no quicker way than this to appreciate how different things are climatically on the two sides of the mountains, because not only do you exchange cold cloud  for sunshine but also the lush greenery of the high valleys to the north for the grass less, stony and, in summer, almost waterless river valley which leads on the Spanish side down to the small town of Bielsa (a little trippery, inevitably, but a place of some character).
At Fabian, as I have said, there is a road off to the west up into the mass if of the Néouvielle, where you can get a terrific closeup view of some of the primary rocks of the Pyrenees, of the unadorned granite.
There is nowhere better or, frankly, easier than this to see some of the high Pyrenean lakes, of which there are at least four that you can get to here by car, as well as a fifth reachable fairly simply on foot.
The road up is a defile, steep, rugged and curvaceous, with a vast pine forest on the left hand.
It brings you first to the Lac d'Orédon, which is a genial, pine girt spot, and from which another, rather more dubious road leads off to the left up to the dam of Cap-de-Long.
This is an artificial lake, the tremendous retaining wall of which you can see up above you well before you arrive there, blocking off the valley.
The reservoir is a grim and comfortless place, flanked to north and west by the exceedingly severe Pic de Néouvielle and Pic Long — the Pic Long, 10,480 feet high, being the highest summit the entirety of which lies on the French side of the frontier.
These giants have their permanent snows and scraps of glacier, and even by the reservoir, in late July, there are patches of grimy, left-over snow to be had.
It is hard to imagine it ever turning quite summery up here.
The other Néouvielle lakes are infinitely more hospitable.
The Lac d'Aumar and its satellite, the Lac d'Aubert, which are on and up from the Lac d'Oredon, are somewhere to spend the day.
Old guidebooks, I notice, call their site ‘desolate’ but that is most unfair, because although you are here at more than 7,000 feet there is a good deal of picnic able and even sleep able turf round about, a lake to fish in, and affable groups of horses browsing the summer away.
You can see desolation but you are not part of it: the desolation being the rock and ice of the Pic de Néouvielle immediately at hand to the  west.
Indeed, clamber up through the rhododendron bushes to one of the crests beside the Lac d'Aumar and look over, and the landscape at once turns much harder and more hostile; you know then you are on the edge of the truly wild Pyrenees.
Comminges
Comminges was one of the lesser of the old Pyrenean counties, without the prestige or the influence of Bigorre or Foix-Béarn.
It became French relatively early, in 1454.
But long before that, the Romans dominated this region.
On his way into Spain in 76 BC, Pompey annexed the valley of the river Garonne, which forms the main axis of Comminges, and four years later, on his way back from Spain, he founded at the northern end of it the city of Lugdunum Convenarum, where Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges stands today.
The name Comminges is taken to be a derivation from this name, of the Convenae, which the Romans gave to the local people whom they had brought together in their new oppidum .