

1
The Question of Gender
Introduction
The research on which this book is based is concerned both with examining the concrete experiences of male and female students, and with the meanings students attach to those experiences.
I suggest that these meanings arise from everyday discourse, which habitually makes use of oppositions such as masculinity/femininity, science/arts — oppositions which make sense only in relation to each other.
Within these oppositions, one is rated more highly than the other: in this case, masculinity and science.
Masculinity is defined by what it is not ; the term ‘masculinity’ does not make sense without a knowledge of the term ‘femininity’.
This book looks at these two divisions — masculinity/femininity and arts/science — and examines the interaction between them in higher education; it regards the terms as social constructions, not as givens.
It examines students' understanding of these divisions and how this understanding relates to the role of education in society.
The next sections of this chapter will draw attention to the issues discussed in the book and outline the content of the later chapters.
The issue of gender
Gender is a social construction; it concerns the differing qualities culturally attributed to women and men (Oakley 1972).
Sociologists, Acker (1981) has argued, have often failed to recognize that sex differences are the result of cultural and social influences:
Writing of men, sociologists show an acute awareness of the social constraints upon their actions.
Writing of women, or of sex differences, they frequently switch to psychological or biological levels of explanation.
(Acker 1981: 78)
An important premise of this book is that people's actions are socially constrained, although not socially determined; people make decisions which are based on an awareness of the potentialities and limitations of certain courses of  action.
The choices made by men and women are limited, amongst other things, by social expectations of masculine and feminine behaviour; this is not to say, however, that people passively accept their socially allocated roles.
The study of gender is, like the study of class or of race, also the study of inequality; we are interested in not only why women do not occupy positions of power, status or responsibility in the same numbers as men, but also the process by which this occurs.
Whether we believe that inequality of the sexes is the result of genetic differences, the desire of men to control and dominate women, outdated attitudes and prejudices or historical struggle, it is undoubtedly the case that there is a continuous process of producing and reproducing inequality.
The use of the word ‘gender’ not only denotes an emphasis on the social (as opposed to biological) attributes of women and men, but also indicates a recognition of the relationship between masculinity and  femininity .
Acker (1981), in her review of articles published on the sociology of education between 1960 and 1979, showed that, whereas 37 per cent of those reporting on empirical research had used all-male samples, only 5 per cent had used all-female samples.
Some feminists (e.g. Sharpe 1976; Delamont 1980) have attempted to redress this imbalance, by using all-female, rather than mixed samples, treating the quality of education received by girls as a serious issue, in a way that was rare before the late 1970s.
However, by focusing exclusively on girls, researchers have ignored the important premise that gender has any cultural meaning only because it is based on difference (Hollway 1982).
As Belotti puts it:
The superiority of one sex is based exclusively on the inferiority and weakness of the other.
Researching gender, then, requires an examination of the cultural creation of male dominance as well as the creation of female subordinance.
Clearly there are a number of institutions which play a part in the reproduction of inequality, whether at a material or an ideological level.
The family and the media, it can be argued, both work at an ideological level in perpetuating inequality of the sexes, while firms which pay lower wages to female workers operate at a material level.
However, the institution which many sociologists have regarded as central in perpetuating inequality — and also, crucially, central in potentially eliminating inequality — is education.
From the nineteenth-century reformers who pressed for universal schooling to today's schemes for increasing the numbers of girls studying science, education has been the site of the struggle for equality of opportunity.
Education
Sociologists are not agreed on the relationship between inequality in society at large and inequality within the education system.
Explanations for the failure of working-class children within the system, for example, have ranged from the ‘cultural deprivation’ theory (e.g. the Plowden Report 1967) to the vulgar  Marxist belief (e.g. S. Bowles and Gintis 1976) that the primary function of education is to instil in working-class pupils the docility and passivity necessary for participation in the labour force.
Those who support the cultural deprivation theory tend to believe that education can play a large part in remedying social inequality, while Marxists believe that education is an essential part of the process of reproducing inequality.
A common criticism of both these theories is that they simply look at the end result of education; they are examples of an ‘input/output’ model.
However, recent Marxist critiques of education (e.g. Willis 1977; Apple 1982) have concentrated more closely on the contradictions implicit in the experience of schooling:the process by which inequality is created and renewed, and the cultural resistance of pupils to the dominant ideology.
Theories of gender and education have, to some extent, mirrored those on class and education: there are those who believe that inequality is caused by the differential socialization of girls and boys (in a sense, that girls are ‘culturally deprived’) and that this can be overcome through removing prejudice; there are also those (e.g. Spender 1982; Mahony 1985) who believe that schools both reflect and reproduce patriarchal relations.
However, it is generally recognized that gender inequality in education is in many respects different from inequality of class.
Whereas the proportion of working-class students succeeding in passing A levels and entering higher education is very small, girls generally pass as many O levels as boys, almost as many A levels, and a relatively high proportion enter higher education.
Statistics for 1987–8 show that in British universities, 43.1 per cent of undergraduate students, and 38.9 per cent of postgraduate students, were women (UGC 1988).
The emphasis amongst researchers on gender, therefore, has not been on increasing the participation of girls in education.
Rather, attention has focused on the issue of subject choice.
Many researchers (e.g. Sharpe 1976; Deem 1978) have argued that the occupational segregation of men and women which takes place after education is completed is related to the subject segregation which takes place at school.
Few girls take physical science subjects; few boys take languages.
Therefore, it is argued (by e.g. Kelly 1981b; Harding 1983; Whyte 1986), that reducing the imbalance is an important step in reducing inequality.
The crux of the argument — the impetus of the Girls into Science and Technology (GIST), Women into Science and Engineering (WISE) and INSIGHT schemes — is that more girls must take up science subjects;girls must do as well as boys .
It might be argued that a tacit assumption of research which examines girls' 'failure' in science is not only that girls are inadequate-not measuring up to the standard of boys — but also that maths, physics and chemistry are more difficult and more important than English, languages, history and biology.
In this model, it is believed that intervention in education can bring about positive change in the balance of power in the social system.
It is fair to say, however, that while feminist educationalists have, in recent years, become more aware of the limitations of the interventionist model, the state continues to see education as an arena where social change can be promoted.
Currently there is a shortage of maths and physics teachers — a  shortage which will be exacerbated by the demands of the National Curriculum.
Figures from the Graduate Teacher Training Registry show that applications for places on teacher training courses for physics are, in 1989, down by 25 per cent on 1988, while the 1988 figures were down by 17 per cent on 1987 (Times Educational Supplement 4 April 1989).
The Department of Education and Science estimates that 20 per cent more students will need to be trained to teach physics, maths, technology and modern languages (report in Guardian 18 January 1989).
Not only are science teachers in short supply, however, but also industry is facing a shortage of skilled scientists and engineers.
It is not surprising, then, that the government wishes to encourage that great untapped resource — women — to take science A levels and science degrees.
As a recent article made clear:
The government…sees women as the key to solving the labour shortfall in the 1990s.
(Guardian 21 January 1989)
However, it is not just a matter of encouraging women to take science A levels.
Currently those women who do take science A levels and who go into higher education are far more likely to choose to study medical or biological subjects than physical sciences or engineering.
Statistics for 1987–8 reveal that 45.8 per cent of medical students were women: 43.3 per cent of dentistry students were women; 53.6 per cent of biology students were women; but only 16.1 per cent of physics and 10.7 per cent of engineering students were women.
Part of the government strategy, therefore, must involve ensuring that women who do choose science specialize in shortage areas (physical science) rather than in popular areas (such as medical or biological sciences).
It may appear unreasonable of any feminist to suggest that schemes to encourage women into physics, chemistry or engineering are misguided.
After all, taking such subjects in higher education would apparently improve women's prospects of gaining jobs, while at the same time filling an enormous gap in the labour market.
However, attempts to change the pattern of subject choice amongst women have not adequately addressed three central questions:
1
What are the educational processes which currently result in fewer women studying science than men?
2
Why is specialization in other areas regarded as indicative of ‘failure’?
3
Would an increase in the number of women choosing to study physical science and engineering result in greater equality for women?
Gender and subject choice
The patterns of subject specialization shown above suggest that a fairly complex process is taking place.
It looks not so much as if women are passively being forced into the arts and rejecting science, but that they are making very clear choices.
It is, for example, remarkable that almost half of all medical students are women, when as recently as 1974 medical schools were operating a quota system to keep women out.
These patterns imply that it is not simply a matter either of ability or of socialization which affect subject choice.
It may be easy to argue that there are too few women doing physics and too many doing English; reversing these trends, however, is an enormously difficult task, as the GIST team found out (see Whyte 1986).
What I should like to suggest is that the issue of subject specialization cannot be tackled without examining our taken-for-granted assumptions about academic subjects, and their place in society.
Perhaps the first assumption is that of the demarcation lines between subjects: what makes something a ‘science’, what makes chemistry different from biology.
As Goodson (1983) has argued, these demarcation lines have developed and changed over time; they are not absolute.
One question to ask, then, is: What do we mean by science?
What are its distinctive features?
A second common assumption is that the sciences, generally, are more difficult than the humanities, and that within that, physics is more difficult than chemistry, which is more difficult than biology, and so on.
This assumption is hardly ever challenged; yet it is clearly the case that many scientists are as incompetent in the humanities as many humanities graduates tend to be in the sciences; it is perhaps a mark of the enormous divide we have made between the two areas that ability in one is often considered to preclude ability in the other.
The most significant — and debatable — belief about science, however, is that it is a good thing in itself.
The popular media — such as Tomorrow's World , for example, or children's science books — tend to present science as consisting of benevolent inventions, or a series of clever tricks.
Yet the reality is that very little money spent on science is spent on improving social welfare; as Rose (1986) has pointed out, 50 per cent of the government's science and technology budget in 1981–2 went on military research and development.
In industry, scientific research effort is often directed at increasing profit rather than improving the quality of life (although science has of course improved the quality of people's lives in many ways).
Further, it is possible to argue, as Millett (1983) has done, that because science and technology are instrumental in maintaining male dominance, women are deliberately excluded from them.
However, even if we accept the argument that the ‘best’ subjects are those which are most useful to industry, this does not necessarily mean that all physical scientific subjects are more useful than all humanities subjects.
We noted earlier that, as well as a shortage of science teachers in schools, there is a shortage of modern language teachers.
The need for industry to employ more people who can speak another language is recognized by Kenneth Baker, as this comment shows:
A new start is needed in foreign language teaching in schools.
If we are to compete effectively in world markets and to communicate on equal terms with our European partners we need to increase substantially the numbers of young people leaving school with a good grounding in at least one foreign language.
(Reported in Guardian 17 June 1986: 32)
Baker was particularly concerned that so few boys were taking O and A levels in languages.
It would seem, then, that girls, who outnumber boys by about four to one in A level French, are at an advantage; if subject choice is so clearly related to career, then those women with modern language qualifications should be occupying important positions in industry.
However, that this is not the case had been pointed out by Professor Lodge, of the Department of French Studies in Newcastle University, in a letter to the Guardian , in which he argues that it is a matter of concern that ‘A level presentations in modern languages are falling away sharply, particularly among boys’.
He added:
This would matter little if decision-making positions were occupied by women possessed of the requisite linguistic knowledge, but unfortunately for all of us, they are not.
(Guardian , 24 January 1986: 12)
Being possessed of a ‘useful’ qualification does not guarantee entry into important jobs; either because women with language qualifications are not particularly ambitious (or are ill-advised) or because employers simply aren't interested in employing female linguists.
Part of the problem with encouraging girls to take ‘useful’ subjects is that we do not know whether it makes any difference to the kinds of jobs they eventually do; and whether, indeed, these jobs would still be highly rated if women did them.
Feiffer has argued
Whatever ground woman manages to establish for herself, man abandons, denying its importance.
While not necessarily accepting the fatalism of this argument, it would be wrong to assume that the balance of power between the sexes can be changed simply by persuading more girls to take ‘boys’ subjects': the issue is clearly too complex to justify simplistic remedies.
Arguably certain kinds of jobs (such as those in the Civil Service) have historically been reserved for male Oxbridge graduates in such ‘useless’ subjects as history and classics: sex and class may sometimes be greater indications of a person's ‘worth’than degree subject.
The significance of higher education
So far, we have looked at different views of the relationship between the education system and social inequality.
However, the inequalities in higher education have rarely been the subject of close and critical attention; far from arguing that higher education serves to reproduce inequalities, commentators (e.g. Wolpe 1977) have argued merely that higher education functions to train middle-class students to take up positions of status and responsibility in society, such as civil servants, managers, teachers and doctors.
Analyses tend to stop at higher education; they note that few working-class pupils or few black people or few women go on to university or polytechnic; they fail to look at what happens to those who do.
This exclusion of higher education from consideration by sociologists of education must in part be due to the fact that higher education is not compulsory; it is perhaps difficult to argue that something which is a matter  of choice can in any sense be repressive.
It is no doubt also due to the reluctance of academics critically to examine their own institutions.
Yet finding out what happens in higher education is of utmost importance in understanding the patterns of gender inequality that exist.
For example, until recently, women were outnumbered by men at postgraduate level in every subject grouping (as defined by UCCA) apart from education.
The 1987–8 statistics show some improvement: female postgraduates now outnumber men in social sciences, languages, librarianship and medical studies (i.e. subjects such as pharmacy and nursing) as well as education (UGC 1988).
Furthermore, women's degree results show a different pattern from those of men: in 1984, only 5.1 per cent of female university graduates, compared to 9.1 per cent of male graduates, gained first-class honours degrees.
This is reversed at the opposite end, however: 11.5 per cent of men and only 6.2 per cent of women gained thirds (Universities Statistical Record).
These patterns are particularly marked in the humanities and social sciences, where women are numerically stronger.
We can also note that few academics are women; few high-ranking civil servants, managers or politicians are women.
Despite the growing numbers taking part in higher education, women are still under-represented in the majority of jobs with any claim to status and responsibility.
Clearly something does happen in higher education; it is not enough to argue that it trains an elite and to leave it at that.
It is not, as most appear to believe, the end of a process, but in many ways a beginning.
If higher education is not an end, not an output, it may be worth looking at it as a process: a process which plays a crucial role in the creation and reproduction of gender difference.
To understand this process, we have to look at the experiences of students themselves, and the meanings they give to their education.
If we are to understand the significance of subject specialization, then we must take the choices made by women seriously: we cannot assume that the student who chooses physical science is somehow ‘right’ while the student who chooses the humanities is somehow ‘wrong’.
More importantly it is necessary to understand why certain subjects have become associated with men, and others with women.
It is not merely the case that some subjects have been numerically dominated by men and others numerically dominated by women; as Keller (1983) has argued, science is generally regarded as more masculine than the arts:
To both scientists and their public, scientific thought is male thought, in ways that painting and writing-also performed largely by men — never have been.
(Keller 1983: 188)
Hudson's (1972) work has also demonstrated the association of science with the masculine, the arts with the feminine, and his research will be discussed in Chapter 3.
Understanding the gender-specific connotations of certain fields of learning is crucial if we are also to comprehend the process by which gender inequality is produced in education.
As Becher (1981) has argued, academic subjects are not neutral, they are ‘cultures’, each with its own way of perceiving  and interpreting the world.
The aim of this book, then, will be to look at the relationship between the ‘culture’ of subjects and our common-sense constructions of masculinity and femininity; and the implications of this relationship for gender inequality in higher education.
The methodology
The research reported on in this book consisted of semi-structured, tape-recorded interviews with ninety-six students (forty-eight male, forty-eight female), and twelve members of academic staff, in three different institutions.
In each institution, I looked at two departments, interviewing sixteen students (eight first year and eight final year) in each.
Two of these institutions were universities, in which the interviews were with members of the English and physics departments.
These institutions will be referred to, for the sake of simplicity and anonymity, as A and B. The third institution was a polytechnic, and the interviews were with students from a department of communications and a department of physical science.
This institution will be referred to as C.
The arguments about the merits of questionnaires as opposed to interviews, positivism versus interpretivism, have been well rehearsed, and I do not propose to go into them in detail here.
The philosophy behind this research is the same as Lewis's:
If we are to explore the actual and perceived experiences of students, it may be better to work from their views rather than to try to squeeze them into some predetermined mould through questionnaires and attitude Inventories.
(I. Lewis 1983: 111)
A few brief comments need to be made, however, about why the research took the form it did.
Having argued in this chapter that the issue of gender can be discussed only if we regard masculinity and  femininity as complementary, it was inevitable that the sample should include both men and women.
It was intended, not to concentrate on women as an object of interest, but to compare the experiences of men and women, to look for difference and similarity.
Similarly it was necessary to move the focus of interest from the question ‘Why do so few women do physical science?’ to the related, but often unasked questions of ‘Why do so few men take the humanities?’'Why do so many women choose English, rather than physics, or chemistry?’'What happens to those students who make these choices — particularly if their choice is unconventional?’
To start to answer these questions entailed looking  at least one humanities subject and at least one physical science subject.
Physics was chosen as a representative subject, not only because it is studied by so few women, and is therefore a typically masculine discipline, but also because it tends to be regarded as the most objective, rigorous and, indeed, successful of the pure sciences.
English was chosen, not just because the majority of its students are female, but because it is generally looked upon by  commentators (e.g. P. Scott 1984), as the ‘central liberal discipline’.
Matthew Arnold, as we shall see in Chapter 3, regarded English as a vehicle for overcoming class divisions; in the late Victorian era, it was regarded as a sop to women demanding higher education (see Baldick 1984).
English, therefore, is an example of a way in which education has been used in an attempt to effect social changes; arguably it is the only discipline (and of course this will be discussed again later) to be distinctively ‘feminine’.
Both physics and English are, essentially, university subjects: I was also interested in the new tradition of the polytechnics and the emphasis they have put on applied knowledge and vocational degrees.
Physical science would, I hoped, prove to be an interesting contrast with physics, being broader-based and more vocational: students took a year out in industry.
Communications also had a vocational emphasis, and was essentially inter-disciplinary, covering sociological and psychological methods of inquiry.
In common with English, however, most students came to the course with humanities A levels.
Interviews were the obvious method for researching the interlinked topics of gender identity and subject specialization.
I was interested both in how individuals develop a sense of themselves through their subject choice, and in how a world-view of a discipline is constructed at an academic and departmental level.
To put it more simply, I wanted to look at the reciprocal interaction between individuals and their immediate social world.
The only way to do this was to allow students themselves to talk about why they chose to study their particular subject, their experience of studying it, and their hopes for the future.
The remaining chapters
Chapters 2 and 3 take a look at some of the literature available on gender and education, gender and science, and the different cultures of ‘science’ and ‘humanities’.
Chapter 2 is concerned with the different feminist approaches that have been directed towards education, and how they might help us towards an understanding of higher education.
Chapter 3 looks more specifically at some traditional ideas about the value of science and humanities education, and at how these might relate to deep-rooted notions about gender.
Chapters 4–7 take up the bulk of the book, and report on the research described earlier.
Chapter 4 looks at how physics students and staff construct the subject ‘physics’, and at the way in which this affects, and is affected by, their ideas about humanities disciplines.
Chapter 5 looks at the ideas of English and communications students about their discipline, and at their view of science.
Chapter 6 examines the way in which studying physics interacts with students' sense of identity, and looks at how this differs for male and female students.
Chapter 7 discusses a similar process at work amongst the humanities students, and also points to certain differences between the science and the humanities students.
Chapter 8 draws some conclusions from the research and makes suggestions for change.
We begin, therefore, by asking the question: what contribution can feminist theory make to higher education?
2
Feminism and Education
Introduction
This chapter will look at the different explanations that have been put forward for girls' 'failure' in education, and at some of the research that has been done in this area.
It will also look at the ways in which these explanations can help us reach an understanding of inequality in higher education.
Much of the work under discussion gives some consideration to the issue of subject specialization: the character of science education will, therefore, be touched on in this chapter, but a fuller discussion of this topic, and that of humanities education, will be found in Chapter 3.
Until recently, it has been easy to characterize three distinct types of feminist approach to education: liberal, radical, and Marxist or socialist.
Middleton (1987) has given a useful account of how these different approaches have informed work on gender inequality in education.
In recent years, however, the distinctions between these three approaches have become blurred, particularly in the area of empirical research: while there are major differences at the level of grand theory, liberal, radical and socialist feminists appear increasingly to agree about what happens in the classroom.
What these approaches have most in common, however, is that they challenge a view of education which is concerned only with male experience, and which treats that experience as the ‘norm’.
When researchers look at schooling from the point of view of girls, it is perhaps not surprising that writers as diverse as Alison Kelly and Valerie Walkerdine can come up with very similar findings.
What is surprising is that so few feminist researchers in the sociology of education have chosen to look at higher education, when so much work has been done on secondary education and, to a lesser extent, on primary education.
It can be argued that this failure to look at higher education may be the result of a deficiency in feminist theory about education — that feminists (and, indeed, other educational theorists) have difficulty in theorizing the role of higher education in the reproduction of inequality.
This chapter will have two aims, therefore: the first will be to look at the shades of difference and similarity between feminist approaches to education; the second will be to ask whether, and in which ways, these approaches can inform our understanding of inequality in higher education.
The liberal analysis
The view of education which dominated feminist thought in the 1970s was heavily influenced by liberal explanations of working-class failure in education.
Just as these explanations had concentrated on the inadequacy of working-class culture and had put forward the notion of compensatory education, so the tendency of feminists was to explain girls' failure in terms of the deficiencies of their socialization.
Schemes such as Girls Into Science and Technology (GIST) and Women Into Science and Engineering (WISE) were devised as ‘remedies’ to girls' early socialization.
In the liberal model, education tends to be seen, to some extent, in isolation from the social structure.
Education may create and perpetuate inequality; it also has the power to redress it.
For example, Friedan (1983) believed that it was the ‘feminine mystique’ which prevented women from leading successful public lives; the education system was partly to blame for the ideology of the feminine mystique, but equally the solution for women who were trapped in their roles as wives and mothers was to return to college to obtain an education.
In a sense, then, women's main problem was their own attitude (albeit an attitude fostered by the education system and the media); if only women would stop wanting to become housewives and start wanting to become lawyers or doctors instead, the problem would end.
Most liberals, like other feminists, believe that schools are partly responsible for instilling sexist attitudes into children.
Delamont (1980), for example, says that:
schools develop and reinforce sex segregations, stereotypes and even discriminations which exaggerate the negative aspects of sex roles in the outside world, when they could be trying to alleviate them.
While the EOC document on science education says:
If girls are taught from an early age that science is a subject to be studied by all pupils, and is not ‘only for the boys’, then some of the problems relating to girls' under-achievement in science in the secondary school will be resolved (Equal Opportunities Commission 1982: 4)
These statements demonstrate the two central emphases of the liberal feminist analysis.
The first is the ability of the school to promote good or bad attitudes, with the implication that changing schools will change attitudes (and hence, eventually, society); the second is the concentration on girls, rather than boys.
There are areas of education in which boys do badly (modern languages, for example); yet liberal feminists tend to be concerned only with the areas where  girls are less successful, such as science and mathematics.
There is a tacit acceptance that, because men are generally more successful in material terms than women, women could become more successful if they made the same educational choices as men.
The liberal feminist perspective in education was embodied by the GIST (Girls Into Science and Technology) project.
The aim of this project was to encourage girls to choose science subjects at the age of 14; to this end, the GIST researchers went into ten Manchester secondary schools and attempted to promote a more positive image of science that would appeal to girls, partly by helping science teachers develop a more ‘girl-friendly’ teaching style and partly by inviting female scientists to speak to pupils about their careers.
The consequence of this intervention was that in some schools, the numbers of girls opting for science increased, while in others they decreased.
The failure of the GIST initiative surely lay in the naivety of its approach: the researchers were so concerned to promote a positive ‘image’ of science that they brushed aside pupils' questions on the reality.
For example, Whyte in her report on GIST, tells how the visiting speakers were told to ‘present themselves as ‘rounded’ feminine beings, i.e. mention how they combined home and family life with their jobs' (1986: 74).
The GIST team seemed to think that they could brush aside any anxieties about the difficulties of being a woman in science by presenting a series of bright, appealing images.
However, an interesting consequence of GIST was that the experience of going into schools and seeing what happens in science lessons seems to have radicalized the researchers involved.
Kelly, in particular, no longer seems to think that the problem of gender imbalances in subject specialization can be solved by making girls change their attitudes.
The crucial shift is from seeing girls as the problem to seeing science as the problem; writing of an article she published in 1982, she says:
If I were writing the article today…
I would put more emphasis on the role of schools and teachers in dissuading girls from science, and less on girls' internal states.
The article suggests that it is necessary to change the image of science; I now think that it is necessary to change science .
(Kelly 1987: 2)
There has, therefore, been a significant move away from psychological explanations of ‘failure’ which see socialization as the root of the problem, and towards explanations which look more closely at the discriminatory practices of schools.
However, this does leave us with the unanswered question of the extent to which schools reflect social practices and the extent to which they shape them.
Many feminists, as we shall see below, believe that the education system is largely an apparatus for reproducing the existing social structure.
Political explanations
Radical feminist and Marxist feminist interpretations of the education system have focused less on attitudes and more on power structures.
The radical  feminist argument is, briefly, that we live in a patriarchy — a system in which men maintain power over women.
This system of power relations is maintained both at the material level-by the military, the police, industry and so on— and at the ideological level: by the media, the family and the education system (Millett 1983).
Socialization of girls and boys into sex roles is seen, not as a means of perpetuating misplaced attitudes and prejudices, but as a necessary tool in maintaining male dominance.
Marxist feminism is rather more complicated in that it sees the oppression of women as inextricably linked to the class system.
As Macdonald has put it:
Both class relations and gender relations, while they exist within their own histories, can nevertheless be so closely interwoven that it is theoretically very difficult to draw them apart within specific historic conjunctures.
However, there is disagreement amongst Marxist feminists about whether the oppression of women is simply a consequence of an unjust economic system or whether the oppression of women is universal, but modified under differing economic conditions.
In either case, education is seen as an important means of perpetuating the system of capitalist relations as well as the system of patriarchal relations.
Radical feminist perspectives
There have been two main strands to the work conducted within the radical feminist paradigm.
The first is a belief that education consists of the transmission of ‘male’ knowledge; that is, that what is taught in schools is simply an account of male experience presented as though it were everybody's experience.
It is biased knowledge, pretending to be value-free.
Spender is the most powerful exponent of this point of view, arguing that:
Men have provided us with a false picture of the world…not just because their view is so limited, but because they have insisted that their limited view is the total view.
(Spender 1982: 16, emphasis in the original)
Spender gives numerous examples of this bias; one is that history textbooks about the nineteenth century contain few or no references to the women's movement, despite the fact that women were fighting to be accepted into the universities and to receive the franchise.
Women's experience, as Spender puts it, has become ‘non-data :it is rendered invisible.
The role of education in a patriarchal society is, therefore, to transmit a dominant ideology: that of masculine superiority.
The second strand of the radical feminist argument is that schooling is part of a process by which the ideas and experiences of girls and women are trivialized by male pupils and members of staff.
While this is a common finding amongst researchers (see pp. 16–17 below), it is the interpretation which radical  feminists put on these findings that is significant.
Radical feminists see the put-downs and discrimination experienced by girls as the means by which men control women — and by which boys control girls.
From this point of view, women are oppressed and victimized; they are not simply the unlucky recipients of prejudice.
For radical feminists, then, schooling represents one of the ways in which girls and women are excluded from power.
For that reason, they reject solutions such as encouraging more women into science; as Spender puts it
such superficial analyses and solutions are not only insulting to women, they also ignore the distribution of power in society and the academic world, and the way in which males have appropriated and defended that power.
Many radical feminists see little point in attempting to change the education system because women are trapped in a vicious circle in which men keep changing the rules if women show any sign of becoming as successful as them.
For feminists such as Spender, the only solution is a separatist one: for women to make their own education, their own rules.
Marxist feminism
Marxist feminism represents a two-pronged attack: the first on orthodox Marxism, the second on orthodox (i.e. liberal and radical) feminism.
At the same time, it draws from each of these approaches, and attempts to integrate them: Hartmann's (1981) essay on the subject is appropriately entitled ‘The unhappy marriage of Marxism and feminism’.
Marxist feminism, like radical feminism, regards the relationship between the sexes as political: that is, about power.
However, Marxist feminists do not regard the relationship between the sexes as the only, or even the main power relationship in society.
While a radical feminist like Millett can argue that ‘male and female are really two cultures, and their life experiences are utterly different’, Marxist feminists would argue that the life experiences of middle-class women are much closer to those of middle-class men than they are to those of working-class women.
Marxist feminists are quick to point to the essentialism of much of radical feminism, and argue that while women's oppression is almost universal, it has taken different forms in different societies.
Thus, under capitalism, women's oppression is not simply a question of individual men oppressing individual women, nor of men in general oppressing women in general; it takes the form of exploitation in the labour market, which has become essential to maintaining capitalism — low wages, harsh working conditions, little job security — as well as exploitation in the home and family.
As Barrett (1984) has argued:
A model of women's dependence has become entrenched in the relations of capitalism, in the divisions of labour in waged work and between wage  labour and domestic labour.
As such, an oppression of women that is not in any essentialist sense pre-given by the logic of capitalist development has become necessary for the ongoing reproduction of the mode of production in its present form.
Hence the oppression of women, although not a functional prerequisite of capitalism, has acquired a material basis in the relations of production and reproduction of capitalism today.
Explaining the role of the education system under this model is rather more difficult than in the other two models.
Education is neither simply about the transmission of certain attitudes nor about the perpetuation of patriarchy.
Traditional Marxist explanations, such as that of Althusser (1971) or S. Bowles and Gintis (1976) had seen education as reproducing the relations of dominance and subordinacy necessary to the maintenance of the capitalist state.
As we saw in Chapter 1, later Marxist explanations (e.g. Apple 1982) move away from a deterministic model towards a looser one, which emphasizes hegemony and cultural resistance.
This is broadly the position taken by Wolpe (1978), in her article, ‘Education and the sexual division of labour’.
Wolpe's argument is that changes in the labour process have resulted in a disjunction between the skills taught by the education system and the skills (or, in a sense, lack of skills) demanded in the labour market.
Consequently contradictory demands are placed on schools and colleges; for example, girls are allowed to study physical science in school, but are also channelled into subjects such as home economics which instil in them their future role as wives and mothers.
Wolpe argues, therefore, that there is potential for change through struggle; there is no simple functional ‘fit’ between education and the demands of the labour market.
Barrett's (1984) analysis is rather more deterministic, arguing that education is explicitly the object of state policy, and serves to reproduce both class and gender relations.
The reproduction of gender relations is neither outside the class system nor is it reducible to it.
She notes four levels at which gender relations are reproduced in schools.
The first is that of ideology, i.e. that girls and boys are socialized into appropriate ‘feminine’ and ‘masculine’behaviour.
The second is that of structure and organization: the majority of headteachers and heads of department are men, while women are at the bottom of the teaching profession.
The third consists of those mechanisms which channel pupils into a sexual division of labour: that boys are persuaded to take science and technology subjects and girls to take the arts.
The fourth is that of definitions of legitimate knowledge: what is often taught as neutral and objective is in fact androcentric and sexist.
(However, Barrett rejects the relativism of many feminists and argues that an objective, neutral knowledge is possible.)
In a sense, Barrett's analysis is remarkable because it is so unremarkable .
While her theoretical analysis of the interrelationships of gender and class at the general level may be controversial, few feminists would disagree with her comments about education.
Her comments about subject specialization may even have more in common with traditional liberal approaches (i.e. that girls  are ‘channelled’ into the arts) than with the approach of radical feminists who see science as inherently masculine.
Arnot (1981) has argued that a theoretical division exists between ‘cultural’(what I have characterized as ‘liberal’ and ‘radical’) approaches and ‘political economy’(Marxist-feminist) approaches.
Both tend to present an ‘overly determined view of women’ in that the former portrays women as ‘over-socialized’and the latter regards them as ‘doubly-determined’by the needs of capitalism and patriarchy.
While the former does not go beyond the school — seeing the school as both problem and solution — the latter assumes that the education system is entirely successful as an apparatus which reproduces gender and class inequality.
She suggests a synthesis between the two approaches which looks at the diversity of girls' educational experiences, and the ways in which  schoolchildren challenge class and gender controls.
I shall return to this issue of determinism a little later, but first I shall take a brief look at some of the themes in empirical research on gender and education.
Gender in the classroom
The focus of much feminist research into education is the extent to which girls are (consciously or unconsciously) discriminated against.
This discrimination may take the form of bias in marking or the preferential treatment given to boys in the classroom.
The work of Spear (1984) and Bradley (1984) are examples of work which suggest — though do not prove — that markers may be biased against girls when marking their work.
Recently some attention has been paid to the differences in degree results of men and women and an experiment carried out at University College, Cardiff shows that women's degree classes improve when a system of anonymous marking is used.
Spender (1982) argues that male teachers are more likely to regard work highly if they think it has been written by a boy, although her research methodology is not made explicit.
Other researchers, such as Clarricoates (1978) and Stanworth (1981), found that teachers tend to spend more time talking to boys, and that they have more difficulty remembering girls' names.
Clarricoates also found that primary school teachers try to gear their lessons more towards the interests of the male pupils, because they are more likely to be disruptive: a finding supported by Morgan and Dunn (1988).
It proves an interesting challenge to the Marxist idea (e.g. S. Bowles and Gintis 1976) that schools reward passivity and docility.
As Walkerdine (1987) has argued, qualities generally attributed to girls, such as industriousness and diligence, are often cited by teachers and researchers as examples of girls' weaknesses in education.
In other words, it seems that some schoolchildren (boys) are rewarded for breaking the rules while others (girls) are punished for following them.
The issue of preferential treatment given to boys is not, however, confined to whether their examination papers are marked more favourably or whether they are allowed to talk more in classrooms.
The concern of some researchers has extended to the ways in which boys are allowed to dominate girls in schools.
Increasingly, research evidence shows that, in mixed-sex schools, girls are consistently subjected to harassment, sometimes sexual, by boys, and that this harassment is either ignored or treated as harmless.
When researching the GIST project, Whyte (1986) found that boys persistently intimidated girls in the science laboratories and refused them access to equipment.
Kelly (1985) found instances of girls performing a service role in the laboratory — being expected to tidy up for boys, for example.
Spender (1982), Mahony (1985), Wolpe (1977) and Lees (1987) all found evidence that in mixed sex schools, girls were harassed, often sexually, by boys.
Mahony in particular found that the problem was either trivialized or ignored by teachers.
More disturbingly, Walkerdine (1987) recorded instances in nursery schools where male children were using sexual insults to challenge the female teacher: the teacher, however, dismissed it as ‘normal’ childish behaviour.
‘Normal’ is the key word here.
There seems to be a sense running through all these research reports that teachers regard boys' behaviour in school, whether it be groaning in unison every time a girl answers a question, or physically harassing female pupils, as quite natural and inevitable.
Teachers make use of a discourse which regards male aggression as normal: ‘Boys will be boys’.
The teacher cited in Walkerdine's research, for example, said that ‘coming out with that kind of expression is very natural.
This kind of research about the treatment and academic performance of girls in mixed sex schools has led some feminists to argue in favour of single-sex schooling.
Spender (1982) has put the case simply:
By removing the group which dominates and excludes the experience of women, single-sex schools can allow women to express and validate their own experience to develop some autonomy, to build some confidence.
Indeed, there is a body of evidence (Pidgeon 1967; Steedman 1980) which suggests that girls do achieve more highly in a single-sex environment.
Even Dale's (1969) book which came out in favour of co-educational schooling, recognized that girls were academically less successful in such an environment.
In an experiment at Stamford school (S. Smith 1984), it was shown that, whereas girls’ mathematics scores were equal to those of the boys on entry in the first year, by the end of the year, boys were scoring more highly.
When, however, some of the classes were put into single-sex groups, the girls in these groups started to score more highly again, while the girls in the mixed sex groups fell further behind.
Deem and Finch (1986) have argued, on this basis, that women should be entitled to a single-sex higher education.
This does beg the question, however, of the extent to which education, and higher education in particular, exists in isolation from the rest of society.
Subject choice, knowledge and curriculum
So far, we have seen that feminists are beginning to agree on what happens to girls in mixed-sex schools; there is a growing consensus in research that education is a powerful force in shaping relations of dominance and subordinance between the sexes.
However, while it may be easy to accept that girls are treated differently from boys in schools, the crucial issue of what is taught in schools may be more complex and controversial.
At the same time, most people regard what is taught in schools (either in the ‘official’ curriculum, or through the unofficial, ‘hidden’curriculum), as the essential feature of an educational system.
Much feminist attention has been focused on the sexist bias of many of the textbooks used in schools.
Macdonald, in her account of some of these studies, says that:
the impression gained is one of women's inferiority, her domesticity, her lack of intelligence, ability, sense of adventure of creativity.
As Macdonald explains, it seems that women are either invisible in most school textbooks or, when they appear at all, they are seen performing low-status tasks.
Amongst liberals, there has been a tendency to believe that remedying the gender imbalances in these books might have a positive influence on girls' educational achievement.
Increasingly this is now seen as over-optimistic; as Kelly has argued, such representations are the ‘tip of the iceberg’.
We cannot assume, of course, that girls simply accept the images portrayed of them in textbooks; a concentration on content analysis of textbooks does not tell us whether they are ignored, accepted, or challenged by their users.
The issue of curriculum and subject choice goes deeper than the portrayal of women in school textbooks, however.
One of the issues that has drawn the attention of many feminists is the general treatment of women in both school and higher education curricula.
Walker (1981), for example, has shown how psychology regards the male as ‘norm’; any results which show that women behave differently tend to be either ignored or dismissed as an anomaly.
Hubbard (1981) has pointed to the inbuilt sexist assumptions of much biology, while Lanser and Torton Beck (1979) have pointed to the exclusion of female writers and critics from syllabuses of English.
There now exist very wide-ranging critiques of male ‘knowledge’ in the humanities and social science subjects.
However, most of these subjects tend to be studied, at undergraduate level at least, mainly by women.
Given the apparent sexist bias of much humanities and social science teaching, it seems odd that it is in these subjects that women are numerous; it is the absence of women in physical science and engineering that has generally been regarded as a ‘problem’.
Indeed, given that the sciences are more usually concerned with the inanimate world than the animate, it would seem that there was much less potential in the physical sciences for portraying women negatively.
In psychology, English, history, even biology, it is not too difficult to demonstrate a bias towards male experience.
Yet girls, and women, apparently choose these subjects in preference to the seemingly more objective physical sciences, while for boys the reverse is true.
The issue of male and female subject choice, then, may be more complex than we generally allow.
We might begin to explain this paradox by recognizing that not only is much of what we call knowledge socially constructed, the boundaries between subjects are also socially constructed.
It is not simply that we can suspect the objective basis of ‘knowledge’ but that ‘knowledge’is compartmentalized; some kinds of ‘knowledge’are considered more important than other kinds, and this is communicated very effectively in schools.
Measor (1983; 1984), for example, has shown that children have very clear ideas about which are high-status subjects in school, and which low-status.
Bernstein has used the idea of ‘framing’ and ‘classification’to explain this; it is an idea that is particularly potent when we discuss gender.
One of Bernstein's arguments is that subject specialization,
reveals difference from rather than communality with …specialized versions of the collection code tend to abhor mixed categories and blurred identities, for they represent a potential openness, an ambiguity, which makes the consequences of previous socialization problematic.
We can argue, then, that subject specialization, in emphasizing ‘difference from’, can reinforce both class and gender distinctions.
While classics, for example, are considered essentially upper- or upper-middle-class disciplines, engineering (in this country at any rate) has long been considered a subject suitable for aspirant working-class men.
The gender divisions are, if anything, even more entrenched.
Not only are certain subjects (physics, maths, engineering) considered more suitable for men than for women, but also these subjects in themselves seem to embody qualities which are closely linked to our ideas about masculinity and  femininity .
As Macdonald (1980a) has put it:
The notions of appropriate behaviours for each sex is converted into the appropriate academic disciplines.
As Macdonald points out, some subjects change from being viewed as ‘masculine’ to being viewed as ‘feminine’, and vice versa; she argues that this is partly the result of ‘pressures exerted on the school and universities by the changing pattern of employment of men and women in the labour force’.
A case in point might be certain subjects related to medicine, such as optics and pharmacy; the growing number of women studying these disciplines may be the consequence of the flexibility of optics and pharmacy jobs in enabling women to take time off to have children.
If we regard the curriculum as essentially concerned with difference , then we can begin to understand the potent ways in which gender divisions are created and renewed.
It has already been argued, in the previous chapter, that we all use  oppositions to make sense of our experience.
In any opposition, one of the pair is likely to be rated positively, and the other negatively: for example, masculinity and femininity, science and arts.
It is not enough, therefore, to say that more women should do science, or that domestic economy should be compulsory for both sexes; we have to get to grips with the ways in which ‘femininity’ is consistently devalued, both in society generally and specifically in the education system.
Gender and higher education
A concentration on seemingly abstract ideas like ‘masculinity’ and ‘femininity’may seem esoteric when compared to issues of whether girls are actively discriminated against in education.
However, my aim is to show that notions of ‘masculinity’ and ‘femininity’are important in shaping students' experiences of schooling.
So far, little attention has been paid by feminist sociologists to higher education.
The attitude of most feminists appears to be that, if women have reached higher education, then they are ‘successful’; the only questions to be asked are why fewer women than men reach higher education in the first place, and why they are concentrated in different subject areas.
Byrne, for example, says that she is not concerned with the
intellectual minority of girls whose elite wings have helped them to fly…from the gutter to the university.
Wolpe, at a different end of the political spectrum, has only this to say about higher education:
Those children who comprise the élite section of the education system are destined via higher education to fill the managerial, professional and higher executive posts of this country.
‘Elite’ is the key word in both these quotes.
The problem for these, as for other feminists, seems to be only how we can help women get to these positions, rather than what happens to them once they are there.
An alternative way of looking at higher education is to see it as a continuing process in the reproduction of gender relations.
This is broadly the radical feminist viewpoint.
Women who reach higher education are not deemed to be successful by virtue of having done so; on the contrary, higher education continues to exclude and marginalize its female students, pushing them further into ‘female’ jobs or marriage and family.
This is the position taken by Acker (1984b) and by Rich (1979a) who argues that the university is ‘a system that prepares men to take up roles of power in a man-centred society’.
Radical feminists (such as the contributors to Spender 1981c, and to G. Bowles and Duelli-Klein 1983) argue that higher education curricula are as biased towards male experience as secondary education curricula.
These two theoretical positions are, apparently, mutually exclusive.
Surely higher education cannot be both the prerogative of an elite group of privileged middle-class women and a means of perpetuating male dominance.
Yet neither of these explanations on their own seems to me to be entirely satisfactory.
A woman who is successful in getting into higher education may feel privileged; however, her experience while she is there, and the influence this has on her decisions about her future life, may challenge this sense of privilege.
As we saw in Chapter 1, the proportion of female students obtaining first-class honours degrees is smaller than that of male students doing so; Kelsall el al. 
(1970) found that the career paths of male and female graduates differed widely.
At the same time, it is hardly adequate to say that higher education is concerned only with reproducing inequality; greater access to higher education has resulted in a growing number of women obtaining degrees and entering the professions.
I should like to suggest, then, that the relationship between higher education and the reproduction of gender inequality is a paradoxical one.
Higher education is relatively autonomous from the state but at the same time it is not isolated from the power structures and values of society.
The aims of higher education (whether, for example, it should be about the disinterested pursuit of knowledge, or about training students for the graduate job market) are confused.
This confusion is very apparent in most of the attempts to formulate a statement of higher education aims and policies, from the Robbins Report (1963) to the 1985 Green Paper (DES 1985).
It is also the case, of course, that stated aims do not necessarily match with practice.
We cannot assume that any part of the education system works as it is supposed to; as Macdonald (1980a) has pointed out, we cannot just analyse the production of cultural messages; we also have to analyse their reception.
Apple has suggested:
Women do often partially reject or filter knowledge, or even use it to their own advantage.
Education may try to produce passive and ‘feminine’ women, but it does not necessarily succeed.
Given the confusing and contradictory messages that women may be getting on their social role, it is worth exploring the question of whether their experiences of higher education are similarly confusing and contradictory.
The small body of research that exists on female students in higher education suggests that women in higher education are faced continually with contradiction.
Komarovsky's (1946) classic study found that many female students experience conflict between the experience of higher education as preparation for a career and the social expectations that women should be passive, ‘feminine’ and marriageable.
Opposing pressures came from tutors on the one hand, and family, male peers, and non-university female friends on the other.
Indeed, some went so far as to ‘play dumb’ when they were with male students because they knew that the men didn't like clever women.
Cleverness and femininity were seen as incompatible.
Similarly Ian Lewis argues that research on female science pupils has found that
girls are presented with a dilemma between maintaining their feminine identities or becoming closely identified with the study of physics.
His own research on female undergraduate students of physics provides further support for this conclusion; many of them explicitly dissociated themselves from the male physics students and their ambitions.
For these students, this was manifested by a decision not to continue with physics at postgraduate level.
Chisholm and Woodward (1980) have demonstrated that female graduates are often torn between the choices of starting a family (and taking the most convenient work to combine with family raising, such as teaching or part-time work) and using their education to enter high-status, traditionally ‘masculine’ jobs.
Society puts pressure on them both ways.
More anecdotal work, such as that of Harris (1974) or Weisstein (1979), illustrates the difficulties of academically successful women: a woman who appears ‘feminine’ is unlikely to be taken seriously.
At the same time, a woman who tries to shake off her ‘femininity’ in order to be taken seriously will be derided as unattractive, as the remarks of James Watson on the scientist Rosalind Franklin in his book The Double Helix (1959) make all too clear.
Institutions of higher education, like most powerful social institutions, are dominated, numerically and culturally, by men.
Hacker's argument in her article, ‘Women as a minority group’(1977), may prove a useful guide to understanding how higher education is experienced by women.
Hacker believes that the position of women in society is  analogous to that of minority groups such as immigrants and Blacks.
Like other minority groups, women often accept their supposed inferior status; they use tactics of ‘helplessness’ and ‘wiles’as a means of accommodation.
The jobs they can do are limited, and they arc thought to bc less intelligent and more easily pleased.
Some of them try to dissociate themselves from their group and ‘fondly imagine’ their identity to be ‘different from what others hold it to be’.
Like Blacks, women are seen, not as individuals, but members of a group, all of whom share certain characteristics.
This theory is a particularly potent one when we look at higher education.
For, whereas women make up over half the members of society at large, in higher education they are very definitely in a minority.
In certain areas of higher education — physics and engineering, for example— they make up a tiny proportion of students.
In other areas, however, their position is ambiguous.
In English and sociology, the majority of lecturers may be male, but the majority of students are female.
When male students are numerically in a minority, do they form a ‘minority group’?
Is the position of women strengthened?
These questions are important ones, because they get to the heart of our concern about higher education.
I have already suggested that subject choice is about ‘difference’; a woman who chooses to study physics is stating (not necessarily intentionally) her difference from other women.
She is making what is conventionally a masculine choice.
A woman who chooses English, on the other  hand, is making a traditionally feminine choice.
What I am trying to argue, however, is that the issue is not merely one of numbers, but one of culture.
Hacker's point was that women may be in a numerical majority, but they are in a cultural minority.
Just because, therefore, there are fewer women in physics than in English, doesn't mean to say that they are any worse off: the opposite may be true.
What I want to explore in the next chapter, then, is the question of the cultural boundaries between different subjects.
Specifically I will look at what we mean by the terms ‘arts’ and ‘science’; what qualities these two areas are seen, in society, to embody; and finally, the relationship between these qualities and the qualities embedded in our notions of ‘masculinity’and ‘femininity’.
3
The Two Cultures
Introduction
This chapter will consider both the idea of an arts/science division and why it exists, and two specific subjects: physics and English.
I shall argue that the question of ‘subject choice’ is not a neutral one and that individual school subjects can be seen to embody certain kinds of values.
Further, the very notion that scholarship can be divided into two completely distinct areas, known as ‘arts’ and ‘science’, in itself implies a value judgement.
To choose to study ‘arts’ rather than‘science’is to make a statement about the values one considers important.
The idea that the two areas, arts and science, are more than simply subject groupings, is not a new one.
C. P. Snow argued that practitioners of science and practitioners of the arts, inhabit two distinct cultures; scientists, for example, have ‘common attitudes, common approaches and assumptions’.
More recently we have come to see that the concept of science or arts is a social construction; as Michael Young has argued:
The whole ‘subject choice’ and ‘swing from science’debate presupposes taking as ‘given’the social definitions implicit in our commonsense distinction between ‘arts’and ‘sciences’.
What ‘does’ and ‘does not’count as ‘science’depends on the social meaning given to science, which will vary not only historically and cross-culturally but within societies and situationally.
Most of us accept unquestioningly, for example, that philosophy, an arts subject, has more in common with history, another arts subject, than it has with physics, a science subject.
Yet this distinction is a relatively recent one: Isaac Newton, for example, would not have distinguished so clearly between physics and philosophy.
At the same time, this division is so entrenched in our education system that a student who wishes to cross the cultural boundary and study both areas is considered something of an oddity.
In this chapter, I should like to look at some of the ‘social meanings’ we give to arts and science today.
In the last chapter, we touched upon Bernstein's ideas about ‘framing’ and ‘classification’.
Bernstein argues that some school subjects have very tight definitions of knowledge, and clear boundary lines marking what is considered relevant ‘knowledge’ and what is either considered not relevant or as belonging to another subject.
These subjects (which have ‘strong classification’) are also the subjects where hierarchical relationships between teacher and pupil are strongest:
Strong frames reduce the power of the pupil over what, when and how, he receives knowledge, and increase the teacher's power in the pedagogical relationship….
The stronger the classification and the framing, the more the educational relationship tends to be hierarchical and ritualised, the educand seen as ignorant, with little status and few rights.
These are things which one earns, rather like spurs, and are used for the purpose of encouraging and sustaining the motivation of pupils.
Although this could in theory apply to any subject (history, for example, may, in certain circumstances be taught with strong classification and framing, or with weak classification and framing), it might also be seen as one of the central features of the arts/science divide.
Bernstein also suggests that students are encouraged to make an identification with their chosen subject and to form a disdain for other forms of knowledge.
The English education system is a narrowing down, rather than a broadening out: disciplines outside one's own are not looked upon as worthwhile or potentially interesting, but as completely outside one's own sphere of practice; subject specialization reveals ‘difference from’ rather than‘communality with’.
This argument is partly illustrated by Becher (1981) who, in looking at the ‘cultures’ of various disciplines, found that academics showed a remarkable intolerance of each other 's disciplines.
Sociology, for example, was characterized by other academics as ‘fragmented and pseudo-scientific, dubious in its methodology and ‘open to ideological exploitation’ '.
Physics was regarded as ‘the extreme of pure science’ but its practitioners were thought of as ‘boffins living in Cloud-Cuckoo land’.
Engineers were seen as ‘dull, conservative, conformist and mercenary’.
There was further division within each field; in physics, theoreticians were rated higher than experimentalists; in law, mere academic specialists were not as highly thought of as those who had practised the profession.
Given that most academics — and, we shall assume students — have a strong sense of subject loyalty, we have now to ask: what are the qualities that attract students to their subjects?
Subject choice
Becher (1981) showed that academics have stereotyped ideas about their colleagues working in other fields.
Indeed, most of us hold in our heads a  stereotyped notion of ‘the scientist’ or ‘the artist’.
Yet it is at least arguable that different kinds of people are attracted into different kinds of subjects.
Weinrich-Haste (1984), for example, in a study which examined the political values of undergraduates, found that sociologists, at one extreme, tended towards liberalism and radicalism, while engineers were the most politically and socially conservative of the groups she looked at.
She also found some differences between the male and female students; the women were more egalitarian, public-minded and humane than men, and she suggests that
women are more people-oriented, and place more emphasis on community and interpersonal values, less on institutions and less on hierarchical organisation.
However, she also found that differences between students of different disciplines were greater than differences between the sexes.
The differences Weinrich-Haste found between students of various disciplines were political.
Hudson (1967, 1970), in his work on subject choices made by schoolboys, found personality and IQ differences between arts specialists and science specialists.
After giving pupils a variety of tests, he was able to divide the pupils into two basic types: convergers and divergers.
Convergers tended to be more conformist, more authoritarian in their views, have a high IQ, do badly on open-ended tests (i.e. ones which demanded a certain amount of free expression and imagination) and specialize in the physical sciences.
Divergers were the opposite: liberal, imaginative, slightly rebellious, with low IQ scores, good on open-ended questions and inclining to specialize in the arts.
They were also more tolerant of ambiguity and contradiction.
Hudson suggests that the reason the more conformist pupils tend to choose science is that science allows the convergent schoolboy to ‘specialise in work which enables him to be unambiguously right or wrong’.
Further:
We should recognise, too, that the ability to think in highly conventional terms may be of the greatest importance to a young scientist in his work.
Far from being a fault, it may be essential that he should accept massive bodies of conventional knowledge on trust; not merely assimilating it as a chore, but thoroughly enjoying it.
We can already see a connection here with Bernstein's idea of ‘strong classification’.
We may also see a relationship between a willingness to accept the authoritative knowledge of a subject and a willingness to defer to authority in general.
Certainly Hudson seems to be suggesting this.
Although most of Hudson's tests were conducted on schoolboys, he did conduct some tests on schoolgirls, amongst whom he found a different pattern:
The relation of convergence and divergence to arts/science specialisation amongst girls proved to be far from clearcut.
As with boys, divergent girls  tend to avoid science subjects, but convergent girls are equally likely to go into the arts or physical science.
On the face of it, this finding might seem to invalidate Hudson's whole theory.
However, he argues that it is an anomaly explained by social pressure.
It is considered more conventional for girls to take arts subjects than sciences; as convergers tend to be more conventional in outlook, girls are in something of a double bind — they have to decide whether to follow their inclinations or to make a ‘conventional’ choice.
Many choose the latter.
However, if divergers are more unconventional, we might expect that some divergent girls would choose science, but this is apparently not the case.
Head (1980) has also discussed schoolchildren's subject choices.
He argues that subject choice is related to adolescent psychological development.
He suggests that choosing science is, for many teenagers, a way of delaying the usual adolescent self-doubt and questioning of social values.
Science's masculine image makes it more appealing to boys who are likely to be less emotionally mature.
Science becomes less appealing to boys as they get older (and to girls, it seems, at all stages of adolescence) and become interested in issues as varied as ‘the meaning of life, the existence of God, ideologies, their emerging sexuality, their future career and lifestyle’.
Science as it is presented in schools, he argues, seems irrelevant to most 13–16-year-olds, and if we are to recruit more pupils into scientific careers, then science should be shown to have some relationship to the issues that concern them.
In a later article, he points to research findings which show that pupils who are good at maths tend, on the whole, to be more conformist and obedient than other pupils.
These three studies all suggest (if do not prove) that science specialists are likely to be rather more conformist and conventional in outlook than arts specialists, who tend to be slightly more rebellious and free-thinking.
This may seem surprising if we are used to assuming that girls only choose to study the arts because society ‘expects’ it of them; it also contradicts Snow's (1959) argument that scientists were more politically radical than the literary intelligentsia.
We shall now look a little more closely at two particular subjects — physics and English — and examine their distinctive features.
Physics
Physics has long been held as the most successful of the sciences.
Most of us, asked to name some famous scientists, would think immediately of physicists Newton and Einstein, for example.
Perhaps because of its success, it has been held as a model of scholarly inquiry; social scientists have tried to emulate what they believed were the methods of physics: formulating a testable hypothesis, setting up an experiment which could be replicated, carefully observing and measuring the results, and proving or disproving the hypothesis.
Physics, particularly since the work of Bacon and Descartes, has generally been thought  of as an objective science, based on observable facts, in this way a body of certain knowledge is gradually built up.
The work of T. S. Kuhn (1963), and others since, has of course challenged this belief; although Kuhn talks of science in general terms, most of his examples are taken from physics.
His argument, now familiar to many of us, is that science, far from being linear and progressive, is dominated by ‘paradigms’.
Science begins as a series of competing theories, struggling for acceptance.
Gradually one theory becomes dominant and ousts all the others, and scientific research proceeds within the framework ('paradigm') of that one theory.
Kuhn characterizes this work as ‘puzzle-solving’ and refers to it as ‘normal science’.
Scientists working within a paradigm do not look for major discoveries; they simply try to solve the problems posed by the current paradigm.
Any anomalies tend to be accommodated by the ruling paradigm, rather than challenging it.
When a crisis comes, that is when a paradigm no longer seems valid, a multitude of competing theories may arise, and the scientific community is in a state of disarray.
A ‘revolution’ occurs when the old paradigm is displaced and a new one takes over.
Kuhn argues that science education is characterized by an uncritical teaching of the dominant paradigm within a subject.
Students learn their subject by accepting what is currently regarded as true knowledge:
Except in their occasional introductions, science textbooks do not describe the sorts of problems that the professional may be asked to solve and the variety of techniques available for their solution.
Rather these books exhibit concrete problem-solutions that the profession has come to accept as paradigms, and they then ask the student, either with a pencil and paper, or in the laboratory, to solve for himself problems very closely related both in method and substance to those which the text or accompanying lecture has led him through.
Nothing could be better calculated to produce mental sets or ‘Einstellungen’.
Only in their most elementary courses do other academic fields offer even a partial parallel.
Cooper (1984) has suggested that there is far more disagreement amongst scientists than Kuhn allows for, which may well be true.
However, it also seems to be the case that science is presented in schools as a body of uniform fact with no disagreement.
In an article entitled ‘Political bias in school physics’, Hine (1975) argues that school physics consists of a mass of incorrect and outdated ideas, presented as if they were neutral and objective, and bearing no relation to the outside world.
In particular, pupils do not learn of the social and political implications of scientific discoveries.
Whitty sums up Hine's argument thus:
It suggests not only that prevailing approaches to the subject involve the selection and presentation of knowledge which legitimates the status quo and the omission of that which might challenge it, but also that the very organisation of the curriculum into discrete units militates against the asking of the sorts of questions that might indicate that the world could be different.
It is of course arguable that, as Jeevons puts it, ‘a dogmatic element in teaching physical science [is]an epistemological necessity’.
Almost certainly Kuhn would agree with this: students must learn a rather simplified and approximate version of the current state of scientific knowledge before they can grapple with the more sophisticated ideas and evaluate the claims of competing theories.
However, although this may be useful as a way of training competent scientists, it does not seem to be an ideal method of producing critical, thinking adults.
Feyerabend (1974), in fact, argues that the best scientists have been free-thinkers; for example, Galileo transformed science by his ability to see beyond conventional assumptions of scientific knowledge: his science was an imaginative one, not simply a ‘rational’ one.
Feyerabend himself believes that current scientific teaching produces an ‘unenlightened conformism’.
Halloun and Hestenes (1985b) have found that students embarking on physics degree courses in American universities had quite mistaken notions of the meaning of terms such as‘force’, ‘velocity’ and ‘mass’.
While they were able to recite Newton's laws by rote, they couldn't explain them.
They were, however, prepared to justify their answers by appeals to authority:
Galileo did the [free fall]experiment in Pisa and said they [falling objects]reach a speed limit.
I guess…because Galileo did it, or at least if what I know about him is true, this must be true.
Halloun and Hestenes describe this kind of response in ironic terms as ‘one of the achievements of teaching passive rote knowledge’.
It may seem curious that physics, on the face of it the most challenging and exciting of disciplines, a discipline whose discoveries have transformed the world we live in, should be taught in a way which demands little creativity or imagination.
Capra (1979), himself a physicist, has argued that most physicists, despite the discoveries of twentieth-century physics, are trapped in a pre-twentieth-century way of looking at the world.
Capra believes that quantum mechanics demonstrates that there is no such thing as certainty in the physical world, and that the mechanistic view of the world which dominates scientific thought should be replaced by a view of the physical world as dynamic and interconnected.
Quantum mechanics, although now eighty years old, has shown no signs of transforming the school science curriculum.
I should like to discuss the reasons for this a little later, but first I want to discuss the teaching of English.
English
‘English’ is a recent innovation.
The very idea of the ‘liberal humanities’, as distinct from the sciences, grew up in the nineteenth century.
The belief that men should be trained for a narrow role in life came to be challenged; it was argued that they should have some knowledge of the liberal arts, the ‘finer’ things in life.
Raymond Williams puts it like this: it was argued that man's spiritual health depended on a kind of education which was more than a training for some specialized work, a kind variously described as ‘liberal’, ‘humane’ or ‘cultural’.
The central discipline of this new liberal education was to be English.
English had a dual role; as Baldick (1984) has shown, it was initially used as a sop to women who were demanding higher education; in the very first intake of students of English at Oxford University, the majority of them were women.
It was also seen, however, by certain middle-class educators such as Matthew Arnold as a means of subduing the masses.
Arnold, like many in the middle classes frightened at the thought of working-class revolution, argued for the need to ‘win the sympathy’ of the working classes, for ‘society is in danger of falling into anarchy’(Matthew Arnold, ‘The popular education of France’, quoted in Eagleton 1983: 24).
Arnold genuinely believed that the transmission of a common culture could help unite the classes and promote fellow-feeling.
English would reduce conflict between the social classes, while maintaining the status quo.
Arnold was not the only, nor last, proponent of this view.
Baldick quotes the much later Newbolt Report (1921), which said that a liberal education based on English
would form a new element of national unity, linking together the mental life of all classes.
These do not seem like promising beginnings: English was merely to be an extra accomplishment for young middle-class women — a ‘convenient sort of non-subject to palm off on the ladies’ as Eagleton puts it; and a substitute for a classical education for the discontented working classes.
Yet perhaps it was the easy accessibility of English which made it so popular; it has grown to be the second largest university subject.
At the same time, it has come to be seen — particularly by its own practitioners — as a serious subject.
This is largely the consequence of the efforts of the Cambridge literary critic, F. R. Leavis, who provided English with a raison d ‘être .
The influence of Leavis is such that it has been claimed that:
English students in England today are ‘Leavisites’ whether they know it or not.
Leavis believed that English was concerned with central moral issues and the study of literature could provide some opposition to the dehumanizing effects of modern industrial society.
The study of literature could help one to become a more sensitive, more moral person.
As one of Leavis's disciples, L. C. Knights, has put it:
It is impossible to indicate all the humanly important matters that literature gives us knowledge of….
It is through literature that we grow into a particular kind of awareness of ourselves and — an inseparable  corollary — of our manifold relations with each other and all that is not self, without which there is really not much ‘self’ to talk about.
Studying literature, then, is a serious business; it is concerned with close examination of those authors who can bring us to a deeper (and more moral) understanding of humanity.
Leavis himself was partisan in the extreme when it came to deciding which writers could be awarded the accolade of ‘moral seriousness’.
The ‘great tradition’ consisted of only five writers: Austen, Eliot, James, Conrad and Lawrence.
Many other major writers — Shelley, Defoe, Sterne, Fielding, for example— were derided as ‘trivial’ or ‘not serious’.
This rather authoritarian form of elitism was usually defended by an appeal to the ‘sensitive’ or ‘discriminating’reader; anyone who read closely and intelligently enough would be bound to agree with Leavis's judgement.
Naturally enough, this lays Leavis open to the charge of ‘unfalsifiability’(as Popper would put it); his unwillingness to provide a set of standards by which to judge literature meant that his own critical judgements were always irrefutable.
Leavis is not, of course, the only influence on the study of English today.
As Bowen (1985) has pointed out, the contribution of I. A. Richards is often ignored, yet it is his prescription for the ‘close reading’ of texts which is the basis of most school and university teaching of English today.
However, it is because Leavis provided a purpose for English that most people regard him as the central figure.
After Leavis, students and teachers of English need no longer feel that their activities were trivial: on the contrary, theirs was the only morally serious university subject.
Yet, since the Second World War, English literary criticism (if not English teaching) has slowly changed.
Perhaps English was seen to have failed in its mission; perhaps moral seriousness was not enough.
It was the scientists, not the literary intellectuals, as C. P. Snow reminded us, who had ‘the future in their bones’.
It is here, of course, that we see an essential paradox at the heart of the arts/science divide.
Science, as we know, has tremendous potential to change the way we live; yet it professes not to concern itself with moral issues, insisting upon its own objectivity.
The humanities, on the other hand, regard a concern with moral issues as central to their meaning; philosophers, historians, literary critics, consistently make explicit their interest in morality-while the study of philosophy, history or English appears to have had little impact on the lives of the mass of people.
As Bowen has said:
It is clear that Marxist literary critics…feel acutely their impotence as individuals to change the world.
It is worth pointing out that this distinction is also a male/female one; whereas most important political actions that have really affected people's lives have been taken by men, it is women, historically excluded from decision-making, who have been concerned with the subjective and the personal.
Perhaps it is this sense of impotence — and the sense that English's image of  ‘effeminacy’ or ‘femininity’makes it appear unimportant-that has led postwar literary theoretical movements to espouse ideals of ‘objectivity’and ‘scientificity’.
In contrast to Leavis's haphazard approach of determining which writers were important, and which were not, literary theory was going to be rigorously objective.
Foremost among the new movements was structuralism: a literary theory which believed in the necessity of examining the ‘deep structures’ of a literary work.
Structuralists did not believe in examining the text in relation to society — although they did believe in examining the relationships within texts and between texts — nor in examining it as a work with moral significance; the aim was simply to lay bare the universal structures which were hidden within it.
Marxists too have sought credibility for their theory through claims to a scientific objectivity.
Eagleton could not put it more simply:
Marxism is a scientific theory of human societies and the practice of transforming them.
The most recent theoretical movements in literary criticism have, however, rejected the notions of objectivity and scientificity.
Deconstructionism has pointed to the inherent flaws in structuralism — that, for example, binary oppositions are not absolute, but are dependent on their social meaning — and has celebrated the idea of ‘subjectivity’.
Deconstructionists believe that it is impossible to reach at the ‘truth’ of a text, because every interpretation of a work is itself open to interpretation — endlessly.
Similarly feminism has stressed the importance of subjectivity, arguing that in the past men's experience has been presented as the objective truth.
Writers such as Moers (1977) and Showalter (1978) have challenged the idea of the ‘canon’, the Leavisite notion of a body of greater writers who have universal value, by discussing the work of many lesser-known female writers, and staking a claim for their consideration as ‘great’ writers.
That challenges have been made to the liberal humanist tradition by Marxists, structuralists, deconstructionists, feminists and others is not, however, to say that these challenges are widely accepted or even taught.
The current consensus in English is that there is no consensus: confusion reigns.
A recent article on teaching English in higher education begins:
By now everyone has heard that there is a ‘crisis’ in English.
One group unlikely to be aware of a ‘crisis’ are school pupils.
In a fascinating study, St John Brooks (1983) writes of English departments in two secondary schools; one in particular, she notes, is located in the Leavisite tradition of English studies.
The teachers in the two departments are possessed of a missionary zeal to improve the quality of their pupils' lives; they do not want an English education to be useful or vocational, but to enable the pupils to think critically about themselves, about life, and about society.
As one memorably puts it:
I am not worried they'll be sold a duff car.
I am worried that they'll be sold a duff life.
An interesting question arising from this study is whether English continues to be regarded as a subject with a mission in higher education; and whether the view of academics differs from that of students.
Gender, subject and society
So far we have suggested that physics and English are subjects with very different traditions and qualities.
In this section I want to look more generally at the ways in which arts and science are associated with ideas about gender and at the social implications of the differences between arts and science.
It is by now almost a cliché to say that science is associated with masculinity and the arts with femininity.
Yet a closer look reveals that the picture is more complicated.
We have already looked at Liam Hudson's early work on personality and subject choice.
That early work tended to take the terms ‘arts’ and ‘science’as givens, rather than as constructs.
However, in a later book,The Cult of the Fact (1972), Hudson looks much more closely at the gendered nature of the arts and the sciences.
He had already found that school pupils and students associated science with masculinity and arts with femininity (or effeminacy):
Artist, poet and novelist are all seen in my studies as warm and exciting, but as of little worth.
Mathematician, physicist and engineer are all seen as extremely valuable, but also as dull and cold.
It is clear too, that the arts are associated with sexual pleasure, the sciences with sexual restraint….
Yet the scientist is seen as masculine, the arts specialist as slightly feminine.
These stereotypes have a much wider set of connotations.
‘Science’, ‘masculinity’, ‘hardness’, ‘difficulty’ and ‘value’are all apparently associated ideas, while ‘arts’, ‘effeminacy’, ‘softness’, ‘easiness’and ‘lack of worth’are also related concepts.
Hudson points to the fact that, not only are these terms applied by pupils to the arts and sciences, but also they are recognized to a large degree by those, like himself, working within psychology.
In psychology, higher status is accorded to the ‘hard’ tradition within the discipline, the tradition which shows ‘a preoccupation with behaviour: with the organism — its physical, corporeal presence, and what it can be seen to do’.
The ‘soft’ tradition is, apparently, concerned to ‘treat people as people, and [is]concerned less with law-making and more with speculative exploration’.
It is not difficult to see the connection between the former tradition and the stereotyped model of physical science — a model which, Hudson says, ‘physical scientists themselves have long abandoned’.
Hudson uses the instrumental/expressive distinction made by Talcott Parsons to characterize the two approaches:
The instrumental approach is one essentially concerned with the impersonal control, the subjugation, of the environment; the expressive with relationships between one person and another.
Hudson's schoolboys saw science as masculine and the arts as feminine.
However, by this, Hudson does not mean that they see the arts as being practised by women; rather, they see them as being practised by ‘effeminate’ men.
This no doubt explains one of Hudson's tests on the schoolboys, which asked them to write a description of a scientist's wife, and a novelist's wife, not a novelist's husband .
In other words, the practice of discovering knowledge, of creating works of art, in short, of making the world we live in, is seen to be conducted entirely by men: masculine men or feminine men — but not women.
This finding is borne out by a study by Weinrich-Haste (1986) which found that, while some subjects were rated by schoolchildren and undergraduates as definitely masculine, and some as neutral, none was rated as definitely feminine: a finding which suggests that the arts/science divide is not a symmetrical feminine/masculine divide, but one which is distinctly asymmetrical.
That this distinction between ‘masculine’ men and ‘feminine’men even exists is interesting.
We are used to thinking of ‘femininity’ as being something to do with women, when in fact it also represents a set of values or behaviour which are generally regarded with disapproval: to call a man ‘effeminate’is generally to insult him (rather more, perhaps, than it is to call a woman ‘masculine’).
To what extent is it true that the sciences and the arts (physics and English in particular) represent these different values?
Keller argues that the equation of science with objectivity is in itself redolent of particular values, saying that:
Objectivity is itself an ideal which has a long history of identification with the masculine.
The argument of many feminists is that the myth of the objectivity of the physical sciences has been a way of legitimizing the abuse of knowledge within a patriarchal and capitalist framework.
Merchant (1982), for example, believes that from the mid-seventeenth century onwards, the scientific view of Nature began to change; instead of seeing Nature as an organic and harmonious entity, it began to be seen as external and chaotic; the role of science was to exploit it.
Nature was likened to the feminine; science to the masculine.
As Brown and Jordonova (1982) put it:
men possessed power through their identification with scientific knowledge.
Simultaneously, women were conceptualised as the passive recipients of scientific manipulation.
The distinction here between two different views of nature — one, harmonious, one exploitative — is similar to the instrumental/expressive distinction used by Hudson.
Other feminist writers, such as Overfield (1981), Wallsgrove (1980) and Fee (1983) have suggested that dichotomies such as nature/culture, subject/object, emotional/rational are harmful because they imply the superiority of culture over nature, the objective over the subjective, and the rational over the emotional.
These dichotomies can be seen as a way of legitimizing both male superiority and the abuse of science.
Rose (1982), for example, believes that the practice of science cannot be removed from its social context: a context both of male dominance and the drive for profit.
The depraved uses to which science is often put are justified by the claim that science is ‘objective’.
She argues that a feminist science, which restored the personal and the subjective to the practice of knowledge, would be a more human science.
It is the argument of many feminists, then, that the high status accorded to science in our culture is dependent on its association with masculinity, and associated values such as objectivity and impersonality.
If we accept that science is objective, then it is more difficult to challenge its practice in modern society; the scientist can always argue that his work is morally neutral.
However, such a position is untenable; as Rose and Rose have argued, science today is so ‘closely and directly enmeshed in the machinery of state and government’, that it is impossible to disentangle the practice of science from its context in modern industrial capitalism.
This helps us to see more clearly the role of science in schools; to challenge the objectivity of science in the school curriculum would be to initiate searching questions about the role of scientists in today's society.
The full implications of quantum mechanics, if discussed in classrooms, might be highly threatening to traditional methods of teaching physics.
If physical science has such a strong association with masculinity, then the position of the arts, English in particular, is surely more ambivalent.
We have already seen that Weinrich-Haste (1986) found that no academic subject was rated by students as ‘positively feminine’.
Yet we also know that English is associated with those qualities generally regarded as ‘feminine’(such as the stress on subjectivity and emotional response) and that English has, since its inception, been studied mainly by women.
One of the reasons why English is, perhaps, not a straightforwardly ‘feminine’ subject is that most of its teachers in higher education are men, and most of the authors and critics studied are also men.
Another is that a degree of tension exists in English between the ideals of subjectivity and objectivity.
We have seen that since the Second World War, there have been attempts by structuralists and Marxists to make English more ‘objective’: attempts which, I would suggest, have not been particularly successful in penetrating the teaching of English in higher education.
However, even in the liberal humanist tradition of Leavis and Richards, there is a striking paradox.
This is that students are expected to respond in a subjective and emotional way to texts; yet they must also accept the ‘objective’ judgement of the canon.
The subjectivity is limited by the conventions of the discipline; in Bowen's words, I. A. Richards enjoined students of English to ‘emotionality and detachment, expression and mimesis, individuality and objectivity’.
Students of English, then, may be treading a tightrope between too much personal response, and too little.
Challenging the authority of the canon is immensely difficult; if a writer is great, then s/he will be in the canon; if a writer is not in the canon, then s/he can't be any good, and to try to put him/her there would be an act of mindless obstinacy.
As Kolodny (1981) has said:
The fact of canonization puts any work beyond questions of establishing its merit and, instead, invites students to offer only increasingly more ingenious readings and interpretations, the purpose of which is to validate the greatness already imputed by the canonization.
What is frustrating about this is that the ‘canon’ apparently consists of works of universal and immutable value; anyone who suggests adapting it to include, say, more female writers, is open to accusations of being ‘political’.
The liberal humanist tradition is unwilling to admit that its own choices are political; that Leavis's intense dislike, for example, of Shelley, was based as much upon political considerations as aesthetic ones.
English, then, is ambivalent.
It allows for subjectivity and freedom of opinion within fairly strict guidelines.
Women who study the subject because they believe it to be solely about intuitive response may feel caught in this paradox.
Without precipitating the arguments of the rest of the book, I should like to suggest that attempts to make English more scientific, more objective, more masculine, are unlikely to succeed.
This is because physical science can be superior as a method of investigation and scholarship only if it has something to be superior to .
Religion lost its hold on the social imagination when it was seen to embody qualities opposed to science: irrationality and superstition.
The arts now hold the position once held by religion; as long as science continues to be highly valued, then the arts will inevitably be devalued.
Summary
This chapter has suggested that our perceptions of the arts and sciences are shaped by notions of femininity and masculinity.
These perceptions, far from being simple or accidental, are intimately related to issues of authority and control and the need to concentrate power in the hands of certain groups of people.
Women, it has been suggested, have been historically excluded from the making of knowledge, in particular science, and this is related (not necessarily causally) to women's powerlessness.
Even in the ‘feminine’ arts, however, women have been subject to more subtle pressures: arts, it is believed, are the domain of ‘feminine’men, not women, and there have been attempts in recent years to render the arts more ‘masculine’.
Further, it was suggested that disciplines embody certain values and that acceptance of these values may be necessary to achieve success in a discipline.
However, it has also been argued, more optimistically, that recent developments in the philosophy of science and in science itself (for example, quantum physics), and in English Literature allow for a greater freedom and flexibility, and indeed, humanity, in the education of students.
Whereas it seems unlikely that these concerns have penetrated school syllabuses, it is possible, given the much greater autonomy of institutions of higher education, that they have had a greater influence on higher education syllabuses.
In the account of the research project which follows, I examine some of these issues.
I look at how physics is constructed by staff and students; whether they view these disciplines in terms of the old paradigm of science as certain, objective and value-free, or whether they view them in terms of the new paradigm of uncertainty, breadth and interconnectedness.
Similarly I look at English and ask whether staff and students locate their discipline within the Leavisite paradigm or whether they are aware of the developments of the past thirty years, such as structuralism and post-structuralism.
We are also interested in whether the disciplines of physical science and communications, both polytechnic courses, are challenging the authority of the older disciplines and moving them in new directions.
A question related to that of perceptions of science and arts is the extent to which relationships in departments are formalized.
How are students taught?
Do students learn passively, by taking notes in a 50-minute lecture, or do they have more control over their own learning?
Is the relationship between staff and students hierarchical or informal?
We are interested in these questions, of course, because we are also interested in gender.
We wish to investigate the experience of being a female, or a male, student in higher education, and whether the experience of studying science is different from studying arts.
Is the experience of higher education more or less rewarding, for example, for a female physics student than for a female English student?
Is the appeal of physics the same for women as it is for men?
The chapters that follow will try to answer these questions, and address the central issue of whether women are, indeed, marginalized in higher education: whether they are, in Helen Hacker's words, a ‘minority group’.
4
Constructing Science
Introduction
This chapter will look at the way in which science is viewed and experienced by those who teach and study it.
It begins by looking at the ideas of lecturers, but is primarily concerned with the meanings that ‘physics’ or ‘physical science’have for students, and the ways in which those meanings are sometimes at odds with the experience of studying those subjects.
The particular emphasis in this chapter will be the contrast, both implicit and explicit, that is made between the activity of studying science and the activity of studying the ‘humanities’.
We discover that the contrast is based upon a particular set of values which science is believed to embody, and which is apparently lacking in the humanities.
I wish to suggest, also, that in describing physics, for example, as a particular kind of subject, students are also saying something about themselves, as people: the qualities which attract them to a particular subject are also, to some extent, qualities which are central to their own self-image.
This theme will be developed a little further in Chapter 6.
I also want to argue in this chapter, however, that there is more than one view of physics (in particular) and science (in general ), and that there are some within the discipline who do not accept the dominant perspective of the subject, but put forward powerful alternative views.
It is, therefore, with two contrasting views of the discipline that I wish to begin.
The viewpoint of staff
This section will look at the way in which physics is constructed as a discipline by briefly contrasting the views of two university lecturers, one at B university, and one at A university.
The attitudes embodied by these two men were described in Chapter 3 as ‘instrumental’ and ‘expressive’; the instrumental  attitude could be said to regard physics as a useful subject, both for individuals and for society, while the more expressive, or liberal, attitude, regards the discipline as valuable for its own sake.
Physics is interesting in having connotations of both: as a physical science, its discoveries (and the skills it gives to its graduates) have obvious uses for industry; while its status as a ‘pure’ rather than an ‘applied’science gives it the appearance of being removed from the uses to which it may be put.
First, we shall look at the view of Dr L,(at the time of interview, the head of department at B), who saw physics as a discipline essentially concerned with fundamental rules and laws:
Students come here primarily to get a degree, but also they should get an understanding of the basic laws of the universe.
That's the ideal thing.
We don't do any astronomy in this department, but we teach an elementary astronomy course, and astronomy of course now is just the physics of outer space; astronomy has stopped being a separate subject.
It's a branch of physics now basically.
Dr L emphasized several times that the ‘laws’ of physics were absolute, and applied everywhere, all the time.
His view of science was reductive; just as astronomy is a part of physics, rather than a separate subject, so is chemistry:
All of chemistry now basically is becoming explicable in terms of quantum theory…we are getting, have been getting in the past 20 years, into the age where a sizeable amount of basic chemistry can now be properly understood from basic quantum theory.
Once you know the thing consists of electrons and atoms, you can more or less calculate what structure it has, what properties the molecule will have.
That's still got an awful long way to go.
The language used by L implies that it is wholly desirable that one discipline should ultimately be explicable in terms of another.
He also suggests that this reductionism should be an end goal of physics; scientific discovery is not about an expansion or a reaching out, but a narrowing in.
Not only are astronomy and chemistry reducible to physics; but also biology is — or would be if physicists put any effort into making it so:
We haven't gone, in physics, seriously into trying to understand the biological aspects, but then you see biology is becoming dominated in the last ten years by the understanding of basic biochemistry of cells.
The biochemistry of cells is basically just the chemistry of the larger molecules that the physicists can't yet deal with through quantum theory calculations.
Give it another fifty years or so, and one should then be able to understand much more the system.
This view of physics sees it as a body of knowledge, or a system, which can explain all other bodies of knowledge.
Chemistry is a part of physics, biology is a  part of chemistry.
Chemists often have to take things ‘on trust’ because, it is implied, the physicists are working on the harder, more fundamental problems.
It is not surprising that Dr L regarded the humanities with some contempt, arguing that students go to sign on for a medieval history course in the arts faculty and
display quite appalling ignorance of other parts of the subject — it doesn't seem to matter too much to the arts faculty or the historians, that you concentrate on something here and know nothing about important things elsewhere.
In the sciences things are a bit different.
In order to illustrate that a reductionist view of physics is not necessarily the only one available, it is necessary to juxtapose the above quote, with the following, from Dr G, a senior lecturer at Department A:
The reason I went into physics and what I try to inculcate is that the ideas themselves are interesting and that seems to me to be the main justification for it, so that when people try and justify scientific research by saying it's good for the economy, the country and so on, or who knows what applications are going to come of it, I'm inclined to sit rather quietly when that's said because I'm not convinced that some of the research that is done nowadays can have any practical application at all in that direct sense.
In one sense, Dr G's claims for physics are much less grand than Dr L's; at the same time, his view of physics is a far broader one:
I try to justify it in terms of training the intellect to think in an abstract and critical way, so I regard it as a general education.
I have on occasion told students that they're doing an arts subject, and tried to encourage them to think in those terms, because if they're constantly thinking of the job at the end of it, then I don't think they're getting the most out of it that they can do….
However, it sometimes depresses me, and again I'm expressing a very personal view I guess, that having tried to teach the students the subject as about ideas, they then insist on learning the subject as things to be learnt and then going off and applying their knowledge to new and more expensive ways of killing people or stopping other people killing us.
So that's rather depressing actually, that a lot of students will go into RADAR and various other sorts of defence things which don't seem to me to be increasing the sum of human happiness.
This rather sad quote illustrates very sharply a point made in the previous chapter, which is that a field of learning such as physics, which has great power to change our lives, is usually divorced from a consideration of moral issues.
This is Dr G's dilemma: that although he tries to inculcate students with a sense of the beauty and joy of the subject, and to stimulate their minds, they often refuse to think, or to be critical and regard physics in an entirely instrumental  way, as a degree to be gained, which will enable them to do something ‘useful’, namely defence research.
Dr G's emphasis on the creative potential of physics leads him to see it as an ‘arts subject’; Dr L, on the other hand, sees the differences between the sciences and the arts as ‘enormous’.
Dr G's belief that physics should be about learning to think in an ‘abstract and critical way’ is reflected in his views on teaching; it is, for example, important to him that students should have some control over their own learning.
Talking of an essay that students are expected to write as part of their course, he says
The student chooses their own subject; most of these subjects are right on the fringes of the course, or overlap several different courses, and what surprised me when I sent round a questionnaire was how much the students said they enjoyed essay-writing.
And I'm sure it's because they're in charge of what they're learning — that they've chosen something interesting to them and are following it up.
Essay-writing is an exception, however; generally physics students, spending about 25 hours a week in lectures, tutorials and labs, have much less time than humanities students to work on their own initiative.
Physical science
The reason for the existence of a physical science course in the polytechnic is pragmatic, rather than educational.
The polytechnic was originally formed from three colleges, two of which ran applied physics degree courses.
When the colleges merged, it would obviously have been ludicrous to run two applied physics courses, and therefore the staff on one of the courses were kept on to teach a physical science course which was
supposed to be an inter-disciplinary mixture of physics and chemistry, in other words, not a bit of physics and a bit of chemistry that you did in isolation, but to be integrated.
The first physical science course which ran was ‘not very integrated’; staff feel that since the course was revised in the early 1980s, it has become more integrated.
The aim, according to Dr H, is to provide students with a broader degree which will be more useful in industry.
The Swann Report (1968) had argued that industry needed ‘85% generalists and 15% specialists’
and we are hopefully turning out some of those generalists, people who can look at things not just from the physics angle, or from the chemistry angle, but can cope with things from both.
The advantage of a physical science degree over a conventional physics or chemistry degree is that 
there's a wider range of jobs available…
I think they go for more sorts of jobs, it's difficult to list them, but a lot are going into computing and electronics today, but we have people — we had one student who's gone into accountancy, Royal Navy, weapons research, gas board, chemical side as opposed to physical side, video discs, hospital physics, where I would have thought the chemical aspects would be of use to them as well as the physics.
The vocational aspects of the course are clearly the most important consideration when it comes to recruiting new students.
Changes in the course occur because of the need to attract a great number of students; recently there has been a move to introduce a greater element of electronics in the course because
The more you can make your course look like another branch of electrical engineering, the better your chances are.
The staff believe that the course is unpopular because physical science is rarely taught in schools; there is no longer, for example , a physical science A level.
Teachers and careers advisers tend to push students towards single honours physics or chemistry degrees, or, more usually, engineering.
The course avoids being two separate disciplines running alongside each other through making energy and matter the core themes of the course: energy and matter are then examined from physical and chemical aspects; as Dr H puts it, energy and matter are ‘pegs to hang the course on’.
Because ‘energy and matter are fundamental both to physics and chemistry’, it can be argued that physics and chemistry are not completely different subjects, but part of one body of knowledge.
The essential difference, therefore, between this course and more conventional university courses is that it is very explicitly geared to the needs of industry, and students spend one year on industrial placement.
We might also expect that, unlike university students, the polytechnic students are given an increased awareness of the social nature of science, as the CNAA has made a ‘science and society’ type module compulsory on science courses.
However, on the physical science course, this module took the form of looking at the problems students might face as scientific managers in industry: issues like risk management, the problems of pollution, dealing with pressure groups and preparing public reports.
The discussion of social problems related to science is somewhat limited; the dominant perspective is that of the company which wishes to protect its interests.
It seems unlikely, therefore, that the physical science course provides any great challenge to the orthodoxy of science teaching in higher education.
Subject choice and higher education
Before we look at students' construction of science, it is important to stress that students' decision to study science was not merely a consequence of their preferring it to other subjects, or being good at it, but the result of schooling and  family influences.
Obviously personal inclination is very important, but personal inclination can often arise from having been taught by an exceptional teacher, or having a scientist parent who helps with homework.
As we are particularly interested in the influences on women who choose science, we shall begin by looking at the women's experiences of single-sex education.
It has often been argued that girls in single-sex schools are likely to have higher educational achievements than girls in mixed schools, and in particular that they are more likely to do well in scientific subjects (e.g. Department of Education and Science 1980; Steedman 1980).
More female science students (sixteen of the twenty-four) had attended single-sex schools than any other group in the sample; it may be that their single-sex schooling had been a major influence in their decision to study science at degree level.
Certainly some of the female science students felt that they had benefited from a single-sex education.
For example, Felicity, who had attended an independent girls' school where all the teaching staff were women, said:
There was never any ‘girls don't do science’ and I'm glad I didn't have that sort of pressure on me, because I think it's a load of bosh, basically
Although this is phrased negatively, it was clear from the interview that the school had been very influential in shaping her enthusiasm for physics.
Another student said of her boarding school:
I don't really agree with boarding schools.
I think in some ways it's better, because girls are meant to get on better in the sciences in girls' schools; they're meant to be pushed backwards a bit in boys' schools.
The term ‘boys’ schools' rather than‘mixed schools’is revealing; however, this is still hardly a ringing endorsement of single-sex schools.
Part of the problem is that as most women who had attended single-sex schools had not known anything else, their comments will focus on the school itself rather than the fact of its being single-sex.
One physics student who had attended a convent school was full of praise for the school:
I think the teachers did influence me a lot in their own enthusiasm for the subject; it seemed to rub off on me, you know; whenever they taught me something, a new concept or something, I'd come away feeling enlightened by it, and wanting to know more, just this curiosity for more knowledge.
But that is true of a lot of subjects I did at O level.
Another student, who had attended a girls' grammar, felt that there were important differences between single-sex schools and mixed schools.
Explaining why she thought there were so few women in science, she said:
I think it's school's fault and/or parents.
I think it goes back to when you're this big.
I think that's why so many people from our school went into scientific things — they pushed you that way, but I know from my friends  that the secondary school where a lot of my friends went to, the girls were encouraged to do typing, hairdressing, home-economics, all the rest of it.
I really think that schools are at fault.
That's why I'm glad that WISE thing, I mean it's about time they bloody realized — I'm convinced that once a woman gets into science she's just as good as if not better than, any man.
This discourse of ‘as good as a man’ was to recur frequently in interviews with the women; certainly there were some schools which had taught their pupils to think in those terms.
However, there was also severe criticism of single-sex schools from some female science students.
Many, although appreciative of the education they received, felt that their schools were too strict in imposing petty regulations — a comment rarely made by students from mixed or comprehensive schools.
In addition, two female science students who had attended girls' grammar schools felt that they had been disadvantaged:
If I'd done English, geography and history, I might have done a lot better, but they just didn't seem to bother about you if you were doing science — perhaps it was an old-fashioned school.
At the male grammar school in town, they had to do O-level physics, but we didn't have to do it.
I think they were encouraged more.
[There was discrimination]not directly, but in subtle ways, like when you're choosing your options, no matter what you're doing there's always a group where you can do cookery or needlework, but if you're doing physics you have to put that down, and that means that you can't do something else that you might want to do, like history or something; you've got to make a positive choice to do science whereas it's quite easy to drift into doing history and things like that.
In both these cases, science departments were under-funded and under-staffed, and there was therefore more pressure on girls to do arts subjects, not science subjects.
The same would not be true of independent schools, which at least are well resourced.
For most students, the decision to follow an arts path or a sciences path is made at the age of 16, when choosing A levels; for some students, it is made earlier, at 14, or, for a very few students, those who have kept their options open, later, after A level.
For some science students, the decision was a straightforward one, a matter of following ability and inclination.
For others, it was a hard choice to make, and different factors had to be taken into account.
Clearly schools played an important, and direct, part in the actual choice of subject, as well as providing the appropriate educational stimulation.
Some students, when making a choice, had been strongly aware of peer-group pressure and pressure from teachers who said that a science qualification led to jobs:
I was very all-round at school.
I got virtually equal marks across arts and sciences for O levels, so making a choice at A level was difficult, but I felt  a bit swayed by the fact that people said it's best to do science subjects as far as jobs and university places go; it's difficult to get on to arts courses, but it's easier to get on to science courses…that's really why I chose science, ultimately.
! found the two [arts and sciences]equally interesting, so the career edged it.
I did enjoy physics, but I found geography a lot easier, and I went and spoke to my careers worker at school.
She said to me, ‘there aren't many jobs for geographers, you should go into something more science-y’, so I just drifted into it basically.
Thus for many students, choosing science was not a simple matter of inclination or ability: many felt happy and at ease with both areas.
However, schools did not like students to feel at home in arts and science: a rigid division between the two prevailed:
I liked English.
At A level, I toyed with the idea of doing physics, maths and English, and if I was just doing it for pure enjoyment I would have done it at that stage.
But people said to me, ‘Well, the English won't be a lot of good to you if you do a science degree and you'll find it difficult to split your time between the arts and the sciences’.
That, at least, is a clear statement of the belief that the arts and sciences were incompatible; for one thing, the arts and the sciences are considered so different that it is difficult to concentrate one's energies on both; for another, English is not useful — and, therefore, by implication, worthless — to someone studying science.
Almost all of the science students in the sample had taken A levels in physics, maths and chemistry or physics, maths and further maths; one had A levels in physics, maths and English, while two had A levels in geography, and some physical science students had biology rather than maths A level: these, however, formed a very small minority of the whole.
There was also one student who had taken the baccalaureate — a combination of ten subjects, arts and science; she had considered changing to English in her first term at university.
For many students, the decision to study science came naturally because of family interests.
A number had come from scientific backgrounds, fathers (usually) were nuclear physicists, engineers, doctors or maths lecturers, and often provided an impetus to study science through discussion of it at home or through help with homework.
One first-year student, whose father was a nuclear physicist, referred constantly to him during her interview, even on one occasion prefacing an answer with ‘I know what my father would say…’.
Father had, apparently, told her she was ‘too stupid’ to take a degree in maths, told her she couldn't do a joint degree in physics and German because he couldn't afford to pay for the year out, and had influenced her to apply for A university because that was where he had taken his degree.
At home, she would argue with him about physics:
I don't talk to my father about physics; it's always a mistake because he gets cross when I say silly things, but the rest of the family get cross because they can't understand.
Whatever he tells me seems to go in one ear and out the other.
(Of course, Natalie wasn't silly; she was, in fact, a year younger than the rest of the first-year students, having kept a year ahead at school.)
Other women mentioned their fathers as direct influences; for example:
If I'd followed my own path, I'd probably have done something like that [arts].
But my dad was always saying, ‘You're going to do sciences’.
So that's why I ended up doing science and I've got this far so I can't be bad at it.
Another said that her father had made her more aware of science,
in normal everyday things which I wouldn't otherwise have been aware of, and he's been someone to have arguments with about science, and it's nice to have someone who understands what you're going on about.
Some fathers seemed to have invested hopes in their daughters of the kind we normally expect to be invested in sons:
My father's sort of said to me that if I want a job afterwards, and if I want a decent job and a job with a future, it's got to be on the engineering side of the works.
This kind of pressure had not been confined to the women; some of the men had been encouraged by their fathers to take science, too.
The women, however, were more aware of being pushed, of being expected to be unusual.
Men were more likely to regard it as natural that they should take science.
Although many students were pushed, or encouraged, in the direction of science by schools or family, the physics students generally felt that physics had special qualities that appealed to them.
Only one of the physics students, had, for example, considered taking a degree in chemistry.
Several had considered maths or engineering, or both; maths was generally dismissed as ‘too theoretical’, while engineering was dismissed as ‘too applied’: physics was held to be the perfect happy medium — applied enough to be ‘relevant’(a favourite adjective amongst both the science and the arts students), but theoretical enough to be stimulating and demanding.
Engineers, it was often said, only carried out ideas that other people had thought of first.
Through the use of these negatives  (engineering and maths), we can see students' construction of an identity as ‘physicist’: a person who is not too remote from reality, but who is at the same time capable of independent and abstract thought — a point we shall return to in Chapter 6.
Physics, I was often told, was a ‘general degree’, one which opened up a range of possibilities; it was also, many students said, ‘one of the best degrees you can get’.
In addition, it was held by some to combine the advantages of generality (a perceived feature of humanities degrees) with the advantages of usefulness (a perceived feature of science degrees).
In the next section, we shall look in more detail at what students mean by ‘physics’.
Constructing ‘physics'
Physics students made sense of their discipline through a series of dichotomies which contrasted the values embodied by physics with the values (i.e. weaknesses) of other disciplines.
Chief amongst these were the following:
Physics
fundamental
certain
progressive
infinite
difficult
hard
concerned with understanding
relevant
useful
‘Other’
tangential
uncertain
static
finite
easy
soft
concerned with rote learning
irrelevant
useless
This list contains all the dichotomies, either explicit or implicit, in comments the physics students made to me about their discipline.
Not all of these dichotomies were posed in terms of a physics/humanities divide.
Some, for example understanding/learning and fundamental/tangential, were posed in terms of a physics/chemistry divide.
Others, particularly hard/soft, have strong masculine/feminine connotations.
Some (e.g. relevant/irrelevant) can be discussed only in terms of the implied criticism of the humanities, and are part of a larger arts/science contrast, and these will be dealt with in a later section.
However, there are certain qualities which are seen to be peculiar to physics and these are crucial to our understanding of the construction of physics as a discipline.
The first quality is the discipline's fundamentality :
I think it's the big mystery, isn't it, the unknown, things like this, trying to understand fundamental concepts of nature, it's quite exciting stuff.
I think of physics as being fundamental.
The things we're doing at the moment are getting more and more fundamental….
I don't necessarily think that all these particle physicists are solving the world's problems but it's fundamental in the way the world works.
The contrast with chemistry came up frequently, and there was often more than a hint of reductionism in the comparison:
The physics department would tell you that chemistry's only a bit of physics anyway.
Chemistry was regarded as a subject which was not fundamental; the issues it examines are not fundamental to the universe in the way that the issues of physics are; in this the views of the students can be seen to coincide with the views of Dr L, who said that ‘all of chemistry is becoming explicable in terms of quantum theory’.
Physics was also regarded as a subject which could be ‘understood’; chemistry — and subjects like French, history and so on— could only be learnt :
I hate subjects where you just have to fill your head with facts.
What's the point of teaching something if you can go and look it up in a book?
I just thought of it as learning what other people have already thought of a subject…physics seemed so much more dynamic somehow.
I think you have to know a lot [in chemistry], whereas with physics, what you hope to do is get general laws and principles that are applicable widely.
With chemistry, things like organic chemistry, where you had to know every reaction, you couldn't work it out, you had to know everything that was going to happen — there wasn't a lot of understanding involved, it was mainly slogging.
Physics is not only a more important and a more fundamental subject, but also, it seems, a more certain subject.
One student, who had transferred to physics from medicine, explained the difference between chemistry and physics:
RACHEL: It [chemistry]wasn't a very positive subject.
You always had a few explanations for why something did something and you could never pick out which — why it did it…you could explain it in several ways, and it just wasn't positive enough for me.
KIM: Is physics more definite?
RACHEL: Yes, and more definite than medicine as well.
Medicine isn't definite at all; I just call it a positive subject — you always get an answer.
The apparent certainty of physics creates the potential for knowing about everything :
The implications of it affect the whole world, it's everything, everything you do, and demonstrates how things work and why they work.
This all-encompassing quality reveals a strong desire amongst students to understand and manipulate their environment.
It is a Baconian view, rather than an Einsteinian view; students have a strong faith in the capacity of physics to provide explanations of the way the world works.
It is seen as revealing certain truths about the universe:
I think it's the diversity really, the number of things you can do in it [that appeals].
The classical thing is if somebody comes up to you and asks what a physicist does, that's the hardest question to answer.
Because really, you're investigating what actually happens in life.
I think that's the reason you enjoy it, because you can explain most things, most things you don't normally think of.
The most surprising thing is if somebody turns round and asks you, like they did last year, ‘Why is the sky blue?’ and a thing a lot of people don't even think of, you end up being able to explain — I think that's the appeal of it.
This curiosity, this quest for knowledge, which typified the attitude of many physics students, was for the never-ending mysteries of the universe:
It's an open-ended subject.
If you study a lot of subjects, they come to an end, there's only so much you can learn about them.
But with physics, it can go on forever, virtually.
It's happening now , it's always progressing and it's always going on and you're never going to reach an end point, you're never going to reach a final point, whereas with something like history, I find it's interesting, but you're always going over and analysing what's happened, it's that much more backward looking, whereas science applied has got more constructive.
Physics was regarded as an infinite subject; it was the embodiment of a search for the ‘truths’ of the universe, which although progressive — i.e. we are always finding out new things — is unending: we will never find out everything.
Many students obviously gained immense pleasure from physics, and real excitement in finding out about the world around them; it was by no means seen entirely or even mainly — in terms of a job-qualification.
However, it is significant that modern physics appears to have had little impact on their philosophy of physics; they still construct it as a subject which is capable of revealing absolute truths.
One or two found the ideas of relativity, for example, a little difficult to grasp:
I found relativity a bit hard to understand to begin with — because if you haven't done it before, the idea that velocity is relative to everything else, I found hard to grasp, because, before, I just said,that velocity was a definite value — now you're doing it relative to everything else.
Relativity and, more importantly, quantum mechanics, were not seen on the whole as a challenge to the idea of the certainty of physics; on the contrary, they were often presented as proof of the exciting inroads physics was making.
It's mind-boggling more than anything else.
It's just different people's ideas of what matter is made from, and how waves travel, it's really mind-boggling.
A minority of students took a more thoughtful view of modern physics however.
This is one student talking about how modern physics affirmed his Christian beliefs:
According to classical mechanics, in theory you could write down the position and momentum of every single particle in the universe; you could therefore work out how everything is going backwards and forwards in time, obviously by highly complicated equations, but in theory, everything's predicted so everything's totally determined from beginning to end; but quantum mechanics says that you can never record the momentum and position of everything identically because of the Uncertainty Principle.
Nietzsche, the German philosopher, adduced his argument from classical concepts —‘This proves that there's no such thing as God’— but when quantum mechanics came along, it threw all that out of the window.
Initially Colin's argument seems unusual; the  uncertainty of scientific understanding would appear to make religious faith more difficult to come by; however, Colin argued
If you look around there a lot more physicists who are Christian than people taking the arts subjects and I reckon it could be that the arts bombard you with a lot of different views and maybe you find it hard to crystallize to say what you want; whereas in physics we get told precisely the answer and we realize that we don't understand it totally.
The standard example is that science has disproved God.
An arts student may have no arguments either way; they've just heard of this mystical thing called Science, but once you've been doing Science, you realize that a statement like that just does not hold water, and so it enables faith to come far more easily.
Colin was the only science student who touched on the relationship between science and religion.
His remarks are interesting because they demonstrate a new way of looking at that relationship.
Newtonian physics at one time seemed to give support to the idea that the universe was ordered and mechanistic and, therefore, divinely made; Darwinism challenged many of the basic tenets of Christianity, thereby setting science and religion in opposition and creating an important set of dualities — rationality/irrationality, reason/faith — through which we have come to construct science.
Modern physics, it has been argued  (by e.g. Capra 1979), supports the view, held by certain eastern religions, that the world is fluid and harmonious.
Here, however, Colin is using modern physics to support Christianity, on the basis that science cannot provide certain knowledge, and that we must therefore look elsewhere for certainty.
It is particularly interesting that he notes that science has come to hold, for some, the status of a religion: students of the arts, for example, might regard science as ‘mystical’.
We shall discuss the attitudes of the arts students towards science later; however, it is worth noting that Colin's attitude to science bore a marked resemblance to some of the English students' attitudes towards their subject.
The following remark, for example, made in the realization that physics was both something less and something more than an objective body of knowledge, was very similar to remarks made by the arts students about English:
I think it's more a way of thinking than knowledge really; because, a lot of the knowledge, I won't use two-thirds of it, but almost a way of thinking, a way of tackling problems, a way of discerning things.
That is physics is a practice, a way of doing things, a means of doing things, a means of interpreting reality, rather than a body of fact.
As has been argued already, most students believed that there was an answer, that physics did provide certainty; and they did not make philosophical connections between the ideas of modern physics and the existence or otherwise of absolute truths about the universe.
One or two were aware that such connections could be made, that quantum mechanics was qualitatively different:
With classical mechanics, things tend to be all laid on a plate, there's not a lot of scope for intuitive thought.
I enjoy the more wishy-washy concepts — I wish perhaps I'd had the chance to do a physics and philosophy option — and it seems to me that when we do things like quantum physics nobody bothers very much with the concepts that that presents — they just tend to give you all the theory.
Julie's language is interesting; implied in what she said is a hard/soft dichotomy; philosophy is seen as being less serious, less important than ‘hard’ theory; she is slightly embarrassed about wanting to do something which is apparently less difficult (and by implication more trivial) than straightforward theory.
Julie, because she accepts the discourse of the other physics students — the idea that physics is ‘hard’— devalues her own philosophical interests.
The language of the hard/soft dichotomy, as argued earlier, is also the language of masculinity/femininity, and Julie is uncomfortably aware of the devaluation of soft/femininity within the physics discourse.
This hierarchy within physics was, as we saw in the last chapter, also noted by Becher (1984), in his examination of the ‘culture’ of disciplines.
Constructing physical science
It is more difficult to talk about the construction of ‘physical science’ than it is to talk about the construction of physics, because physical science is not recognized as a discipline in the way that physics is.
For many of the physical science students, the term ‘physical science’ referred to the specific course rather than to a wider discipline; I therefore reserve many of their comments for a later section.
However, there are some interesting comparisons to be made between the discourse of the physical scientists and that of the physicists.
One of these is the physics/chemistry distinction which is, interestingly, maintained by the physical scientists.
The students tended not to regard physical science as a unified discipline, and often complained that they disliked either the physics or the chemistry (usually the latter) aspect of the course.
For example:
I find it difficult to remember so many different things about chemistry, where at least with physics I seem to remember what things are supposed to be about…with physics you see it and understand it and it's stored, with chemistry…there are so many complicated formulae and whatever you've got to look at it again before you can regurgitate it.
Another is that they retained some of the broader arts/science contrasts of the physicists: the progressive nature of science, for example, compared with the static nature of arts:
English doesn't change from year to year and history doesn't change and languages are just languages but physics and chemistry are changing constantly because new things are being discovered.
There were also differences between the physicists and the physical scientists.
I suggested earlier that one element in the construction of physics was the useful/useless duality.
However, this was far less significant for physics students than it was for the physical science and materials students.
Amongst physics students, the intellectual appeal of the subject — its certainty, its fundamentality, its discoveries — was its most important quality.
Very few students talked about their subject in terms of its social utility.
Even when they did, it tended to be in flippant terms; for example, one student remarked that without physics ‘we'd be in a right mess for a start’; another that ‘we'd still be in the caves’.
Sometimes they stressed the usefulness to their own careers of studying a science degree, and this was for some the determining factor in choosing between science and arts.
Amongst the physical science students, however, personal utility was seen as crucially important, although sometimes social utility and personal utility were confused, students not distinguishing between the two.
Often, it was not only the arts which were seen as less useful, but university subjects like physics: the physical science degree was regarded as one which was more useful for getting jobs in industry.
This attitude — stressing the instrumental value of a degree course-is taken to its extreme in the following quote, where a student who wants to take up materials science is criticizing physical science:
I can't see physical science being as useful as a materials degree.
I think it's more constructive; we're always going to make weapons of some kind, ships of some kind, boats, we're always going to drive some kind of vehicle, and we're always going to need hospital equipment.
Very few physical science students stressed the intellectual enjoyment of the degree course.
They all thought that the value of studying the course lay in the career opportunities it opened up — what Gibbs et al.
(1984) describe as an ‘extrinsic’ motivation.
For example:
I think our course is quite good because of the energy situation.
I think chemistry and physics students are quite a good thing to be at the moment.
If you want a highly paid industrial job with a lot of responsibility you've got to do a science degree.
‘Usefulness’ was a key component of the physical scientists' evaluation of their discipline; and ‘usefulness’referred to the capacity of the degree to get them a well-paid job.
Their attitude to the course, more so than that of the physics students, was an instrumental one: the course was a means to an end.
The experience of studying science in higher education
In this section, we shall look at how the ideals and expectations students had of science compared with the reality of studying the subject.
We shall also look at certain features of the learning environment of the departments which are of particular interest.
Perhaps the first thing we can note about all three departments is the formality of the relationship between students and staff: a formality which is reflected in the teaching methods.
Although the nature of science teaching meant that there was far more contact between staff and students than in the humanities departments we shall look at, it was noticeable that staff were addressed by titles, not by first names.
The staff were also much more formally dressed than in the three humanities departments.
There was, in many cases, a reluctance to go to lecturers for help; for example:
KIM: Do you generally find the staff approachable?
NATALIE: Yeah, well, I don't know, I've never actually gone and asked any of them round here about any problem.
KIM: Do you think you could?
NATALIE: Mmm, probably.
We don't — I don't know.
I mean, I've got a list of all the physicists in hall, you see; I go and visit them instead…they're more obtainable.
It was commonly accepted, both in Department A and Department B, that final years could be approached by first years for help; staff were regarded as out of bounds.
Some students in both departments also said that they preferred to ask postgraduate demonstrators, rather than staff, for help.
Staff were often considered quite remote — even in Department B, which was much smaller than Department A:
Some are completely on another plateau, you know, they're just not in the real world; they wander round and don't make eye-contact unless they're talking to you; they just look at the ceiling all the time when they're lecturing.
This was seen by some as being in marked contrast to the humanities departments, a point we shall pick up later:
If you compare it with other departments, if you talk to people who do English and stuff, and they know all their tutors by their first names; I mean, it's nothing like that here, it's all Dr So-and-So — I mean, half the lecturers, I didn't even know what their second names were, let alone their first names — maybe that's just a result of physics, nothing to do with them.
By its being ‘a result of physics’, she meant:
It's not really a discussion.
Physics is physics, isn't it, you can't really discuss…not in the same sense you can discuss a novel or something, you can't really discuss a formula.
As we have already seen, physics students made very strong (hierarchical) distinctions between physics and chemistry, and between physics and other disciplines — and even between subdivisions in the department itself; one final-year student noted in B that ‘on the top floor, one half is theoretical physics, one is experimental physics and they just don't seem to mix’.
In the above quote, Sioned is simply acknowledging the authority of the lecturers to define what ‘physics’ is, and accepting that this will necessarily result in formal relationships.
However, this formality has its price.
Because students felt that they could not approach staff, they often had problems about what to do when they couldn't understand the work:
What you were saying about approachability of lecturers, I'm not afraid to ask for help, but I am reticent to ask for help more than once on the same thing, because I would hate them to think that I hadn't been listening first time round or that I was stupid.
As understanding is crucial in physics, the difficulty in asking for help leads to problems with work; it is, as Chapter 6 will argue, a particular problem for women, who often feel isolated in the department.
The atmosphere in C was slightly more informal; this was in large part due to the physical layout of the lecture rooms, which bore a greater resemblance to school classrooms — students sat on chairs at desks and the lecturer's podium was on the same level as the desks, allowing lecturers to move about the room answering questions.
Because there was a significant male-female difference in perceptions of staff on this course, we shall have more to say about it in Chapter 6.
For the present, we can simply note that many of the women felt that relations between themselves and the staff were less formal than relations between the male students and the staff; the women said that they found it quite easy to ‘get round’ the male staff, whereas several men complained that staff were quite unhelpful.
A particularly striking difference was that when the staff addressed the men, it was by surnames, but when they addressed the women, it was by their first names.
It seems that the staff were inclined to regard the women as light relief from the sombre business of teaching science.
The formality of staff-student relations was reflected in the conventionality of the teaching methods used.
The science students had very full timetables; these consisted mainly of lectures, with some lab sessions and problem classes or tutorials (the latter being much less frequent on the physical science course).
Several students compared the teaching to school:
It's almost exactly the same…we get everything we need for the notes written on the board so we can just copy it down…so it's just the same as school, except the homework — when you do those problem sheets, they don't bother to mark it.
At school the teachers talk and write on the board and that's all it is here really, they talk and write on the board.
First-year students at the polytechnic also felt the teaching to be very similar to school (or technical college) teaching; one thought that polytechnic was a ‘cross between school and university’.
However, a noticeable difference between school and university teaching is the lack of personal attention; and this was a particular source of anxiety for some students.
For example Marie, a student at B who, in the first few weeks of term, felt herself to be getting behind with work, was concerned about the lack of help provided by the department:
A levels were so different.
They were small groups for a start.
My biggest A level group was twelve.
You could put your hand up and ask questions, and you weren't all up at a level on him, he was at the same level as you, talking, and he knew all our abilities so he explained things more clearly to us.
But here they just give you a few examples and expect you to do example sheets, it really is so difficult.
It is interesting in that quote that the idea of being ‘on the same level’ is used literally and metaphorically.
The staff at B are perceived as being both physically and emotionally distant.
Several other students were concerned about their inability to understand what was being taught in the lectures; a commonly expressed view was that they couldn't take notes and follow what was being said at the same time.
Many students felt a tension, therefore, between learning and understanding.
Despite students' insistence, as we saw earlier, that physics was a subject concerned with ‘understanding’, note-taking in lectures was necessary for learning and examination revision.
This meant that preparation for future ‘learning’ could occur at the expense of present understanding; on the other hand, not to take notes, but to concentrate on the lecturer's words, would prevent students from being able to learn the work later.
This applies not only to less able students, but also the cleverest: Paul, for example a final-year student at B, and the only first-class honours of his year, remarked:
The strange thing is, quite often you do a lot of courses that you don't understand at the time, you think it's a load of rubbish, then you read through them, and just understanding them, they're really quite important.
The student in this situation is essentially passive, not in control of his or her own education.
Paul suggested a way of getting rid of this passivity, arguing that lecturers should give out notes at the beginning of lectures and then:
They could go through them, and then they could encourage a more open thing, and people could — there could be a discussion going on in the class at the same time.
This would certainly allow students to participate more in their own learning, and give them more chance to get to grips with complex ideas.
In reality, however, the lectures allowed students almost no control; students were, in some ways, treated like school pupils; expected to listen and take notes, and accept the authority of the lecturer.
As a result, some of them even behaved like schoolchildren; it was not uncommon, apparently, for students at A to throw paper aeroplanes in lectures — a rather immature (but possibly understandable) response to the frustration of endless listening and note-taking.
Most of the science students, however, accepted as inevitable that there were large chunks that they couldn't understand, illustrating Hudson's (1967) argument about the need of the scientist to ‘accept massive bodies of conventional knowledge on trust’.
At the same time, this is an immensely frustrating experience for the student:
Some of the lecturers keep saying in a lecture, ‘this is somehow related to something else you've done somewhere else’ and I wish they'd tell us how it's related to something else because half the time we can't see that.
Many students contrasted their interest in physics with the experience of studying it.
This contrast was made by several other students.
Most students, as we have already seen, were very enthusiastic about physics.
Physics  was perceived as exciting, progressive and fundamental, in contrast to other disciplines which were perceived as routine, static and lacking substance.
Yet their experience of studying physics was far from exciting.
While quantum mechanics — or ‘weird physics’ as one called it — was generally enjoyed, other courses seemed tedious.
As Richard, a final-year student at B, put it:
I went to all the lectures and they're easy to go to, because you're spoon-fed, they don't sit back and they don't philosophize, a lot of it, it's all material on the board, which can be a bit boring sometimes, but we've done some big course like quantum mechanics and there have been a few other theoretical ones which have been really involved but the lecturers have been really good, you can see how excited they are, and it starts spilling over to you.
The problem is not, however, simply one of boring lectures; the few very bright students found studying physics challenging and stimulating.
The problem was more one of having to absorb a vast amount of information in a short space of time.
For most students, physics was no longer a subject which required thought and understanding:
It's just proved my ability to learn chunks of knowledge, chunks of pages and books, and reproducing them the day after, then forgetting it, then you have to learn it again for next year's exams.
Related to this was a feeling amongst students that they lacked independence.
The most popular work was that which allowed students freedom to work on their own — projects, for example.
Students felt that the need to learn large amounts of work left no time for the challenge of individual discovery.
Physics is very rarely discussed on the courses; the students' main aim is to get through the course and pass the examinations.
This is not because they don't enjoy the subject but because of the way the courses are structured.
We can see here a process that Becker et al.
(1961) identified, whereby students embark idealistically on their courses, hoping to become good doctors (or in this case physicists), but soon abandon this ideal in favour of the short-term goal of passing examinations.
Another common criticism was that much of the work was ‘irrelevant’.
This word, which varies in its usage from student to student, was generally used to mean something like ‘applicable in the outside world’.
The criticism was often made by those who disliked the more abstract theoretical work, and who preferred more tangible ideas, which could be shown to have some application:
I like medical physics…
I can see some use for the theory I've learnt — there's some sort of application which is indirectly helping people.
The comments about ‘relevance’ came more frequently from women than from men, and I shall argue in Chapter 6 that there are important differences between what male and female students look for in physics.
Of course, there was some opportunity for students to work independently and to discuss their work problems.
While lectures were generally disliked as a teaching method, students generally felt happier about tutorials and skill sessions.
However, even here there were problems.
One was simply that there weren't enough of them, particularly at C:
When I first started I thought we'd have tutorials and seminars; you get three or four students and you discuss something.
We don't do anything like that; we very rarely have tutorials.
Another, at both A and B, was that very little genuine help was given with problems; the question and answer sheets were not marked, for example, and tutorials didn't always provide the key to understanding what the work was about:
The problem sheets are so difficult now nobody can do them and they usually just wait until the answers come out every week and usually it's just a case of copying them down.
Students are often left to muddle along; the help they may need is not forthcoming, even in tutorials.
Consequently many students, by the final year in particular, felt that they had lost all hope of making sense of the subject or getting to grips with the work.
So far, we have seen that while physics was viewed by students as exciting and forward-looking, in practice the teaching tended to be conventional and hierarchical, very much like school, with students being given a body of information to absorb.
In higher education, however, students are expected to do far more practical experiments than in school.
For at least eight hours each week, students were expected to work alone or in pairs on experiments in the laboratory, with some supervision by staff and postgraduates.
In theory, this gives students more freedom to explore and find out for themselves; indeed, the final years worked on individual experimental projects.
In practice, however, and particularly for the first years, what happened in labs was strictly controlled by the department.
Students worked from textbooks which explain how to conduct the experiment and the sorts of results one would expect to get.
As a third-year student said:
[It was]just exercises in following instructions…you'd end up doing a lab before you ended up doing anything about it in lectures.
One fourth-year student at C explained to me that several experiments conducted in the lab in the first term of the year could not be written up until the second term, after the theory had been presented in the lecture course, which obviously meant a tremendous backlog of work to catch up on.
Therefore, conducting the experiments often involved little understanding of the theory behind them; indeed, they often involved equally little understanding about how to set up an experiment to test a theory:
If I had my choice, I'd rather be left to work something out myself; instead of it all being set up and you just walk in and take measurements, go away and analyse them, you'd have to go in and set it all up, then you'd really learn something.
There's a feeling you don't learn enough from them, not in practical experience…you can go through the labs half-asleep.
The point of the lab work was, essentially, to demonstrate the truth of a theory, rather than to allow students to experiment for themselves.
The students do not conduct the experiments with a detached eye; rather, they are looking for the results predicted in the textbook.
As one student patiently explained to me when I asked him how he knew what results he was looking for:
A lot of the labs are finding physical phenomena that are already well known, so if you're just validating facts that are already known you know they're wrong because your answers don't tally with the answers in the textbook.
This practice supports T. S. Kuhn's (1963) argument that science textbooks ‘do not describe the sorts of problems that the professional may be asked to solve and the variety of techniques available for their solution’ but rather they ‘exhibit concrete problem-solutions that the profession has come to accept as paradigms’which the student is expected to solve for himself (or herself) in the laboratory.
The interesting question, of course, is what happens when labs ‘go wrong’, when they do not produce the result expected.
On the one hand, students have the option of explaining why their results have turned out wrong:
a lot of the lab work done here anyway, everyone knows what the results should be, it just seems a waste of time because you know the equipment's not good enough to get the results you should be getting, so you spend most of your time writing why your results haven't come out.
The lack of good results is here explained by faulty equipment (an explanation also offered to me by other students); however, students gain higher marks for lab work if the results are ‘correct’ than if they are wrong but adequately accounted for:
Before, you might be able to say, if you haven't got the right results, you can get away with padding out your lab report and writing a lot of background, so that would bung your mark up a bit, but this year, you can do that and you still end up with a bad mark if you've got bad results.
The alternative to explaining faulty results, then, is to tamper with them:
It always seems to me that you've got a set of results, and if you come to write them up, and you know they're obviously wrong, you're going to get  a lot more marks if you put down the right values — or what should be the right values — so you end up fiddling things eventually.
Alan eventually obtained a first-class honours degree, as did Paul, whom I quote again:
I know somebody here who got very good marks for his lab work and he's good on computers, and he just programmed the computers in random errors and stuff that give him set results and nice graphs, and they weren't perfect so nobody noticed them, but he fiddled them, and that way he didn't have to do any lab work if he didn't want to.
These two students, Alan and Paul, both very successful physicists, saw the lab work as a ‘game’ which has to be played.
Implicit in Paul's description of another student is the idea that, although the student didn't do what was required, he got round it in such a clever and ingenious way, that he still deserved to do well in it; indeed, Paul said that ‘there is less understanding in lab work than there is ingenuity’.
Neither Alan nor Paul really accept that lab is an objective measure of ability; they simply see it as a set of rules made to be broken.
Paul, in fact, had concluded that lab was a waste of time and his final-year project was a theoretical one, rather than a practical one.
His attitude towards lab was rather blasé; he even joked about the fact that he always managed to break vital pieces of equipment.
One student who was much more critical about the lab work was Mark, a student right at the bottom of his class, who later failed his degree:
The experiments are not particularly relevant to anything, they're just experiments for experiment's sake, one experiment illustrating a particular bit of theory; it doesn't do anything particularly useful, you just look at an oscilloscope and take some readings and hence you can demonstrate this bit of theory.
Mark, however, didn't bother to fake his results:
If they're totally wrong I don't generally bother.
I don't fiddle my results really — usually it's easier to make up excuses for it being wrong than to go through and work it out to make it come out right.
Like Alan, Mark saw the practical work as a game, but unlike Alan he refused to play it.
He resented what he saw as arbitrary and pointless rules, whereas Alan is, if anything, amused by them, and enjoys manipulating them.
For some students, however, labs were not a game, but a set of rules to be adhered to.
This was particularly the case amongst many of the female students, several of whom expressed anxiety about handling machinery or breaking expensive equipment (unlike Paul, who was able to make jokes about it):
As far as lab work went, I always felt very intimidated because I'd never touched anything more technical than a hairdryer, and all these boys around me were confidently plugging in their oscilloscopes, because I mean, I suppose they had their train sets and that sort of thing, and I was very scared to plug things in, in case they blew up.
Others felt frustrated by their inability to get to grips with the lab work:
I always seem to get the wrong results even though I'm working as hard as possible.
The real problem was that many students felt unable to ask for help when they were in difficulty.
This was especially the case in B, where staff were considered unapproachable, and where students were expected to work individually at labs:
On the Thursdays in lab you have to work on your own and everybody's doing different experiments and it is really — I mean, I dread Thursdays, because it is really worrying.
If students asked for help too often, marks were deducted.
For Marie, this was a constant source of worry, because she had continually to choose between understanding fully what she was doing, by asking demonstrators for help, and risking losing marks, or by not asking and floundering further and further in the experiment.
Thus the desire of the department to assess students (which meant that they had to work competitively, rather than co-operatively) conflicted with the desire of the students to understand the work; the apparent aim of the department — to improve the knowledge and understanding of the students was being impeded by its other aim: to grade students.
The four first-year women at B subverted this by swapping lab books; Marie said, ‘We're not meant to, but we do’— as if there were some shame attached to having to ask for help.
Like Jane, Marie perceived a male/female difference in attitudes to labs; when I asked her if other people on the course found the lab work difficult, she said:
I think other people are finding it difficult, but it's mostly boys and they tend to be more practical and keep calmer about it and also not worry about it, which does help.
The difference between the male and the female experience of lab work is partly a difference between male and female upbringing; writers like Kelly (1981a) have been quite correct to point out that women are disadvantaged in science because of their lack of experience with scientific toys, machines and so on in childhood.
Yet this difference is reinforced and indeed exacerbated by the women's experience of physics at university.
Although departments could  dispel needless anxiety by encouraging co-operation amongst students, they strengthen women's sense of themselves as inadequate by making them work individually and competitively.
Some students were more positive about the final-year work in lab than about the first-year work; as one said, ‘You can do what you want; instead of being taught, you've got to learn yourself’.
Projects allowed some room for genuine experimentation and discovery, although the projects themselves are decided by the department, who draw up a list from which students can choose.
Despite a general feeling that project work was more interesting than first- and second-year experiments, there was much dissatisfaction with the projects; some students, particularly at C, complained that they had received very little advice on selecting a project, others that they had not been allowed to choose the project they wanted.
The most common complaint, however, was that the projects weren't working; results hadn't turned out as hoped, essential equipment had proved faulty (or in some eases hadn't arrived) and students were left writing up why their project hadn't worked out.
The real limitation was time; many students, although they enjoyed the projects, felt the pressure of looming final examinations and said that they were unable to complete their project to their own satisfaction and had to make the best of a bad job in order to work at other, equally pressing, aspects of the course.
Some students managed to struggle through their courses by learning as much as they could without understanding it.
Certain other students simply fell behind so much that they could not catch up later on.
Two students in particular, Jane and Mark, embody many of the problems encountered by those students who were not amongst the department's high-flyers.
I interviewed Jane in the Easter term of her final year at B, at a time when she felt thoroughly disillusioned with the course, though not with university, which she had enjoyed.
Her problems had started before university, when she had changed schools after the fifth form.
In her first school she had been considered outstanding at maths, and had obtained six grade As in her nine O levels.
When she changed schools, however, the maths A level course was different from the one she'd been following at her old school, but the new teacher expected her to catch up immediately.
Jane explained the difference in terms of the schools' differing perceptions of her ability:
Because she [the new maths teacher]didn't know me, she didn't have any confidence in me…but because she didn't have any confidence in me, I didn't have any confidence in myself, and that is the thing that really makes me regret changing schools…at my first school all the teachers knew me and had confidence in me.
I was doing very well in that school.
I think I should have stayed at the old school where they had confidence in me.
Her case suggests the potency of the ‘self-fulfilling prophecy’; she found maths increasingly difficult and ended up with a grade D A level.
Such was her dislike of maths by this stage that she told me:
I was very disillusioned when I started doing physics by the amount of maths in the course.
I got to the stage where I couldn't see the wood for the trees.
Jane had experienced a downward spiral such that, by the time I interviewed her, she felt completely lost.
(She eventually got a third-class honours degree.)
About physics as a subject she was enthusiastic; but she was unhappy about the degree course.
She contrasted her experience of school physics with university physics, and she saw the distinction as a quantitative/qualitative one.
This is what she says about university physics:
I find it difficult in my notes that they're all so mathematical, that you just read through lines and lines of equations and there's very few sentences in between to explain what's going on.
It's very difficult to draw out any physical meaning.
Trying to follow a mathematical argument is very different from following an argument that's set down in plain English, in a qualitative way.
It's all so quantitative, I find it difficult to relate to.
Whereas in school:
I couldn't see how you could get a lot of maths into physics on the grounds of the experience I'd had in school.
I mean, I thought they were just nice, chatty, qualitative subjects.
Her perception of physics as a discipline is one that is about ideas and concepts; she said that she'd always found physics much more ‘dynamic’ than ‘static’subjects like chemistry and geography.
It seems to be almost a perception of physics as an ‘arts’ subject; indeed, Jane told me that she had been equally good at arts and sciences but had chosen sciences because of the job and university prospects.
By the third year she was beginning to regret her choice:
I'm quite an artistic person; in retrospect, I think perhaps I should have risen to the challenge and maybe applied to do a language, because I really enjoy literature and languages in my spare time.
But then again, if I was forced to do them full-time permanently, maybe I wouldn't enjoy them as much.
I think it's because I'm being made to do physics that I'm rebelling against it.
She concluded:
I think that's the problem with degrees, they're all very specialized, and they don't give a lot of scope for broad sort of study.
Jane saw her degree as a process of narrowing down, rather than a broadening out; it shut out the creative, ‘qualitative’ aspect of her nature, and presented her with a set of rules and definitions which she had to conform to, or reject, but which she could not challenge.
Like many of the other female physics students, she rejected it and told me that she had no intention of continuing with physics afterwards.
Mark, whom I have already quoted in my discussion of the lab work, was a final-year student at A who, although he had obtained A level grades of AAAB, eventually failed his degree.
He said that he found the work dull, and did as little of it as possible:
I find it boring, it's not particularly useful — it's very academic, more so than I would have expected it to be.
Unlike Jane, Mark did not feel that he would have been better off taking a different subject; he had decided that he was unsuited to any kind of academic work, although most of his friends were arts students.
He expressed strong dislike of the department itself; it was ‘pretty unfriendly’; the work was ‘irrelevant’.
This much is perhaps to be expected from someone who faced insurmountable difficulties in coping with the work.
What is interesting about Mark, however, is that he rejects the values of the physics department in their entirety, as well as what he perceives as the values of academic life generally.
That is he rejects the pervasive competitiveness and individualism; he was the only male physics student I talked to who talked in terms of doing something socially useful after finishing the course.
Although he blamed himself rather than the department for his own failure, making comments like ‘I'm just not an academic basically’ and ‘I don't think there's a lot wrong with the course, if you want to do an academic course’, the path he saw himself as taking seemed directly opposed to the departmental ethos; stating that he didn't want to do ‘anything theoretical’, he told me that he wanted to train to be a nurse.
Reluctant though he was to talk about it, he gave the main reason as ‘it's just the sort of job that would suit me really…helping people, that sort of thing’.
It is also, however, just the sort of career that most physics students wouldn't dream of entering, being part of a predominantly female profession, low-paid and low-status.
The satisfaction gained from nursing, like that of the other ‘caring’ professions, comes mainly from an intrinsic satisfaction at doing something useful rather than from external recognition of one's value.
It is important to recognize that in Mark's case, as in the case of some other (mainly female) physics students, the rejection of physics was not simply due to a lack of ability or application, but a clash of beliefs and assumptions about what is worthwhile and what isn't.
If we look at it another way, we can suggest that many physics students feel that they must accept what they are told by their departments and that they find it difficult to challenge what they are told.
There is little space in which students can develop individually or subvert the ‘knowledge’ of the department.
Few students said that they found the staff approachable, and some seemed just to muddle along, hoping that all would eventually be clear.
Others found that the sheer workload of the course left them unable to develop outside interests, such as reading or the theatre.
To do that almost seemed to entail giving up on the course altogether.
For example in B, I had tried several times without success to  contact a third-year female physics student who, it seemed, never looked in her departmental pigeonhole where I left the notes.
It turned out, when I asked another student about her, that she spent most of her time organizing the Drama Society and almost never came into the department.
In the event, I interviewed someone else, but the incident is an indication of the fact that a science degree and artistic interests are often perceived as incompatible.
In this sense, a physics degree can indeed be a narrowing down rather than a broadening out.
This is how one physical science student put it:
It [being at polytechnic]has broadened my outlook, and it's also narrowed it — science-orientated.
You tend to keep to that sort of regime.
I wouldn't say it was exactly narrow-minded, but you've got a position, you're given a position to hold and you get it rammed down you that ‘I am now an applied scientist’.
I don't feel like one, but I'm supposed to be, well, a physical scientist, so you get that sort of identity thrown at you.
So you accept it, because you don't know what else to accept.
Consequently many students who find themselves unable to accept this definition of themselves, who have difficulty in constructing an identity as ‘physicists’ or ‘physical scientists’, find that they are outside of the department, that they are gradually less and less successful in getting to grips with the subject.
Science students' perceptions of the humanities
Given that the meaning of ‘arts’ and ‘science’is dependent on the differences between them, it is necessary to look at scientists' perceptions of the arts, and vice versa.
It has already been argued that physics is constructed through a series of dualities in which physics is rated positively, and other disciplines, chiefly the arts, are rated negatively.
One of the dualities noted was that of hard/soft; another was that of difficult/easy.
These were articulated more often when students were invited to talk about the arts than when students simply talked about physics.
The mention of the word ‘arts’ often brought out feelings of resentment in physics students about the apparently easy time arts students had of it:
More work has to go into a science degree than an arts degree…
I see arts students' timetables, an English student comes in for two hours a week, and he's home for the rest of the time.
I just think we do a lot more work than they do.
A first-year physics student told me that he had thought of transferring to an arts subject, maybe psychology, in the first few weeks, because:
I thought it'd be a lot easier because arts students get about ten lectures a week…we had thirty lectures a week, or something like that.
The same theme recurred frequently; because arts students had few timetabled hours, science students tended to assume that they did little work, although one first-year physical science student did note that most of her work was done in lectures and labs, while many girls on her corridor had a lot of background work to do outside timetabled sessions.
In addition, science students thought that arts students had freer relationships with staff, and this resulted in an attitude of some disdain towards the arts:
Some of the courses I know, lecturers go drinking with the students and everything, but they're all older, suits and ties and things, there's nothing wrong with that, you just know them to be a lecturer and get on with the work rather than thinking, ‘we had a nice drink last night, didn't we?’
Implicit in that quote is the idea that science is more serious because of the more formal nature of staff-student relationships.
Physics and physical science students had a strong sense of the hierarchy of different disciplines; Debbie, for example, described business studies (which she had originally hoped to study at university) as a ‘soft option’; a first-year physics student at A described astro-physics (a course also run by the department) as ‘watered-down physics’.
The language of ‘hard’ and ‘soft’subjects — which can extend into the discipline itself, as in the derogatory description of astro-physics — reveals a perception of academic study in which subjects are tiered, with ‘hard’sciences at the top and ‘soft’arts at the bottom.
The harder the subject is, the more work students have to do, and the more formal are relations with staff.
Subjects in which it is possible to have fun are not serious subjects.
Students also showed an impatience with the intangibility of the arts:
Languages and stuff seem to be boring.
You're just looking at words every day.
With physics, you find things about the environment, you know, things you wouldn't normally think about.
Physics is more or less talking about actual things in life.
That's the difference between arts and science, because you've actually got something there you can look at and study, so you're talking about facts, whereas in the arts side it's all airy-fairy and you're beating about the bush a lot.
I'm not one for doing things like that.
I'd rather have something there that I can look at and take hold of ideas, and actually get to grips with something that's actually there.
The language used by Nigel is particularly revealing: ‘airy-fairy’, ‘beating about the bush’, ‘get to grips with’.
It reinforces the idea of science as more relevant, more concerned with reality and more certain.
It shows a desire for an orderly and methodical way of examining the world, and a dislike of detached contemplation or philosophical and intuitive ways of understanding reality.
The most common criticism of the arts and the most strongly expressed, however, was that they are ‘useless’, that is not so much that they are useless to society, but that they are useless to the individual.
This criticism was expressed most often by physical science students, but it was also made by physics students; for example There's a friend of mine doing Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic — what on earth is she going to do with that afterwards?
She's going to have to work in a museum for the rest of her life!
Several science students seemed to believe that there was very little that an arts degree qualified graduates to do.
Often, it was argued that science degrees qualified students to enter ‘general’ jobs such as management as well as specialized scientific ones, whereas arts students could apply only for the general jobs.
On more than one occasion the view was expressed that ‘physics is the best degree you can get’— because employers looked on it favourably.
In this emphasis on personal success and achievement we can see a strong thread of individualism in the physics students' world-view; they are keenly aware of competition between individuals both in higher education and in the labour market.
Physical science students were particularly harsh in their indictment of the ‘uselessness’ of the arts:
I'm not into education for education's sake.
It's a waste of taxpayers' money.
I couldn't motivate myself to do it just for the sake of it.
I think it's a lot more worthwhile doing a science degree because a lot of arts degrees don't lead anywhere because then you have to find a job…they're not leading to a career of any sort…
I feel they're a little bit of a waste of time…the course I'm doing, I'm gaining knowledge which I can use; which, I mean, you can't really use a history degree unless you're going to be an archaeologist or an historian or a teacher.
It seems that if you've done an arts degree, apart from social science, then really you're in line for jobs that science students go for as well, whereas arts students can't go for science degree jobs so you've got more scope to apply for.
My tutor was saying to me that when he did his degree twenty odd years ago, he knew everything there was to know about chemistry, but because it's growing, because it's new, you've always got to keep up with it, whereas history doesn't change, does it, apart from you add a bit on to what happened last year; with chemistry it's constantly changing, you've always got something new to learn, you never stop really.
A feature of all these quotes is that they conflate the social and the personal; Vicky, for example, argues that the arts are ‘a waste of taxpayers’ money' and then says ‘I couldn't motivate myself to do it’.
The idea that education should be  functional for the individual is confused with the idea that education should be functional for society.
Debbie uses three ideas common to the science students: one, that science degrees are more useful in enabling students to gain jobs; two, that a degree is a process of ‘gaining knowledge’ which can be applied; three, that the knowledge gained in a degree such as history can be applied only in limited ways and therefore a limited number of jobs is open to the history graduate.
Debbie's view of knowledge as a body of fact means that she does not regard the acquisition of skills, ways of thinking about and approaching problems as an important part of learning and does not, therefore, consider their potential usefulness in jobs.
Neither does she consider the possibility that there are reasons for doing degrees other than as qualifications for jobs; therefore humanities degrees are a ‘waste of time’.
Like Debbie, Fay starts from the premise that the point of doing a degree is to get a job, as we can see in her statement that science students are able to apply for a wider range of jobs than arts graduates.
Obviously if one does not start from this premise, then the point about the wider range of jobs is no longer relevant; the belief that degrees are taken in order to get jobs is so much part of the physical science students' taken-for-granted ideas about education that it remains implicit rather than explicit.
Fay's other principal assumption is the same as Debbie's: that learning is about the acquisition of a body of knowledge.
When learning is viewed in this way, students often regard science as progressive, and the arts as static; science as infinite and the arts as finite.
It is this belief that enables Fay to say that her tutor had at one time known ‘everything there was to know about chemistry’ and that ‘history doesn't change…apart from you add a bit on to what happened last year’.
The perceptions that most science students had of the arts, then, are grounded within a discourse which regards education as primarily functional, believes learning to be concerned with the acquisition of knowledge, and views the relationship between different types of knowledge as hierarchical.
It would be wrong, however, to suggest that all the science students disliked the arts.
Physics students were more tolerant than physical science students; amongst the physicists, women were more tolerant than men.
It was noted earlier that some physics students had had difficulty choosing between science and arts at A level, and these students, like those who had interests such as reading or music, were usually more broad-minded than those who had always regarded themselves as scientists; for example In a way, long-term, something you do in science is possibly going to be of more value, but it's very necessary, I think, literature and things like that are very much part of your life, you'd go mad without them, I certainly would; so I don't think you can really assign values like that — it's just where your personal interest and qualities lie, what you're best at.
I see education as far more than just training you to go out and do a job, and I think the whole learning process, whatever you're learning, matures you  into being capable of taking responsibilities and learning other things, and I think arts subjects do that just as well as science subjects.
Even those who, like Julie and Felicity, were tolerant of the arts, were clearly aware that sciences were generally perceived as superior; Julie, for example, noted that ‘arts subjects do that just as well ’, while Felicity went on
I don't look down on arts students, though I do moan about their empty timetables, but then, someone doing a German degree, no way could I do that, I have the greatest respect for them.
A physical science student showed a nice awareness of the science/arts hierarchy when, talking about her brother who was doing a Fine Art degree, she said
He thinks I think I'm better than him because I'm doing a science degree and he's doing Fine Art.
These students were aware that they were being magnanimous towards the arts; very few conceded that the arts might have more to offer than sciences.
One who did made the same point as many arts students:
I think university just trains you to think and to prove to an employer that you can apply yourself for three years; perhaps because in the sciences you learn things that will be relevant in your career, but as a training for an individual I don't think it is any more worthwhile.
In some ways, in fact, it's a bit less worthwhile, in that you tend not to think about social matters, people's characters and things like that.
Another expressed the same view:
Only from your own personal practical point of view is it [physics]more worthwhile, getting a job at the end…but I think a lot of people who come to university and do a degree job that isn't related in any way and what they should get out of university is social skills, and enjoyment, they should enjoy the course, so they should do the course they want to do, I think, in as many cases as possible.
It has already been noted that some science students had made the choice between science and arts on the basis that it was easier to keep up with arts in one's spare time than it was to keep up with science.
It is perhaps interesting that some of them, because of the volume of work, had had difficulty keeping to this, and that those who had — Natalie, for example, who played a trumpet in a band — found some tension between their course work and the time they wanted to devote to their hobby.
The attempt to bridge the arts/science divide was, in many cases, doomed to failure, with the result that students felt forced to make a  choice between their coursework and their outside interests.
For some of the students, science demanded an all-or-nothing commitment.
Conclusion
We began this chapter by noting the importance of certain ideas of science amongst both lecturers and students.
The most prevalent view was that physical science consisted of a body of hard, certain and fundamental knowledge.
Amongst physicists, there was a belief that physics was essentially about understanding , while other science subjects such as chemistry were about the rote acquisition of ‘facts’.
The less common view of physics was that it was concerned with exploration, breadth, uncertainty.
The challenge of physics was not its certainty, but its lack of certainty.
Whereas the holders of the former view of physics made a strong distinction between arts and science, the holders of the latter view saw affinity between arts and science.
Most students, in fact, not only made a distinction between arts and science, but also believed in a hierarchy of different disciplines, with ‘fundamental’, ‘useful’ subjects like physics at the top and ‘wishy-washy’humanities subjects at the bottom.
From the picture drawn by its students, physics can best be seen as a highly organized, tightly structured set of rules which its students are expected to obey.
The heavy workload and the difficulty of the work itself meant that a high degree of conformity was required of all but the most able students.
Lab work, for example, was a matter of getting the ‘right’ answer; failure to do so resulted in loss of marks.
Some students were reduced to learning their work parrot-fashion in order to keep up to the standard, while at the same time lacking any real understanding of what they were taught.
Many physics students, and almost all physical science students, had an instrumental attitude towards their degree courses.
Higher education was seen by them primarily as a means to an end, not an end in itself.
Those students who did not have an instrumental or single-minded attitude towards studying physics or physical science were the least successful.
Mark and Jane, for example, who rejected the implicit values and beliefs of the discipline, both did badly in their degrees.
There were others, such as Marie, who had hoped to gain a greater understanding of a subject they loved, and found themselves bogged down in a process of constant marking and grading, passing and failing.
Using Bernstein's terminology, we can characterize physics as a discipline which has ‘strong frames’ and ‘strong classification’; it is a subject in which ‘the educational relationship tends to be hierarchical and ritualised, the educand seen as ignorant, with little status and few rights’.
The same can also be said of physical science: despite the apparent breadth of the course, students felt that they had little control over their learning.
To say that physics and physical science have such strong boundaries is not simply to make a statement about the disciplines.
It is also something which has important consequences for the people studying those disciplines.
We have  already seen that some of the less successful students had suffered a blow to their self-esteem as a consequence of the rigid rules on learning.
There is a strong demarcation in physics between those who have succeeded and those who have ‘failed’; quite a lot of firsts and thirds, and not a great concentration in the middle.
There is a great pressure on students, therefore, to conform.
It is precisely this need to conform that causes tensions and difficulties for women studying physics.
If, to be a successful physicist, one has to conform to a certain code of behaviour, what are the implications for women who, by definition, do not conform to our conventional ideal of ‘physicist’?
Scientists characterize the humanities as uncertain, vague and irrelevant.
The next chapter will look at how humanities students characterize their own discipline, and at the extent to which the characterizations match.
It will also begin to consider the extent to which humanities students' sense of themselves is affected, adversely or otherwise, by the experience of studying their subjects.
5
Constructing Humanities
Introduction
This chapter will follow the same pattern as Chapter 4, but this time it will look at the views and experiences of students in English and communications.
It will look at the parallels between the humanities students' viewpoint and the science students' viewpoint, exploring similarities and differences.
In particular, it is concerned with the question of symmetry — whether the experience of studying humanities is a mirror image of the experience of studying science, or whether there is an asymmetry.
Of especial interest is students' perception of science and scientists: is their view of science, like the scientists' view of humanities, limited and partial?
The central question, however, is: what does it feel like to be a humanities student?
We are interested in the relationship between studying a subject, and students' sense of identity: the way in which the beliefs we hold about an academic discipline affect our sense of who we are.
For humanities students, as for science students, the values that attracted them to a subject were values which were also important to them as individuals.
In some of the comments which follow, we can see that students are discussing more than a subject which they happened to choose to study at college: they are discussing issues which are central to their lives.
As in Chapter 4, however, we shall begin by looking at the ‘official’ view of English and communications.
The viewpoint of staff
English
I began Chapter 4 by contrasting two views of physics, which I loosely characterized as the instrumental and expressive view.
This section on English will take broadly the same shape; I do not propose to discuss the theoretical  debates in English (such as those between structuralists and liberal humanists) but to discuss instead the purpose of English: what the teachers of English think is the point of teaching it.
Again, the easiest route is to take opposing views, though I am aware that one could probably detect many shades of opinion amongst teachers of English in universities.
Of the four lecturers I interviewed, three could be broadly described as ‘traditional’ in their views, while one might be described as having a ‘radical’viewpoint in so far as she challenged the conventional wisdom of English studies.
The difference between the two viewpoints is not really the instrumental/expressive one that we found in physics.
The traditional view in English sees the subject as a ‘practice’, a set of skills for reading and analysing texts, which students acquire during the course of an English degree.
One lecturer, asked what he thought students should gain from an English degree, said:
Skills, certainly.
Knowing how to read, I suppose, knowing the varieties of reading which are necessary and available is perhaps the most important thing.
The other view of English sees it as a means of enabling students to think in a critical and intelligent manner:
What I'm interested in is people thinking.
And in a sense it happens to be English language and English literature that I teach, but I don't really think I'm teaching that, what I'm doing is helping people to think, hopefully, and have ideas and excite them about ideas and think about themselves and the way they live.
While these two viewpoints may not at first sight appear to be strikingly different, they do in fact embody two quite opposing ways of approaching the discipline.
Whereas the second quote implies independent thought, ‘skills’, in the first quote, refers to a discourse, a way of doing things; it implies a ‘right way’ of studying English.
In a similar vein, Dr M in Department B said that the first year is concerned with ‘settling in and acquiring practice, and acquiring a certain body of common reading which can then be appealed to or built on in subsequent years’.
We can look a little more closely at what this practice, this right way, is.
The dominant idea in the liberal ideology of English is that of ‘universality’; great literature is universally ‘great’ for different peoples in the world and at different times in history.
This ideology is reflected in the content of the courses which, in both institutions, consist mainly of individual ‘great’ writers.
The successful reader is one who can transcend her social background to make a sympathetic adjustment to a writer whose norms and values may be those of a different age.
This is how Mr R, talking about Milton, put it:
It's a useful way of getting a perspective on the present, to realize that people think and feel in such different ways, in totally alien ways, that are  completely unsympathetic, which is why feminism is an interesting development, because the ability to read something written in a totally patriarchal tradition, and to make the sympathetic adjustment, giving him his due, recognizing that he couldn't have thought what you think, because people didn't think like that then….
And what do you say, do you say, ‘I don't agree with what that man says, it's a bad book, I don't like it or I won't read it’, or do you say, ‘it's probably useful for me to try to make the imaginative judgment to see things the way he sees them, to see the way the world looks like from his point of view, and I may reject that, but at least one ought to have some tolerance and some understanding’, and it seems that that's where the study of literature meets life.
This is interesting because it disguises who is making the sympathetic adjustment.
The tradition of writers represented in most of the texts studied on the course is that of the white, male, Christian middle class.
It is those who do not come from those dominant traditions who have to make the sympathetic adjustment.
To put it more crudely, those students who are male, white, middle-class and Christian, will very rarely have their views challenged or have to make sympathetic adjustments as a consequence.
The idea, too, that ‘people didn't think like that then’ is significant; we do not know, of course, how many people at a certain point in a history were (for example ) feminists, who were prevented from writing about their views, or whose writings have been forgotten or lost.
Arguing that we should criticize literature only on ‘literary’ grounds rather than on political or personal grounds ignores the difficulty of making boundaries between the purely literary and the political.
The assumption is that of I. A. Richards: that it is possible to disengage oneself from one's own prejudices, beliefs, experiences, indeed, one's own historical and social location, in order to shape a purely aesthetic or literary response to the text.
The term ‘universal’ is in itself interesting.
While the writing of male white middle- or upper-class Christian writers is considered to have ‘universal’ relevance (and is thus put on the curricula of university English departments), the work of writers outside that tradition is considered of ‘local’rather than‘universal’relevance (hence terms such as ‘woman writer’or ‘black writer’).
Another feature of the traditional liberal humanist ideology is the emphasis on close reading of individual texts and the lack of emphasis on theory.
There was a ‘critical approaches’ course at A, but no theory at all at B. At A, the ‘critical approaches’course is taught by a variety of lecturers; each specialist lectures on his/her favoured critical approach.
Thus the department's structuralist lectures on structuralism, the department's feminist lectures on feminism, and so on.
The different approaches are thus seen to be distinct, but perhaps not in conflict; each approach is seen as an area of specialism, rather than as an area of commitment.
I asked a lecturer at B why there was no theory course:
My experience is that students of literature, and teachers of literature, too, I would even put myself in that category, are not very good conceptually, they respond more to actual texts in a sort of affective way, or quasi-sensuous  way.
When you start talking about arguments in literature, conceptualising, generalising, a lot of people get rather lost, one would have to admit that.
So I mean, maybe they need a course in theory all the more for that reason, I don't know, I think a lot of them would have real problems with it.
Again this is the language of Richards and Leavis: the sensuous response to the text, the words on the page.
It is surely only in English that an academic would admit to finding ‘conceptualizing’ difficult.
By refusing to include theory, the department is, in effect, refusing to declare its own theoretical standpoint: it must have a standpoint, for it is impossible to judge or measure the correctness of someone's ‘affective’ or ‘quasi-sensuous’response; yet English departments do examine and judge people's performance, just like any other department.
We need not devalue subjective, affective response to understand that subjective response is partly determined by theoretical (if unacknowledged) preconceptions.
Dr P was asked what effect the growth of English literature all over the world, and the advent of modern literary criticism, had had on English teaching in universities:
Well, I think academics are quite good at resisting what they don't want to deal with you know, so in many departments, it's not had very much.
People are quite good at covering things up; they say, I don't know very much about literary theory, you talk to so and so down the corridor; or Well, I don't know African writing, but So-and-So does, and then people offer options on them, that to some extent is what we do here, within a framework of a fairly traditional English structure…people manage by excluding what they don't want to deal with, really.
What is so interesting about this is the way in which it both resembles, and differs from, Kuhn's account of changes in ‘paradigm’.
On the one hand, there is certainly a resistance to change and to new ideas; academics appear quite happy to continue teaching the same old syllabuses as if there had been no ‘explosion’(Dr P's word) in English studies; at the same time, there is no resistance to allowing other people within the same department to teach quite different things to students, and to do quite different types of research.
There is a great tolerance towards a multiplicity of paradigms, provided those paradigms never challenge the mainstream in any serious way.
Thus, as in A, matters such as Literary Theory or non-mainstream areas of literature (such as African literature) are considered ‘specialisms’ which need not interfere with the traditional way in which English has been, and is, taught.
Dr P makes it very clear that one must accept that certain pieces of writing are superior to others; but the criteria for judging superiority are, interestingly, not very specific:
What I think is happening, I find this interesting, people are rejecting the idea of the aesthetic, and I'm not quite sure why; I don't know whether they think it's elitist or whether they've got no taste of their own, or what, I don't know, but people read poems not as poems which convey aesthetic emotion, which is the way I tend to think about poems ultimately, but simply as ideological statements and political texts, or at least, things that give you some understanding of the way people thought or so on at the time….
If you take out the idea of the aesthetic, you're just left with communication.
Then people, for some ideological reason, people might say, well, you know, you can't say one form of communication is better than another, so that say, I don't know, I suppose, a kind of feminist belief is better than Paradise Lost or something — well, it might be more acceptable to some people for various reasons, but I say some writing is more rewarding, ultimately some things are better than other things.
If you say, how do you know they're better, then how do you know one football team is better than another, it plays better, gets more results, you know, and people respond to that.
He concluded:
In terms of institutional study, there is a dislike of what I think is rather sourly thought of as high culture and high art, and in favour of communications, which can be awfully boring and not terribly rewarding.
But yes, it is going on, and certainly in polytechnics.
The idea that certain analyses of literature reject aestheticism is, in fact, a fairly crude parody of the Marxist and feminist positions.
However, the belief that good poems are like good football teams, in that they get ‘better results’, is undoubtedly novel.
Certainly Paradise Lost does get ‘better results’ for some people; Sylvia Plath gets ‘better results’for others, while Catherine Cookson gets ‘better results’for even more people.
People from different backgrounds, different eras and with different levels of education will inevitably respond in a variety of ways to the same texts.
Dr P's argument is that in a piece of ‘good’ writing, there are certain qualities, above and beyond the techniques s/he uses to communicate an experience or belief, that make that piece of writing intrinsically superior to other pieces of literature.
If one asks the question, ‘Who decides what is a piece of ‘good’ writing?’one is back to Leavis's statements about the ‘morally sensitive’reader.
Dr P's argument disguises the reality that, as has been pointed out by writers as diverse as Spender (1981a) and Eagleton (1983), only a small group of people, historically, have participated in deciding which literature gets the best ‘results’.
Whereas the liberal view emphasizes the universal qualities of ‘good literature’ and claims that there is an objective standard by which that literature can be judged, one alternative view, as expressed by Dr S, is that our responses to literature are necessarily subjective.
This is what she said about her ‘women and literature’ course:
I try and make women's history clearer, because obviously they've done history A level so they've probably learnt about wars and all the male sort of things, so what women were doing and thinking and the way in which that has been suppressed; as much as possible I like to teach by not putting very much of what I think across but trying to get other people to produce it…also encouraging them to share as an experience and personal responses and talking about things one wouldn't normally talk about in the department, the emotional side of things, in quotes ‘irrational’, ‘intuitive’ and all of that, and valuing that…try and make it a space where people can say whatever they want to say; I suppose value things that would not be valued elsewhere.
In Dr S's view, the discourse of the emotional is devalued in the rest of the department, and she tries to bring it to the fore.
She sees this course as explicitly challenging some of the accepted norms of the rest of the course.
It is intended to be non-competitive and less about following rules than allowing people to express their own feelings and ideas.
Perhaps the inherent problem with this is that ‘women and literature’ is labelled as ‘subjective’and ‘trivial’, and therefore becomes marginalized: it is not allowed to challenge the mainstream ideas of the English degree.
Clearly each of the English departments contained a multiplicity of views within its staff.
Curiously however, the three traditional lecturers with whom I discussed the matter insisted that the plurality made no difference to assessment of students' work; in the words of Mr R:
As far as examining goes, or marking essays, I assume that most of my colleagues take the sort of line that I do, that what we're looking for is not a particular interpretation of something, but an ability to get to grips with texts, to produce an argument that's logical, coherent, well-written and is supported from the texts.
This view was also the one put forward by Dr P and Dr M in Department B. However, Dr S had a different view:
They [theoretical differences]are not resolved really; they continue as quite big arguments; and there are quite big camps really of those who believe in theory and those who believe in scholarship, I suppose; and we pretend that you can just muddle along and it doesn't matter, but the crunch comes at things like marking exam papers, because if you've got a student who's heavily into theory, writing for a marker who's heavily not into theory, then they tend to say things like ‘oh, he's just read Terry Eagleton, so blah blah blah’ or ‘she's just read Cate Belsey and regurgitated that’so someone can get a bad mark because they've written for the wrong person.
This statement points to an alarming rift in English, and suggests that degree classes can be determined by whichever side wins the battle in a particular examination meeting.
However, while most teachers of English in our universities believe, or appear to believe, that there is an unspoken consensus about what constitutes ‘quality’ in the practice of English, then this rift will remain unresolved.
The divide in English studies seems to be between those who want to bring the rift out into the open, and those who prefer to pretend that it doesn't exist.
There is, therefore, a continual tension between the claims of the departments to objectivity, and their emphasis on subjectivity.
Despite this tension, there is also a refusal to examine curricula or practices: student failure, therefore, is the fault of the student's inability to make the necessary sympathetic adjustment to the requirements of literary judgement; not the failure of the departments in setting those requirements.
Communications
The communications course, in many ways, is as much a social science as an humanities subject, although many of the staff come from English literature backgrounds.
It is concerned with the ways in which people communicate (with particular emphasis on the mass media), in both a practical and an academic sense.
Lecturers I spoke to saw the course as chiefly concerned with the development of critical skills combined with promoting an understanding of the vocational areas on which communications has a bearing:
I think any student going through higher education is getting something from it if they come in as some measure sceptical, in some measure critical, that they're not prepared to take things at face value.
If you are encouraging them all the time to consider propositions or arguments and then what evidence has been marshalled in support and the like, then you want them to come out like that….
We don't pretend in any way to professionally train students [but]they are expected to understand something of what professional training would consist of….
What we would be dealing with are more of the implications, or this is how, for whatever reasons, it has come to pass that people write journalistic stories in this kind of way — might there not be other, better, more adequate ways of writing journalistic stories?
Those kind of questions…it makes them, should they become practitioners, better practitioners.
Despite the clarity of this statement of intent, staff still regard both the course and the discipline of communications as emergent, rather than complete:
Our general philosophy about the area hasn't changed.
We still think that communications arguably, whilst still emerging as a discipline, is best approached from a range of disciplines.
So it's still, if you like, at the  beginning, a multi-disciplinary exercise which progressively becomes inter-disciplinary.
Unlike English, which is an established discipline, communications is still in the process of finding a language and an identity; it is not yet a discipline in itself.
Having said that, it is beginning to gel as a discipline; Mr D said that staff rarely discussed the aims of the course now, there being a ‘general assumption that the ground rules are more or less the same [as when we started]’.
He added:
I wouldn't say there's a consensus, but there are various consensuses, that's the plural, which overlap, which aren't in opposition, about what communications ought to be about.
The awareness that there is not a discussion about what communications is, and that perhaps there should be, is rather different from the viewpoint of some English lecturers, who believe that English is established as a practice and therefore has no need of a debate about its development as a discipline.
The multi-disciplinary/inter-disciplinary nature of communications can, however, make it very disjointed, particularly in the first year when sociology, psychology, and so on, are studied as separate subjects between which little connection is made.
In the second and third years the course comes together as it concentrates on communications as a discipline, taking the discourse of sociology and psychology much more for granted.
Communications, as taught at C, is more overtly theoretical than either of the English courses.
Despite the many points of contact between the study of film or media and the study of literature, despite the fact that there exist theorists such as Barthes who have made important contributions to the study of film and the study of literature, it is only on the communications courses that such theorists are studied.
Most of the English practitioners were not concerned to look at literature as a method of communicating .
The teaching of communications demands that students approach the subject in a way that entails thinking, not just about individual ideas or issues, but about the relationship between those ideas and also the social location of those ideas.
It is assumed that a text, or a film, is not something which has a set of meanings which can be extracted from it, but something whose meanings exist only because they are part of a wider social world; people can find meanings only if their world shares some common meanings with that of the text.
For example, a question on one of the communications examination papers asks:
How is masculinity constructed in any of the films you have studied this year?
This question is interesting not only because it suggests a world wider than that of the film itself, but also because it focuses on the issue of ‘masculinity’.
This provides a contrast with many of the English papers which had the occasional question on ‘Discuss Rossetti's/Dickens's/Browning's representation of  women’, but never had anything on an author's representation of men .
The response of Dr P to communications, it will be remembered, is that it ignores the aesthetic, that it is so obsessed with ‘ideological statements and political texts’ that it can no longer make a distinction between good and bad.
In fact, the ‘aesthetic’ is discussed on the course, but as a problematic rather than as a response to literature.
Interestingly Mr D denied that communications was more inclined to encourage students to question conventional wisdom than subjects such as English, saying that ‘I don't think academic subjects do…take things for granted’ and that English looks at how writers are ‘situated socially and economically and culturally’.
He believed that communications was only different in that it offered some vocational skills.
His claims for communications were, in fact, much more modest than the English lecturers' claims for English.
Essentially, what the communications course does is to bring to the fore issues which had hitherto been considered marginal; it brings the perspectives of a variety of disciplines to bear on one subject.
To a greater degree than any other discipline — maybe even than sociology — it is concerned with the social construction of meaning, with dispelling certainty about knowledge.
English departments are apparently tolerant of competing ideas and paradigms; lecturers, however, argued that assessment of students was more concerned with assessing students' grasp of a discourse, their ability to practise English, than with judging the validity of their opinions.
In communications, given that the course deals with a variety of political relationships, disagreement between staff would have to be more overtly ideological; the course itself is easily open to charges of left-wing bias.
It doesn't give the impression of staff muddling on regardless: differences in theoretical perspectives are made explicit.
The extent to which these differences should be made obvious to students is less clear:
What you're trying to do is indicate to them how best you might be able to work your way through those controversies to be able to make some statement of policy or some recommendation and the like….
There's no point, I don't think, in that kind of pretension to an absolute objectivity, and some of my colleagues in the department do, and I think that's regrettable, and I don't think it serves any useful function.
There's a much greater sense here of tolerating plurality and diversity than there was in the English departments, although obviously there is conflict amongst staff about the extent to which such plurality can be tolerated.
Students are encouraged to challenge orthodoxy, to be critical.
Having said that, it would presumably be very difficult for a student who held particularly strong right-wing views to survive on the course.
There is a sense in which the challenge to convention can become a convention in itself; it is easier to say that a multitude of views will be tolerated than to put it into practice.
Indeed, both the lecturers I spoke to felt that some of their colleagues were less tolerant of dissent than they were; we shall see later that some of the students felt this too.