

Chapter Nine
George and Elaine had taken their Boxing Day constitutional in Grantley Woods.
As they drove past Vauxhall Drive, George smiled to himself.
He wondered fleetingly what Elaine would do if she knew that he was the ‘Grantley Ripper’.
At the moment though all she was interested in was her holiday with the girls, and her two nights out a week.
George knew that she was a bit nonplussed at his eagerness for her to have her own social life.
She thought it was an act of selflessness on his part.
She could not have been more wrong.
On the nights that Elaine went out with her friends, he went out on the prowl.
He liked the word.
Prowler, prowling, prowl.
It was similar to prowess, another of his favourites.
While Elaine was out gallivanting, he could do his prowling in peace and watch his videos without interruption.
He had talked her into ringing him when she wanted to come home so that he could pick her up, make sure she was safe.
He grinned to himself.
All he really wanted to know was when she would be arriving so he could clear away.
Her absences had done wonders for their marriage.
Now, when they were in, they managed a sort of truce.
He didn't annoy her and she shut her almighty trap.
He wished she had done it years ago.
Bugger Elaine!
He grinned again.
No chance.
She wouldn't even let him have what she termed normal sex.
‘George, what are you thinking about?’
Elaine watched him sceptically.
She hated his long silences.
He parked the car outside their house and smiled at her.
‘I was just thinking how lucky I am to have a wife like you.’
Elaine leant back in the car seat to get a better look at him.
‘Really, George?’
‘Really.
You've been a good wife, Elaine.’
‘Oh.
Well, thanks.’
They got out of the car and George noted that she did not return the compliment.
Elaine walked up the garden path and he followed her.
As she opened the front door the phone began to ring and she rushed to answer it.
George slipped off his Burberry and hung it up in the hall cupboard.
‘It's your sister Edith from America!’
George took the phone.
‘Hello, Edith!’
There was genuine affection in his voice.
He had always been close to her.
Both had taken the brunt of their mother's tongue and had a natural affinity.
‘Hello, Georgie.
I just had to ring you — Merry Christmas!’
‘And to you, dear, and Joss.
How are the children?’
Elaine smiled at George's happiness.
God knew the man had little enough from his family, and she had always liked Edith herself.
She had the same manner as George, a sad kind of demeanour that on a woman was attractive while on a man like George it was annoying.
Elaine went into the kitchen and made two Irish coffees.
What the hell?
It was Christmas.
When George had finished on the phone he came in to her, beaming.
‘She sends you her love and wants us to go over and stay with them.’
Edith asked them over every year.
Elaine bit her lip for a second, her round face thoughtful.
‘Let's go over next year, shall we, George?
We could easily afford it, and you and Edith have always been close.
It would be a great holiday for us.’
George caught her excitement.
‘Yes, let's.
Oh, Elaine, let's.’
He looked into her eager face and almost loved her.
‘Right then, George, I'll see to it after the holidays!
Now, I'm going in to watch the film.
Are you coming?’
‘In a little while, my love.
I'll drink my coffee out here, I think, make some plans.’
‘Okey doke.’
She left the kitchen, beaming.
George sat at the white Formica table and smiled.
Then he remembered the redundancy.
He clenched his fists.
Elaine still did not know that he was going to lose his job.
The redundancy money would be quite a bit but that was not the same as having a wage coming in.
He brightened.
He could take the redundancy money and put it in a separate account!
Then he felt discouraged again.
Where could he go all day?
No, Elaine would find out.
She always found out.
There was nothing for it but to tell her the truth.
They would go out to Florida and see Edith, though.
He was determined on that.
He remembered Edith as she had been when a girl.
She had been exquisite.
Not too tall, and she had developed early.
She had the same mousy brown hair as George himself, except on her it looked right.
It had a slight curl in it that made her look soft somehow.
She had porcelain white skin that showed the blue veins perfectly, especially on the swell of her breasts.
She had fine grey eyes that were heavy lidded, giving her a sensual look, a tiny rosebud mouth and soft round pink cheeks.
His mother had always hated Edith.
Then one day she had gone away.
Only George knew that she had run off to Brighton with a salesman, but his mother had guessed as much and beaten her daughter's whereabouts out of him with a belt.
He had told on his sister, poor Edith.
The scene when Nancy had turned up at the Shangri-La guest house must have been terrible.
As always his mother had had the upper hand.
Edith had been pregnant and alone, the salesman abandoning her when she had told him her condition.
How his mother had made her pay!
Oh, how.
She had taken a delight in reproaching Edith at every opportunity.
The mother who swore to everyone that she loved her children!
Edith had lost weight while other pregnant women  bloomed.
She had looked like a spectre; all the fight and vitality were gradually sucked from her.
Then, when she had finally gone into labour, Edith had been left to birth alone in her bedroom with only their mother's reprimanding voice to help her along.
George had sat outside and listened.
‘All children come into the world in pain, Edith, but none as painfully as a bastard child.’
He clenched his teeth.
He had only been thirteen then, but had wanted to burst into the room and strike his mother to the ground.
The groans and cries of his sister had broken his heart.
He sat up all night and into the next day until he heard a soft mewling sound like a kitten and knew that the child had been safely delivered after all that pain.
Edith had loved the boy.
Loved him with all her heart and soul, thinking in her ignorance that her mother would allow her to keep him because adoption had never been mentioned.
Believing in her heart of hearts that Nancy would soften towards her and the child once it arrived and made a niche in her heart.
But it was not to be.
When the boy was two months old they had come to take him away.
A big woman from an adoption agency, with hard steely blue eyes and cherries in her hat, and a smaller woman, kinder, with watery eyes and a big grey folder.
Edith had screamed, pleaded and begged on her knees but her mother would not relent.
She had enjoyed it.
In the end, the big woman with the cherries in her hat had dragged the now screaming child from his mother's arms, pulling poor Edith along with her for a few steps until she had dropped sobbing on to the linoleum.
Then it was all over.
Edith's son was gone from the house and from her life.
And she had been left bereft, broken-hearted.
The next day George had seen his mother forcing her to drink a cup of cold tea full of Epsom salts to help her get rid of the milk in her breasts.
He had finally hated Nancy on that day.
When Edith had met Joss Campbell a few years later he had been so glad for her, because Joss was older than Edith and was more than a match for Nancy.
When his mother had told him, as she always told any man interested in Edith, about the bastard  child, he had just smiled.
Smiled and said he would have her under any circumstances.
George had loved Joss for that one sentence alone.
Yes, he would go and see Edith.
Even if it took every penny of his redundancy money.
He was fifty-one now and Edith fifty-five.
Life was drawing on, and he wanted to see her before it was too late.
He drank his now cold coffee and was grateful for the whisky that Elaine had put in it.
Somewhere in the world was a man, a thirty-eight-year-old man, who was probably married with children of his own.
Who, because of his grandmother's warped mind, would never know the kind and gentle woman who had borne him.
George washed up his cup and saucer carefully and placed them in the plastic drainer.
Then he joined Elaine to watch the film.
But thoughts of Edith stayed with him all that evening.
Kate glanced at her watch.
It was five forty-five.
She had been interviewing people since nine that morning and was tired.
She sat in her car and turned the heater on while she wrote her comments on a piece of paper.
The man she had just interviewed, a Mr Liam Groves, had not been too happy to be interviewed on Boxing Day.
He was not at all impressed by her explanation that it was just to eliminate him from their inquiries.
In fact, he had told her in no uncertain terms to go forth and multiply.
Only not in the biblical words!
She finished her notes and looked at the list of suspects.
Peter Bordez, Geoffrey Carter, John Cranmer…the list still had over fifty names on it.
She decided to call it a day.
Placing the file on the passenger seat, she started up her car.
The little Fiat pulled away quickly and Kate put on the radio.
‘I saw Momma kissing Santa Claus’ blared out.
Frowning, she turned it off.
She was not into Christmas this year.
Maybe next year she would be able to enjoy it.
Dan had taken Lizzy and her mother to a pantomime of all things.
Which left her free, on Boxing Day, to get on with her work.
She gripped the steering wheel until her knuckles were  white.
She scanned the houses in the streets, looking at the Christmas trees in gaily lit windows, the decorations that were hanging from ceilings.
She knew that behind a similar door somewhere, the Grantley Ripper was sitting by his fireside, stuffed full of Christmas goodies.
He could have children sitting at his feet.
His wife might even be sparing a thought for the murdered women's families, never guessing that the man she was married to had been the perpetrator.
Kate wished she was at the pantomime.
Wished that she was laughing and joking and shouting out ‘Behind you’ and ‘Oh no you don't’to the dame on the stage of the theatre.
She wished she was anywhere but Grantley at this moment.
Dan was doing his utmost to be helpful and she appreciated it.
At least this Christmas she didn't have to feel guilty because Lizzy didn't have either of her parents with her.
Oh, her mother was good, she worshipped her grandchild, but sometimes Kate felt a twinge of guilt at the amount of time she herself spent away from Lizzy.
It was a joke really, because if she was one of the male officers then she would not have given it a second thought.
But being a woman, she had to juggle her home life and her police work with expert precision.
She consoled herself with the fact that her daughter understood.
And Lizzy, bless her, really did.
She knew how important Kate's job was.
How it kept the roof over their heads as well as helping the community.
How many times had Kate snuck into a school hall, late for some school event, her male driver beside her cringing with embarrassment at the childish antics on stage.
But she knew that Lizzy appreciated her turning up, and that her reputation as a DI had not suffered because of her being a mother.
On the contrary, male CID officers admired her.
Well, if she was honest with herself, only the older ones.
She was finished today, though.
She'd had enough.
This inquiry was getting to her.
What she wouldn't give for a nice warm lap to rest her head in.
She didn't go as far as to say a nice warm man to slip into bed with, but that was not far from her mind.
Dan's arrival had aroused all her dormant sexuality.
Sex with him had always been good.
It had been  wonderful in fact.
The trouble was, Dan liked it so much he tended to spread it around and that was no good to Kate.
No good at all.
She stopped at the crossroads that took her towards her house and, instead of going right, as she normally would, went left towards the outskirts of Grantley.
To the large eighteenth-century house that belonged to Patrick Kelly.
She decided that she would drop in and see how he was.
Patrick Kelly sat on his daughter's bed.
She was all around him.
The bedroom smelled of her musky perfume; on the floor by the bed was her diary.
On the dressing table inside the large bay window all her cosmetics and lotions stood vacantly, as if they knew they would never be used again.
There, all alone, stood a large framed photograph of himself, Renée and Mandy.
They were all laughing.
It had been taken in Marbella, just before Renée's death.
Now they were both gone.
He turned his head at a slight tap on the door.
It was Willy.
‘That detective bird's downstairs, I shoved her in the drawing room.’
‘Thanks, Willy, I'm just coming.
Get cook to make up a tray of coffee will you?’
The man nodded and left the room.
Standing up slowly, Patrick walked from the room.
He walked down the staircase, his shoulders bowed as if by a great weight, and Kate saw him pull himself erect.
He walked towards her with his hands outstretched, and she clasped them warmly before she thought about what she was doing.
‘Ms Burrows.
Very nice to see you.’
Kate smiled.
‘I was passing and I thought I'd just pop in and see how you were.’
Both knew it was a lie.
No one was ‘just passing’ Patrick Kelly's house.
‘That was very kind of you.
I've ordered some coffee.’
Kate followed him into the morning room.
A roaring fire was in the grate and the room was pleasantly warm.
It was like going back a hundred years.
Kelly sat on the settee beside her and smiled sadly.
‘Actually, I'm glad of the company.
My sister's no good at times like this.
I've told her I'll see her at the funeral, though I suppose it won't be for a while.
But I need company.
My friends, or people I call friends, aren't really close.
I never realised until now that in fact I have very few people I can trust.
Only my daughter, and my wife when she was alive.’
Kate looked into his haggard face, so different from Dan's blond smoothness.
‘I see so much unhappiness in my work, it's hard sometimes just to switch off.’
They sat together on the settee.
‘What about your family?
Won't they be wondering where you are on Boxing Day?’
‘My daughter's sixteen, and today my ex-husband has taken her and my mother to a pantomime.’
She saw the flicker of pain cross his face as she spoke of Lizzy and guessed that he was thinking of his own daughter.
She hurried on, ‘So I have a couple of hours to myself.’
Patrick Kelly heard the underlying loneliness in her voice and knew instinctively that they were two of a kind.
Loners who worked and worked, and at the end of the day had nothing except their families.
And when the families were no more, they had nothing at all to show for their efforts.
‘Have you eaten today?’
Kate shook her head.
‘Not since this morning.’
‘Then why not have lunch with me?
I could do with the company and Mrs Manners has still got enough turkey to feed the third world and the poor Albanians.
Unless you have to get back of course.’
‘That sounds lovely.
I'd love to have lunch with you, Mr Kelly.’
‘Patrick….
The name's Patrick.
Right then, I'll go and sort it out.’
Kate felt inordinately pleased at his offer, even though she was astute enough to know that it came from a desire for any company, rather than hers specifically.
She was still thrilled to be there.
She self-consciously fiddled with her hair, tidied up her  clothes.
She wished she had worn her new suit, but she consoled herself that at the moment he didn't care what she looked like.
Willy brought in the coffee and smiled at her.
Kate smiled back but inside she shuddered.
The man looked like something from a bad nightmare.
Half of one ear was missing, and his nose had obviously been broken more than a few times.
He grinned at her from a toothless mouth.
‘Shall I pour for you, love?’
Kate shook her head.
‘I'll do it, thank you.’
Willy looked relieved and left the room.
Patrick Kelly returned.
Lunch would be ready in twenty minutes.
Leaving Kate with her coffee, he slipped into the library to use the phone.
Dimitrios Brunos, a London Greek, was one of the best ‘minders’ in the West End.
He was also one of the most violent.
‘Mr Kelly, how are you?’
His voice was solicitous.
‘Listen to me carefully and pass on what I say to all the others.
My Mandy is dead and I'm upping the ante.
There's half a mil’ for whoever finds the ponce, right?’
Patrick heard a sharp intake of breath and smiled grimly.
That should get some results.
‘Also, I'll be looking for the slag personally, so I reckon between us we should find him.
Whoever gives me his name gets the money, OK?’
‘Yes.
Please accept my most sincere condolences.
Your daughter was a…‘
‘Yeah, yeah.
All right, Dimitrios.
I ain't got that far myself yet.
Just let the others know the score.’
Patrick put down the receiver and closed his eyes tightly.
He was going to hound the slag into the ground.
He would find him and pay him out if it was the last thing he ever did.
Pulling himself upright, he squared his shoulders.
First thing tomorrow he was going to phone the Chief Constable to request copies of everything the Old Bill found out.
Patrick intended to get to the suspects first.
He went back in to Kate and sat beside her.
Even though she was an Old Bill, a filth, he trusted her somehow.
She had the same quietness and serenity his Renée had had.
Patrick liked her.
George and Elaine had opened a bottle of wine.
She was tipsy and they were watching a comedy film on TV.
The curtains were pulled and the lamplight gave a cosy glow to the room.
In fairness, George thought, Elaine was an exemplary housewife.
Never in all their years together had he lacked an ironed shirt or clean underwear.
His suits always went to the cleaner's on time, and his meals were always cooked for him.
Admittedly, Elaine's cooking often left a lot to be desired, but she was at least conscientious.
A good woman.
His mother, whatever her faults — and they were legion — had been the same in the housewifely stakes.
Hate her or love her, the children were always well fed.
She made sure they were the best dressed, the cleanest, the brainiest.
Her house was the best furnished and kept spic and span.
She had been proud of her Nottingham lace curtains, her wooden beds….
George jumped.
Elaine had placed her arm around his neck.
He looked at her from the corner of his eye.
She was resting her head on his shoulder.
Oh God!
‘Give us a kiss, George.’
Her voice was low and slurred.
He concentrated on the television screen.
Bette Midler and Danny De Vito were fighting it out.
Ruthless People the film was called.
Ruthless People?
He was the ruthless one.
Hadn't he proved it?
‘Come on, George, give us a kiss.’
Elaine pulled his face round and planted a wet, sticky mouth on his own.
George kissed her.
He didn't know what else to do.
For the first time in over sixteen years, Elaine showed some signs of interest in him!
He shuddered.
‘I've had a lovely day, George.
A lovely day.
And next year  we will finally have a good year.
Three hundred and sixty-five days of happiness.
I'm going on holiday with you, to Florida to see our Edith.
And I'm going to Spain with the girls.’
Elaine was having trouble forming the words now and George guessed that if he kept quiet she would fall asleep.
He put his arm around her with difficulty and held her close to him.
She snuggled into him and closed her eyes.
Please God make her go to sleep.
His prayer was answered.
Within moments the wine, the heat and the excitement of the day caught up with her and she began to snore softly into his thick cable-knit cardigan.
George breathed a sigh of relief.
He would do many things to keep her happy, but sex was not one of them.
Picking up the remote control, he turned the TV on to video.
Mandy appeared on the screen.
He had set the video up earlier in the evening while Elaine was making supper.
He had been waiting for her to go to bed.
Now he turned the sound down and watched the action on the screen.
The element of risk gave it an added excitement.
So Mandy went through her nightly ritual and Elaine snored and George was happy, his finger poised over the TV button on the remote control.
In a funny way he wished that Elaine would open her eyes, but she was blind drunk and slept.
And George just sat and watched.
Kate had enjoyed her late lunch with Patrick Kelly very much.
They had opened up to each other.
Now she sat with her own family and listened to their account of the pantomime.
‘Oh, Mum, it was really funny.
You should have seen the dame!
He was hilarious.
Joanie was there with her brothers.
They sat with us and we had the greatest time.’
‘Considering you didn't really want to go.’
Evelyn's voice was jocular.
‘I'm too old for pantomimes, I'm an adult.’
And when we got there she was shouting louder than anyone!’
‘I'm sorry I missed it.’
‘Dad was really funny, he made jokes all through it.
I wish you could have been there, Mum.’
‘So do I, Lizzy.
It sounds great.’
‘Oh, it was.
Dad's gone up for a bath.’
Lizzy looked at the kitchen clock and squealed.
‘Oh my God, if I don't get a move on I'm going to be late.’
‘Where you off to then?’
‘Oh, me and Joanie are going to a party tonight.’
She twisted her hair around her fingers.
‘I'm sure I mentioned it.’
‘You never said anything to me.’
‘Or me.’
Evelyn's voice was low.
‘Well, it's been arranged absolutely ages and Joanie is coming round for me at seven-thirty.
I really must go, Mum.’
Kate and Evelyn exchanged glances.
‘Well, I don't remember you telling us anything about it.
Where is this party?’
‘It's near Joanie's house, in the next street.
I don't know the number.’
‘I see.’
‘Oh, Mum, don't say it like that.
I must go!
I want to go.’
Lizzy's voice was high and near to tears.
‘No one has said you can't go…yet.’
Dan walked into the kitchen in his dressing gown.
‘What's all this racket then?’
Lizzy ran to him and he put his arm around her.
‘I want to go to a party and Mum won't let me.
Everyone will be there.’
‘Your mother never said you can't go, Lizzy.
That's not fair.’
‘Oh, Gran, I want to go so much.
And between you, you'll talk me out of it!’
‘We will not!
All your mother wants to know is where it is and who'll be there!’
‘I'll take her and pick her up, how's that?’
Everyone looked at Dan.
Lizzy kissed him on the cheek.
‘That's settled then, I'll go and get ready.
Blimey, Mum, sometimes your job really goes to your head.
I'm not a suspect, you know!’
Her voice was happy once more and Kate watched her run from the room.
‘Thanks, Dan.
Thanks a bundle.’
He opened his arms wide.
‘What have I done?
All I said was I'd take her and pick her up.
There's no harm in that, Kate.’
He counted off on his fingers.
‘First, we'll know where it is.
And secondly, we'll be able to sort out a reasonable time for getting her home.
Third, I'll have a quick look at who's there.
I can't see there's any problem.’
He walked from the room and Kate felt an urge to jump on his back and tear his hair out.
Not five minutes in the house and he was already countermanding her.
Lizzy would be allowed to get away with blue murder while her father was around, it was always the same, then when he swanned off again, it would be left to Kate to pick up the pieces and get back some kind of equilibrium.
She sighed heavily.
‘He's right, you know, Kate.
She's not a child any more.’
‘Oh, Mum, don't you jump on the bandwagon.
She's so grown up that she shouted herself hoarse through a bloody pantomime not two hours ago.
I saw a girl not much older than her battered and dying in a hospital bed, not twenty-four hours since.
There's a bloody maniac on the loose and you tell me that she's grown up!’
Evelyn put her hand on her daughter's arm.
‘That's not all that's bothering you, is it?
Now is it?
It's Dan taking the reins from your hands that's brought all this on.
Well, listen to me and listen good.
It won't last — it never does.
But you can't stop that child from living a normal life.
She'll be with Joanie and her other friends, Dan's picking her up.
So swallow your pride and don't make an enemy of your own child.’
‘I'll be glad when he goes.
And first thing in the New Year he will be going.
That, Mum, is a promise!’
‘He only wants to see the child enjoy herself with her friends.’
Kate sighed noisily.
‘Don't you start taking his side, Mum.
It's bad enough Lizzy thinks the sun shines out of his…’
‘Kate!’
Evelyn stopped her flow of words.
‘You should listen to yourself, young lady.’
She sat at the breakfast bar and lit herself a cigarette.
It wasn't the time to remind her mother that she was forty.
Her lovely afternoon had been spoiled.
She would have let Lizzy go to the party eventually, she rarely denied the girl anything.
But to have the decision taken out of her hands like that was irritating and downright unfair.
But Kate knew when enough was enough so she kept her peace.
Dan dropped Joanie and Lizzy off at a respectable-looking semi-detached house and after a quick kiss on his daughter's cheek drove away, pleased with the way he had handled everything.
It would do Kate good to realise that he could be responsible too.
Lizzy went into the party with Joanie and was immediately surrounded by a crowd of boys.
She was wearing a short black skirt and a tiny scrap of a top that emphasised her heavy breasts.
Joanie stood by her side as she laughed and chatted with the guys.
She was a different girl to the one her mother and grandmother knew.
‘So come on then, has anyone got any puff?’
A tall thin boy with straggly hair passed her a joint and Lizzy took it from him, inhaling the fragrant mixture deeply.
‘Mmm, smells like Sensimelle!’
She took a large draw and held the smoke in her lungs for about ten seconds before letting it out.
Her breasts quivered and gathered the attention of every male in the vicinity.
‘I have been dying for a toke all day.
Where's Angela and Marianne?’
‘They won't be here till later.
They're trying to score a few Es over in Grays.’
Lizzy's eyes lit up.
‘Oh, great.
I have to be home for halfpast one!
There's plenty of time for fun yet.’
Everyone burst out laughing and Joanie smiled uneasily.
Since they had got in with this crowd, she had not felt very happy.
They were too forward for her, but Lizzy loved them.
She thrived on all the attention and excitement.
Joanie tagged along with her, as she always had done.
An hour later Lizzy was against the wall in the back garden with an eighteen-year-old boy named Joey Meeson.
He had pulled the band of material that passed for a skirt up around her waist and was tugging at the top of her tights.
‘Not here!’
Her voice was scandalised.
Joey looked down at her and grinned.
‘You really must learn to get into the swing of things, Lizzy.’
She pulled her skirt down and blinked rapidly.
The cannabis and the vodka she had consumed were making her feel light-headed.
‘Is it true that your mum's a filth?’
Lizzy giggled.
‘You could call her that.
She's a Detective Inspector.’
‘Really?
That's wild.’
‘Actually, she's all right.’
‘What would she say if she knew what we'd been doing tonight?’
His voice was genuinely interested.
‘Probably go ape shit.’
They both laughed and then Joey kissed her again.
Softer this time.
‘Talking of shit, how about I skin up again?
This time in the bedroom?’
His voice was low and husky and Lizzy was lost.
He was the best-looking boy she had ever seen in her life.
‘That would be fine.’
‘Come on then.’
He pulled her by the hand through the crowded kitchen and hall and over the bodies on the stairs.
Inside the bedroom, Lizzy found out what Joey's idea of a good time was.
And Joey found out that Lizzy, the daughter of a policewoman, was not as innocent as he had first thought.
Chapter Ten
New Year's Eve
‘Are you sure you're going to be all right on your own, George?’
Elaine's voice was concerned but deep inside she hoped he would not decide to go to the party.
The last few days he had been getting on her nerves.
George fit and well could get you down, but George ill was a nightmare.
‘You go to the party, dear, and give everyone my best.
I'm really much too ill to go tonight.’
She breathed a sigh of relief.
‘Well, if you're sure?’
George smiled wanly.
‘You go and have a good time.
I've got a good book, a flask of soup and my tablets.’
She kissed him on the cheek.
‘See you then.
I might be late.’
She giggled.
George nodded.
In her new dress, a fitted emerald green sparkly affair with huge padded shoulders, George thought she looked like a cross between a Christmas tree and an American footballer.
‘You look lovely, Elaine.
You'll have all the men wanting to dance with you.’
‘Oh, George.
You old silly!’
Elaine giggled again, a schoolgirl going on her first date.
She dropped her clutch bag and George frowned as she strained to pick it up.
Not an American footballer — a sumo wrestler.
God, she was bad enough in her shell suits.
A taxi hooted outside and Elaine rushed from the room, leaving a scent of Estee Lauder and face powder.
‘Bye, George.’
He listened to the thud of her feet on the stairs and the satisfying slam of the front door as it crashed behind her.
She was gone.
He was alone.
Hallelujah!
George lay with bated breath until he heard the taxi turn at the end of the street, then jumped from the bed.
‘Look, Mr Kelly, it's New Year's Eve.
We always get lots of punters in on New Year's Eve.
She's a good kid….’
Kelly stared hard at the woman in front of him.
Violet Mapping had been running this massage parlour for five years.
She was one of the hardest toms he had ever met in his life, and he had met a few, but she had one vice: she was a dyke and liked the young girls.
But this young girl was not working in his massage parlour until she was qualified.
‘Listen, Vi, get the girl a certificate and she can work here till the cows come home.
Till then, no way.’
‘Oh, Mr Kelly, you know and I know that that piece of paper is a bloody con.’
‘I don't care what you know, Violet.
Once she's done a course in massage and has her certificate she can work here.
Until then, no.’
Violet saw the man's face harden and decided it was better to give way on this occasion.
Everyone knew about Mandy, it was common knowledge on the streets.
It was best not to annoy him now.
She sighed.
‘If you say so, Mr Kelly.’
‘Good girl, Vi, you know it makes sense.
Now then, if you get any weird ones in I want you to cop the names and addresses — the lot.
Then I want you to pass them on to me.’
Violet snorted with laughter.
‘They're all fucking weird, that's why they come here!’
Kelly shook his head in annoyance.
‘You know what I mean.
If one wants something a bit outlandish like, or gets violent with the girls, I want to know.
OK?
You're one of the best ‘lifters’ in the game, Vi.
You can lift a wallet better than anyone I've ever known.
Only after you've lifted it, Violet, you put it back, comprenez?’
She narrowed her hard blue eyes.
‘I give up lifting years ago, Mr Kelly, you should know that.’
The two eyed each other for a few seconds.
‘Just make sure the wallet goes back into the pocket, Vi, or there'll be hell to pay.
Now get back on reception.
By the way, before I forget, how old is that little black bird out there?’
Violet pulled her mouth down at the corners and shrugged her skinny shoulders.
‘I dunno.’
Patrick Kelly stood up.
‘You don't know?
Well, judging by the looks of her I'd put her at about fifteen, Vi, so get rid of her.
Fuck me, I pay you to run this gaff.
I might as well run the bastard place meself!’
‘All right, all right , no need to get your knickers in a twist.
I'll sort it, OK?’
‘Good.’
‘I'm sorry about your Mandy, Pat, heart sorry.
We all are.’
Her voice was soft now.
She had been working for, and fighting with, Patrick Kelly for years.
He was a good boss.
Fair but hard.
His daughter had been his life.
Everyone knew that.
He dropped his eyes.
‘Thanks, Vi.’
‘Right then, face ache, I'd better go and give my little friend the bad news.’
Her voice was once more loud and aggressive.
‘You do that, girl, and once she's got her certificate, she can work her little arse off.’
‘I'll get her a bent one off Vinny Marcenello.’
‘You get it where you like, love, but she don't work till she's got it.
I mean that, Vi.’
‘I know that, don't I!’
Her voice was shrill again.
She walked from the office.
Kelly carried on looking over the books but his heart wasn't in it.
Finally he got up from his desk and walked out  into the foyer of the massage parlour.
All around the walls were plushly upholstered seats.
Girls and women of every colour, creed, shape and size were sprawled all over them.
They all sat up straight as Patrick walked among them.
He nodded at them absentmindedly.
Then turning to the left he walked through a door to the back of the parlour.
That was where the cubicles were.
He walked silently along the thickly carpeted floor until he came to the last cubicle.
He listened.
A childish voice wafted from behind the thin curtain.
‘Do you require any extras, sir?’
‘How much will it rush me?’
‘Well, hand relief is fifteen quid, a blow job's twenty, and the full bifta is forty-five quid.’
Patrick heard the man laugh.
‘Gis the full bifta, girl.’
Patrick shook his head and turned to walk back to the foyer.
For some reason the childish voice had upset him.
He knew the girl.
She was only seventeen and looked about twelve.
She was blonde, like his Mandy, except unlike Mandy she had never had a chance in life.
He walked out of the tiny corridor, through the foyer and out to his car.
Don't start getting soft now, boy, he told himself.
Tomming is the oldest profession in the world.
If they didn't work for you they'd only work for someone else.
He climbed into the back of his Rolls and tapped on the window.
Willy's voice came over the intercom.
‘Where to, Pat?’
‘Forest Gate this time.
I want to see how Juliet's getting on.’
The car purred away and Kelly relaxed in his seat.
Yet the childish voice was still repeating in his head.
‘Stop the car!’
‘Do what?’
The car screeched to a halt in the middle of the road.
Patrick
Kelly jumped out and ran back into the massage parlour.
‘Oi, Vi.
In the office quick sharp.’
Violet followed him in.
‘Yeah?
What?’
Her voice was belligerent once more.
‘That little blonde bird, what's her name?’
‘Marlene?’
‘Yeah, Marlene.
Well, she's giving the punter the full bifta.’
‘So what?’
‘Well, I want it stopped.
From now on there's no full sex in here, right.’
The Old Bill can't touch us if the girls don't cock their legs over.’
Violet looked at Patrick as if he had gone mad.
‘You feeling all the bleeding ticket?
We won't get any girls working here if we do something like that.
Gordon Bennett, if you had the choice between a mouthful of spunk or a prattfull, what would you rather have?’
Kelly's face screwed up.
‘Don't be so disgusting, Vi!’
She opened her arms wide.
‘I'm only stating facts, mate.
We won't get a tom in here with them rules, and you know it.
Our clientele will go down quicker than free beer on a beano!’
Kelly felt sick.
‘Why don't you go home and have a nice rest, Pat?
It's all the worry you've had, it's turned your head.’
He felt a fool.
‘Maybe you're right, Vi.’
‘Listen.’
Violet's voice was soft.
‘We ain't social workers, mate, we're in business.
Them girls out there are gonna flash their clout no matter what anyone does.
It's the only thing they know how to do.
So leave them to it.’
‘Oh, I don't know, Vi, there's some fucking nonces about.
Look what happened to my Mandy.’
‘Well, let me tell you something.
Them perverts, they pick on the nice innocent girls.
They don't want no tom.
They like a struggle.
Same as them posh blokes what come here — they all want to be caned.
I'm telling you, Pat, we go out the back, into the garden and cut a swish from that bleeding forsythia bush, then come back in and beat the buggers’ arses black  and blue.
Now if they didn't pay us they'd only pay the Paki down the road.’
Kelly nodded at her.
He was very tired all of a sudden.
‘Maybe you're right, Vi.’
As he walked back out into the foyer, the girls automatically straightened again as he passed them.
Out on the pavement, an elderly woman with a small sausage dog gave him a filthy look.
He sighed again.
That put the tin lid on it as far as Patrick Kelly was concerned.
The old bird thought he was a nonce.
The Rolls was parked outside once more and he climbed in.
‘Forest Gate, guv?’
‘No.
Home, I think, Willy.’
‘Okey doke.’
Kelly watched the people in the cold grey streets.
It was New Year's Eve and he had arranged to spend it with Kate.
He settled into the seat once more.
Sod the toms.
He had enough on his mind.
‘Oh, Mum!
Why must I always have you and Dad on my back?
All the girls in my class are going.
I'll be the only one who doesn't!
I'll never live it down!’
Louise Butler stamped her foot.
Her mother Doreen grinned.
She had a mind of her own did Louise.
She glanced at her husband.
‘What do you think, Ron, shall we let her go?’
Louise breathed a sigh of relief.
If her mum was asking her dad then she was going.
Mum had more or less said yes.
Before her father answered she had thrown herself into her mother's arms.
‘Thanks, Mum.
Oh, thanks.’
‘Hurry up and get changed then.
I'll run you over there.’
Ron's voice was jovial.
Louise looked at him with a mock stern expression.
‘I am ready, if you don't mind!’
They all laughed.
In her designer tracksuit of vivid mauve and gold, her Reebok bumpers and man's leather flying  jacket, she looked the complete opposite of her parents' idea of dressed up.
But she was a hardcore acid fan, from her backcombed sixties hair style to the sovereign earrings in her ears.
‘Well, I've been reading about these waves.’
‘It's raves, Dad.
Raves.’
‘Waves, raves…whatever.
You be careful.
Don't take no drugs or anything now, will you?’
Louise rolled her violet eyes.
‘as if I would.
I'm not stupid, you know.’
‘We worry about you, love, that's all.’
‘I know that, Mum.
Come on, Dad, or we'll be late.
Don't take me right to the party, drop me off at Sam's.
We want to make our way there together, OK?’
‘Oh, all right then.’
After kissing her mother, Louise followed her father from the house.
Five minutes later she was outside Sam's.
‘Now where is this rave again?’
‘Just up the road from here at Woodham Woods.
About seven miles away.
Stop worrying, Dad, we'll be fine.’
‘Well, you remember that I want you in by one at the latest.’
‘OK.
See you later, Dad.’
She kissed her father and got out of the car.
She watched him drive off before walking up the path to Sam's house.
She rang the bell.
‘Hello, Mrs Jensen, is Sam here?’
‘No, dear.
She left about ten minutes ago.
With Georgina, Tracey and Patricia.
I think it was them, anyway, she's got so many friends.
Well, they came round for her in a blue car….’
‘Oh.
All right then.
Sorry to have bothered you.’
Louise walked up the path, her heart dragging in the dirt.
That bloody bitch Sam had gone ahead knowing that Louise was coming round.
The two-faced cow!
Well, she would have to go home and get her dad to run her to the rave.
But if he did he would see that it was in an old barn, and not at all legal, and then he would make her come home.
What was she going to do?
She smiled to herself.
She would thumb a ride.
Might even get a lift off some blokes.
That would show Sam and her lot, wouldn't it?
She pulled her long dark hair from inside her flying jacket and began to walk to the outskirts of Grantley.
She'd show them.
Lizzy was dressed and ready to go.
She took one last look at herself in the wardrobe mirror before she pulled on the sheepskin that her father had bought her for Christmas.
Licking her lips to gloss them, she walked to her mother's bedroom.
‘Oh, Mum, you look scrumptious.’
Kate smoothed down the deep red pure new wool dress that hugged her figure, and smiled at her daughter.
‘Thanks, love.’
She looked at herself in the mirror, knowing that she looked good.
Her hair had been washed in a coconut shampoo and gleamed under the light.
She was sporting a pair of gold hoop earrings, and her face was skilfully made up.
‘Now what time will you be back from Joanie's tomorrow?’
‘About lunchtime, I suppose.
Don't worry about me, you just enjoy yourself.’
‘I will.’
Kate looked into her daughter's eyes.
‘You look beautiful you know, Liz.
Show me what you're wearing.’
‘Oh, I just shoved on my black suit.
After all, the party is at Joanie's house.
‘She pouted her red-lipsticked lips and Kate laughed.
Joanie's family were what Lizzy would call ‘lame’.
‘I hope you enjoy yourself.’
‘Oh, I will, Mum.
You just concentrate on yourself.’
Lizzy eyed her mother critically.
‘Wear the red lipstick, it will look better with that dress than the coral.
You're dark enough to get away with it.’
Kate laughed.
‘Okey doke.’
She began to tissue off her lipstick.
‘What's Dad going to do tonight?’
Kate shrugged.
‘I've no idea, love.
Gran's off to Doris's.
I should imagine your father's going out as well.’
‘Well, didn't you even ask him?’
Kate stopped in her tracks as she applied red lipstick.
‘Why should I do that?’
She locked eyes with her daughter in the mirror.
‘We're divorced, Lizzy, my life's my own, and your father's life is his own.’
Lizzy looked sad.
‘I wish you two could get it together.’
Kate turned and held her daughter's face in her hands.
‘I wished that for a long time, Lizzy, but your father has a different approach to life.’
She was stumbling for the right words.
She wanted to make Dan sound as good as possible and after some of the stunts he'd played on her in the past that was difficult.
‘Your father is his own man, he lives his own life.
And so do I.’
Lizzy stared at her mother and Kate could see her trying to comprehend what was being said.
‘I'd better go or I'll be late.’
‘Hang on a sec and I'll drop you at Joanie's.’
‘It's OK, I called a cab.
You go to your party, Mum, just forget about me for once!
I'm a big girl now.’
‘Well, Happy New Year then.’
Kate kissed her.
‘Happy New Year, Mum.’
She rushed from the room at the sound of the taxi honking and Kate watched her go with a pang of regret.
Picking up her handbag from the bed, she walked slowly from the room.
‘You look a picture Katie.’
Evelyn was dressed up to the nines.
She had on a bright green crimplene suit and a dark green hat.
Her feet were encased in fur-lined ankle boots and she had a large brown handbag at her side.
‘Will you drop me round Doris's?’
‘Course I will.
Are many people going?’
‘About twenty I think.
This'll be the first New Year we haven't seen in together, just the three of us.’
‘I know that, but Lizzy's right, she is growing up however much we don't like it.’
‘Where's your party again?’
‘Oh, just one of the guys from the station.
It's at his house.’
Kate hated lying, but she wasn't ready to tell anyone about her feelings for Patrick.
‘Where's Dan?’
‘He's in the front room, you go and see him and I'll get me coat.’
Kate went into the front room.
Dan was sitting on the settee watching television.
He looked at her as she came in.
She watched, with some satisfaction, the widening of his eyes.
He gave a low whistle.
‘You look lovely, Kate, really lovely.’
He sounded sincere.
‘Thanks, Dan.
Did you see Lizzy before she went?’
‘Yeah.’
He ran his hands through his thick hair, a familiar gesture.
‘Why don't you let me take you out, Kate?’
His voice was small.
‘You look much too good for a bunch of old policemen.’
‘Haven't you made any arrangements?’
She raised her eyebrows.
‘Well, no.
I was going to take you out — you never go out on New Year's Eve.’
The petulant note was back in his voice.
‘Well, I do now.’
She heard her mother's feet on the stairs and smiled.
‘Happy New Year.’
‘Happy New Year, Kate.’
He watched her go from the room and felt an urge to drag her back.
For the first time ever Kate was in charge and Dan was not sure how to act.
In the past it had been her coming to him.
There was a man involved this time or his name was not Danny Burrows.
Kate was dressed for a date, not a party.
He would make it his business to find out who it was.
As the front door closed he pulled himself from the sofa and watched her drive away.
Then, when she turned the corner, he went out to the hall and picked up the phone.
He dialled and after a few rings a female voice answered.
Dan had a motto in life: Always have a back-up plan.
In the car Evelyn kept up a stream of chatter.
‘You really do look lovely, you know.
It's a long time since I saw you looking so well.
If I didn't know better I'd think there was a man on the horizon.’
‘Oh, don't be silly, Mum.
If there was a man on the horizon, you'd be the first to know.’
‘Well, maybe the man himself don't know yet.’
‘What on earth are you talking about?’
Evelyn smiled vaguely.
‘Oh, nothing, nothing.
Stop here, Kate.’
She pulled over to the kerb and turned off the engine.
‘Happy New Year, Mum.’
‘Happy New Year, love.
And listen — if for some reason you want to spend the night with a friend, maybe you'll want to drink and then you won't be able to drive…you know…don't worry about Lizzy because I'll be home soon, should anything come up.’
She got out of the car and walked up Doris's path, her back ramrod straight.
Kate started the car and smiled to herself.
Her mother was shrewd.
She began to drive to the outskirts of Grantley.
She was looking forward to seeing Patrick Kelly.
George was wrapped up warm.
Although he was not as ill as he had made out to Elaine, he still felt a bit under the weather.
George always liked to look after himself.
He was obsessed with his health.
He had the car heater on and the whirring as it blew out hot air was beginning to annoy him.
He snapped on the radio.
The sound of Mozart's Horn Concerto filled the car and he relaxed.
That was more like it.
He drove out of Grantley and along the road that led to the village of Woodham.
He often drove out this way first; there was a small lay-by that was usually filled with cars with courting couples in them.
Their steamed up windows excited George.
He put his foot on the accelerator and dipped his  headlights.
He felt free, free and happy.
Later on he would drive back into Grantley and go and watch the flats.
He began to hum along with the music.
His usually dead grey eyes were sparkling.
His bushy black brows, liberally sprinkled with grey, moved up and down in time to the music.
His cheesecutter hat hid the balding patch on his head.
Then he saw her.
In front of him were two other cars, which was unusual for this road.
Normally it was dead.
But it was New Year's Eve, and all the roads were busy tonight.
George had no idea about the rave that was just beginning in Woodham Woods.
The girl had her thumb out.
He saw the car in front of him slow down and slowed with it.
The girl walked towards the car and it pulled away quickly, leaving her standing with her hands on her hips by the side of the road.
George drove past her and into the first lay-by.
Taking the carrier bag from the back seat he slipped on the mask.
He felt the adrenaline begin to course through his veins, and smiled.
Adjusting the holes so that he could see properly, he turned around in the road and drove back towards her.
His heart nearly stopped.
A car was parked up beside her.
George drove past and felt a terrible anger replace his elation.
The slut!
He drove along the road, and turned again.
Louise stared into the dark interior of the XR3.
There were three boys in the back and two in the front.
They were obviously drunk.
‘Come on, darlin'.
Jump in the motor, we'll be there in no time.’
Louise was not sure.
One of the boys in the back wound down his window and spat on to the roadside.
‘Look, hurry up, will ya?
I'm fucking freezing me bollocks off!’
The blond youth who was driving leant across the front seat.
‘Look, get in.’
Louise was frightened.
‘No….
No, it's all right.
I'll walk.’
‘Let the silly bitch walk then.
Come on, I want a drink.’
‘You stupid cow!’
The car screeched away and Louise watched its tail lights disappear into the distance.
They were drunk, or drugged, maybe both.
She did not like walking along the dark road, but she was not getting into a car with five blokes!
No way.
She pulled her leather flying jacket tighter around her.
No, she would walk and find Sam and the others.
She began to hurry, sorry now that she had not gone home, because all of a sudden the thought of missing out on a rave didn't seem that bad.
But if she had missed this one, she would be the laughing stock of her class.
She wished she was sixteen.
She wished she was at hairdressing college.
She wished she was at home in bed!
Another car came up behind her and she heard it slow down.
Oh, please don't let it be another car full of drunks!
Let it be some dreamy boy of about seventeen with his hair cut in ‘curtains’ and some really nice gear, then she could show off to Sam and the others!
She turned as the car drew to a halt.
The passenger door opened and she walked hesitantly towards it.
The dirt path she was on was flanked on the left by a steep bank.
The bank sloped down about ten feet, into a large ploughed field.
Bending, she looked into the car.
As soon as her mind registered what it had seen she jumped away from the car door, a scream issuing from her that cut through the night air.
Inside the car was a man in a black leather mask.
Nowhere in her wildest nightmares had she ever imagined anything like this!
She stumbled backwards.
Too late she remembered about the steep bank behind her and stepped into thin air.
Landing with a thud on the dirty slope, her brand new Reeboks scrabbled in the dirt a couple of times before she finally pulled herself up.
There in front of her was the masked man!
She dodged around him and ran into the road as he made a grab for her.
In his hands she saw something glint and realised it was a knife.
She felt her bowels loosen as she realised fully what was happening.
She was dazzled by a set of headlights as a Volkswagen Golf swerved to avoid her, music blaring out of the open windows.
She stood helplessly in the road as it shot past.
With it went her hopes.
The man was standing on the grass verge watching her.
On the other side of the road was another field.
She bit her lip, weighing up in her confused mind where to run.
It was dark, so dark and lonely.
She backed away from the man slowly, trying desperately to think of an escape.
She saw him begin to walk towards her.
In the distance she heard another car, and putting up her arms began to run towards it, waving and shouting.
Terry Miller had dropped a tab of Ecstasy at six that evening.
He was buzzing, really buzzing.
Beside him his brother Charlie was tripping out of his head.
They had driven around for over an hour trying to find the rave that every one was going on about.
Inside the car the sounds of Technotronic screamed out so loudly that they could hardly hear themselves think.
When Terry saw the girl in his headlights he snorted with laughter.
‘Look, Charlie, she must be well stoned!’
He grinned, trying to clear his mind.
‘Look at the geezer with her.
Wild, man.
Look at his headgear.’
They drove past the two figures and Terry sounded his horn that played the first few bars of the Star Spangled Banner.
‘Wicked!
Did you see that bloke, man.
Really wicked.’
Louise Butler watched her potential saviours drive away, their horn blaring out into the dark night.
She began to cry.
Looking around her as if she thought someone was going to run out of the field behind her and save her, she saw that the man was much nearer.
Turning, she began to run.
Before she had taken five steps she hit the chain link fencing that was invisible in the  darkness.
She felt the fence give a little and then it literally threw her back into the arms of the man with the mask.
As his arms tightened around her all the fight left her body.
Fear took over and she went limp.
Her shoulders were racked with sobs.
Oh please, please God, help me!
George half carried, half dragged her back to the car.
Inside the mask he was smiling.
His secret smile that just exposed his teeth.
Kate had had one glass of wine with dinner and was now enjoying an armagnac.
Patrick smiled across the table at her.
It was the second time that Kate had had dinner at his house, and he was finding that he liked her being around.
She took his mind off Mandy, and that was strange considering she was on his daughter's case.
He had no illusions about the police.
He had been dealing with them on and off all his life.
But Kate was the first plain clothes police officer he had ever dealt with on a personal basis.
Oh, he had greased a few of the Old Bill's palms over the years, such as the Chief Constable's, but they were both in the Masons.
Kate was the first member of the Force he had met socially because he wanted to.
Because he enjoyed her company.
She looked good enough to eat tonight.
Red suited her.
Her dark hair shone in the light from the candles.
She looked softer somehow.
More appealing.
After all his empty-headed bimbos, he found he liked having a woman around him who demanded a bit of respect.
In fairness to the young girls who had come and gone over the years, he had deliberately picked well-stacked, dimwitted types whose only claim to fame was the fact that they were a good lay.
He had not wanted to have to trouble himself making conversation.
What on earth did a man on the wrong side of forty have to say to an eighteen year old?
Nothing, that's what.
But Kate, she was a different kettle of fish altogether.
They discussed everything under the sun.
And she wasn't  one of those pushy birds either, who wore their intelligence like a pair of boxing gloves, willing to punch a point home.
Oh, no.
Kate would listen to his opinions then give hers, quietly and fairly.
He liked her.
He knew that she was not making much headway with finding the nonce, but in fairness neither was he.
The bloke was obviously a chancer.
Kate had explained all that to him.
He never left any clues.
But she would not give up.
One day he would make a mistake, then she would have him.
Only what Kate didn't know was that when that break came, Patrick would also be after the bloke.
And when he was finished with him there would be nothing left.
Nothing recognisable anyway.
‘So you don't have anything to go on, really?’ he asked.
Kate shook her head and he watched her hair ripple with the movement.
‘We're gradually eliminating people from the inquiry but it takes time.
We're still interviewing all men with dark-coloured Orions.
We should be finished with that in the next ten days.
I myself will be interviewing from tomorrow along with Spencer and Willis.’
‘I see.’
His voice was gentle.
‘We will get him, Patrick, eventually.
Normally when a murder is committed, or a rape, the person is known to us.’
Kate smiled ruefully.
‘I think I've said all this before!’
‘You have.
Come on, let's change the subject.’
He nearly burst out laughing and Kate looked at him quizzically.
‘I nearly said, ‘How's work’!
My head's up my Khyber these days.
Come on, let's adjourn to the drawing room, shall we?’
His voice mimicked that of an aristocrat and Kate laughed.
He was a character.
In the drawing room they sat together on the large settee.
Patrick had brought the brandy decanter and two glasses.
‘This is a lovely house — eighteenth-century, isn't it?’
Patrick nodded.
‘Yeah, I picked it up for a song about twelve years ago.
Seventy grand I paid for it, and that was the national debt then I can tell you.
It was a ruin.’
He waved his hand.
‘Cost me  nigh on that again to restore it back to its original beauty, but it was worth it.
Renée loved it and so did Mandy.
Now though — well, it's empty without them.
What's a house without a woman in it?’
Kate instinctively grasped his hand.
He stared into the dark depths of her eyes.
She really was lovely, with a mature quality he had grown unused to in a woman.
Suddenly he wanted her wholeheartedly.
He wanted to feel her arms around him.
He wanted her to love him.
He wanted, needed, a woman's loving.
A woman's, not a girl's.
A real woman's loving.
Kate read the expression in his eyes and parted her full lips to speak.
Then he kissed her — a long slow kiss that set her tingling right down to her toes.
And Kate kissed him back, caught up in feelings that had nothing to do with background or career or anything except pure sensation.
He wanted her.
She could feel the want and the need in him.
She felt him pushing her backwards on the overstuffed settee and she let him.
She lay back gladly.
This was what she had been waiting for since she had first met him though she had never admitted it to herself until now.
Dan was not even in the running any more.
She wanted Patrick Kelly.
She felt his big rough hand running along her body outside her new dress.
Felt the tingle as he found the skin of her thighs.
Then everything was forgotten except the moment.
He pulled away from her and looked into her face, his expression soft and serious at the same time.
‘Will you stay the night, Kate?’
His voice was husky.
She loved him for having the consideration to stop now.
For wanting to make sure she knew what she was doing.
She nodded.
Picking her up as if she were a doll, he placed her on to unsteady feet.
She followed him up the large curved staircase and decided that even if this was for one night only, she would be happy.
Even one night with Patrick Kelly was better than none at all.
Inside the bedroom she stared around her in awe at the sheer scale and opulence of the room.
Patrick was slowly taking off his clothes and Kate felt scared for a moment.
She was not a young girl any more.
She was forty years old.
Patrick walked to her and pulled her red wool dress over her head, exposing her tiny naked breasts that had never really needed a brassiere, and her lower body, encased in black tights.
As she pulled her head free she looked at his face fearfully.
He smiled.
‘You're lovely, Kate.
Really lovely.’
And she believed that she was, then.
He pulled her to the bed.
Finally naked, they gazed at one another in the muted light from the lamps placed either side of the bed.
In all her years with Dan she had never had this abandoned feeling.
Had never felt the exquisite excitement that she felt at this moment.
Had never experienced a hunger the like of which was eating at her now.
In the back of her mind she knew that the situation should never have got this far.
The man was a villain.
Patrick Kelly was a bad one, a robber, a violent repoman.
‘The Snatchman’ was his nickname.
But at this moment Kate could not have cared less if he was a mass murderer.
She wanted him.
She had him.
She kissed him.
She would worry later.
Much later.
Patrick Kelly kissed her back, then caressed her breasts, biting the nipples gently, pulling them up with his lips, until they were like tiny pyramids in his mouth.
The wetness of his tongue as it slipped over them made Kate arch her back with delight.
Kelly was an experienced lover and Kate was glad.
It had been so long for her she was like a dam waiting to burst.
She felt his hand move gently down her body, caressing her thighs, then she felt the heat and the moistness as he slipped a  finger inside her.
She groaned.
She could feel Patrick's erection digging into the side of her leg, his excitement making her more breathless by the second.
He played with her tiny button, running his thumb over it lightly, until she tried to pull his hand away.
Her whole body was trembling.
She opened her legs wider, feeling her juices trickling out on to his fingers.
Then he was moving down her body, his dark head moving slowly away from her and as he moved he kissed her skin, the little biting kisses that she was beginning to love so much.
When his mouth engulfed her sex she held in a long breath.
She was going to come.
She felt the waves begin to wash over her, and as each wave began, Patrick licked and sucked her, gently pushing a finger inside her simultaneously.
Kate had never experienced such ecstasy in her life.
When, finally, the tremors stopped, she looked down the bed at his smiling shiny face.
‘Oh, Patrick….’
She watched him climb from the bed and put on his dressing gown.
His member was still swollen and purple.
‘Where are you going?’
Kate's voice was husky and bewildered.
‘There's only one thing to do after an experience like that.’
‘What's that?’
‘That is to go down to my wine cellar and get a bottle of nice cold vintage champagne.
After a couple of glasses I think you'll be ready for round two.’
He kissed her on the mouth and she tasted herself on his lips.
As he walked from the room she hugged herself.
Already, she wanted him to hurry back.
Patrick walked down the stairs in a daze.
She was so juicy.
He had never experienced anything like it before.
It was as if he had opened her up in some way.
It had taken all his willpower not to plunge himself inside her there and then.
But instinctively he knew that she needed gentle loving, the hard, penetrating loving would come later.
Tonight she needed a long soft loving, and he was the man to give it to her.
He could not believe his luck.
Who'd have thought she'd  be so sexy?
He got the champagne and two glasses and went back up the stairs.
He smiled to himself as he realised he was practically running.
It was a long time since he had been like this.
Too long.
Louise Butler was sobbing hard.
In fact she was getting on George's nerves.
‘Shut up!’
His voice cut into her, sending shivers through her body.
‘I…
I want to go…go…home.
Please.’
She drew the last word out on a whine.
George gritted his teeth.
The mask was hot again.
His white cotton gloves stood out like beacons on the steering wheel.
He glanced at her.
She had drawn her lips back over her teeth while she cried, rocking herself backwards and forwards in the seat.
Long strands of snot were hanging from her nose.
George shuddered.
Trust a woman to make a mountain out of a molehill!
Anyone would think he was going to murder her.
He was completely oblivious of the Swiss army knife clutched hotly in his hand, which caught the moonlight as he steered the car and drew Louise's eyes like a magnet.
He was the Grantley Ripper.
He was the man everyone was talking about.
He was going to kill her.
She knew that as surely as she knew she would never get to the rave in Woodham Woods.
She cried harder, feeling a wave of sickness wash over her.
George drove to a large quarry near Woodham.
He parked the car by the side of the deserted road and dragged Louise out of the passenger seat.
The ground was hard beneath her feet and she stumbled, falling heavily on to the frosty ground.
George dragged her upright by her hair.
‘You are annoying me, young lady.’
He pulled her through a hole in the fencing.
In the distance Louise could hear the music from the rave and every now and then a shrill cry broke the night.
She was crying desperately, all the fight had left her body.
She could only wait and see what was going to happen.
George pulled her towards a large hole that was blacker than the night around it.
Giving her a final shove, he pushed her inside.
Louise cried out as she felt her body tumbling down into the blackness.
She felt her legs being pushed up over her head and heard the crack as her ankle hit a lump of granite.
Her tracksuit and flying jacket dragged on the ground as she slid and bumped down into the blackness.
She lay at the bottom, winded and in pain.
She heard the man in the mask sliding down slowly and knew she should try and make a run for it but her ankle was already swelling inside her Reebok.
Her hands and face were skinned from the descent, the gravel sticking to the skin and stinging.
She lay there in the pitch black.
She had a pain in her chest that was not due to the fall, it was fear.
Pure, naked fear.
George scrambled down to her.
The mask was hot and he loved it.
Loved the feel of it and the smell of it.
He also loved the fear that was emanating from this girl.
Thumbing lifts!
My God, asking for trouble, just asking for it.
Well, she had got it now, by Christ.
She had well and truly got it now.
George felt the rage roar in his head.
A red hot rage that made his hands tremble.
Pulling a torch from this pocket he played the beam across her prostrate form.
He frowned.
She was unconscious.
He sighed heavily, then taking back his heavily booted foot he kicked her in the chest, sending her skidding across the gravel.
Still she did not move.
George sighed again.
The mask was making his head itch.
Still she did not move.
George knelt on gravel, and taking the knife more firmly in his hand he stabbed her in the stomach.
As the knife entered her she seemed to try to double up, but it was only a reflex action.
George was puzzled.
He pulled the heavy leather of her flying jacket from her arm and tried to find a pulse.
There was none.
She was dead.
George was fuming.
How dare she die on him?
How dare she just die like that!
He pushed the knife into her calf, through the thin material of her shellsuit and the soft plump skin, hitting the bone.
George sat on his haunches, biting his lip inside the mask.
He pulled it off and felt the cold air bite into his hot skin, his scanty hair standing up and waving gently in the breeze.
George spat into the dirt and pulled the knife out of the girl's leg, then he began to undress her.
He carefully pulled down the bottom of her tracksuit and cut off her panties.
He opened the flying jacket and folded it then unzipped the tracksuit top.
He was surprised to find that she was very big-breasted.
He cut the white lycra bra so that her breasts sprang free.
He had placed the torch on a small mound of dirt and the light shone on to Louise Butler's cold and lifeless skin.
George cheered up.
He glanced at his watch.
He had hours before he had to get home.
He began to hum.
In the distance the rave had really got underway.
The music was blaring and the partygoers were dancing.
It was New Year's Eve.
Everyone was waiting for twelve o'clock, for 1990 to begin.
Everyone except Louise Butler.
‘Happy New Year, Kate.’
Patrick's voice was soft.
‘Happy New Year, Patrick.
I hope it's a good one for you, I really do.’
He smiled sadly.
‘Well, I've got to be honest, girl, I ain't looking forward to it.’
Kate felt a great sadness for the man lying beside her.
While they had made love she knew that, for a short time anyway, he had forgotten the events of the previous week.
It had crossed her mind that he was using her, but wasn't she using him?
He was only the second man she had ever slept with.
In forty years, she had had two men.
In this day and age it was laughable!
Only she wasn't laughing.
Kate had surprised herself with the intensity of her response.
She had never known any other man but Dan, but after tonight she was more than aware of what she had been missing all these years.
Dan made love like he did everything else: with only himself in mind.
Patrick Kelly, whom Dan would look on as an ill-educated lout, had actually spent time  on her enjoyment.
Oh, and she had enjoyed it!
More than she had ever thought possible.
The earth-shattering orgasms that she had read about were not a con, they were there just waiting for her to experience them.
She snuggled into Patrick's hard body, enjoying the feel of him.
‘I bet this would go down like a lead balloon if it was known in Grantley police station.
The DI knocking off a local villain!’
His voice was jocular and Kate found herself laughing with him.
‘Knocking off?
Thank you very much, Mr Kelly!’
Patrick held her tightly.
‘That's just a figure of speech.
You're a good woman, Kate.’
She put her face to his and kissed him.
Let the outside world hang.
At this moment all she was interested in was him.
She would worry about the rights and wrongs of the situation in the morning.
As she felt his hands travel across her body, she closed her eyes and with them her mind.
‘Oh, Happy New Year!’
Elaine had been kissed until her lips were sore and her lipstick just a faded memory.
She had not enjoyed herself so much in all her married life.
Normally when they were invited to a party George never wanted to go.
Elaine had therefore always declined.
Since her newfound freedom, however, she had decided that she would get as much out of life as she could.
With or if possible without George.
And tonight had been her watershed.
She had been danced off her feet and had loved every second of it.
She looked around the crowded room for her best friend, Margaret Forrester, and smiled as she saw her sitting on her husband's lap.
Elaine wished she could have a marriage like that.
Where everything was just plain and simple, laughing and joking the norm.
Her face fell as she thought about her life with George.
Still, they were going to Florida and she was going to Spain, so at least this year she had something to look forward to.
And this party looked as if it could go on for hours yet!
‘Would you like to dance?’
Elaine turned to face the man who had spoken.
He was about fifty-five and fat, but jolly with it.
She had already danced with him three times.
Someone had put on a Roy Orbison album and she slipped into the man's arms to the strains of ‘Crying’.
She loved Roy Orbison, and she loved all the attention.
‘I'm ever so sorry, but I've forgotten your name.’
The man grinned, showing pristine but ill-fitting dentures.
‘It's Hector…
Hector Henderson.
And you're the lovely Elaine.’
She felt a tingle going down her spine that could have been romance or could just as well have been the drink.
Whatever it was, she liked it.
George was pushed from her mind as they took to the tiny space allocated for dancing in Margaret Forrester's front room.
Joey Meeson watched as Lizzy danced, her body undulating to the thumping rhythm of the acid house music.
About an hour earlier they had each dropped an Ecstasy tab.
He could feel himself ‘coming up’ now.
Everything around him had taken on a rosy hue and he felt excitement in his guts.
Lizzy's hair was flying around her head as she danced faster and faster.
Since he had been going with her he had been having a great time.
No one would think her mother was an Old Bill.
Lizzy wanted to try everything and she did it in style.
Joanie also watched her.
Joanie was cold and fed up.
She glanced at her watch and sighed.
She was supposed to be sleeping at Lizzy's house tonight and Lizzy was supposed to be staying over at hers.
That meant they had to stay out all night whether she liked it or not.
Lately Lizzy was getting on her nerves.
All she was interested in was getting out and getting laid.
A black boy with extensions on his hair walked over to her and asked her to dance.
Joanie bucked up.
Maybe tonight wouldn't be such a cop-out after all….
Lizzy went over to Joey and put her hand on his arm.
‘Enjoying yourself, Liz?’
‘Oh, it's great.
Really great.
Look at the lights!’
To Lizzy, with her heightened awareness, the lights were a swimming halo of blues and red.
‘How about we go to my car for a while?’
Lizzy giggled.
‘OK.’
She was so far gone that Joey had to help her walk across the field to where he had parked.
As they made their way through the throng of people, boys and girls laughed and joked with them.
One boy, dressed like a refugee from Woodstock, was spinning around in circles.
His hair was braided with flowers and he smoked a large joint.
Lizzy and Joey laughed at him.
The further they got from the rave the more bodies they had to step over.
Some were making out; others were just tripping out of their skulls, lost in their own world.
Joey opened the Sierra and they both got in the back.
He kissed her hard, pushing his tongue down her throat.
‘Happy New Year, Lizzy.’
She looked up, trying to focus on his brown eyes.
‘Happy New Year, Joey.’
He slipped his hand up her top and she giggled.
‘One moment, please, I've got a New Year's present for you.’
‘What's that?’
Joey was smiling in the darkness.
Then he felt his trousers being undone and her dark head slipped down on to his lap.
‘Oh, Lizzy.
Happy New Year.’
She was wild all right, and he loved it.
George decided to bury the girl's body in the gravel.
Let them look for this one.
Let the police earn their bloody money for once.
He covered her over and ran the torch around the dirt, checking that he had not left any incriminating clues.
Then he walked backwards, scraping the gravel with the side of his boot.
He was certainly not going to do their job for them.
Oh, no.
He scrambled up the side of the quarry to his car.
The heavy thump of acid house music was everywhere.
George  frowned as he put his mask neatly in the brown carrier bag before driving home.
The youngsters today were like animals.
What sort of parents would allow their daughter out until this time of night?
There was no decency in the world any more.
The family was a thing of the past.
In this self-righteous mood he drove home.
Well, he would make them all sit up and take notice.
1990 was going to be his year.
He would make all the parents and husbands in Grantley frightened.
Then they might take a bit more care instead of allowing young girls to roam the streets like common prostitutes!
A man had to be in charge.
It was a man's duty.
And George Markham had never shirked his duty.
He was back home, showered, changed and in bed by eleven forty-five.
Elaine tripped in at four-thirty and George was well and truly asleep.
She felt a moment's remorse as she looked down at his sleeping face.
Then she thought of Hector and smiled.
Hector Henderson.
She said the name to herself a few times, enjoying the feeling it created.
A good strong name.
Hector Henderson.
He had given her his phone number!
She giggled into her pillow, clenching her fists in excitement.
She would ring him in the week.
Finally, Elaine slept.
Chapter Eleven
‘How long has she been missing?’
‘Since last night.
Her mother's going out of her mind with worry, and I can't say I blame her, can you?
They've tried all her friends.
Her father had dropped her off at her best friend's house….’
Kate listened attentively to Amanda Dawkins.
‘And she's never stayed out before?
Has she got a boyfriend?’
‘No to both questions, Kate.
The girl seems to be the perfect daughter.
Always rang if she was going to be late, always let them know exactly where she was.
I get the impression from this friend, Samantha Jewson, that Louise was looked down on because of it.
I think this Samantha fancies herself as a bit of a girl, know what I mean?’
‘Well, we'll get the cars to keep an eye out for her, but I have an awful feeling in my gut that she is not coming home.
Not alive, anyway.
‘Listen, let the papers know about it, ask if any of the readers can remember seeing her.
After she was at Samantha Jewson's house, she seems to have disappeared.
Someone must have seen her.
What's happening with the door-to-door?
Anything suspicious in that department?’
‘Not really, there are eighty uniforms on the job.
Each has been allocated a certain number of streets, but like everything else it takes time.
We had a couple of suspicious characters but their alibis are watertight.
Oh, before I forget, we've received all the names of sex pests, perverts and fully fledged rapists.
We're trying to locate each and every one of them.
Most of the uniforms and CID from all over the county are offering to work in their spare time.’
‘We could do with them as well.
Right then, I think the best thing we can do now is try and calm Louise Butler's parents.
If she was at a rave, how come we haven't had anything from the patrol cars about it?’
Amanda breathed out heavily.
‘There were no patrol cars there.’
Kate looked aghast.
‘You're joking!
On the news this morning it said that over eight hundred kids turned up!’
‘I know.
There's more than one red face in the mobile division this morning, believe me.
The old man was like a raving lunatic, apparently.’
‘And can you blame him?
Jesus wept!
If we're not careful we'll have the heavy mob down here offering to hold our hands!
‘Well, I'd better get in to see Ratchette.
Do me a favour would you?
Find me a decent cup of coffee.’
Amanda nodded.
Kate made her way to the Superintendent's office, her mind whirling.
No mobile units at a rave?
It was bloody laughable.
The barn where it was held was owned by a local farmer, John Ellis, and if Kate knew anything about it, he had known exactly what was going on.
He would sell his own mother for a profit.
She knocked on Ratchette's door.
‘Hello, sir.’
‘Ah, Kate.
Bad business this.
What do you think?’
‘In all honesty, sir, I don't think Louise Butler's coming home.
It's just a case of looking for the body really.
Once we ascertain her movements, we'll know more.
Someone somewhere must have seen her.’
‘True.
Now listen carefully.
I've had the big boys on to me today.
They're sending a Chief Inspector over to work with you.
I must stress that it's to work with you, OK?
He's a good man, you've probably heard of him.
Caitlin.’
Kate groaned.
Oh, please, not Kenneth Caitlin!
Ratchette saw her face and snapped at her: ‘Look, Kate, whether you like it or not, the man's coming.
You are a  Detective Inspector, I am a Superintendent.
You take your orders from me and I take mine from the Chief Constable.
Just try and work with him.
Whatever his reputation, he gets results.’
Kate looked at the floor.
Her heart had sunk down into her shoes.
‘All right?’
Ratchette's voice was still hard.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Good.
Now before he arrives, have you any thoughts on this that you want to talk to me about?’
‘Actually, yes.
In 1984 at Enderby in Leicester two young girls were raped and murdered.
There was nothing to go on at all.
The police took blood samples from just about every male in the vicinity.
The only thing we've got here is the DNA of the murderer.
I think, if nothing else, we should try and eliminate as many men as possible by DNA testing in the area.’
Ratchette's wrinkled face was incredulous.
‘You're joking.
Do you know how much that would cost?’
‘A little over half a million pounds.
I know it will be expensive, but for Christ's sake we're dealing with a maniac.’
‘You realise that some men won't allow us to take their blood?’
‘Then they will immediately be under suspicion.’
Ratchette shook his head.
‘I don't know, Kate.
This is something I shall have to discuss with the Chief Constable.
It's already going out on this month's Crimewatch.
Hopefully someone will have their memory jogged.
The man isn't invisible, he must have been seen.’
‘Well, up till now, sir, he's done a pretty good job of eluding us.’
‘Leave it with me.
Caitlin will be here in about an hour.
Make him welcome, won't you?’
The fact that the Superintendent could not look her in the eye was not lost on Kate.
‘Of course, sir.
Now if there's nothing else?’
When he didn't answer, she rose from her seat and walked  from the room, giving the door a satisfying slam as she closed it.
Bloody Caitlin!
Bloody hell!
Elaine had a hangover and the shrill ringing of the telephone made her head ache even more.
She heard George pick it up.
They did not get many phone calls and any other time she would have rushed out into the hall to see who it was.
Today though she just wanted to curl up and die.
Her mouth felt as dry as a bone and her eyes were closed against the intrusive light.
She wished George would hurry up with her cup of tea.
‘Hello?’
His voice was quiet.
Who could be ringing them?
The only people to phone were Joseph and Lily, and now and again a friend of Elaine's from work.
‘Hello?
Mr Markham?’
The voice was rough and coarse.
‘Speaking.’
George was bewildered.
‘This is Anthony Jones from Sexplosion in Soho.
You asked me to give you a ring like.’
George felt his heart begin to beat a tattoo against his ribs.
He dropped his voice.
‘I said I would ring you.
How did you get my number?’
He heard the man laugh.
‘You paid by Barclaycard, remember?
I got your address from your driving licence — you gave it as further proof of your identity.
I got your number from inquiries like.
Listen, mate, I wouldn't drop you in it.
If your wife had answered I would have given her a load of old cods.
Said I was selling double glazing or something.
So calm down, for Gawd's sake.’
‘What do you want?’
‘What do you think?
I've got some new films in and they are hot .’
Despite his fear, George felt a tiny shiver of excitement.
‘These are from Thailand, and you know what those chinky birds are like, don't ya?’
The man chuckled and the action caused him to start coughing.
George held the phone away from his ear as the man's phlegmy voice carried on: ‘This new film makes the last one I sold you look like Noddy and Big Ears in Toytown!’
‘How much?’
‘Three hundred smackers.’
The man was aware that George was a bit too quiet at the other end of the phone and hurried on, ‘But to you, two-fifty, being as how you're a regular customer like.’
‘Well….’
‘They won't last long, mate, these type never do.’
George was in a quandary.
He wanted the film desperately, but he had already had to hide one Barclaycard statement.
He racked his brains.
‘Look, mate, if it's too much….’
The other man's voice was placating and wistful.
Suddenly George was frightened that the man would think him mean.
‘I'll take it!’
‘When can you get in?’
‘First thing tomorrow.’
‘See you then.’
The phone went dead.
George replaced the receiver and went back to the kitchen.
He reboiled the kettle for Elaine's tea.
The phone call had frightened him.
George felt exposed.
He poured the water into the teapot.
He would get the film.
He would draw the money out of the bank this time.
Elaine might notice it was gone but then again she might not.
He would cross that bridge when he came to it.
Chinese women….
He liked Chinese women.
They knew their place all right.
‘GEORGE!’
He winced as Elaine's voice drilled through him.
‘Who was that on the phone?’
George poured out her tea and took it in to her.
‘Just a friend from work.
Peter Renshaw.
He wished you all the best, dear.’
Elaine took the tea.
‘Oh.
Do I know him then?’
‘I don't think so, dear.
But I often chat about you to him.
Would you like a biscuit with your tea?’
‘I'd love one, but with my diet and that….’
She grinned at him, a girlish look on her face.
George grinned back.
If she was waiting for him to say that she didn't need to diet she had a long wait.
Elaine felt the grin slip from her face.
Her head was still pounding.
She sipped her tea.
Imagine old George getting a phone call from a friend.
Wonders would never cease.
Patrick Kelly was in his main offices in Barking.
Normally on New Year's Day he would be at home with Mandy.
Mrs Manners would cook a large early dinner and they would sit and chat about the coming year.
Now all he had to look forward to was burying her.
And in a funny sort of way he was looking forward to that.
At least then he would know that she was not lying on ice in a bloody mortuary.
He lit himself a cigarette with his gold lighter.
He grasped it tightly in his hand.
On the front of it was the inscription:To Dad, Love Mandy — xxxx It was all he had of her now.
A sharp knock at the door brought him back to earth.
‘Come in.’
Two large men entered.
They were brothers, Marcus and David Tully.
There was only ten months between them and they looked like twins.
Both had skinhead haircuts and both wore identical grey tracksuits that hugged their large beer bellies.
Both wore large chunky gold jewellery.
Marcus, the elder, was the first to speak.
‘So where to, guv?’
‘I want you two to make your way up North, to Huddersfield.
There's a brand new Jag and a few bits of plant up there that need to be repossessed as quickly as possible.
Take shooters with you, I think you'll need them.
The bloke don't want to give them back, that's how come we got involved.
There's good bunce for you both as soon as the stuff's delivered back here.
OK?’
The two men nodded.
‘You'll need to take a couple of drivers with you.
Take young Sonny and Declan, they're pretty good, and that new bloke….
What's his name?
Dodson.
Here's the address, and I'll see you sometime tomorrow with the stuff.’
‘What's the plant then?’
‘Two large earthmovers.
The details are outside on the duty rosta.
Select numbering, the works.
The Jag has got private plates on it.’
‘Okey doke, guv.
See yer tomorrer then.’
‘Try not to use the guns this time.
Just frighten the bloke.’
‘We'll only use them to wound, guv.
We know what we're doing.’
‘Be careful, that's all I ask.
Now get on your way.’
The two men left the office.
Patrick shook his head.
They were two of the biggest lunatics he had ever met, and he had met a few in his time.
Still, they got the difficult jobs done and that was the main thing.
He pressed the button on his intercom.
‘Bring me in a cuppa, Debbie, will you?’
‘All right, Mr Kelly.’
He carried on working until Debbie brought him in a cup of tea.
She smiled at him, placing the cup on his desk in such a way that he got a glimpse of a fairly considerable pair of breasts.
‘Thanks, love.’
‘Anything else?’
It was a loaded question and Kelly knew it.
No, thank you.’
He smiled at her crestfallen countenance.
Before he had met Kate Burrows, she had been on his list of ‘things to do’.
He had put her down as Tiffany's successor.
Now he just wished she would leave him alone.
‘Off you go then, Debbie.’
She stamped from the room.
Physically she had a lot more to offer than Kate, but for some unknown reason he really fancied the policewoman.
There was something about her.
When he was with her, buried inside her, Mandy, Renée and everything else was gone from his mind.
For that he was supremely thankful.
Kate heard Caitlin before she saw him.
Since the news had spread about him working on the case, the whole of the station had been in a state of excitement.
She groaned  inwardly.
He was like something from a Boy's Own comic.
A real macho man.
She stayed seated until the excitement wore off.
Caitlin's loud Irish accent boomed over everyone's heads.
‘Sure Jesus, would you let a man get some air here!’
Everyone was greeting him.
He was a living legend.
Poor old Fabian and Spilsbury weren't even in the running where Caitlin was concerned.
He made Sherlock Holmes look amateurish!
Kate saw his bulky form moving towards her desk.
She had worked with him once before, when she had been a Detective Sergeant.
After she had been introduced to him he had sent her to get him a cup of coffee, but not before patting her behind.
He had solved the case with a male DS and a DC.
Or that was how it had looked on the final report.
Kate fixed a smile on her face.
‘Katie!
How are you?’
His voice sounded genuinely pleased to see her.
She stood up and held out her hand.
‘Chief Inspector Caitlin.’
He looked old.
Kate was shocked.
The man looked positively ancient.
His head was nearly bald, his full mouth had that loose-lipped look peculiar to ageing men, and his startling green eyes were now watery-looking.
The lids were wrinkled above them like old venetian blinds.
‘You don't look a day older than the last time I worked with you.’
The Irish burr was more pronounced than she remembered.
‘I've been hearing great things about you, great things.’
Kate smiled.
Caitlin pulled up a chair and sat down opposite her.
‘As we'll be working together, I thought we could share a desk.
Make it more personal.’
Kate felt the smile freeze on her face.
The smell of Teacher's and cheap cigars wafted across the confined space and she cringed inwardly.
Caitlin settled himself in the chair.
‘Now what's this I hear about this madman driving an Irish Ford?’
Kate's heavy brows knitted together.
‘I'm sorry?
An Irish Ford?’
‘An O'Ryan…
Orion.’
Kate burst out laughing, causing many pairs of eyes to focus on her.
Caitlin laughed with her.
He leant across the desk in a confidential manner, scanning the room shrewdly.
He tapped his nose.
‘You can call me Kenny.’
He nodded at her and Kate realised with growing dismay that the man was drunk.
She forced the smile back on to her face.
‘Whatever you say.
Now shall I fill you in on all that I have?’
Caitlin leaned back in his chair.
Opening his coat, he took out his handkerchief and blew his nose loudly.
‘You do that, Katie.
The sooner this bastard's caught the better.’
Well, they agreed on that much anyway.
Taking a deep breath, Kate started to talk.
Chapter Twelve
2 January
George had left for work at his usual time of eight fifteen.
By ten thirty-five he was walking into Sexplosion.
Anthony Jones was behind the counter and George smiled at him tremulously.
The shopkeeper gave a large toothy grin.
‘Hello, cocker!
Happy New Year.’
He was full of good-humoured camaraderie.
‘Happy New Year.
Er, I have the necessary.’
‘Good, good.’
Tony Jones lifted the serving hatch and invited George through to the back of the shop.
He looked around him hesitantly before walking through.
There were quite a few customers even this early in the morning.
Tony Jones shouted to a dark-haired boy of about eighteen.
‘Emmanuel, watch the shop, I've got some business to attend to.’
In the back of the shop he whispered to George: ‘He's as queer as a nine-bob note, but he's a good little worker.
Right then, look at this!’
He rubbed his hands together in anticipation and pressed the play button on a video that stood on a small table.
On the television screen above it a young Chinese girl appeared.
Her face was a mask of fear.
‘Sit yourself down, mate, I'll make us a cuppa.’
George sat down and watched the flickering images in front of him.
In the dirty little office, he felt the first stirrings of excitement.
An hour later he left with the film tucked firmly under his arm, and a phone number and address in his pocket.
He got into his car and began to drive aimlessly around London.
It was a dark overcast day; the people milling around all looked grey.
Grey and dirty.
George found himself in Paddington and smiled.
He rooted around in his coat pocket until he found the address that Tony Jones had given him.
He parked his car off Warwick Avenue and, locking it up, began his search.
He walked along the Harrow Road until he found the small turning he wanted.
He walked into Chippenham Road, scanning the house numbers.
When he arrived at the right house he checked the number carefully against his piece of paper.
He walked to the front door and looked at the array of bells there.
All the bells had little cards above them.
Flat one: Suzie, French model.
Flat two: Sexy Sadie, full correction.
Flat three: Imogen, Swedish masseuse.
Flat four: Carol, schoolgirl temptress.
Flat five: Beatrice, for naughty boys.
He wanted flat six: Sure enough there it was.
Flat six: Tippy — submission my speciality.
George rang the bell.
‘Yeah, what?’
George was startled.
Hardly a submissive voice!
He cleared his throat noisily.
‘Er…
Tony sent me.
Tony Jones.’
Suddenly the voice changed.
‘Oh, I'm so sorry, sir.
You caught me offguard there.’
George heard a throaty laugh.
‘Bit early for me, love, but come up anyway.’
There was a whirring noise and the door clicked.
George opened it cautiously.
His cheesecutter hat and Burberry overcoat gave him the look of a working class spiv.
His hard little grey eyes were moist with anticipation.
He had drawn out three hundred pounds earlier.
Two hundred and fifty had gone on the video that was now tucked away securely in his car.
He still had fifty left.
He'd decided to treat himself.
If all that Tony Jones said was true, this Tippy was just what he needed.
He wrinkled his nose in distaste at the acrid smell of the place.
The narrow hallway was littered with old newspapers  and circulars.
It was dark and dingy.
George pressed the lightswitch on the wall by the stairs and a muted light came from above.
He began to mount the uncarpeted stairs.
The wallpaper was long gone from the walls, and here and there in places were rust-coloured stains that looked like blood.
He began to hurry.
Inside her room, Tippy, real name Bertha Knott, was hurrying around trying to tidy up.
The night before had been a hectic one with seven punters.
One after the other.
It was always the same in the holiday season.
She picked up her discarded clothes and threw them into a small bureau, scratched and marked by years of neglect.
She practically threw the overflowing ashtray and empty vodka bottle into the tiny kitchenette, the cigarette butts flying across the worksurface and into the sink.
Bollocks!
Sod that bloody Tony Jones!
Imagine sending her a punter at this time of day.
No brass worth her salt was even up before twelve-thirty!
She heard the timid knock on her door and sighed.
She hoped this bloke wasn't too rough.
She was sore as it was.
She pulled the grubby negligee around her bony body and opened the door, a wide professional smile on her face.
George looked at the woman, dismayed.
She was absolutely horrible.
She had dyed black hair that looked like cotton wool dipped in liquid boot polish, her face was thin and feral-looking, and through the flimsy see-through negligee George could see that under her arms was enough hair to make a pair of identical wigs.
‘Come in then, cocker.’
Her voice was jovial.
‘Would you like a cuppa or a drink?’
George walked into the room.
He watched the woman's scrawny buttocks disappear behind a curtain and looked around him, heartsore.
The room was filthy, the large double bed taking up most of the space.
It had black sheets on it, and George was not sure if that was their original colour or just the result of years of use.
The cord carpet on the floor was covered in cigarette burns.
Around the iron fireplace there were hundreds of them.
Obviously the men who had used this room over the years  had tried to flick their cigarettes into the hearth from the bed, and the majority had missed.
One large overstuffed chair stood under the window covered in items of apparel: stockings, suspenders and other types of underwear.
Tippy came back with two relatively clean glasses full of vodka and tonic.
George took his for want of something else to do.
Tippy placed hers on the old bureau.
Picking up the underwear from the chair, she dumped it on the floor.
‘You have a sit down, luv, and I'll go and get myself ready.
Sorry about the mess but you caught me on the hop like.
I'll only be ten minutes.
She disappeared through a door that George had not noticed before and called over her shoulder, ‘Take your coat off and get comfy.’
He stood with the drink in his hand, deciding whether or not to make a run for it.
Elaine's houseproud ways got on his nerves but he would rather them than this dirty cat's way of living.
He walked to the chair and looked through the grubby net curtain.
The street below was busy.
George watched the people rushing about their business and just for a second he wondered what he was doing here.
It was a disappointment.
George did not class his pastimes as dirty in any sense.
He had never thought that prostitutes and squalor went hand in hand.
He had always imagined them as they were depicted in the media — beautiful young girls who loved their job and lived like queens.
Reality was different and George did not like reality.
He had just turned from the window, intent on leaving, when the woman walked back into the room.
She looked completely different!
She saw George's mouth drop open and smiled.
She had her hair in two pigtails.
Her eyes were made up with heavy black eyeliner, her mouth was a deep red rosebud.
She had discarded the dirty wrapper she had been wearing and had on long silky black stockings and suspenders, a black peephole bra and crutchless panties.
An overpowering smell of Freesia perfume hung around her like a cloud.
She grinned at George.
‘Now this is more like it, isn't it?’
Her voice had taken on a husky, girlish tone and he was gratified.
All his earlier  thoughts flew from his head.
She looked like the women of his younger days who had adorned the packs of nude playing cards.
Who had gazed up at him from his adolescent girlie mags.
In short, she looked like a whore.
Her high-heeled shoes showed off her long thin legs to advantage.
Her breasts were tiny and pert, the pink aureoles just hardening in the cold air of the room.
‘You haven't taken off your coat.
Shall Tippy take it off for you?’
She slipped it from his shoulders, folding it up and placing it carefully on the chair.
George faced her, his eyes shining once more.
Tippy pouted.
‘Tippy wants her money first.
Twenty quid for the works, anal sex is an extra tenner.’
George nodded, and handed over the notes.
‘Good.
Well, I'm ready when you are, lover boy.’
She watched George pulling off his clothes and grinned again.
They were all the same.
Stupid buggers.
She gritted her teeth.
Oh, please, let him be a quick finisher.
She wasn't in the mood for a long day's screwing.
She lay down on the dirty bed.
Even through her perfume she could still detect the sour smell of the sheets.
As George loomed over her, she was planning in her mind when to take the sheets to the launderette, and whether or not to pay for a service wash.
She hoped he noticed the Durex she had strategically placed in the top of one of her stockings.
He looked greener than the proverbial grass to her.
Maybe she should have told him fifty quid.
He looked as if he could afford it.
Well, she consoled herself, his type normally came back, and she liked that.
If she got another regular customer it would keep her off the streets for a bit.
King's Cross was not what it had been in her day.
What with the runaways and the young druggies….
Tippy felt George bite her nipple painfully and suppressed a cry.
Another bloody nasty bastard.
She sighed heavily.
Here I go again.
She pulled herself up on the bed and, kneeling in  such a way that George could see her breasts to their best advantage, took his phallus into her mouth.
After a couple of minutes an idea occurred to her.
She lifted her head and looked into the man's face.
‘For another tenner, you can tie me up if you like.’
She got off the bed and, opening the bureau, took out a set of handcuffs and some leather-look rope.
George nodded and Tippy brought them to the bed and handed them to him.
As George tied her up she thought: Oh, well, in for a penny.
Even Tippy was amazed when she heard George actually humming while he worked.
Finally, with the prostitute spreadeagled on the bed, her arms and legs stretched wide, he was happy.
This was submission.
She would not fight him, she would just lie there and accept whatever he did.
Getting off the bed, he went to his coat.
He took his white cotton gloves from the pocket and slipped them on.
Tippy watched him, half bored already.
But when she saw what he was taking out of the inside pocket of the overcoat, she felt faint with fright.
It was a large knife in a leather holder.
As he pulled it slowly free it caught the weak January sunshine and Tippy strained against the bonds that held her.
‘'Ere, what you doing with that?’
George walked to the bed and smiled.
‘Don't worry, I won't hurt you, my dear.’
Kneeling over her lower body, his belly hanging on to her knees, he began gently to cut off her panties.
Tippy was breathing heavily, her face white under the black eyeliner and heavy foundation.
Her mind was reeling.
The bloke was a fucking nutter and she had let him tie her up!
‘Look, you're not gonna hurt me, are you?
Promise.’
‘I promise.
Now shut up!’
George's voice had taken on a harsh inflection.
Tippy shut up.
Suddenly, the mild-mannered little man didn't look green  any more — he looked positively dangerous.
Especially with that smile of his, that smile that just showed his teeth.
Tippy closed her eyes tightly.
Just wait until she saw that Tony Jones.
The ponce!
Sending her a candidate for Broadmoor.
Tippy lay back and prepared herself for the worst afternoon of her life.
‘So, sir, what do you think?’
Kenneth Caitlin lit himself a cigar, blowing the smoke out in huge puffs that swirled around his bald head.
‘From what I can see, Katie, this man is either very careful or has been very lucky.
Very lucky indeed.
There's nothing at the scenes of the crimes.
Nothing on the bodies, except of course as you pointed out his genetic fingerprint.
There is absolutely nothing else to go on at all.’
He grinned at her.
‘This is just up my street, by Christ.
I'll find the bastard though.’
He poked his finger at her.
‘You just watch.’
Kate's voice was sarcastic.
‘So what do you suggest we do now?’
‘Well, the uniforms are out in force looking for the Butler girl.
I think she's dead though.
This man has never hidden the bodies before, has he?
So obviously if he's hidden this one, he's playing a whole new ball game.
But I'll tell you something now, Katie.
They all bugger themselves up in the end.
Look at the Yorkshire Ripper.’
Kate was annoyed.
Caitlin was getting on her nerves.
‘The Yorkshire Ripper killed thirteen women, sir, and was finally caught during a routine inquiry.
Otherwise there's no knowing just how many more he would have killed.
What we have here is a chancer.
The psychological profile is of a man who hates women, that much we already know.
A man who has a job that could possibly have brought him into contact with the victims, though I don't think so myself.
If the women knew him, there would be someone else who knows him as well in the same capacity.
The psychologist also says he's likely to be married.
That narrows the field down a bit, if it's correct.
He also has a knowledge of the area so is obviously a local man.
Other than the dark-coloured car seen  at the scene of the second murder, and a dark green car seen at the first, we have nothing whatsoever to go on.’
Caitlin watched her.
Women were always so emotional.
They took their cases personally.
‘Well, I'm appearing on Crimewatch this week.
Maybe something will come of that.
Someone who's not from the area could have been driving through and seen something.’
‘Yeah, and pigs might fly.’
Kate's voice was bitter.
Caitlin took another puff on his cigar.
‘Pigs can fly already, or so the druggies think when they see the police helicopters.’
Kate closed her eyes.
The man thought everything was a big joke.
She stood and picked up her jacket from the back of her chair.
‘Where you off to?’
‘I'm going to see how the search is going on.’
‘Leave that to the uniforms, they'll let us know soon enough if they find something.
It's bitter cold out.’
As Kate opened her mouth to answer, the phone on her desk rang.
She picked it up.
‘I'll be straight down.’
Caitlin heard the excitement in her voice.
‘Who was that?’
‘I think we may have a breakthrough.
Come on.’
Geoffrey Winbush walked hesitantly into Grantley police station.
The desk sergeant smiled at him.
‘What can I do for you, son?’
‘It's about the disappearance of Louise Butler.
I think I may be able to help like.
I think I saw her.’
The desk sergeant was all business now.
Opening the security door, he led the boy through to an interview room.
‘What's your name and address, son?’
‘Geoffrey Winbush, 122 Tenerby Road.’
The sergeant wrote it all down.
‘Well, sit yourself down.
There'll be someone to see you in a minute.’
Leaving the boy sitting at the table, he went back to his  desk and phoned up to Kate.
Sergeant Mathers hoped that the boy could shed some light on the case.
Kate walked into the interview room followed by Caitlin.
Her first thought was that the witness was a good-looking boy.
He was blond with deep-set brown eyes which looked troubled at this moment, and he was well dressed.
He looked about twenty.
His shoulders were wide and even though he was sitting, Kate saw he was a large boy.
She smiled at him.
‘I'm Detective Inspector Burrows and this is Chief Inspector Caitlin.
I understand you have some information about Louise Butler?’
Kate sat opposite him and Caitlin leant against the wall of the room, his cigar smouldering in his mouth.
The boy looked at them nervously.
‘Well, I didn't know her personally but the other night like, I think it was her that we seen on the Woodham Road.’
‘We?’
This from Caitlin.
The boy nodded.
‘Yeah, me and me mates.
We was going to the rave — me, me brother Ricky, and three others: Tommy Rigby, Dean Chalmers and Mick Thomas.’
He swallowed heavily and Kate felt sorry for him.
‘Go on.’
‘Well, as we was driving along, we saw this bird, walking by the roadside.
She was on her own like.
Anyway, I stopped and offered her a lift.
But she wouldn't get in.
I'm sure it was her though.’
‘Why wouldn't she get in?
Did she say she was waiting for someone?
Did she mention what she was doing on that road on her own?’
‘No, nothing.
Mick Thomas was pissed out of his head.
He slagged her off.’
His voice broke.
‘We all did.
We left her there, on that road.
We left her there to die.
We drove on to the rave and left her walking, thumbing a lift.’
‘Thumbing a lift?
Was she definitely thumbing a lift?’
The boy nodded.
Caitlin's voice made him jump as he bellowed across the room: ‘You left a young girl to walk along a dark road at  night?
You slagged her off, as you put it, and left her there?
Have you any sisters, young man?’
‘Yes, sir, two.’
Caitlin had the cigar clamped between his teeth.
He removed it before saying venomously, ‘Well, I hope if they're ever in Louise Butler's position, they're treated better than you treated that girl.
Now then, names and addresses of the other boys.
Pronto.
I can't be bothered to waste me breath on yer.‘
Kate closed her eyes.
Caitlin was right, of course.
The boys should never have left her there.
But by the same token, the girl should have had more sense than to walk along a road like that in the dark.
But that bloody Caitlin, he had to throw his weight around.
He had to make himself heard.
And the worst of it all was, Kate was the one who had to listen to the old sod!
She smiled at the white-faced boy.
‘Shall I get us some coffee and then you can make your statement?’
‘Please.’
He began to cry.
‘We never thought that she'd be murdered.
We'd had a drink….’
‘So you were drunk-driving on top of everything else?
And how the thunder do you know she was murdered?
We have no body that I know of.’
The boy looked at Kate beseechingly.
She got up from her seat and manhandled Caitlin from the room.
Outside she whispered, ‘Don't you think he feels bad enough without you on his back?’
Caitlin shrugged his shoulders and buttoned up his wrinkled suit jacket.
He blew cigar smoke in her face.
‘No, actually, Katie…
I don't.
I think he's an arsehole.’
With that, he went back inside the interview room and she clenched her fists.
If he called her Katie once more she would be getting arrested herself.
For grievous bodily harm.
She went to organise the coffee.
Kate pulled into her drive.
She was tired.
Winbush hadn't  really been any help.
Caitlin had put the fear of Christ up him and, consequently, he had been loath to say too much.
Kate had arranged to go to his house and see him herself.
The trouble with Caitlin was he still behaved as if it was the old days, when everyone wanted to help out the police.
He should come back down to earth with everyone else.
Since the West Midlands business and now all this about false evidence everywhere you looked, the police popularity poll was down to minus two.
She let herself into her house.
The smell of meat assailed her nostrils and she followed the smell into the kitchen.
Her mother was turning lamb chops under the grill.
‘Hello, Kate, get yourself seated and I'll make you a coffee.’
Dan got up from the breakfast bar.
‘I'll do it, Eve, would you like one?’
Evelyn shook her head.
‘Oh, by the way, Katie, you had a call.
Said his name was Pat and could you call him back.’
Kate felt her heart freeze in her chest.
She could feel Dan's eyes boring into her face.
‘Thanks, Mum.’
She lit a cigarette for something to do.
Patrick calling here.
She felt herself go hot all over.
‘So who's this Pat then?’
Kate detected a hint of jealousy in Dan's voice.
‘None of your business, Dan, actually.’
He stared at her and Kate dropped her eyes.
‘He's a friend of mine if you must know.’
‘I see.
Where did you meet him then?’
Evelyn watched the two of them with a little smile on her face.
Dan's questions were annoying Kate and if he wasn't careful he just might end up on the receiving end of her tongue.
She placed the chops under the grill once more and the only sound in the kitchen was the lamb fat spitting.
‘I said, where did you meet him?’
Dan's voice rose.
Kate put down her coffee cup and looked at her ex-husband.
‘What the bloody hell has that got to do with you?’
‘It's got a lot to do with me.
My daughter….’
‘Oh of course, your daughter.
Well it's a pity you didn't think of your daughter when you were whoring your way around the world, isn't it?
The poor little mare wasn't even in the running then was she?
WAS SHE?’
Dan stared at Kate in bewilderment.
He realised that he'd opened up a can of worms.
‘All I'm saying is, Kate….’
‘You know your trouble, Dan?
You don't know when you're well off.
I don't like to remind you of this, but if it wasn't for me, you'd be in a bedsit somewhere now, living off the DHSS.
I allow you to stay in my home because of Lizzy, but I warn you now, Dan, if you try and interfere in my life, I'll have you out the front door so fast you'll burn a hole in the carpet.
Do I make myself clear?’
Dan's face was scarlet and for a fleeting second Kate felt ashamed of herself.
‘Perfectly.’
He went from the kitchen quietly.
Kate let her breath out and put her head in her hands.
‘He asked for that, Katie.
Don't you go feeling bad now.’
‘Oh Mum.
I shouldn't have said it.
I shouldn't have said any of it.
But he annoys me so much.’
‘Let me get you another coffee.
Who is this Pat, by the way, or am I going to get my head bitten off as well?’
‘He's a man I met during the course of my work.’
‘Is that the one you spent the New Year with?’
Kate looked at her mother sharply and seeing the mischievous look on her face she grinned.
‘It is actually.’
Evelyn held out her arms wide.
‘You're a grown woman, Kate, you do whatever you want.
Personally I think it's about time you had a bit of life.’
Kate smiled.
She felt it was about time too, but Patrick Kelly was dangerous for her.
For her career.
He was a danger to everything, but knowing that, admitting it to herself did no good.
She wanted him desperately.
He gave her so much pleasure when she was with him and she had been lonely for  so long.
So very, very long.
After the New Year, she could no more give him up now than she could cut off her own hands.
She had only been mad at Dan, because he had brought up Patrick's name when she wanted him to be a secret.
But it wouldn't be a secret for long.
She lit another cigarette.
What would she do when the secret was out?
She would cross that bridge when she came to it.
Everything people said about Kelly was supposition, nothing against him had ever been proved and in this country you were innocent until proven guilty.
The thought had a hollow ring to it.
Kate felt she was tumbling headlong into something that she was not strong enough to fight.
But fight it she would.
If the time came.
Chapter Thirteen
Sexplosion was just getting busy when Tony Jones saw Tippy walk through the door.
He smiled at her.
‘Bloody hell, girl, you don't half look rough.’
Tippy's face was drawn and white.
‘I want to talk to you Tony, now!’
He was puzzled.
‘All right, girl, come through to my office.’
He looked around the shop for Emmanuel, who was trying to pick up an elderly man in a smart business suit.
‘Emmanuel, get behind this bloody counter now!
Come through, Tippy love.’
He opened the serving hatch and she limped through.
In the dingy back room, the tom sat down on the ramshackle chair.
Tony watched her warily.
There was something wrong here.
He hoped she didn't have AIDS or something.
She did look ill, and Tippy looked rough at the best of times.
All the birds who worked the submission trade did.
‘Got any booze, Tone?’
He opened a small cupboard in an old sideboard and took out of a bottle of Gordon's gin.
‘I ain't got nothing to go with it.
Will you drink it straight?’
Tippy nodded.
‘I'd drink of a cup of cold piss at this moment in time, Tony, if it blotted out the world.
I've never felt so bad in all my life.’
Tony poured her out a generous measure into a half pint glass.
‘Here you are, girl, get your laughing gear around that.’
Tippy took a long drink.
Tony noticed that her hands were  shaking.
He bit his bottom lip in consternation.
‘Look, I ain't being funny, love, but I ain't got all day.’
She looked at him with hooded eyes.
‘That punter you sent me yesterday…he was weird, Tone, really weird.’
Tony relaxed.
Was that all?
‘They're all weird, girl….’
She interrupted him.
‘No, not normal weird.
He was a nutter, Tony.
A bloody nutter.’
Tony pictured mild-mannered George.
He liked a bit of old bluey, and admittedly they were a bit near the mark, but that aside he seemed a nice, quiet, polite man.
‘You're just feeling low, Tippy.
All brasses feel like that at holiday times….’
She laughed scornfully.
‘Listen, Tone, I've been on the game for eighteen years, woman and girl, and I've had some strange ones in my time, but never anyone like this.
Look….‘
She stood up and lifted her skirt.
She heard Tony's intake of breath.
‘Stone me, Tip, he done that?’
She nodded, big tears welling in her eyes.
‘They're all over me.
On me tits, arse, the lot.’
Tony stared at the criss-cross cuts all over Tippy's thighs.
Some were superficial and some looked deep.
All were scabbed over.
Purple and black bruises abounded.
‘I've been pissing blood all night, Tony.
He shoved something up inside me.’
Her voice broke.
‘He tied me up and he had a knife.
He kept holding it at me throat and threatening me….’
She began to cry in earnest and Tony, for the first time in his life, felt emotion for a working girl.
He took her in his arms and cuddled her.
‘All right, Tippy.
Calm down, love.’
‘How am I gonna work while I'm like this, Tone?
I'll be out of action for weeks.
And supposing he comes back?
He  knows where I live, he knows I won't go to the Old Bill.’
Her face was grimy with tears and Tony set her gently on the chair.
‘Listen, Tippy, I'll give you enough to tide you over.
And I'll have a talk with the bloke, all right?
Make sure he leaves you alone in future.
OK?’
‘Promise.’
‘I promise.
Now how about I take you to a doctor I know in Swiss Cottage.
Payment on the nose and no questions asked.
How's that?’
Tippy nodded, wiping her streaming face with her hands.
‘I'll just go and tell Emmanuel to mind the shop and we'll be on our way.’
Tony Jones walked from the room.
Who would have thought it?
A polite little bloke like that with a tiger in his tank?
Tony shook his head in wonderment.
He'd have to sort George out in a delicate way.
He didn't want to lose a regular customer.
He'd just warn him off Tippy by saying she'd got herself a big coon for a boyfriend.
There was nothing like a big coon or a dose of clap to get rid of a punter.
He shook his head again.
Poor old Tippy.
She'd be scarred for life.
Terry Miller picked up the Grantley Times .
He had just made himself a cup of coffee and sat in his mum's kitchen smoking a cigarette.
There were six Miller children, ranging in age from nineteen to seven.
Terry was eighteen and his brother Charlie nineteen.
To sit in relative peace and quiet in the Miller house was a very rare occurrence and Terry was enjoying it.
That was until he saw what was on the front page.
It was a picture of Louise Butler and Terry recognised her at once as the girl who had run out in front of his car on the night of the rave.
The girl who was being chased by the bloke in the weird headgear.
He had had to swerve to avoid them.
He read the article and frowned.
They believed she had been murdered by the Grantley Ripper although as yet no body  had turned up.
He ran his hands through his hair.
Should he go to the police?
If he went to them he would have to admit that he left her there.
That he was high as a kite on Ecstasy and had thought they were larking about!
He screwed up the paper and threw it on the kitchen table.
He knew what he would do.
He would talk it over with Charlie when he got in from work.
Terry relaxed a bit now that he had made a decision.
Charlie would know what to do.
He always did.
The search for Louise Butler had been going on for over two days.
Police had covered every piece of waste ground, undergrowth, field, wood.
Even the quarry.
Nothing.
Kate Burrows and Kenneth Caitlin were getting worried.
If something didn't break, and soon, they would be back to square one.
Frogmen had dragged the local river.
Every shed and garage and outbuilding had been searched.
Louise Butler had disappeared off the face of the earth.
Every sex pest and rapist had been interviewed and their whereabouts checked out.
Still nothing.
The Grantley Ripper looked set for a long reign of terror.
Kate sat in her office staring at the files in front of her.
She rubbed her eyes with her finger and thumb of her right hand.
She was bone tired.
Caitlin was off at the BBC studios, he was appearing on Crimewatch later in the evening.
He had walked in and taken over and the marvel man had come up with nothing.
Kate looked around her at the busy incident room.
Phones were ringing, computer screens were displaying information, and still there was nothing to go on.
She thought again of the Leicester murders.
If they could get even some of the men in Grantley to take the blood test they would be halfway home.
Because if only three thousand of the potential five thousand male suspects took the test, that was three thousand they could eliminate.
There was also the  chance that the man himself would go for the test.
If they sent haematologists around local firms and offices then men would be honour bound to take the blood test when they saw their colleagues taking it.
A subtle form of coercion.
But no one in authority would even countenance the idea.
Money.
It all came down to bloody money.
Kate chewed on her bottom lip.
There must be something she had missed.
Even Geoffrey Winbush's statement only told them that Louise had been on the Woodham Road.
Surely someone else must have seen her?
She was a good-looking girl, dressed in a purple and gold track suit and man's flying jacket.
She would not be easy to miss.
Eight hundred youngsters had been at that rave.
Someone must have noticed her.
Kate stared back at the files in front of her.
The people who owned dark-coloured Orions were still being interviewed.
Nothing yet.
There were only a few names left on the list from the DVLC.
Maybe the man had lived in Grantley at one time and now lived somewhere else?
That idea had occurred to her before now, but a gut feeling told her that he was still living locally.
And if he was, the best way to catch him was through blood testing.
Back to square one.
Her phone rang and she picked it up.
‘Hello.
DI Kate Burrows here.’
‘Hello, Kate.’
She felt her heart miss a beat.
It was Patrick Kelly.
‘Are we still on for tonight?’
‘Oh, yes, of course.
I can't promise what time I'll be there, I'll have to ring you as I'm leaving work.
We're pretty snowed under….’
‘Nothing yet then?’
His voice was flat.
‘No, nothing concrete.’
‘I'll see you later then.
‘Bye.’
‘'Bye.’
Kate replaced the receiver and smiled.
She was getting to like Patrick Kelly.
Getting to like him a lot.
Yet the sensible part of her was telling her to grow up.
She was a policewoman and he was a….
He was a what?
He was a nice man, that's what he was, and when she left this station her life was her own!
She picked up the file and began to read again.
She was being paid to find this murderer, and find him she would!
Charlie Miller came in from work at six-fifteen.
The house was, as usual, in pandemonium by then.
All the children were in, and their Irish ancestry made loud arguing the norm.
Like most children from big families, they had learnt to outshout one another at an early age.
Charlie went straight up to the room that he shared with Terry and put on a Fine Young Cannibals tape.
He was in the middle of getting undressed as his brother walked in with the paper.
‘All right, Tel?’
He shook his head and sat on the bottom of the bunk beds.
‘No, actually, I ain't.’
Charlie frowned and stopped in the middle of taking off his shirt.
Terry did look bad.
He sat beside him.
‘What's the matter, bruv?
You got aggravation?’
His voice was low.
Even though there was only a year between the two boys, Charlie looked on Terry as his little brother.
‘It's about that bird who went missing…
Louise Butler.
Look.’
He opened the paper and Charlie glanced at it.
Terry watched his brother's face.
‘It's that bird from the other night!
The one with the weird bloke in the mask!’
Terry nodded.
‘I reckon we should go to the police.
Tell them we saw her.’
Charlie shook his head vigorously.
‘Not on your bleeding nelly, mate.
I ain't going nowhere near them.
And neither are you!’
‘But, Charlie….’
He pulled off his shirt and threw it into the corner of the tiny room.
‘No buts, Tel….
Leave it!’
Terry knew by the sound of his brother's voice that he had  to do as he was told.
Charlie didn't like people disagreeing with him.
Terry ground his teeth in consternation.
The girl was missing.
She could still be alive.
Charlie looked at his brother and sighed.
Terry was such a soft touch.
He pulled off his work jeans and threw them on to the little pile in the corner.
He hunkered down and looked into his brother's face.
‘Listen, Tel, I'm sorry about that bird and all.
It's that Ripper bloke they're all going on about.
But for all that, I ain't putting my…or your…face in the frame.
Get it?’
Terry nodded.
‘Good.
Now don't let me hear any more about it.
Besides, we was out of our nuts.
What the hell could we tell them that would do any good?’
With that, Charlie picked up his deodorant and shampoo and went to have his bath, leaving Terry sitting on the bed, his mind in a turmoil.
Fine Young Cannibals were singing, ‘Jonny, we love you, won't you please come home’ and the words made Terry feel like crying.
He wished Louise Butler would come back home and be safe, then he could stop thinking about her.
Turning off the tape, he lay on the bottom bunk and crossed his arms under his head.
They had nearly run her over.
If the Grantley Ripper had got her, as the papers seemed to think, he wished now that they had.
At least her end would have been short and quick.
Elaine and George were sitting in their lounge watching South East at Six when the story of Louise Butler's disappearance came on the air.
As her photograph appeared on the screen, Elaine shook her head.
‘Oh, George, isn't it terrible?’
Louise was in her school uniform and looked very young.
Quite unlike the girl of the previous Saturday.
‘Yes, dear.
That's all they've talked about at work, you know.’
‘Same with us.
Her mother uses my supermarket.
How must she be feeling?
It must be like a nightmare.
This is the third one, isn't it?
I was reading in the Sun today that the other girl, what's her name, her father is a London gangster!’
‘Mandy Kelly.’
‘That's it, Mandy Kelly.
Imagine you remembering her name like that.’
George felt a tightening around his heart.
It was fear.
‘Oh, it stuck in my mind, that's all.’
Was Elaine looking at him oddly?
‘Would you like a nice cuppa, dear?’
Before she could answer there was a loud banging on the front door.
‘Goodness me, who on earth can that be?’
Elaine's voice was high.
People knocking at the door was a very unusual event in this household.
She stood up quickly to answer it.
George remained seated.
He was still trying to recover from his earlier slip.
He looked even more surprised when Elaine walked into the lounge with two men.
‘George, this is Detective Sergeant Willis and PC Hemmings.
They want to have a word with you.’
Elaine's voice was quavering.
‘Can I make you two gentlemen a cup of tea or coffee?’
Willis smiled.
‘Tea would be lovely, madam.’
George sat in his seat, stunned.
They knew it was him!
They had come for him!
‘Please sit down.
Would you like fresh tea, George?’
He could feel his head moving up and down of its own accord.
He was aware of Elaine leaving the room.
His eyes were glued to the two men now sitting on his couch.
He could feel his breathing quicken and strove desperately to control
‘I'm sorry to trouble you, sir, but we are questioning everyone in Grantley with a dark blue saloon car.
It's just so we can eliminate people from our inquiries.’
Eliminate.
Eliminate.
Eliminate.
They didn't know.
They didn't know.
George smiled.
Outside the lounge door Elaine relaxed as well.
Walking to the kitchen, she filled the electric kettle, her heart hammering in her chest.
George would never do anything like that.
What had made her think that he would?
She was too hard on him.
It was just the shock of seeing two policemen on her doorstep.
It was like the other time.
The terrible time.
Then a thought occurred to her.
Would they bring that up now?
All these years later?
She set about making a pot of tea.
George would never do anything like that again.
Never.
Not in a million years.
In the lounge, Willis and Hemmings were listening to George's account of where he had been on the nights of the murders and the disappearance.
‘I was in bed with terrible ‘flu’.
My wife can vouch for that, officers.
May I ask you a question?’
‘Certainly.’
‘If one of you is a police constable, surely he should be in uniform?’
Willis smiled.
‘On these kind of cases, sir, we try to be as informal as possible.
We recruit uniformed officers into plain clothes so that people like yourself, who are being eliminated, won't feel under pressure.
From neighbours etcetera.’
‘How very thoughtful of you.’
Elaine came into the room with the tea.
Her big-boned body felt clumsy and she placed the tray on the coffee table with a loud clatter.
Willis watched her surreptitiously.
She was a bundle of nerves.
She began to pour the tea and when she had finally finished and sat down felt as if she had run the London Marathon.
She tried to calm herself.
Willis spoke directly to her.
‘Now, madam, on the second of December, 1989, which was a Saturday, I understand that your husband was home with you all evening?’
Elaine nodded.
‘He very rarely goes out in the evenings.’
‘I see.
Now on the twenty-third of December, which was a Saturday, he was home with you then, as well?’
‘Yes.’
‘And on New Year's Eve, you were home together?’
‘Yes.
No.
Actually, he was in bed with very bad ‘flu’.
I went to a party at my friend's alone.
George was much too ill to leave the house.’
Elaine was aware that she was babbling.
Willis and Hemmings were both staring at her.
Even her red hair seemed to be trembling.
Willis smiled and closed his notebook.
‘That will be all.
I am very sorry to bother you, but I'm sure you understand.’
‘Of course.’
George was more his old self now.
He could feel a giggle in his throat, just waiting to explode.
They were fools.
Utter fools.
He swallowed hard.
The giggle was nearly at the roof of his mouth.
‘Would you gentlemen like another cup of tea?’
Hemmings was about to say yes when Willis declined.
George smiled at the younger man.
Hemmings smiled back.
Elaine watched them.
Was it her imagination or was George laughing at them all?
More and more lately she had the feeling that George was different somehow.
Now all this.
Eliminating him from their inquiries.
‘Have you found the other girl yet?
The one who's missing?’
‘Louise Butler?
No, not yet.
We're hoping against hope that she's gone off with a friend or a boyfriend and will get in touch with her parents.
But every day that goes by makes it less likely.’
George tutted.
‘How terrible.
This man, whoever he is, must be very clever.
I mean, three women murdered and no clues.
That's if the other young lady has been murdered, of course.’
‘He'll make a mistake, sir.
They always do.’
‘Quite.’
George smiled.
They always did, did they?
Well, not this one, Mr Clever Clogs policeman.
Not this one.
‘He must be some kind of animal.’
Elaine's voice was low and throaty.
‘Those poor girls.
No woman's safe any more.’
Hemmings nodded at Elaine, thinking, Well, you are.
Any man who'd try and attack you would have to be mad!
Willis stood up and held out his hand to George who shook it warmly.
‘Thanks for all your help, sir.’
‘You're welcome.
Any time.’
Hemmings nodded and Elaine pulled herself from her chair and saw them to the door.
‘Thanks for the tea, madam.’
‘That's OK.
Goodbye.’
She closed the front door and leant against it, her heart beating fast once more.
What was wrong with her?
Why did she feel so worried?
George walked out into the hall.
‘All right, dear?
You look dreadful.’
‘I'm fine, George.
But it was like before.
You know….’
Her voice trailed off.
He put his arm around her.
‘Now then, Elaine, there's nothing to worry about.
It was all a terrible misunderstanding.
Anyway that was a long time ago and I paid my debt to society.’
He led her back into the lounge and steered her to her chair.
‘Now you stop worrying, my love.
Just because I have a dark blue saloon car…well, does that make me a murderer?’
She shook her head.
‘Of course not, George.
I'm sorry.’
‘There now, you're chasing ghosts again, Elaine.
It's always been there between us, hasn't it?’
George's voice was soft.
She couldn't look at him in the face.
After twenty years this was the first time George had ever referred to what had happened.
And he was right, it had always been between them.
Because it had always been in the back of her mind, from the moment she got up in the morning until she went to  bed at night.
Even then, sometimes, it strayed into her dreams.
‘I'm sorry, Elaine.
Really I am.
I wish with all my heart that I could go back and change that time, but I can't, I just can't.’
George watched Elaine's guilty expression and felt the laughter threatening again.
‘I know that, George.
It was just seeing them, standing on the doorstep like that.’
‘I know, my love, I understand.
I know that you've never forgiven me for what happened, and I don't blame you, darling.
I appreciate the way you stood by me.
Really I do.’
He took her plump hand in his and repressed a shudder.
‘I love you, Elaine, I always have.’
She wiped her eyes with the back of her hand, knowing in her heart that it was an excuse to curtail the physical contact with him.
‘I'm just an old silly, George.
I'll make another cuppa.’
George moved so she could get out of the chair.
He watched the material of her shell suit strain to the limit as she bent over the coffee table and picked up the tray of cups and saucers.
She must have gone off her diet over Christmas.
When she left the room he sat back in his seat and grinned.
They were all bloody fools!
Every last one of them.
And he was cleverer than a bag of monkeys, as his mother used to say, and would outwit them all.
Starting with that fat bitch out in the kitchen.
Elaine was making the tea.
She felt an urge to smash the teapot against the wall.
The night of Mandy Kelly's murder George had been out on one of his walks.
She pushed the thought from her mind.
The other night she'd been in with him.
On New Year's Eve he had been ill.
Very ill.
She was just paranoid, that's what was wrong with her.
She wished the time would go faster until her holiday in Spain so she could go away, leave George and just enjoy herself.
She poured the water over the tea bags and felt the tears again.
For all George's faults he was not a murderer.
He was not a killer.
She had to believe that.
She had to.
Roll on Friday.
She was seeing Hector Henderson, and more and more as the days went on found that she needed him, his simplicity and his jolliness.
Most of all his kindness.
Willis and Hemmings discussed George and Elaine on their way to the next address.
‘He seemed OK, but that woman!
She was a bundle of nerves.’
Willis shrugged.
‘We affect some people like that.
Make them nervous.
People like her never have the Old Bill round, see.
When they do, it throws them like.
He was a nice bloke though.
Very polite and well spoken.’
Hemmings nodded.
‘I wish a few more people were like them.
Afford us a bit of respect now and again.
I went round a house the other week the kid had been caught shoplifting and the father wanted to fight me.
Like it was all my fault.’
Willis grinned.
‘I know what you mean.
Everyone's on our case these days.’
‘Don't I blinking know it!’
Evelyn and Dan sat at the breakfast bar.
Evelyn lit herself a cigarette.
‘I think you should find yourself somewhere, Dan.
After all you've been here over a fortnight.
Kate's a kind woman but I think there's a chance you just might wear out that welcome of yours.’
She sipped her coffee and watched him over the rim of the cup.
‘Has she said anything?
I mean, about me going?’
Evelyn took a deep breath.
‘Let's just say I think she's had enough.’
Dan picked up her pack of cigarettes and lit himself one.
Evelyn snatched the packet from his hand and put it in the pocket of her apron.
‘Surely things aren't that bad?
You've got the money for your own cigarettes, haven't you?’
Dan raised his eyebrows and tried to decide whether or not to confide in her.
Anthea had always paid the bills.
They had lived a life of pleasure.
Dan had not had a proper job for over ten years.
Oh, he talked about deals and the market, but it was all for effect.
Dan realised with growing dismay that at forty-six he was qualified for nothing.
It was a frightening prospect.
‘Listen to me, Dan, I'm only trying to help you.
Kate can't abide wasters, you know that as well as I do.
You were an insurance salesman once, why can't you go back to that?
They must be crying out for men like you.
Good-looking eejits who could charm the birds off the trees.’
Dan, for once, had the grace to look away.
How could he explain to the old woman sitting opposite him that he wore a five thousand pound watch?
His suits were the best that money, Anthea's money, could buy.
That he had not had to think about paying a bill or buying food for God knows how long.
How could he explain that Kate was his last chance?
Because Kate, for all her faults real and imagined, was the only person ever to take him at face value.
He glanced at his Rolex and closed his eyes.
Then, taking a deep breath, he began to talk, the words tumbling out of him as he finally admitted the truth.
‘Look, Eve, I'm the wrong side of forty.
I don't know if I could even get a job as a junior salesman.
What would I be looking at?
Ten grand a year?
Fifteen top whack.
That wouldn't even pay for my clothes….’
The self-pitying tone of his voice was not lost on Evelyn and she snapped at him.
‘If you could hear yourself!
Like a big ninny sitting there bemoaning your fate.
If you'd let your heart rule your head instead of your winkle, you wouldn't be in this state!’
Dan stared at her in shock.
‘Oh, I've seen plenty like you in me life, Danny Burrows, only the majority of them were women.
What you've got to do now is get yourself together.
Get a life, as Lizzy is always  saying.
Take your jewellery and pawn it, get yourself a place to live, and then get yourself a job.
It's what everyone has to do at some time — it's called taking responsibility for yourself.
‘Do you know, all those years I watched my Kate yearn for you, it used to amaze me.
How could such an intelligent and articulate woman want a bloody waster like you?
You're no good to man or beast.
By Christ, Dan, how you've lasted as long as you have amazes me on its own!’
The atmosphere in the tiny kitchen was charged.
Dan felt an urge to take back his fist and slam it into the old woman's teeth.
But he knew he wouldn't, because he was too much of a coward.
Anthea knew it, which was why she did what she did to him.
She told him what to wear and eat, when to sleep or make love to her.
In short, she had called the shots and Dan had let her.
In all the years he had not had one really happy day because Anthea was always the boss.
What she said went.
They travelled extensively, but he had to pander to her every whim.
If she decided that they had had enough of sightseeing or whatever, then they had had enough.
The woman sitting in front of him was right, he had to take responsibility for himself.
Because there was no Anthea to do it for him now.
‘I know what you're saying is right, Eve, but I'm not sure I'm man enough to do what you suggest.’
She slipped the cigarettes from her pocket and gave him one.
‘Listen, Dan, Kate's sick of seeing you on that settee.
Get yourself somewhere to live and gain her respect again.
Get a job, sort out your life.
If you really want her back, that's the only way to get her.’
‘What about the man she's been seeing?’
‘What man?’
Evelyn sounded puzzled.
‘Oh, come on, Eve.
There's a man in the pipeline or my name's not Danny Burrows.’
‘Well, if there is it's the first one I ever knew of.’
God forgive me for lying, she thought.
She knew as sure as eggs was eggs that Kate, bless her, had finally caught herself a man.
A mysterious man, she admitted, because she couldn't  get anything out of her daughter about him, but a man all the same.
‘You get yourself fixed with somewhere to live and then start your campaign to get Kate.
Life has a funny way of sorting itself out.
I've learnt that much over the years.’
He smiled at her.
A genuine smile.
Danny had never liked Kate's mother because he had always known she didn't like him.
That she could see through him as if he was glass.
‘Thanks, Eve.
It's meant a lot to me to have us talk like this.’
Evelyn grasped his hand and smiled.
‘I'm only trying to help you, son.’
She had the grace to look down at her wedding ring, a worn gold band.
She couldn't look him in the face any more.
All she really wanted was to see him out of the house.
For all their chatting about him and Kate and Mystery Man, he had not mentioned his daughter once.
That was typical of bloody Danny Burrows.
Lizzy pushed her fingers through her long hair and yawned.
Joey lay beside her smiling.
Both were naked.
Lizzy looked around the room and blinked.
‘This place is a right dump.’
Joey laughed out loud.
‘Of course it is, it's a squat.’
The walls were daubed with splashes of paint, and here and there large eyes were drawn, with daggers sticking out of them.
‘Who did the decorating, Joey?’
‘Oh, some bloke called Nipper.
He fancies himself as a gutter poet and artist.’
‘Well, my advice to him would be, don't give up the day job.
The sour smell of the sheets was wafting up to her nose and she grimaced.
‘Why don't you skin up?’
‘All right then.’
Joey sat cross-legged on the bed and proceeded to build a joint.
Lizzy watched him languidly.
She liked Joey a lot.
He was exciting.
He knew all the places to go and all the people to  know.
She had bunked off work all this week, Joanie had rung in and said she had ‘flu’, and every day had been spent like this.
Lazing around in someone's flat or car, just getting right out of it.
Her mother was becoming suspicious at the amount of time she spent in her room, but Lizzie had told her everyone liked to be on their own at times.
Her mother was a pain in the ass.
Always wanting to know where she was and what she was doing.
Who she was with and what they had done.
Her gran wasn't much better.
Lizzy's butter-wouldn't-melt-in-her-mouth image had kept her in good stead the last few years, but soon she wanted to break away.
Go her own way and enjoy life.
If her father got himself a place she'd go and live with him.
She was like him in a lot of ways.
He liked the good life, lived to enjoy himself.
Her mother lived life in a vacuum.
Waiting for things to happen instead of making them happen.
That was the secret.
Joey lit the joint and drew on it deeply, passing it to Lizzy.
She took the smoke down deep into her lungs and held it there for a while before letting it out slowly.
‘That's the way to do it.’
She sounded like Mr Punch and Joey grinned at her.
He had never met anyone like her before.
Lizzy Burrows was game for anything and everything.
He watched her sit up and flick the ash on to the floor.
She was not in the least self-conscious of her body.
He grabbed a breast and squeezed it.
His rough hand had dirt under the nails.
Lizzy pushed it away.
All she wanted now was to get really stoned and lie back on the mattress thinking good thoughts.
She did this all the time at home, listening to Sinead O'Connor or Pink Floyd.
She passed the joint back to Joey and lay back.
He took a toke on it and, putting his mouth over hers, breathed the smoke down into her lungs.
She laughed and kissed him back.
From one of the other rooms came the harsh sounds of Guns'N'Roses, the heavy guitar making the walls vibrate.
‘Oh, shit!
Stud's back already.
Come on, let's get dressed and shoot off.’
Lizzy pulled the dirty sheet over her breasts and laughed.
‘Why?’
‘Because Stud's like an accident waiting to happen, that's why.’
‘Oh, fuck off, Joey!
I'm just nicely stoned.
I don't want to move yet.’
Joey sighed and scratched his greasy head.
‘Look, how about we go and score a bit of Wiz or something?’
‘All right, but only if we can come back here.
Deal?’
‘You've got a deal.
Now get dressed before all the bikers come in here.’
Joey was genuinely worried.
The bikers were a good crowd but could get a bit out of hand.
He didn't fancy Lizzy's chances much if they decided they all wanted a bit of the action.
It wouldn't be the first time.
Lizzy pulled on her underwear and jeans.
As she was pulling her tee-shirt over her head the door opened.
A large man with a long ginger beard and straggly blond hair stood there.
He had a beer belly that hung over the top of his filthy jeans.
His sweat shirt had a death's head printed on it.
‘Hello, Joey, who's this?’
The voice was deep and had a drawl to it that Lizzy didn't like.
‘This is Lizzy…
Lizzy Burrows.
Lizzy, JoJo Downey.
He runs the squat.’
Lizzy picked up Joey's fear from his voice.
‘Hello.’
Her voice was small.
JoJo frowned at them both through little squinting eyes, then his face broke out into a toothless smile and he grinned at them.
This was more frightening than his frown.
‘Come and have a drink with us, you two.’
The music was once more blaring out and Lizzy slipped on her boots and followed Joey and JoJo from the room.
In the lounge she saw about fifteen people, mostly men.
Two girls sat with them.
Both had dyed black hair and wore the female biker battledress, the uniform black leather miniskirt, black lycra top and short bumfreezer denim jacket.
They had on the  heavy black mascara and purple lipstick of female bikers.
Both smiled at Lizzy and she smiled back.
It was easier now that she was dressed.
‘Sit down, love, and have a drink.’
JoJo motioned to the girls on the brokendown couch to move over, and they hastily made way for Lizzy.
She sat between them.
Joey sat on the floor with the others.
His joint was taken from his hand by a man in his forties with a studded leather jacket flung across his lap.
It was when Lizzy was sipping her cider that she realised what the man with the leather jacket was doing.
He was burning something in a small crucible, watching it bubble.
Then, placing it gently on the jacket, he took the syringe from off the floor and began to draw the liquid up into it.
He caught Lizzy's eye as she watched and winked at her.
The music was turned down at the request of a fat man who was actually trying to sleep through all the noise.
Lizzy saw that Joey was once more skinning up and quailed inside.
All she wanted to do was get out of here.
Get out and never come back.
But Joey was relaxed again.
The two girls either side of Lizzy were both chatting together about their children.
As they spoke a little girl of about two stumbled into the room.
Her nappy was so wet it was falling down her legs.
The girl on the right of Lizzy held out her arms and the child tottered towards her.
The heavily sodden nappy slipped down her legs and she just stepped out of it, much to the amusement of the assembled people.
The stench of urine was added to the other rancid smells of the room.
Lizzy looked over the child's head to where the man was jacking up.
The needle slipped into his blue-veined arm and he closed his eyes while he felt the first rush.
He opened his eyes and looked straight at her.
‘Wanna go?’
Lizzy shook her head.
‘Well, stop fucking staring at me then!’
She bit her lip and the man laughed.
The joint that Joey had rolled was passed to her and she  drew on it gratefully.
The girl beside her took it and puffed over the child's head.
Joey smiled at Lizzy and she relaxed.
The cannabis was working at last.
Someone got up and put on a Pink Floyd album.
‘Great Gig in the Sky’ filled the room, the woman's haunting voice soothing Lizzy.
This was better, this was music she knew, and somehow the room didn't feel so menacing.
The man on the floor who had jacked up grinned at her and she found herself grinning back.
Then JoJo offered her a tab of LSD.
She took the proffered tiny scrap of blotting paper and wiped it on to her tongue.
Joey did the same.
An hour later she was floating somewhere between reality and the fifth dimension.
She was having a great time.
Somehow more children seemed to have arrived from the bedrooms in the flat.
The music, although still loud, was not blaring and someone had even made sandwiches, which were being passed around along with a cider and vodka mixture.
Joey was now lying tripping out of his head on the floor.
Then there was a loud knocking on the door.
One of the girls got up to answer it and two well-dressed women came into the room.
JoJo stood up and took them out to the kitchen.
Joey watched from his vantage point on the floor as they did the deal.
Three thousand tabs of Ecstasy were handed over for a thick wad of notes.
Joey relaxed, happy in the knowledge that for the next few weeks at least, the place wouldn't run dry of drugs.
It was just as the two women were leaving that the pandemonium started.
Police seemed to be crawling everywhere.
Lizzy was so far gone by this time that she just smiled at them as they took her out to the meat wagon.
Kate and Caitlin were both going over ‘suspect’ evidence.
This involved taking apart any statements made by known offenders and seeing if they could pinpoint a flaw somewhere along the line.
As yet they had got precisely nowhere.
Caitlin yawned loudly.
‘There's nothing here, Katie, you know that and I know  that.
This man, whoever he is, isn't your normal nutter.
He's one of the new breed.’
Kate smiled despite herself.
‘New breed?’
‘Sure isn't that what I just said?
I've noticed over the years that the violent attacks are changing subtly.
If you go back to the ‘fifties and ‘sixties, there were a few killers around like this one.
But their attacks, bad as they were — well, they weren't as violent as now.
Look at this man we have here.
He batters the girls to death.
Now most rapists get off on their domination of the woman.
The struggling, the fear, the knowledge that they are committing the worst violation a woman can experience.
This chappie here, though, he seems to want them still.
As still as death, in fact.
It's almost if he wants the ultimate submission.
as if the woman's acquiescing, if you like.
Giving him permission.’
Kate stared at Caitlin's ruddy face and nodded.
‘I think I understand you.
But even knowing that, we're still as far from finding him as we are from the Holy Grail.’
Her voice was flat.
‘Oh, we'll find him, don't you fret.
It's just when.
That's the bastard of it all.
When.
He'll make a mistake.
They always do.’
The phone on their desk rang and Kate picked it up.
Caitlin watched her face register astonishment.
‘I'll be right there.’
‘What is it, Katie?
Another one?’
Caitlin's voice held disbelief.
‘Oh, no, it's not another murder.
But it could bloody well end up as one.’
Picking up her bag she rushed from the incident room, leaving him staring after her.
Chapter Fourteen
Kate slammed into her house, banging the front door behind her.
Dan and Evelyn heard her stamping up the stairs and both followed her.
They found her in Lizzy's bedroom, systematically tearing the room apart.
‘What the hell's going on here, Kate?’
Dan's voice was incredulous.
She was pulling underwear from a drawer and searching every piece as she picked it up.
‘Lizzy is at this moment in Grantley police station on a charge of possession of cannabis.’
Her voice was thick with fury.
‘What!’
Evelyn held her hand to her heart.
‘Are you sure?’
‘Oh, I'm sure all right.
I know what my own daughter looks like.’
She pulled the drawer from its hole and examined the underneath.
There, taped to the bottom, was a small plastic bag of amphetamines.
Kate ripped it off and shoved it in the pocket of her jacket.
‘Look, Kate, relax for a second and tell us what happened.
There must be some mistake.’
‘There's no mistake, Dan.
I thought that as well, until I saw her.
I was called from the incident room by the desk sergeant who recognised her.
She was in a squat in Tillingdon Place.
Yes, Tillingdon Place, the biggest dump in Grantley, and she was tripping out of her head.’
‘No.’
Evelyn felt sick inside.
‘Yes, Mum.
Now will you two just get out?
I must find out what she's got, what's going on.
I got the duty doctor to give  her a blood test, for my eyes only.
I could break her bloody neck!’
‘Listen, Kate, maybe someone took her there and gave her the drugs….’
‘Oh, don't you think I thought of that?
Well, don't you?’
She rounded on Dan.
‘I went into the cell and she told me to fuck off out of it.
Those were her exact words.
She was shouting and swearing at everyone.
I have never been so humiliated in all my life.
Miss Goody Two Shoes hasn't been to work for a week apparently.
I went round to Joanie's and she told me everything.
Lizzy wasn't at Joanie's on New Year's Eve, she was at that bloody rave!
She's nothing but a lying, scheming little bitch!’
She burst into tears.
Evelyn went to her and put her arm around her shoulders.
‘I'll make us all a cup of coffee, shall I?
Dry your eyes, Katie, crying won't solve anything.’
‘I did everything I possibly could for that girl.
We treated her well, tried to bring her up decently.
Why has she done this to us?
To herself?
It's as if I never knew her.’
Evelyn kissed the top of her head.
‘Sure there's plenty of people must have said the same thing after a visit from you, love.
You bring your children up, you do your best, but in the end they go their own way.’
‘I could cheerfully kill her, Mum, for this.
From what I can gather from Joanie, she's been taking drugs since her last year at school.
No wonder she didn't want to stay on and make something of herself.’
Kate clenched her fists.
‘If she was here now I'd tear her apart.
What a foolish, foolish girl!’
Dan walked from the room, his head reeling.
Lizzy on drugs?
His Lizzy?
He sat at the top of the stairs as the news sank in.
A little while later Kate's sobs had subsided and Evelyn pushed past him to make her daughter a coffee.
Inside the bedroom Kate began once more to search the room.
She had just found Lizzy's birth control pills when Dan came back in.
‘Look, Dan, she's on the pill.
Another first for Madam Lizzy.
When she gets home I'm going to slaughter her.’
‘It's because of you, Kate.
You were never there for her.
You should have dedicated yourself to bringing up your child….’
Dan's trite speech was what she needed to bring herself down from her temper.
She turned to face him.
Her voice was deadly calm as she spoke.
‘You dare to tell me what I should have done, Danny Burrows?
You dare to tell me about my child?’
She poked herself in the chest.
‘Yes, my child.
Never yours, Dan.
You were never here for her.
My mother and I brought her up and she brought herself this low.
Where that girl is concerned I have nothing on my conscience.
Nothing.’
But Kate knew that no matter how many times she told herself that, she would always blame herself.
Always.
She began to pull all her daughter's clothes from the wardrobe, searching the pockets as she went.
‘Look at you, you'd think you were at a suspect's house instead of your daughter's bedroom.
You haven't even tried to hear her side of it.’
Dan's voice was disgusted.
He turned and walked from the room.
Kate followed him on to the landing and shouted: ‘You're another one.
You can take your stuff and get out.
I've had enough of freeloaders.
She's like you, Dan, that's the trouble.
She looks like an angel and she's a slut….’
She heard him slam the front room door and went back into the bedroom.
The Paddington Bear wallpaper that had been on the walls for years was mocking her.
On a shelf over the bed were Lizzy's dolls from childhood.
Picking up the Tiny Tears she grasped it to herself, cuddling the cold plastic head to her face.
Oh, Lizzy, Lizzy, when did it all start to go wrong?
How could she not have noticed what was going on under her nose?
What had come over her child?
She licked the salty tears from her lips and, taking a tissue from the box by the bed, blew her nose loudly.
Placing the doll on her lap she pulled the legs off.
Kate knew everywhere there was to look for drugs.
It was her job, after all.
Patrick answered the door himself and smiled in delight as he saw Kate on his doorstep.
‘Hello, love.
Come in.’
She stepped into the hallway.
As Patrick walked her through to the lounge he frowned.
She did not look like a happy woman.
When she was seated on the sofa with a glass of brandy, he spoke.
‘What's up, Kate?
You look terrible.
Is it something about the case?’
She sipped the brandy.
‘No.
Nothing to do with that.’
Then it all tumbled out.
Patrick sat beside her, unsure if what he was hearing was true.
When she had finished, he sighed heavily.
‘Sounds to me like your daughter needs a good kick up the arse, if you'll pardon the expression.’
‘I'm sorry to bring my troubles here but I really didn't know where else to go.’
Patrick grasped her hand.
‘Listen, Kate, if ever you need me, I'll be there.
All right?’
He meant it.
Seeing her like this made her more human somehow.
It was gratifying to know that she could feel the same as him.
That she had the same troubles, worries and hopes that he had.
It made her more a person and less a policewoman.
Kate ran her hands through her long hair and sniffed.
‘It was just the way she acted when I went in the cell.
You know, as if I was the enemy or something.’
‘At the moment, Kate love, you are the enemy.
She probably feels ashamed of herself.’
‘I know what you're saying, but she was drugged out of her head, Patrick.
She was nicked in a filthy squat with a load of known druggies.
The boy who took her there was called Joey something or other.
He already has a record as long as my arm and he's only eighteen.
I tried to kid myself that someone took her and dragged her there, you know the scenario.
But after talking to her best friend, I realise that my daughter is nothing but a little slut.’
Patrick slapped her knee sharply.
‘Hey, hey, you listen to me now, Katie, that's your child you're talking about.
I wouldn't care if my Mandy was flashing her clout on the Old Kent Road if it meant having her back!
You're being too hard on her.
She's sixteen.
Christ Almighty, didn't you ever do anything wrong at sixteen?
‘Kids today have too many choices in front of them.
Drugs are part and parcel of their everyday life.
That's why they go to these raves.
In our youth, the ‘sixties and early ‘seventies, we had the same thing, only we were the generation who were going to change the world.
Remember Sergeant Pepper and all the other drug music?
What you've got to do now is try and build some bridges with her.
Try and get her back on an even keel.’
Kate stared up into his face.
What he was saying made sense in some respects but she would never, ever forgive Lizzy for the charade of the last eighteen months.
She had thought her daughter was pure and good, and she had been gratified by that.
Seeing the lowest of the low on a daily basis made you glad your child was normal.
Was safe.
Was secure.
To find out that she was a drug user was like finding out your twin was a murderer.
It was unbelievable.
To see that child lying in a cell out of her head on drugs was like having a knife twisted somewhere in your bowels.
Kelly watched the changing expressions on her face and guessed what she was thinking.
‘I feel I've failed Lizzy, Pat.
Failed her dreadfully.
I put my work before everything.
I could have got a nine to five job but I never wanted one.
I wanted to be a policewoman.
I suppose you, of all people find that hard to believe.’
Patrick shrugged.
‘Look Katie, your job is your business, I admit that until I met you I didn't have a lot of time for the police.
But that's history.
I am a hundred per cent legal these days.’
‘All the same though, Pat, what I'm doing with you is not really any different to what Lizzy did with the drugs.
We both want something we shouldn't really have.’
Patrick stared into Kate's eyes, his expression soft.
‘Drugs destroy people, Kate.
I don't.
I resent you implying that.
I've never intentionally hurt a woman in my life.
If you feel that you are in any way compromising yourself with me, then I think we should both say our goodbyes now, before it becomes even harder.’
Kate returned his gaze.
He was offering her an out and she respected him for that.
While another part of her, the female part of her, resented the way he was willing just to end what they had.
‘I'll miss you though, Kate, you've kept me together body and soul since I lost Mandy.
I've come to rely on you very much.
I'd even go so far as to say I'm falling in love.
But what you said has a ring of truth.
All I can say in my defence is that I have nothing now in my life that I would need to hide from you.’
‘What about the future?’
He smiled.
‘Who knows what the future has in store for us?
Kate looked away from him and concentrated on the ormolu clock on the mantelpiece, its ticking the only other sound in the room.
She bit her lip.
So much had happened in the last few months.
Her life would never be the same again.
Her relationship with Lizzy was over.
It would be different now between them.
Lizzy would need a firm hand after this.
All the trust was gone.
The one person whom Kate had always seen as constant and good had been shown up in a dark light.
It scared her.
How could you not know that about your child?
On the other hand, the man she had been wary of seeing, who had a bad reputation, who in her right mind she should never have got involved with, had turned out to be a good man underneath.
A good and kind man, whose reputation was only believed by the people who didn't really know him.
‘I don't want to finish with you, Kate.’
His voice was soft and low.
‘I don't want to stop seeing you either, Pat.’
She wasn't sure she could stop now, even if she wanted to.
‘When is she home?’
‘Tomorrow, I could have taken her tonight, you know, being a DI.
But I didn't trust myself, Pat, I thought I might harm her if she was with me while I felt like this.’
‘Why did you come to me?’
It was a low whisper.
‘Because I trust you, I suppose.’
He smiled and pulled her to her feet.
‘Come on.’
‘Where are we going?’
‘I'm going to run you a nice bath, Katie, and I'm going to soap your body personally, every nook and cranny.
Then I am going to lay you on my bed and stroke every care and worry from your mind.
Then when madam gets home tomorrow, you'll be in a fit frame of mind to see her and get this sorted out once and for all.’
He pulled Kate to the bottom of the staircase and she dragged her hand from his.
‘Oh Pat, what am I going to do?
What with the case and everything, and now all this with Lizzy….’
Her voice trailed off and Patrick took her hand once more.
‘Just you bear in mind that you've got me now, Kate, and you'll have me for as long as you want me.
I'm here for you whenever you need someone.’
It was said simply and sincerely and Kate followed him up the stairs gladly.
For the first time in years she had someone she could rely on.
It was a heady feeling.
‘After the bath, we can have a good old chat.
That's what you really need, you know.
Someone who's not too close to the source of the problem.’
Kate followed him up the stairs.
She had left Dan packing and her mother had retired to her bedroom.
Kate had felt she could not stay in that house a moment longer.
She had found cannabis as well as amphetamines in her daughter's room.
What Patrick said made sense.
She needed a real shoulder to cry on.
It was not until much later, after her bath and with Patrick snoring softly beside her, that she realised the implications of her visit to Patrick Kelly.
The irony of it all was not lost on her.
But she leant up on her elbow and looked down into his face and knew the truth of it.
She was falling hopelessly in love with the man.
And it felt good.
Very, very good.
She pictured Lizzy as a small child.
Her white socks and sandals pristine on her little feet.
Her Holly Hobby dress ironed to crisp perfection.
Her long dark hair brushed like burnished jet.
It was her first day at school.
Kate had been so proud of her.
What had happened to make her daughter take drugs?
When had Lizzy grown away from her?
She felt the anguished tears of motherhood blur her vision and blinked them away.
She was done with crying.
Patrick was right, she must build bridges now with Lizzy.
Try and make some good come out of all this badness.
Patrick turned over and his arm settled across her stomach.
It felt good, it felt right.
She felt safe.
Kissing the dark head beside her, she settled down.
Not to sleep, that was a long way away, but to think and plan.
The initial shock and fury were gradually disappearing; now she needed a plan of action and would concentrate her energies on that.
Somewhere, at some time, she had missed some vital step with Lizzy.
It was up to her to rectify that as best she could.
And rectify it she would.
Snuggling into Patrick, she closed her eyes and let the memories drift in front of her closed lids.
The only thing she forgot to wonder was how Lizzy was going to feel about everything.
It was a mistake she would soon regret.
Kate felt the eyes of the desk sergeant boring into the back of her head as she signed the papers for her daughter's release.
She made her way to the cells with a heavy heart.
The fact that Lizzy had been nicked was the talk of the station, she knew that.
She passed Amanda Dawkins who smiled at her sympathetically.
Kate looked away.
As the cell was unlocked she held her breath.
Lizzy was sitting cross-legged on a mattress on the floor.
Her make up was smeared over her face and her hair was a mass of tangles.
She looked defiantly into her mother's face as the door opened.
‘So you've come then?’
Kate swallowed deeply.
‘Get up, Lizzy.’
The girl pulled herself from the mattress and stood with one hand on her hip, in an aggressive pose.
The duty officer shook his head in wonder.
If she was his daughter he'd give her a smack she wouldn't forget in a hurry.
‘Come on, get your things, we're going home.’
Kate's voice was low.
She turned to the duty officer, a man called Higgins.
He was nearly fifty and Kate could see the pity in his eyes.
‘Has she eaten?’
‘Not a thing, love, but we made her drink the orange juice.
It brings them down you know, the Vitamin C.’
‘Yeah, I know.
Come on, let's get out of here.’
‘I want Dad to come and get me.’
This was said through gritted teeth.
‘He can't come so you'll have to make do with me.
Now come on, Liz, I'm not in the mood for games.’
Lizzy sneered, then sat back down again.
‘I'll just have to wait for Dad then, won't I?’
‘You're coming home with me now, Lizzy.’
She grinned annoyingly.
‘I'm going to do whatever I want, Mum.
I'm through with you and Gran always telling me what you want, what you expect me to be….’
Kate felt herself reddening.
She tried desperately to control her voice.
‘We can talk about this at home, Lizzy.
This is neither the time nor the place.’
‘Really?
Funny that, because you seem to spend enough time here.
I'd have thought this was the place for you, Mum, more than anywhere else.’
‘I'm telling you for the last time, Liz, get up and let's go home.
We can talk this through, make some sense out of it.’
Lizzy laughed out loud, her mouth wide with mirth.
‘That's about right for you, isn't it?
Let's analyse everything.
Let's find the hidden meaning in everything.
Oh, fuck off, Mum.
You sound like a bad play!’
Kate spoke between clenched teeth to the duty officer.
‘Would you leave us alone, please?’
The man had been so embarrassed he had been pretending to study the graffiti on the cell walls.
He rushed from the cell, shutting the door behind him.
He liked Kate Burrows a lot.
She was a nice woman, a good DI; to see her shamed like that was terrible.
Mother and daughter stared at one another and Kate was aware that it was now a battle of nerves between them.
For some reason Lizzy was enjoying this.
She was not contrite or sorry or any of the things she should have been.
In fact, it seemed as if she was actually enjoying it.
Where, oh where, was the daughter of two days ago?
Where was the girl with the ready smile and the laughing face?
It was as if she was seeing a stranger, a stranger with her daughter's face and body.
A body that had been well used, judging by the diary she had found.
‘What's all this really about, Lizzy?
Come on, tell me.’
She stood up and walked to the back of the cell.
Her hair was in her eyes and she brushed it away impatiently.
‘I want Dad.’
‘Well, your dad isn't here, I am.
And if necessary, Lizzy, I am going to take you out of here by force.’
She laughed again.
‘I'd like to see you try!’
It was said in a tone of such contempt that Kate felt something inside her break.
She walked across the room and, grabbing her daughter's long hair, yanked her towards the cell door.
It took every bit of strength that she possessed.
Lizzy, though, was not having any of it.
She brought her fist round and punched her mother in the shoulder.
Kate felt the blow, and swinging Lizzy round to face her, slapped her hard across the face, sending the girl flying to the corner of the cell.
Both were breathing heavily.
‘Get up, Lizzy, now, before I really lose my rag!
Get up, I said!’
The last sentence echoed around the small cell.
Kate walked towards her daughter and Lizzy scrambled to her feet.
‘You are coming home with me now, and if you so much as open that foul mouth of yours, I'll beat you within an inch of your life.’
Something in her mother's voice told Lizzy that she meant it.
Kate grabbed the shoulder of her daughter's tee-shirt and dragged her to the cell door.
She banged on it with her free hand and it was opened by Higgins.
Kate then marched the girl along the cell row, through the desk sergeant's office and out of the building to the car park.
She threw Lizzy in the car.
Getting into the driver's seat, she started the engine.
‘You'd better have a good reason for all this, Lizzy, because I want to know exactly what's going on with you.’
With that she drove out of the station and home.
Neither of them said a word more.
Evelyn desperately wanted to clean up Lizzy's room for her but Kate had forbidden her to touch it.
She sat on the bed looking at the utter chaos around her.
Pictures of Lizzy as a child were everywhere.
She shook her head.
If anyone had told her that her granddaughter was on drugs she would have laughed in their face.
‘Not my Lizzy,’ she would have said.
But now the truth was facing her and it was like gall.
That beautiful girl was ruining her life, was breaking her family apart — for drugs.
From what Kate had told her Lizzy had been on amphetamines for a couple of years.
She shook her head.
Standing up, she looked around the familiar room.
How many times had she come to tuck Lizzy in when she had been small?
Kissed the soft skin of her face?
Brushed the long hair till it gleamed?
She walked to the window and looked out into the dull afternoon light.
That was when she saw the diary.
It was a girl's diary, with birds and flowers painted on a pale green silk background.
Evelyn opened it up idly and began to read.
She was still reading when Kate and Lizzy arrived.
Kate had to pull the girl from the car and practically drag her up the garden path to the house.
Opening the door, she pushed her daughter inside.
Lizzy walked into the front room and through to the  kitchen where she began to make herself a cup of coffee as if nothing had happened.
Kate pulled her coat off and put it on the banisters.
She followed her daughter through to the kitchen.
‘Right then, I want to know everything that's been happening.
I want to know where you got the drugs, who from, and who you took them with.’
Lizzy poured milk into her cup.
‘That, Mother, is none of your business.’
Kate pushed her hands through her hair.
‘I'm not going to argue all day, Lizzy, I mean it.
I want some answers and I want them now.’
Lizzy faced her mother and crossed her arms over her breasts.
‘That's you all over that is.
‘I want some answers and I want them now.’
Who the hell do you think you're talking to?
I'm your daughter not a bloody suspect.’
‘That, madam, is just where you're wrong.
As far as I'm concerned at this particular moment in time you're both those things.
You are suspected of dealing in drugs, Lizzy.
You were at a known dealer's house, so where exactly does that leave you?
I found drugs in your bedroom.
I also found your diary.
So I know I'm not dealing with Snow White here.’
Lizzy turned to the kettle and poured boiling water into the mug.
‘I don't need this at the moment, Mum, I've had a terrible night.
Maybe later I might feel like discussing it.’
Kate watched in amazement as Lizzy stirred her coffee.
Her long fingers gripped the spoon so tightly her knuckles were white.
Kate looked at the womanly figure in the jeans and tee-shirt.
She wasn't even wearing a bra.
The tee-shirt was stained and crumpled.
Her hair was like rats tails and she just stood there making herself a cup of coffee.
Not for the first time in the last twenty-four hours Kate wondered what on earth had happened to her child.
Evelyn had been in the front room listening to the exchange.
Now she walked into the kitchen as Lizzy sat at the breakfast bar and threw the diary in front of her.
‘I have seen a lot of things in my life, Elizabeth Burrows, but I never thought to see this.
I felt sick to my stomach reading that filth.’
Evelyn's voice was hard and cold.
Lizzy picked up the diary and looked at her grandmother.
‘You shouldn't have read it, Gran.’
Her voice was small.
Her grandmother was important to her.
‘Don't you call me Gran!
Don't you ever call me that again.
That you could do those things with boys and then write about them….
It's disgusting!’
‘It's real life, remember that?
You must have been young once.’
Lizzy felt her voice rising and tried desperately to control it.
‘My life is my own now, I'm nearly seventeen years old.
If I want to sleep with boys I like, then that's my business.
Mine .
Not yours or Mum's or anyone's.
Mine!’
Evelyn gave her a look of contempt.
‘That's all you're interested in, isn't it?
You know, it's funny but over the years I can always remember you saying: me, my, mine.
I want, I think, I, I, I. Never a real thought for anyone else.
We all fell in with what you wanted, we all bent over backwards to do what you wanted.
Never a thought for ourselves.
You're nothing but a conniving, scheming, little bitch!’
‘Mum!’
‘Oh, don't ‘Mum’ me, Kate.
That diary says it all.
I make you feel suffocated, do I, with my loving?
My cuddling annoys you.
Well, don't worry, Lizzy, because I never want to touch you again as long as I live.’
With that Evelyn walked from the room, her shoulders stooped.
Lizzy put her head in her hands.
‘Why did this have to happen?
Why did you have to let her read that?’
She threw the diary on to the breakfast bar and Kate could hear the tears in her voice.
‘I think you should ask yourself why you wrote it, Lizzy, and why you did those things?
That's the important issue here now, not what we think.’
Tears were pouring down the girl's face and every maternal instinct in Kate's body told her to comfort her  child.
But the descriptions in the diary were there in the forefront of her mind and they stopped her.
To picture your daughter with two boys in the back of a transit van is not exactly conducive to maternal solicitude.
It caused a wide gap, a void that Kate was sure would always be between them.
‘Why can't you just let me live my life how I want to?’
‘Because you're set on a course of self-destruction, that's why, Lizzy.’
‘I didn't mean the things I said about you and Gran in the diary.
I was just a bit stoned at the time and it all poured out….
I love Gran, I always have.’
Kate sat opposite her and sighed.
‘It's not just what you wrote that hurts us, Lizzy, it's the way you've been living a lie all this time.’
‘I had to live a lie!
If you knew what I was doing you'd have moved heaven and earth to stop me.
It's my life, Mum, my life.’
Kate lit a cigarette.
Lizzy leant across the table and took one from her packet.
‘Yes, I smoke as well.
You know everything else, you might as well know that.’
Kate shook out her match and Lizzy took the box from her hand.
The touch of her daughter's warm skin on her own was like an electric shock.
She watched Lizzy light her cigarette.
Her fingers were stained with dirt, her nail varnish chipped.
Her lips were cracked and dry.
She looked like a girl who had been tripping all night.
She also looked very young and unsure of herself, but Kate knew that was just an illusion.
How many times had she pulled in young girls over the years?
‘Tarts’ was how she had described them in her own mind.
Little tarts with too much make up and too much to say for themselves.
Now, here was the truth of her life in front of her.
Her daughter had been sleeping with boys, and men since she was fourteen.
Kate couldn't even justify it by saying it was a boy Lizzy loved, whom her daughter had been with for a long time and so sex was a natural progression.
From what she had read in  the diary, it seemed any boy with a pleasing face and the latest clothes was in for a good time.
Kate closed her eyes tightly.
‘Where's Dad?’
‘He's gone, Lizzy.
I don't know where.’
‘Figures.
You never cared about him anyway.’
‘Listen, you!
I let him stay here because of you.
If it had been left to me I would have put him out on the street long ago.
Turning up here as and when it suited him.
I thought you needed a father, even a lousy father.
A father who loved you was better than no father at all.’
Lizzy laughed softly.
‘I never had a father.
I never really had a mother either, did I?’
Kate took a long pull on her cigarette and sighed.
What the hell had happened to her life?
Evelyn lay on her bed and stared at the ceiling.
The shock of what she had read was just wearing off.
In place of her anger was sorrow.
Sorrow for her daughter.
Not for her granddaughter, but for Kate.
She had battled against all the odds to give that girl everything she could possibly want.
Evelyn had watched Kate over the years putting her own life on hold for Lizzy, and for what?
What?
She admitted to herself that she had been partly to blame.
She had spoiled the child rotten.
But what else could she have done?
Who would have thought that that bright articulate girl would turn out like this?
That the little girl who had sat on her granny's knee and smiled and laughed, would grow up to give herself to anyone and everyone who asked her?
Hadn't she tried to instil morals into the girl?
Not for the first time she missed her husband dreadfully.
He would have known what to do.
She wiped her eyes with the back of her hand.
Lizzy had never known the love of a father, a real father.
Kate used to wait in the hallway, sitting patiently on the stairs, listening for her father's boots to clump up the tiny pathway.
Then, as he opened the door, she'd be picked up in  a big hug.
Kate had known the security of love, as a child and as an adult.
It was the advent of Dan that had changed her.
When he had left her with a tiny baby, she had hardened her heart somehow.
Oh, she loved Lizzy with all her being, Evelyn knew that, but she had also channelled her energy into her work.
On reflection, Evelyn wondered now if this was such a good thing.
If Kate had maybe married again and given Lizzy a father figure….
She shook herself mentally.
‘What's bred in the bone comes out in the blood.’
How many times had she said that to people?
Lizzy was like her father.
She used people for her own ends.
Dan had been the same.
He was still the same.
He had packed his bags and disappeared, as he always had, at the first sign of trouble.
He said he couldn't cope with aggravation.
Those were his exact words.
Well, he generally caused any aggravation that was floating around, but he would never admit it.
She heard the bedroom door open and put her hands over her eyes to shield the glare from the landing light.
‘I've brought you a cup of coffee, Mum.’
Kate set the cup down on the dresser by the bed.
‘How are you feeling?’
Evelyn had closed her eyes.
She felt the springs in the bed shift as Kate sat beside her.
They clasped hands.
‘I don't know how I feel, to tell you the truth.
Now the shock's wearing off, I keep trying to make excuses for her.’
She heard Kate sigh.
‘I know what you mean.’
‘Oh, Katie, that we would ever see the day….’
Her voice broke.
‘I know.
Believe me, I know what you're feeling.
The worst of it all to me is that I never guessed anything.
Me a policewoman, a DI, never saw what was in front of my face.’
‘That's because you trusted her.’
Evelyn's voice was so filled with despair that Kate felt rage again.
Rage at her daughter, not just for what she had done but for all the unhappiness she had caused her grandmother.
Evelyn was of a different era, a different breed.
She had been a virgin when  she married, had stayed faithful all her married life.
Even when she had been widowed young, she had never wanted another man.
Kate had envied her mother her nice clean life.
Now Lizzy had taken all that her grandmother held dear and dragged it through the dirt.
For that Kate would find it hard to forgive her.
The two women sat together in silent despair.
Then the phone rang.
Kate answered it and went back in to her mother.
‘Frederick Flowers wants to see me.
No prizes for guessing why.’
Her voice was trembling now.
The Chief Constable had been quite nice, Kate conceded.
He had asked her what was happening and she told him as truthfully as possible.
The possession charge had been dropped because her daughter had only had a small amount on her.
Not enough to be a dealer, only enough for what the police termed ‘personal use’.
Kate drove home in a stupor.
She knew that this would be a black cloud hanging over her for the rest of her working life.
But that wasn't the issue here.
The real crux of the matter was finding out why her daughter felt the need to take drugs.
Why she lied and cheated.
What the hell was going on in the child's mind.
She pulled into her drive and sat looking at the house.
It was early evening and the day had been too long.
Far too long and far too fraught.
She rubbed the back of her neck with a gloved hand.
She had to walk into work tomorrow and face her colleagues.
It was the talking point of the station, she would lay money on that.
Groaning slightly, she got out of the car.
Inside the house, all was quiet.
Kate went to the kitchen and turned on the light.
She put the kettle on for a cup of coffee.
Preparing three cups she went upstairs to her mother's room.
She opened the door slightly and listened.
All she could hear were soft snores.
She shut the door gently then went to her daughter's room.
She opened the door and went inside.
Lizzy lay in bed, with just her head showing.
Kate tiptoed to her and looked down.
Her long dark hair fanned out across the pillow.
In the light from the streetlamp Kate could see the long dark lashes against her daughter's cheek bones.
Lizzy really was lovely.
She had so much going for her, why had she felt the urge to destroy herself?
Because as far as Kate was concerned, that was all people who took drugs wanted to do.
She felt a tear squeeze itself from the corner of her eye.
Turning away, she looked at the familiar little roam: the dolls, the make up scattered over the dressing table, the books, haphazardly placed on their shelf.
She had attempted to clean up at least.
Then Kate saw the piece of paper.
Walking the few steps to the dressing table, she picked it up.
Words registered in her mind, but she just could not comprehend them.
She read the piece of paper again and again.
Sorry, Mum….
Sorry, Mum.
Tell Gran I love her….
Tell Gran….
She dragged her eyes from the paper to the bed and the deathly whiteness of Lizzy's skin made her spring into action.
She dragged back the covers and stared.
Even in the dim light she could see the blood.
Somewhere in her mind she registered the fact it was still pumping.
Picking up a hand towel from a nearby chair, she wrapped both of Lizzy's wrists tightly.
Her fingers were suddenly stiff, she couldn't control them.
The hammering of her heart in her ears was like a drum beating.
She ran into her bedroom to phone an ambulance.
She registered the blood on the white telephone.
It was Lizzy's blood.
Lizzy's.
She answered the telephonist's questions calmly and rationally, she had no idea how.
It was the policewoman in her taking over.
Please hurry.
Oh God, please hurry.
She was not sure whether she was speaking out loud.
She put down the phone and rushed back in to Lizzy.
Oh God, please let her be all right.
I'll do anything you want if you let her be all right.
I'll go to mass every day of my life….
Like many another before, she was trying to bargain with God for her child's life.
Then, somewhere in the stillness, she heard the ambulance siren.
It wasn't until she was stumbling from the room that she saw her mother.
Evelyn stood in her bedroom doorway, her face ashen.
Kate couldn't look at her.
She went in the ambulance with Lizzy.
Of all the things she had expected from life, the events of the last twenty-four hours had not been remotely near them.
If someone had told her what was going to happen she would have laughed in their face.
Now, in the middle of the biggest case she had ever worked on, she had problems of a much larger scale and Kate was aware that her life would never be the same again.
Kate sat in the hospital waiting room.
The young doctor was smiling at her.
She noticed that his hair had scissor marks in it, as if it had just been dry cut.
He had a day's growth of beard covering a weak chin.
‘Well, we've stitched her, Mrs Burrows.
The cuts were quite deep, but not really life threatening as such.
She cut lengthwise along the arm and missed the main arteries.
She was unconscious because she had taken some sleeping pills.
But she's awake now, though groggy.’
‘Can I see her?’
‘Of course.
She'll stay here tonight and the psychiatrist will see her tomorrow.’
‘Psychiatrist?’
Kate's voice was small.
‘It's standard procedure after a suicide attempt.
Don't worry, everything will be all right.’
Kate swallowed the trite remark.
He was only trying to make her feel better.
She stood up and stubbed out her cigarette.
It had in fact gone out minutes before but she hadn't noticed.
‘Can I go and see her then?’
‘Of course.
Try not to keep her too long.
Sleep's the best thing for her now.
Sleep is a great healer.’
Kate felt an urge to tell him to get stuffed.
But she didn't.
Instead she gave him a tight smile.
‘Thank you.’
Slipping past him she went into her daughter's ward.
Lizzy had the curtains pulled around her bed and Kate stepped towards them gingerly.
She saw Lizzy's eyes open and tried hard to smile.
‘I'm sorry, Mum.
I really am sorry.’
‘Oh, Lizzy!’
All the pain and anguish inside her rose like a tidal wave and enveloped her.
Mother and daughter cried together.
‘Everything will be all right, Lizzy, I promise you.
We'll work this out, I swear.
We'll work this out.’
‘Oh, Mum, I wish Gran hadn't seen my diary.’
Kate could hear the little hiccoughing sounds in her voice.
‘We'll make it right between us.
You just concentrate on getting better.’
A nurse rustled into the tiny space.
Kate could smell Pears soap and the smell brought back memories of when she had been younger.
When Lizzy had been a baby.
‘I think you'd best get yourself off home now.
She really does need her sleep.’
Kate nodded.
Kissing Lizzy on the lips, she pushed back her hair from her face and tried valiantly to smile.
‘I'll be here in the morning, OK?’
Lizzy nodded and closed her eyes.
Kate walked from the ward.
As she pushed open the swing doors to the corridor, Patrick walked towards her.
‘Oh, Kate, I'm so sorry.’
He put out his arms and she walked into them.
Feeling the strength of him, the security he offered.
He pulled her to him, stroking her hair and kissing her forehead.
At the display of sympathy she was undone.
She sobbed into his cashmere overcoat, smelling the peculiar odour of him, Old Spice and cigar smoke.
As he accompanied her out of the hospital and towards his  car, it did not occur to Kate to ask how he knew where she was.
How he knew what had happened.
She was just glad to see him.
Chapter Fifteen
Evelyn heard a car pull up and poked her head through the heavy curtains of the front room.
She sniffed loudly.
It was a big expensive car, must be someone for one of the neighbours.
Then as she looked she saw Kate getting out of the back.
She frowned.
Too much had happened today for anything else really to surprise her.
She saw the man emerge from the car and as they both turned towards the house she quickly shut the curtain.
She sat back on the settee until she heard Kate's key in the lock.
She couldn't summon up her usual boisterous welcome for her daughter.
She heard Kate speaking then a man's voice, a deep, dark brown voice.
Wiping her eyes once more with a sodden hanky, Evelyn waited for them to come into the room.
Patrick helped Kate with her coat then shrugged off his overcoat.
He slung them on the banister in a casual manner.
Somehow this little act pleased Kate.
Her home was not very grand and she knew it.
But Patrick was acting as if he lived her kind of life, which indeed he had once.
Only, from his beginnings, Kate's home would probably have been something to aspire to.
Patrick followed her into the front room, his eyes taking in her home.
He noticed everything, from the good but worn carpets to the books that abounded in the room.
It looked comfortable and warm.
He saw a tiny woman sitting on the settee, dressed all in black.
She had a remarkable face, one that denoted a quick intellect and a kind heart.
He warmed to her immediately.
‘Mum, this is a friend of mine, Patrick Kelly.
He  brought me home from the hospital.’
Evelyn inclined her head.
She noted the breadth of his shoulders, the long legs and dark good looks, and decided Kate had better taste than she'd given her credit for.
Then the name registered.
It was the man they had been talking about at Christmas dinner.
Evelyn pushed the thoughts from her mind.
With a name like Kelly, he must have some Irish in him so he couldn't be all bad.
‘How do you do?’
Patrick smiled at her, and she found herself smiling back.
‘The child?’
She stared into her daughter's drawn face.
‘She's fine, Mum, or at least as fine as she could be in the circumstances.
The cuts weren't deep enough to really harm her.
I found her just in time.
She's to see a psychiatrist in the morning.’
Patrick sat on a chair by the fire and Kate turned to him.
‘Can I get you a drink?
I've got some scotch somewhere.’
She went to the drinks cabinet and opened the door.
She poured out three large  whiskies .
When everyone had their drink Kate sat beside her mother.
Patrick looked at them.
They were like two peas in a pod, both with the same high cheekbones and widow's peak.
Both had a slightly Roman nose.
Individually, all their features were beautiful, but altogether they just missed being wholly lovely.
Instead they had what was termed attractive faces.
Women who looked better as they got older.
Kate certainly looked all right to him.
Evelyn broke the silence.
‘So she's to see a head man, is she?
Well, I think it's for the best, Kate.
There's something drastically wrong with the child.’
She nodded, her eyes on the floor.
Patrick's heart went out to her.
‘You're the man who lost your daughter, aren't you?’
Evelyn asked.
‘Yes.’
‘Tragic to lose a child like that.’
He looked into the old woman's face, saw the sympathy there and the understanding.
‘My son went to Australia, you know.
I've not seen him for twenty years.
It's like he died.
I hear from him regularly but it's not the same as holding them to you.
Watching them grow and turn into whatever they become.
He's a big grown man now and all I have are photographs to chart his years.
It's not like seeing for yourself.’
Her little speech touched Patrick to the core.
He felt the empathy between them.
Knew that she had warmed to him, that she wanted to ease his grief, and for a dangerous few seconds he thought he would cry.
He swallowed the lump that had come to his throat and downed his whisky.
‘Are your family Irish, Mr Kelly?’
Evelyn had to keep talking, had to stop thinking about Lizzy.
‘Yes.
My father was a Dublin man and my mother was from Cork.
I was born in Glasnevin.
I came over here when I was two.’
‘Jesus save us, I know Glasnevin well!
Is your mother still alive?’
Patrick shook his head.
‘No, I'm afraid not.
She was a wonderful woman.’
‘I bet you have some great memories of her?’
He smiled again.
‘Yes, I do.’
He saw his mother in his mind's eye, her arms red to the elbows from doing other people's washing and ironing, her knees permanently swollen from scrubbing floors.
But he also saw the tiny smile she had, that serene look when she came home from six o'clock mass every morning.
Her pressing a shilling in his hand every birthday, no matter how hard up they were.
Oranges at Christmas and a small toy.
Oh, he had fond memories all right.
Kate watched her mother and Patrick as if in a trance.
She could see that if the circumstances of their meeting had been happier they would have had a good drink of her mother's secret stash of Bushmill's and reminisced all night.
She was glad Patrick was here.
He was like a big dependable rock, taking both their troubled minds off Lizzy.
But her daughter had to be helped and that was what scared Kate.
Getting up she went to the cabinet to replenish their glasses and found that the Bell's bottle was nearly empty.
Seeing this Evelyn got up from her seat and said, ‘I'll go and get me Bushmill's.’
She went from the room and Patrick smiled at Kate.
‘Try and relax.
Lizzy's in the best place for her at the moment.
Tomorrow's time enough to worry.’
‘I feel so bloody useless.
How could all that have gone on under my nose?’
Patrick grasped her hand and pulled her to him.
She stared into his eyes.
‘Look, Kate, you're not the only person this has happened to.
Every parent says this at some time.
I remember when I found out Mandy was sleeping with that geek Kevin, I felt like throttling the pair of them.
But it's something that's happened and you can't make it unhappen.
No matter how much you might want to.
I told you, build some bridges now.
Let some good come out of this.’
Oh, he sounded so right, but deep inside Kate she felt she had failed Lizzy somehow.
Evelyn bustled back into the room with her Irish whiskey.
‘I call this my Holy Water, it's as good as a tonic.
My cousin from Coleraine sends it to me, may God bless her and keep her.
It's the mountain water that gives it the taste.
You know her name's actually Katie Daly.
It's true.’
Patrick laughed.
‘Katie Daly’ had been one of his mother's favourite songs.
It was about a girl who made poteen, an illegal Irish whiskey, and the troops who came to arrest her.
Evelyn poured everyone out a generous measure.
Kate sipped the liquid and felt the burn as it hit her throat.
‘Tomorrow, when she sees the head man, I'll go with you, Kate, and we'll try and sort this business out.
We'll make it all right, you'll see.’
‘But to cut her wrists like that, Mum.
She was more worried about you reading the diary than anything else.’
‘And so she should have been, the ungrateful little villain!’
Patrick sipped his drink.
This was getting personal.
‘I think I better go soon, I know you have a lot to talk about.’
Kate nodded.
The driver was sitting outside waiting and suddenly she remembered him.
‘Oh, your poor Willy must be freezing!’
‘I beg your pardon, Kate Burrows?’
Despite herself she laughed at her mother's scandalised face.
‘That's his driver, Mum.
Willy's his name.
He's waiting outside for Patrick.’
‘Oh I see.
Well, bring him in.
We don't stand on ceremony in this house.’
Patrick drank up quickly.
Somehow he didn't think Kate's mother was quite ready for Willy yet.
‘No, I've intruded long enough.
I just wanted to make sure that Kate got home OK.’
He stood up and the two women stood with him.
He shook Evelyn's hand.
‘It was a pleasure to meet you, Mrs….’
‘O'Dowd.
Evelyn O'Dowd.’
He smiled at her again.
‘Mrs O'Dowd, I hope we meet again, in more pleasant circumstances.’
‘So do I, son.’
Kate went out to the hall with him and Patrick kissed her gently.
‘You stop worrying now, Kate, and if you need anything, anything at all, you just ring me.
OK?’
Kate nodded, too full of unshed tears to answer.
She watched him walk down the path and get into his Rolls-Royce.
When the car was out of sight she shut the door and went back into the warmth of the lounge.
‘Well, you're a dark horse and no mistake.’
‘Oh, Mum, he's just a friend.’
Kate sat down and picked up her drink again.
‘Just a friend is he?
Well, if you want my advice, I'd say make him more than a friend, if you get my meaning.
Men like that don't grow on trees.’
‘He owns massage parlours, Mum.’
Evelyn O'Dowd had her own set of principles, which she changed and updated depending on the situation.
‘Well, we can't all be policemen can we?
He's a good kind man by the looks of him.
You take my advice and grab him quick, then you can show him what he's doing wrong.’
Kate sipped her drink.
‘If the Chief Constable knew that I was seeing Patrick, all hell would break loose.’
Kate didn't know that the Chief Constable knew all about her and Kelly.
Patrick Kelly and Frederick Flowers went back a long way.
They were much closer than anyone knew except the two of them, and they certainly wouldn't be telling anyone.
Evelyn bridled in her chair.
‘Well, in that case you just refer him to me, young lady.
What you do when you're out of that station is none of his business.’
If Kate hadn't had so much on her mind she would have laughed at her mother's scandalised voice.
‘It's not like that, Mum, and you know it.
Patrick's a nice man, you're right there, but he is also just on the verge of being a criminal.’
‘I'm on the verge of being one meself, child, if I had the name of that person who gave Lizzy the drugs I'd scalp the face off them.’
Both women were silent.
‘Listen to me, Katie.
If you like this man, and you're happy seeing him, then you do what you want.
No matter what your Chief Constable or Dan, or me or Lizzy or even King Street Charlie feels.
You only live once.
Live your life how you want.
Before you know it you'll be old.
Old as me.
And when you get to my age you get a different perspective on life.
Suddenly, every day seems just that little bit shorter.
You feel the ache coming in your bones.
You know that the best, most fruitful part of your life is over.
I read once that when people get old and go senile, they go back to a time in their life when they were useful.
To when they had young  children, and a husband coming home from work.
Meals to prepare.
Maybe a little job as well.
I could understand them wanting to escape back to a time when they were ‘needed’.
Maybe because my days of being needed are nearly over.’
Kate slipped off her chair and knelt in front of her mother.
‘I'll always need you, Mam.’
At the word mam, Evelyn pulled her daughter into her arms, memories flooding back to her.
Kate and her brother had both called her mam as children.
‘Well, Kate, I'll be here for you for as long as you want me.
The same for Lizzy, God love her.
I could cheerfully cut the legs from her, but I'll always love her.
Mary Ann that she is.’
Doctor Plumfield surveyed Kate and Evelyn as they sat in front of him.
Kate had asked for another day of leave to try and get her family affairs sorted out.
It had been granted grudgingly and she knew she was on thin ice as far as her superiors were concerned.
Sympathetic they may be, but at the end of the day she was a DI and should put her work first.
Particularly a murder investigation.
Lizzy's attempted suicide had been whispered around the station by now, she was sure.
Plumfield was young, and Kate thought he looked more like a social worker than a psychiatrist.
He wore a pair of faded blue jeans and a rugby shirt.
His hair was thinning on top but he had a small ponytail at the back.
His fingers were tobacco-stained as he fiddled with a biro.
He sat back in his chair and sighed.
Kate felt like a little girl who has been caught cheating in her exams.
‘Your daughter, Mrs Burrows, is a very confused and unhappy girl.’
She listened attentively, all the while thinking, Tell me something I don't know.
Plumfield continued talking in a nasal voice and she decided that he must be a demon to live with.
He did not address people as equals but spoke down to them.
‘Lizzy has manifested signs of severe depression, and I feel  that her drug taking and other behavioural patterns need close attention.
To a child, Mrs Burrows, a slap is as good as a cuddle.
After all, they are both forms of attention.’
‘So you think that Lizzy needs more attention?’
Plumfield held up his hand.
‘I am still talking, Mrs Burrows.’
Kate rolled her eyes to the ceiling.
This man just could not be real!
‘I can see you are used to being in charge.’
He pointed a finger at her.
‘You are not at the station now.’
He smiled to take the edge off his words and suddenly it hit Kate: he was a Bill hater.
Kate had come across them all her working life, from the solicitors who tried to get off known offenders to the social workers who stood up in courts of law and gave character references for people who should have been locked up once and for all.
He was going to lay all the blame at her door.
Kate bit her lip and let the man speak.
‘Your daughter —’ this was said like an accusation —‘has agreed to go into a psychiatric hospital for a while, where we can assess her properly.
She will travel there later this afternoon from here.
She'll be in Warley Hospital.’
Evelyn watched his loose-lipped face and felt her mettle rise.
‘Excuse me, Doctor Plumtree….’
‘It's Plumfield.’
‘Doctor Plumfield then.
I think you've got an awful cheek!
This is my grand-daughter that you're talking about.
Now I don't like your attitude, young man.
Just tell us when she's going, what's going to happen to her, and how long we can expect her to be there.’
Doctor Plumfield shook his head as if he was dealing with two recalcitrant children.
Kate put her hand on her mother's arm.
‘Your daughter will be there as long as it takes to help her, Mrs Burrows.
She is rebelling against something.
What, we're not sure of yet.’
He looked at Kate as he said this and the message was quite clear to her.
‘This destructive behaviour needs to be looked at.
If you wish to see her you  may do so, but I must stress that you should try not to upset her in any way.’
Kate stood up.
‘Thank you very much, Doctor Plumfield.
Before we go will you be treating her at Warley?’
‘No, I won't.’
Kate smiled then.
‘Well, at least we have that to be thankful for.
Come on, Mum, let's go and see Lizzy.’
They left Doctor Plumfield sitting shaking his head.
As they walked through the hospital to Lizzy's ward, Evelyn kept up a stream of abuse.
‘The cheek of that one!
To try and insinuate that we had done something wrong.
I'd have liked to have cut the face off of him with a few choice words.
And what's Lizzy been saying to him, I'd like to know?’
As always when she was very angry, Evelyn's voice was a thick Irish brogue.
Kate let it all go in one ear and out the other.
They finally arrived at Lizzy's ward.
She was sitting up in bed listening to the radio on the headphones.
Her face was washed and her hair brushed.
In the hospital gown she seemed very young.
She looked at her mother and grandmother and smiled tremulously.
Pulling the headphones from her ears she put out her arms, and Kate hugged her.
‘Oh, Mum….
Gran…
I'm so glad you're here!’
Evelyn pushed Kate gently out of the way and hugged her grand-daughter.
Lizzy began to cry.
‘Now, now, whist now.
Everything's going to be all right.’
Kate sat on the bed and watched them.
‘They want me to go to a mental hospital, Mum.’
‘How do you feel about that?’
Lizzy shook her head.
‘I don't know.
They seem to think that I'm a bit touched….’
Evelyn broke in, ‘Now don't call it that.
All you need is a bit of a rest, time to sort out your thoughts.’
‘I don't know what's wrong with me, though!’
Lizzy was on the verge of hysteria.
Kate grasped her daughter's hand.
‘Well, they'll find that out in Warley.
A sui —…what you did, is a very frightening thing, Liz.
You must try and find out why you did it.’
‘I know why I did it!
It was because of Nan reading the diary, that's all.’
‘Why did you take the drugs?’
‘Oh, everyone takes drugs nowadays.
I'm not an addict, Mum.
I don't take heroin or anything like that.’
‘But from what I read in the diary you take them often, every day.
Amphetamines, cannabis, Ecstasy.
What I can't understand is how this all went on under my nose.’
Lizzy lay back in the bed.
‘Sometimes, Mum, when I was stoned, I would come and chat to you when you got in.
You never even guessed because the amphetamines just make you chatty.
They make you high, happy.’
‘And you're not happy without them?’
Lizzy stared down at the bandages on her wrists.
‘Not very often.’
‘But why?’
Kate's voice rose and the girl in the next bed stared at them all.
‘I just don't know, Mum.
I don't know.
I think about death all the time.’
Kate stared at the white-tiled floor.
How could a sixteen-year-old girl think about death?
Her life was just starting.
‘Where's Dad?’
‘I don't know.’
‘He hasn't even tried to find out how I am, has he?’
Her voice was flat.
‘He'll be in touch, Lizzy, he thinks the world of you.’
‘Yeah, of course he does.’
Her voice was bitter and Kate and Evelyn exchanged worried glances.
Life had a funny way of catching up with you, thought Kate.
Just when you thought you had it all figured out, it threw you a curve like this.
Doctor Plumfield was right about one thing.
Lizzy should go to Warley Hospital.
She needed help, professional help, and Kate was honest enough to admit that it couldn't come from her or her mother.
Patrick was standing outside a house in Barking.
Three of his best men were with him.
It was twenty to twelve and he had arrived ten minutes earlier.
This was one of the jobs that he hated.
They were to evict a couple and their three children from a rented house.
Patrick had been called in when the man had threatened his team with a baseball bat.
In normal circumstances the men would just have forced their way in and relieved him of the weapon.
But the police had been called so everything had to be done by the book.
The man was watching them from a bedroom window, the bat visible.
A young PC went to the letter box and began shouting through it.
‘Come on, Mr Travers, this is silly.
If you come down here we can talk about it.’
He stepped away from the letter box and looked up towards the window.
Mr Travers, a plasterer, who had lost his house when he had been made bankrupt, opened the window slowly.
He poked out a grizzled head.
‘Fuck off, the lot of you.
I paid that bastard and he knows I paid him.’
The constable tried again.
He lifted the letter box.
‘The man you rented the house from has never paid the mortgage.
It is the building society who's evicting you, Mr Travers, not your landlord.
If you'll just come down we'll try and get this sorted out.’
He looked through the letter box.
He could see a woman holding a young baby standing at the end of the hall.
She looked haggard.
Her clothes were crumpled and she had no shoes on.
He noticed that her feet were filthy.
She shook her head at him in a gesture of bewilderment.
‘We paid him the other day.
We paid him four hundred quid, a month's rent.
We've been here for six months.
We ain't got nowhere to go.’
Two little girls, twins, walked from one of the downstairs rooms and went to her.
The constable sighed heavily.
He shut the letter box and went back to the little crowd on the pavement.
‘Poor bastards.
This is happening more and more.
Someone buys a house, gets a mortgage and then rents it out to poor gits like them.
They take the four hundred a month or whatever for as long as they can, then when the place gets repossessed they've had it on their toes.
Nowhere to be seen.
Some of these blokes have eight or nine houses on the go.
They make a fortune.’
Patrick nodded.
Mortgage scams were as old as the hills.
He hated these jobs.
‘Let me have a go.’
The constable shrugged.
‘I'm getting on to Social Services.
They might find them a bed and breakfast or something.’
Patrick nodded and went up to the front door.
He bellowed through the letter box: ‘My name's Patrick Kelly and I have been asked to repossess this property.
I am a court bailiff.
Now, Mr Travers, you have your wife and children in there with you, and they are probably frightened out of their lives.
Come down and we'll try and get something sorted.’
Ben Travers stood in the bedroom.
He knew who Patrick Kelly was, everyone knew who Patrick Kelly was.
He was a legend in his own lifetime.
Travers looked around the squalid room.
Their so-called furnished accommodation had consisted of two old beds that had come from a second-hand shop, a brokendown settee, and a gas cooker that had probably been used all through the war.
He looked around the room and felt the frustration and anger building up inside him.
He had come to this, with a wife and three kids to support.
Every penny he'd saved had gone to getting the key money for this house, over a thousand pounds, and then the four hundred a month rent.
They'd had to get away from Louise's mother!
They had lived with her for three months before they got this place, and it had been three months too long as  far as he was concerned.
Two years earlier he'd had a privatised council house in East Ham, a nice little business and his family.
Now it had come to this, the repomen at the door for the second time.
He caressed the baseball bat, then holding it down by his side slowly walked down the uncarpeted stairs.
His wife was crying quietly and he looked at her sadly.
‘I'm sorry, Lou.’
‘Just let them in, Ben, let's get this over with.’
He nodded and went to the front door.
As he opened it Patrick Kelly walked inside.
He shut the front door on all the onlookers.
‘Mr Travers?
I am really very sorry about this, but the eviction notice has been granted.
I know that the bloke who tucked you up will get off with it scot free.
By the way, do you have a name for him at all?
Maybe I could find him and recoup some of your money?’
Ben Travers nodded.
‘It's Micky Danby.
I trusted the ponce.
He was only round last week to collect the month's rent.
He never told us nothing.
We signed a year's lease on this place but it ain't worth the paper it's written on.
What the fuck we gonna do now?’
Patrick opened his coat and took out his wallet.
He pulled out three fifty-pound notes.
‘Take this to tide you over.
Get a B & b or something.
This is my card.
Leave a message with my secretary about where you are and I'll see about recouping some of your losses.
Micky Danby is a pratt and I owe him a few scores meself.’
The man took the money.
‘Thanks, Mr Kelly.
I'll pay you back one day.’
His voice was shaky.
‘Give me the baseball bat and we'll get this over with.’
Patrick inclined his head to the woman watching him.
‘How about a nice cuppa, love, while we get this sorted out?’
The woman nodded, glad of something to do.
Patrick opened the front door and smiled at everyone.
‘Everything's OK, officers, you can go now.’
‘Fair enough.
I've radioed in for the Social Services, they'll  find them some alternative accommodation.
See you, Mr Kelly.’
The PC got in his car and drove off.
Patrick followed Ben Travers into his front room.
It was nearly bare except for an old portable TV and a sixties-style PVC settee.
He sat on it with the two little girls and gave them a big smile.
He'd wait until the Social came, see what the score was.
He looked at Ben Travers.
He looked a big strong man.
‘Working?’
‘Only on the lump, here and there.
The building game's fucked at the moment.
They're laying down the footings for houses and then just leaving them.
It's a bloody joke.’
Patrick nodded.
‘Ever thought of doing this job?’
Ben Travers frowned.
‘What, being a bailiff you mean?’
‘Yeah, why not?
It's good steady work.’
‘Never thought about it.’
‘Well, see one of my blokes and they'll tell you what you'll need.
I'd take you on.
I'm always after decent blokes with a bit of savvy.’
‘I'll do that, Mr Kelly, I'll do that.’
Patrick smiled at the woman as she brought in the tea.
‘Thanks, love.’
He gestured around the room.
‘Not worth four hundred sovs a month this.’
The woman grimaced.
‘The fucking Ritz it ain't.
If I could get my hands on that Micky Danby now, I'd break his sodding neck.’
Patrick looked at Ben Travers.
‘Do you think she might want a job and all?’
Ben Travers burst out laughing.
It was a laugh he didn't think he had in him.
Patrick sipped his tea.
Since Mandy had died, he'd gone soft, he admitted that.
Knowing grief as he did, he wanted to spare as many people as possible the experience.
Except the Grantley Ripper.
That was one man he wanted people to grieve for.
When that bastard was dead, maybe he would start living a proper life, a life that he hoped would include Kate Burrows.
Kate was beginning to mean a lot to him.
He thought about her constantly.
The day she had come to his house to talk about her daughter's problem he had felt much closer to her.
He knew that she was a DI and a bloody good one, by all accounts.
He knew that they came from two different worlds, but still nothing would deter him.
When she'd said she was worried about her superiors, he'd felt like telling her that he had her superiors right where he wanted them, but he couldn't.
Kate would not stand for anything like that, she was too straight.
That's what he liked about her.
From the first night he had met her, when she had stood up to him in his own house, he had been attracted to her.
She was one of the few people who had no fear of him, even her Chief Constable would be shocked if he heard the way she argued with him sometimes.
Kate was a woman in every sense of the word, and she was a woman who would not give herself to a man lightly.
When they had gone to bed together on New Year's Eve it had been like a revelation to him.
Never before, not even with Renée, had he felt such a force of love in him.
She confided afterwards that it was the first sexual contact she'd had in over five years.
She had only ever had one man before in her life.
To Patrick that statement had put her above everyone.
She was clean and decent and he wanted her on any terms.
He wondered how her daughter was.
How Kate was coping with the day.
He found himself thinking about her all the time.
Despite all his heartbreak, it was a pleasant feeling.
Kate and Evelyn took Lizzy to Warley themselves.
They had stopped off at home and packed a case for her and then they had stayed to help her settle in.
The funny thing was that Lizzy seemed glad to be going.
At least everyone there seemed very nice, they had welcomed Lizzy and made her feel secure and wanted.
She was sharing a room with a girl called Anita, an ex heroin addict.
Anita was small and blonde and full of life; she seemed to hit it off with Lizzy straight away.
Lizzy had made Kate promise not to let on she was a policewoman.
Kate had been reluctant to agree, but she saw the sense of it.
In a unit where most of the people were drug abusers it would not exactly endear Lizzy to them to have a mother who was a ‘filth’.
Lizzy's white, drawn features haunted her.
She watched her mother and daughter talking together and felt a deep hurt, as if she had somehow been the cause of it all.
She had lain awake the night before, thinking, if only I'd made Dan stay.
But he had not wanted to stay.
She had not made Dan go, he had practically run out of her life.
Bag and baggage.
Lizzy had adored her father and he had only ever let her down.
Kate had prided herself on never doing so, but maybe she had failed?
As they left the hospital, Evelyn grabbed her hand to cross the road to get to the car park.
Kate closed her eyes tightly.
Her mother still helped her across the road.
It was laughable really.
She dropped Evelyn off at home and then made her way into work.
She had to see Ratchette and try and undo some of the damage that had been done there.
As much as she loved Lizzy, and as much as she wanted to help her, without her job they would all be up a creek without a paddle.
Something Lizzy often forgot.
As Kate and her mother left the hospital, Dan was making his way in.
It was just as well they missed each other.
Kate wasn't in the right mood for him.
But his presence made Lizzy happy.
Ratchette and Kate faced one another.
He had offered her coffee and now the two of them sat sipping it.
‘Are you sure everything's OK, Kate?
If you need compassionate leave….’
She shook her head.
‘No, I don't.
Lizzy is being very well looked after and I shall be back at work tomorrow.’
‘Well,’ Ratchette drew the word out between his teeth, ‘this is a very stressful case, Kate.
As I'm sure you're aware, we need people on it who will give it one hundred percent….’
As she opened her mouth to speak there was a knock on the door.
‘Come in.’
Caitlin bowled into the office.
‘Hello there, Katie!
How's your poor daughter?’
He beamed at them.
‘I'm glad that I caught you.
When are you back?
Because I've been keeping a record of everything that's been happening for you, you know, so you won't have missed anything.’
‘I'll be back tomorrow.’
‘That's grand, just grand.
I hope everything works out with the girl.’
‘Did you want anything, Kenny?’
Ratchette's voice was loud.
Caitlin poked himself in the chest.
‘Who me?
Not at all.
I just heard that Katie here was in so I came to see when she'd be back on duty, that's all.
See you tomorrow then.’
He smiled at her and gave her a little wink.
Then, as he was walking out the door, he slapped his forehead hard and turned back to face them.
‘Have you finished here, Kate?’
She looked at Ratchette who nodded his head.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Then come with me and pick up the latest reports.
Very interesting they are as well.’
She put down her coffee cup and, nodding at Ratchette, followed Caitlin from the office.
Once outside he linked arms with her and took her to the little pub that the station staff used.
It was called the Swan and was always busy.
He bought two large whiskies and, sitting Kate in the corner, drank to her daughter's health.
‘Thanks, Kenny.’
He waved his hand at her.
‘Sure I know what you're going through.
I remember when one of my girls had an abortion, I was like a maniac for days after.
You need your work at the moment to keep you sane and normal!’
‘I thought you were Catholic?’