

3
Analysing Language in the Community: General Principles
3.0 Introduction
The purpose of the next two chapters is to consider how far the practical analysis of language use in live speech communities can contribute to our understanding of language change.
I am concerned largely with laying a basis for this by first determining the general patterns of language variation and social variation in which changes in progress may then be discovered — in other words I am concerned with the embedding of language variation in society.
My concern in the present chapter is mainly with linguistic patterns, which amounts to a description of the main methods and principles of social dialectology as we have tried to develop them, especially as they concern the analysis of what are usually called ‘non-standard’ varieties.
In social dialectology we need to abstract from speaker-interaction and the social contexts of speech events as we observe them, to project the data on to the configurations of language systems (recall Principle 1).
Analysis of purely linguistic variation is, however, an essential part of a study of language change, because language change is manifested as change in systems; therefore, in this chapter, I am mainly concerned with the principles of observing and analysing language variation in the community.
In chapter 4 we shall consider the sociolinguistic interpretation of these patterns.
As the language system is the focus of our study here, we start with the idea of the linguistic variable (for example the vowel /a/ in such items as cat, bad, have ), and our first task is to discover what the  possible variants of a variable may be: subsequently, the quantitative distribution of linguistic variants may be demonstrated by reference to the familiar speaker-variables of social dialectology, such as age and sex of speaker.
But the important point to remember is that we do not observe these sociolinguistic patterns directly: it is the speech of individuals in conversational settings that we observe and describe, and it is by analysing a large quantity of spoken language from many speakers that we can then demonstrate the patterns that emerge from our data.
I shall be discussing the general principles of this kind of analysis, and I shall start with some remarks about the general context within which the Belfast research (1975–82) was designed — the context of historical linguistic description.
Here, we need to recall the very broad distinction that has been mentioned in chapter 2, between historical linguistic theory (and the theory of change) on the one hand, and historical linguistic description, on the other.
Of course this is not an absolute distinction, as historical descriptions depend on some kind of theoretical orientation, and theory depends on systematic observation and description of linguistic forms (otherwise there is nothing to have a theory about).
For practical purposes, however, we can accept this broad distinction here.
But it is clear that the data collected in close investigations of live speech communities are much richer than the data preserved from early language states, and they are observable in a larger number of dimensions and at a much finer level of detail; thus, the patterns revealed in systematic investigations of live communities appear to the observer as much more variable and multidimensional than historical patterns (as these are usually reported).
That is to say, the variation is not necessarily patterned in one single linguistic dimension (for example , it does not necessarily move in a single phonetic direction: it may diverge in two or more directions), nor does it necessarily display a unilinear or unidirectional pattern in terms of any independent ‘social’ variable: on the contrary, the patterns shown in relation to different social variables may conflict and interact in a variety of ways.
In the Belfast research programme one of our aims was to use the complex patterns discovered in a live speech community to throw light on the kind of movements that might have taken place in linguistic change in the past.
In conventional historical description, three very prominent inter-related tendencies had been noticed.
These are, first (as I have mentioned in chapter 1), a tendency to focus on patterns of change  alone with little or no attention to stable patterns of language through time; second, a tendency to unidimensionality, that is, an inclination to think of the history of a language as the history of a single homogeneous variety and of sound-changes as proceeding in straight lines; and third, as noted in chapter 2, a tendency to impose theoretical and ideological orthodoxies on (sometimes rather sparse) data that might often be open to alternative kinds of interpretation.
Of these orthodoxies, the ideological ones are perhaps the easiest to explain here, and they are relevant to what I have to say later, so let us consider here a very general point about the effects of ideology — the apparent contrast between typical models of ancient language states, on the one hand, and recent language states on the other.
It is noticeable that for the distant past of language orthodox models of change, such as the Indo-European family-tree model, are mainly models of divergence (in these models languages are envisaged, like galaxies, as moving away from one another at considerable speed), whereas for recent centuries models of language history are predominantly convergent .
Specifically, the history of English since about 1550 is often presented as what Lass (1976: xi) has called a ‘single-minded march’ towards RP and modern standard English, with divergent developments either excluded or admitted only in so far as they throw light on ‘standard’English.
This is in clear contrast to the divergence model in Indo-European studies, and as a result of this contrast, the shape that emerges from historical language description (from ancient times to the present day) is not so much a pyramidal shape (with gradual convergence at the top) as a funnel shape (the kind that is used for pouring liquids), as in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1 The divergence/convergence model, from Indo-European to the present day.
At about the year 1550 the pyramidal base of the funnel suddenly narrows and from that time proceeds in a straight and narrow path to the present day.
That is to say, scholars have assumed that around 1550 the English language became much more convergent than it had been before even though there can be no direct evidence that spoken English did become more convergent.
Following this type of model, conventional histories of English have customarily given considerable attention to phonological and morphological change and diversity in Indo-European, Germanic and Early English.
At the Middle English stage, the description of divergence is still very salient (partly because the states attested in writing are unquestionably divergent states), but we also begin to notice attempts to launder the data retrospectively in such a way as to focus on those features that lead to modern  ‘standard’ English and to ignore, reject or explain away those features that deviate from it.
Examples are noted below and in chapter 5.
Then, at around 1550, the story becomes exclusively about standard English.
A model like this cannot be a sufficient basis for a convincing explanation of a recurrent phenomenon like linguistic change because both divergence and convergence can be present in language states at any time, or, perhaps, at all times.
But what we have to notice here is that it cannot be right for mere historical description either: as there is no such thing as a uniform language or dialect (and standardization implies uniformity), and as sound-changes do not proceed in straight lines, this cannot possibly be an adequate conceptualization of English phonological history.
There are traditional influences at work here, and they are ideologically loaded.
H. C. Wyld, for example, was a very great expert on the grossly divergent regional dialects of Middle English, but when it came to post-sixteenth-century English, he was quite insistent that the only object worthy of our study was Received Standard English.
Such views have an ideology behind them (though not necessarily a conscious one), involving as they do a decision that the language of ‘the Oxford Common Room and the Officers’ mess' is an appropriate object of study, whereas that of ‘illiterate peasants’is not (Wyld, 1927).
From the point of view of standardization theory, this  backward projection of Wyld's ‘Received Standard’ on to earlier states can be seen as an attempt to historicize the standard (literary) language — to create a past for it and determine a canon , in which canonical ('genuine') forms are established and from which unorthodox ('non-genuine' or ‘corrupt’) forms are rejected.
This retrospective model has been influential and pervasive in historical description: since Wyld wrote there has been further important work on Early Modern Standard English and its history, notably that of Dobson (1955, 1968).
Naturally, the ideological assumptions behind this unilinear model have led to dismissive attitudes to ‘non-standard’ dialects.
In his account of EModE pronunciation, Dobson (1968: 551) dismisses ‘vulgar’ and ‘dialectal’sources, and I shall comment further on this tendency in chapter 5.
Even so, it's surprising to find the following comment in the work of a distinguished historical linguist: ‘Nonstandard forms may be found among antisocial groups, such as criminals, or a rebellious younger generation, or among rustics’(Lehmann, 1962: 142).
This has the effect of marginalizing non-standard vernaculars — appearing to present them as abnormal or pathological language states — when the majority of human beings throughout history must have used varieties that were, to a greater or lesser extent, non-standard.
Thus, the imposition of these preconceptions on the object of study necessarily leads to a distorted view of the history of a language.
As a language is variable at all times, the many different varieties can each be seen as having continuous histories, with influences passing to and fro between them, as represented in figure 3.2.
If our ideological preconceptions incline us to an exclusive interest in standard English, we will produce what is in effect a history of literary English; this will exclude and neglect other historical patterns that are capable of enriching our description of the history of spoken English and, ultimately, of adding to our understanding of the general phenomenon of linguistic change.
Clearly, the difference here between traditional approaches (as exemplified by Wyld, Dobson and others) and sociolinguistic approaches is that, whereas the former project a uniform state (standard English) on to the past, the latter project linguistic variability on to the past.
This backward projection is one of the things that has motivated my own work on present-day speech communities, and my interest in how the authority of the legitimized variety is promoted in linguistic scholarship J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1985a ).
I shall have more to say about it in later chapters..
Figure 3.2 Simplified model of multidimensional change in the history of English.
(The dotted lines represent influences passing from one variety to another.)
3.1 Shapes and Patterns
My purpose in the remainder of this chapter is to set out the main principles of exploring multidimensional language states in present-day communities, on the assumption that historical states of language must also have been multidimensional.
A major contribution of Weinreich, Labov and Herzog (1968) and the quantitative paradigm has been to demonstrate that heterogeneity in the speech community can be shown to be have patterns in it.
But we noticed in chapter 1 that linguists have often lived by metaphors — the biological metaphor in the nineteenth century and the machine metaphor today.
If we speak of patterns and shapes in speech communities, we are again talking in metaphors, but this spatial metaphor is one that I have found congenial in speaking of linguistic history and the complexities of usage in live speech communities.
The phonological system, for example, can be described as having a ‘shape’, but there is also a sociolinguistic shape of the speech community, involving society as well as language.
If we can describe this (and the Brown and Gilman (1960)‘power and solidarity’ model is suggestive as a beginning), we can use it to help to model the embedding of language in the community.
The perception of shape and pattern in apparently disorderly (but dynamic and mobile) things is usually mentioned with reference to visual perception, and it is commented on in the sciences and the arts alike: it is prominent, for example, in the notebooks of the poet Gerard Manley Hopkins (J. Milroy, 1977), in his careful descriptions of cloud formations, waterfalls and other dynamic phenomena, and much of the poet's imagery depends on a kind of ‘observer's paradox’(rather different from the familiar Labov version), through which a dynamic phenomenon can nonetheless appear to have stable shapes and patterns within it and, conversely, a static phenomenon may appear to contain mobility.
But it is also apparent in the perceptions of some scientists, especially in subjects that are, like historical linguistics, ‘uncomfortable’ sciences — meteorology and some aspects of astronomy, for example(see Diaconis, 1985; Gleick, 1988).
At the most general level, therefore, it is convenient to think of the speech community as having a ‘shape’ and of language in the community as being capable of displaying patterns, much as we might think of these other dynamic phenomena as displaying shapes and patterns.
To the extent that language is perpetually shifting and changing, it plainly resembles dynamic states such as weather and cloud formations more closely than it resembles static objects.
In the case of language, however, the patterns are not immediately observable in the way that, say, cloud formations are: as we have noted above, they are observed in the configuration of the data after the analysis has been carried out.
But as there must always be some kind of observer-effect in patterns revealed in this analytic way, the position of the observer, and the preconceptions that he or she brings to the act of observing, must be accounted for at every phase of the research.
Observation of historical states is affected by the limitations of the database, and we can liken this to a situation in which the object is viewed from a distance.
When this is the case, some patterns will be obscured or invisible, and many details in the patterning will be unobservable.
The present-day sociolinguist, however, who is observing and exploring a ‘new’ language situation is in a close-up position; he or she can observe the phenomena at successively finer levels of detail and thus reveal fine-grained patterns that are not accessible in historically attested states.
But first let us stand back a little and, starting at the surface of the phenomenon, let us consider the most general ‘shapes’ and patterns that speech communities may exhibit.
At this superficial level, different kinds of speech community shape can be readily distinguished.
For example, some states that can be easily identified are bilingual or multilingual, others can be viewed as bidialectal, and yet others as monodialectal (but still variable).
Although the matter is much more complicated than this, with many subtle gradations within and between these different shapes, this rough classification is sufficient for our present purpose.
The Belfast community is a broadly monodialectal one, but within this it can be described as a divergent-dialect community (Johnston, 1983).
It is this typological point that I would like to consider now, bearing in mind the question of historical divergence and convergence that I referred to above.
From a static point of view, the term ‘divergent-dialect situation’ can be understood in two senses: first, Belfast dialect (for example) is observed to be divergent from other dialects and, particularly, from ‘mainstream’norms of language, such as RP and standard English; second, the dialect exhibits a great deal of internal variation — much greater than is generally reported for these better-known varieties (this is approximately the phenomenon that Le Page (1975) calls diffuseness ).
Thus, it is not a uniform state (as standard English appears to be in handbook descriptions), but a highly variable state, with many complex patterns observable within it.
As compared with handbook accounts of supposedly homogeneous varieties, therefore, it can be characterized as a ‘normal’ situation, as it is the normal state of language to be heterogeneous.
But what is important here is that, just as present-day language states are normally heterogeneous, so historical language states must also have been heterogeneous in similar ways; hence, unilinear historical descriptions of single varieties (such as‘standard’ English) cannot be adequate descriptions of the history of a language.
In section 3.2, we shall briefly consider these two aspects of divergence: external and internal.
3.2 Describing Divergent Language States
As we do not have intuitive knowledge in detail about states of language that are divergent from us in time, space or social space, we cannot reliably project our own linguistic intuitions on to them.
In order to describe them, therefore, we may be inclined to use as a  reference point the linguistic norms of some well-described dialect such as‘standard English’.
But this is not acceptable either, because there will then be a danger of projecting the norms of standard or ‘mainstream’ varieties on to the dialect (imposing them from above, as it were), and this will result in a distorted account of patterns observed within the community, which may bear no direct relation to these other varieties.
We cannot assume that a divergent phonological system, for example, is structurally similar to or derivative from RP, or that lexical items belong to the same phonemic sets, or that the tense/aspect system is structured in the same way as that of standard English.
In Belfast, for example, all these things are quite different.
Nor are we likely to know beforehand the sociolinguistic functions of all the linguistic variants identified — whether they mark age, sex or contextual style differences, for example.
Thus, the exploration of a present-day divergent state of language resembles the exploration of a historically attested state to the extent that we cannot successfully describe either of these in terms of an external (and usually superordinate) variety.
That is to say, you cannot describe sixteenth-century English as if it were a variant of RP any more than you can do this for divergent present-day varieties.
Let us consider briefly what difference all this makes to our analysis and interpretation.
Specifically, what interpretations of data would be available to us if we relied on ‘mainstream’ norms, and how would these differ from internally-based interpretations?
Here, I shall look at some examples of internal linguistic variation in Belfast in (roughly) ascending order of generality in order to show how little we can rely on outside norms in preparing a sociolinguistic analysis.
First, a particular instance: one of the many cases of ‘hypercorrection’ that were noticed.
In exploratory recordings (1975), the word queue occurred several times pronounced as [ku:](without the [j]glide), by a middle-aged female in a careful style.
There is no externally-based explanation for this, as there is no sign of [j]-deletion as a known process in the history of Ulster dialect, and it is not favoured by RP, which on the contrary replaces the [j]of [j]-deleting dialects (Trudgill, 1974; Wells, 1982).
Nor is it found in the more ‘standardized’ forms of Ulster English.
To understand what is happening here, we have to know that Ulster vernaculars have palatalization of initial [k]in certain prevocalic positions (as in [kjat, kja:r]‘cat, car’), and furthermore that this is recessive in inner-city Belfast.
Figure 3.3 shows the recessive pattern: palatalization is hardly present at all except in males over 40, and the area which has the most recent immigration from the country is the most conservative.
Figure 3.3 Recession of palatization in middle-aged males in car, cat , etc.
(Clonard: 62%; Hammer: 14%; Ballymacarrett: 0% palatization.
From this internal knowledge of Belfast English we can conclude that the speaker who says [ku:]for queue is using a careful style strategy to avoid the palatalized segment (see my comments on avoidance of stigma in chapter 2.6, above), which is a strongly regional marker and also a marker of older male speech.
Therefore, we can say that the speaker's ‘knowledge’ includes the knowledge that /k/ is palatalized in the dialect.
But we could not draw these conclusions if we relied on external norms, on general historical information as codified in historical textbooks, or on our own ‘intuition’.
We must, therefore, use such instances empirically to help to establish what the internal linguistic norms of the community actually are, and to do this is to be accountable to the data in quite a strong sense.
In fact, we made considerable use of hypercorrection phenomena of this kind in preparing our phonological analysis.
A second example concerns the pronunciation of /a/ before velar consonants in words of the type rag, pack, bang .
In Belfast vernacular (henceforth BV) the vowel is front-raised as far as [E]in this environment.
However, there is also a substantial incidence of a low vowel with a prominent closing glide: approximately [aI].
This has the effect that such items as back can sound very similar to RP bike , and the outsider may easily miscomprehend ‘I was on my back ’ as ‘I was on my bike ’.
It is clear that the ‘underlying’ norm:([Ε]), is not the RP norm, even though the movement towards [aI]may be modelled on  some external norm.
However, as it results in near-homophony with RP bike , it seems that the constraints of the local system are much more powerful than any superordinate norm: whereas back can be [baIk],bike is not normally [baIk], but [beIk]: there is a partial avoidance of homophony.
Clearly, the explanation for such phenomena must be based on an analysis of the local vowel system, not that of RP.
My next examples are more generalized, and they concern the imposition of external RP stereotypes on the vowel phoneme /a/.
One common local belief about Belfast English is that upper-middle-class people tend to front-raise /a/ (as in bat ) towards the conservative RP value:[ae](but we found little sign of this in any part of our research).
However, inner-city speakers normally, and quite consistently, have [ae]and [Ε]in items where the vowel precedes a velar consonant (as noted above), and I have sometimes been told that this is affected by RP.
Our quantified investigations (for example, J. Milroy, 1984), however, have repeatedly demonstrated that the only environments that show a consistent front-raising pattern are these velar environments; thus, while it affects the whole phoneme /ae/ in conservative RP, it is confined to velar environments for most Belfast speakers.
Clearly, if it were based on RP, there would be no reason why it should affect this environment and not other environments, and these internal facts about BV are quite sufficient to establish independence from RP.
And this independence is further supported by the existence of the ‘velar-raising’ rules in other Ulster varieties: they are carefully described by Gregg (1964) for Larne, and by Patterson (1860) for nineteenth-century Belfast, and so in this case they are plainly of some antiquity.
Also within the /a/ system, however, there is a high incidence of back varieties of /a/: in BV, this vowel is realized in certain following consonantal environments as a long, back vowel, which is in many contexts virtually identical to RP (as in RP dance, bath ); on a superficial view we may therefore be tempted to believe that speakers are adopting this external norm.
The consonant environments that encourage backing of /a/ are:(1) following voiceless fricatives (as in grass, path );(2) following voiced obstruents generally (as in has, bad ),(3) nasals (as in Sam, man ); and (4) /r/ (as in car ); but backing does not occur before voiceless stops (as in bat ), or nasals followed by a voiceless obstruent (as in dance ).
Of these environments, however, only the voiceless fricative and /r/ environments coincide with the  backing environments of RP, so we are clearly dealing with a different /a/-backing rule.
The difference from RP can be appreciated quite easily by reference to the pair can, can't :can has the long back vowel predicted by the single nasal environment, whereas can ‘t has the short front vowel predicted by the nasal + voiceless obstruent environment (compare also dance, ranch , etc., which are short, front).
This is the opposite of RP (where can is front and can't is back), so we plainly cannot explain this back /a/ pattern by relating it directly to RP.
There are many other examples that show the RP (and general southern British) rules as ‘flip-flopped’ in certain environments in Belfast: they are of historical interest, and we shall return to them in chapter 5.
What is important here, however, is the fact that a description of these divergent configurations in the phonological system is an essential basis for subsequent quantitative analysis: the further away the variety is from mainstream norms, the more important this prior description becomes.
The above examples were noted prior to quantitative analysis, and were used, with other observations, as the basis of an internal phonological description on which all our subsequent work has been based.
However, the general independence of the /a/ system from mainstream influence is supported even more conclusively by the broader community norms as they emerge from later quantitative analysis.
We have demonstrated in various publications (for example, J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1978) that in the inner city there is a change in progress moving from front values of /a/ towards back values, beginning to affect even those environments that were formerly always front (for example pre-voiceless stop environments, as in map, that ).
However, as we move out of the inner city the trend to backing is reversed, and the system swings back again to front realizations J. Milroy, 1982b): it converges on front-vowel realizations to the extent that all items (except those with following /r/) including items such as grass, path (which are back-vowel items in both RP and inner-city vernacular) have the front vowel.
Thus, if we project this information on to the socio-economic class dimension, the movements of /a/ show a zig-zag (or a split-level) pattern from front to back and then from back to front, as in figure 3.4.
RP thus has no direct effect on the convergence pattern displayed by middle-class speakers: therefore, if we start with the RP norm and derive these speech community patterns from it, we can falsify the situation totally.
In this case the main falsification would be that hundreds of thousands of inner-city  speakers who are not remotely interested in RP have ‘borrowed’ back [a]from RP.
It might also appear from such an analysis that working-class people are converging towards RP back [a]in grass, path , and middle-class people diverging from it, when in fact there is no evidence that the usage of these speakers is influenced by RP in any way at all.
Figure 3:4 The zig-zag pattern in the community
To this extent, of course, a synchronically divergent language state requires the same kind of treatment as a historically divergent state: in neither case can it be assumed that the norms of some ‘standard’ variety can be successfully projected on to it.
In section 3.3 we turn to the principles of exploring linguistic variation in present-day vernaculars.
3.3 Exploring Language in the Speech Community: Some General Principles
It is clear from the above examples (and from many others) that we have to describe the speech community in depth and in its own is to say, our conclusions about phonological structure must be accountable to, and ‘warranted’ by, the data.
If we do not do this, we shall not find out very much about the social functions of variation in the community or about the sources and motivations of change, and our results will therefore be superficial.
They may also be misleading.
For example, if we observe only public speakers in Belfast (newscasters, reporters and the like), we will notice that some of them adopt  quasi-RP forms in their public styles.
In the inner- and outer-city work in Belfast, however, these forms (for example, fronting, unrounding and diphthongization of /o/ to /au/, as in home, stone ) did not occur at all in hundreds of hours of recording.
Therefore, if we had taken our cue from these public styles, we would have produced a top-heavy account that would have been of only marginal importance to the social ‘life’ of the speech community.
From this perspective, the success of Labov's work in New York City, which is based on more widely-known variables, suggests that New York City speech is much less divergent from mainstream American English than Belfast is from mainstream British English.
To that extent, therefore, we are dealing here with a different kind of analytic task.
It is also relevant to notice that Horvath and Sankoff (1987) in their Australian work found the social variables the most difficult to deal with and the linguistic variables ‘well defined’.
In these dialect-divergent studies (J. Milroy, 1981; Johnston, 1983; Newbrook, 1986), however, it is the linguistic analysis that is the greatest immediate challenge facing the investigator: if we do not investigate the internal linguistic structure of the speech community itself, the sociolinguistic interpretation of the data will be at best superficial, and, at worst, wrong.
In addition to this external divergence, however, communities like Belfast also exhibit massive internal linguistic divergence, and we must attempt to find out what are the internal social functions of this divergence.
In New York City Labov was able to show important patterns of variation on the basis of only five linguistic variables; in contrast to this, Pellowe et al.(1972) identified in Tyneside (a divergent dialect community) no less than 303 linguistic variables that they considered worthy of study.
In Belfast we assumed that the number of socially-patterned variables that we might uncover could well run into the hundreds.
If we adopt here Le Page's distinction between focusing and diffuseness in language states, a community like Belfast is relatively diffuse (divergent within itself) in comparison with more homogeneous communities,but relatively focused when compared with communities in which there is extensive code-switching and code-mixing (such as the Caribbean communities studied by Le Page and Tabouret-Keller, 1985).
But to suggest that a speech community is diffuse (or internally divergent) is not to imply that it is necessarily unpatterned or unstructured: on the contrary, our task is to find out how the variation is structured by demonstrating what the patterns in the community are like.
However, our descriptive task will  be more difficult, as it involves dealing with greater complexity of variation than would be the case in more focused communities, and it has to be carried out at a very fine-grained level.
There are many different ways in which speakers may exploit, in varying social functions, the resources of variation that are available to them, and we do not necessarily know beforehand what these are, how they interact, or what the limitations on possible variants may be.
However, as it is the ‘normal’ state of language to exhibit structured variation, I have suggested above that speech communities like Belfast can be regarded as ‘normal’speech communities.
I mention this here because it has sometimes been thought that this type of community is abnormal or atypical.
Romaine (1982b), for example, suggests that these may be atypical communities and, further, that such communities may exhibit two ‘norms’ within them (we shall return below to the question of internal norms).
Similarly, Johnston (1983) describes the patterns discovered in his Edinburgh work as ‘irregular’.
But the Belfast and Edinburgh situations are abnormal and irregular only if it is assumed that the patterns revealed in the New York City study are the normal and regular ones, and that Labov's findings on the structure of that speech community are universally applicable.
There is of course no reason why the patterns revealed in one pioneering study should be taken as definitive and exhaustive for all communities: it is an empirical matter to determine what kinds of pattern can be revealed in speech communities and hence to determine what the norms of particular speech communities may be.
And this, of course, is in accordance with Principle 2, suggested in chapter 1.
The guidelines that we rely on here are parallel to those of ‘exploratory’ science, as described by Tukey (1977), Diaconis (1985) and others, and also to those of ethnographers who investigate the internal structures of non-mainstream societies.
The papers in Cohen (1982), for example, describe research into geographically peripheral communities in the British Isles, such as Shetland, Tory Island and the Isle of Lewis.
Their aim is to explore and describe the internal social systems that govern behaviour in these communities, and of course they gain access to these systems through studying overt behaviour in the communities.
Being aware of the (external) divergence between these cultures and ‘mainstream’ culture, they are anxious to avoid imposing what they call ‘crude mainstream stereotypes’on to the interpretation of these internal systems: they want to  get access to what the patterns of behaviour mean internally and how these are perceived by in-group members.
As the investigators are themselves out-group members, they cannot have reliable prior intuitions as to the social meanings conveyed and must investigate these by observation and analysis.
This is very much the position of the observer of ‘divergent’ speech communities: the difference is that the linguist's ultimate goal is to draw generalizations, not about behaviour in general, but about language behaviour.
I have implied above that a major difference between more diffuse and more focused communities is relative complexity of variable linguistic structure: Cohen (1982) is very clear on the question of internal complexity.
The ‘voice’ to the in-group is, according to him, more complex in structure than the ‘voice’to the outside world, and the internal meanings and functions of variation in behaviour are not easily accessible to outsiders.
This last point is a familiar one, which fits in well with the remarks on observing patterns that I have discussed above.
In the Belfast research, we wished, like Cohen, to approach an explanation for ‘the complex differentiation within ’ communities, by exploring and analysing in-group patterns and functions of differentiation; in the event, we showed that a great deal of variation has in-group functions that are not readily accessible to outsiders, and we shall review this in chapter 4.
In the analysis of linguistic variation, therefore, we were looking for fine details of variation-variation that shows internal patterning within the speech community, but which may have no social meaning for outsiders — and in the first application for funding it was specified that the research was intended to extend the quantitative methodology to a type of community that had not been studied in this way before.
It was of course necessary to introduce modifications in method and procedure, which have sometimes been (wrongly) thought to be in opposition to Labov's work.
These modifications are required because of the similarity of our task to the ethnographic tasks described in Cohen (1982).
As these anthropologists chose to investigate geographically peripheral communities, so we chose in the first instance to investigate communities that are marginal in a different sense.
As hundreds of thousands of speakers use Belfast vernacular, it is hardly marginal as a linguistic variety; but in the tradition of linguistic inquiry it seems to be marginal.
Linguists have taken little notice of such communities in the past — their language is not part of the central ‘canon’— and so such vernaculars are still  largely peripheral to the general body of linguistic knowledge.
We chose to investigate in the first place the speech of those who are not very likely to be directly affected by mainstream norms, and whose speech is of the type that had been least explored by descriptive linguists — the urban working class.
The intention was to relate the linguistic variation revealed to social patterns within the communities themselves, avoiding prior assumptions about social norms that might seem to be imposed from outside.
In this work we give full weight to the speaker/system distinction that has been introduced above, and hence to the general principle that speakers are ultimately responsible, not only for introducing and adopting linguistic changes, but also for maintaining diversity in language states.
In section 3.4, I move on to an outline of the methods of the Belfast research.
3.4 The Belfast Research Programme: Principles and Methods
The empirical research in Belfast was carried out in two stages.
The first stage was the inner-city project, ‘Speech community and language variety in Belfast’(October 1975 — June 1977).
The second stage (1979–82) consisted of two major projects: the outer-city speech community studies and a random-sample ‘doorstep’ survey.
There were also a number of minor studies in connection with the main research programme.
As we have noticed above, the success of any social dialectological project in a dialect-divergent community depends crucially on adequate methods of analysing linguistic variation, and it is this analysis that takes most of the time.
For methodological reasons, it is important to distinguish between this and the socially based interpretation of the results, because if the social factors involved are seen as the motivating principle for the selection and analysis of linguistic variables, the investigators may be accused of biased selectivity and circularity.
Within the inner-city study, we believed that the language might show patterns of differentiation between older and younger speakers and between the sexes, but we did not know that it would, or if it did, what the precise differences would be.
No one had investigated inner-city language in this way before, so for all we knew there might have been no significant differences at all, and we were  told by at least one colleague — not very encouragingly — that ‘Broad Belfast’ dialect was all very much the same.
But it is important to affirm the independence in principle of the linguistic and social analysis at this stage of the work, especially as this does not always seem to be recognized.
Wardhaugh's (1986: 175–7) reference to the Belfast research, for example, appears to suggest that the whole thing was undertaken as an investigation of social network and the linguistic variables selected specifically for the purpose of demonstrating network patterns quantitatively.
If this had been so, however, it would have been a weakness: the strength of our arguments on social network (and other social aspects of the research) depends precisely on the fact that these socially-based criteria are not the motivating factors for our selection of linguistic variables.
The research consists of different methodological phases, which we can describe as collection, classification, analysis and interpretation .
In practice they overlap: for example, while the inner-city data was still being collected, we were analysing the tape-recordings that had already been obtained.
It is, however, useful to think of these phases as separate in principle.
The analytic and interpretative phases are the most relevant to the subject-matter of this book.
In this chapter, I am mainly concerned with analytic methods, and in succeeding chapters with interpretation; I shall confine my remarks about collection and classification to those points that affect the interpretation of the findings.
3.5 Collection and Classification of Data
The type of sampling used in the five community studies is quotasampling , and our main concern is not to claim absolute representativeness for the whole city, but to guard ourselves against the accusation that our informants might be hand-picked from amongst friends and neighbours — or, worse, from our students.
In this respect, therefore, our work conforms to the general principles of Labov's work and is not comparable with studies (experimental or otherwise) that are based on the language of, for example, RP-speaking or near RP-speaking persons from amongst the analyst's own university students.
For these reasons, access to the communities was obtained through suitable intermediaries, who were not used as informants.
Thereafter, the fieldworkers were passed on from person to person within the communities; thus, the informant groups were self-recruited in that the speakers were not known to the investigators beforehand.
In J. Milroy and L. Milroy (1977), we justified this method, somewhat retrospectively, in terms of the social network model (the fieldworker can be described as a second-order network contact), and it is useful methodologically to think of it in this way (indeed, many other investigators have successfully used the idea of social network as an explicit part of their fieldwork strategy).
But the essential point here, whether or not we describe it in terms of the network model, is that we are concerned not with a superficial survey of the communities, but with obtaining depth of coverage.
In the perspective of this book, the contrast with traditional dialectological method, and with data-gathering in orthodox historical linguistics, is clear and requires no further comment.
As for the fieldworker's position vis-à-vis informants, our concern is to account for this (this can be seen as an extension of the notion of accountability to the data into the fieldwork phase) and to use it as part of our method of data classification.
We do not use Labov's concept of the vernacular — the language used by speakers when they are not being observed (which is described by Labov as the most ‘regular’ style)— and this is in accordance with Principle 1, suggested in chapter 1: language in use is always observed within a social context of some kind.
The immediate reason for not using Labov's concept is that the vernacular must be an idealization — on a par with other idealizations such as dialect or speech community — and so as an idealization it must be inaccessible in practice (recall that you do not observe the language: you observe people talking).
But if by any chance it were ever possible to locate this ‘vernacular’ in the usage of an informant, we would have no criteria for demonstrating that we had located it, any more than we could locate ‘the dialect’in the speech of a single informant.
We have used the term ‘vernacular’ in a different way: for us it is a ‘primitive’term roughly synonymous with ‘real language in use’, and it is interpreted on a continuum of relative closeness to, or distance from, the idealized norm , or (in some cases) the idealized standard language .
I shall have much more to say below about vernaculars, norms and standards, and that is one reason why I have to comment here.
Otherwise, the fieldwork strategy in large-scale quantitative studies must be broadly the same as that of Labov: we need to go as far as possible in obtaining casual styles from informants and to develop ways of distinguishing styles on a continuum from ‘careful’ to ‘casual’style.
But we do not claim that we have reached the ‘vernacular’, or the most casual of possible styles, for any informant (although some reports on our work have stated that we have): we merely claim that our data is rich and variable enough to enable us to classify styles on the stylistic continuum in an extremely well motivated way.
I have noted above that in both social and historical linguistics the position of the observer is crucial and is relevant to the interpretative phase in that the observer may affect the data in some way.
It is consistent with this that we should use the role of the fieldworker in speech-exchanges as a means of classifying different speech-styles.
We explained this during the course of the research (L. Milroy and J. Milroy, 1977).
Briefly, when the fieldworker is actually interviewing the informant and thus controlling the exchange, the style is labelled ‘interview style’.
It is possible to distinguish this style from others in that the discourse turns in interview style are alternating and relatively brief; they follow a question-answer discourse structure, and they are often of roughly equal length.
Here, the degree of control exerted by the fieldworker over the speech-exchange is the guiding principle, and the fieldworker's aim is to get away from interview style (that is, to lose control) as soon as possible.
In our 1977 article, we use transcripts from our data in which:(1) the question-answer discourse structure is overridden; and (2) in which the fieldworker is not in control, but is a participant/observer.
The differences in discourse structure are quite obvious (the reader is referred to L. Milroy's (1987) report of our field methods, where the same transcripts are used).
Much of what I have said here is relevant to the second methodological phase (classification ), but it should also be noted that we do not make prior classification of social levels of language in the way that many other urban dialectologists do.
Bertz (1975: 77), for example, in his study of Dublin, uses a prior classification into ‘drei Soziostilistischen Typen ’: ‘educated’, ‘general’ and ‘popular’Dublin English, and his informants are pre-classified in these groups.
We are of course aware that educational levels may be important at some stage, but we do not pre-classify in this way because we do not assume beforehand that we know the sociolinguistic structure of the speech  community: this is what we are trying to find out!
Our classification is based solely on the speaker-variables of age, sex and area, and on contextual styles, and this is regarded as a procedure whereby we can establish the internal linguistic norms of the community.
The classifications we use normally depend on fine-grained analysis of language , and I move on in section 3.6 to the analytic aspects of the work.
3.6 Analysis
Whereas for Horvath and Sankoff (as noted above) the linguistic variables are ‘well defined’, this is not so in a dialect-divergent community: in such a community few of the linguistic variables can be said to be defined at all.
This difference seems to be partly a consequence of the relative homogeneity of Australian English on the one hand, and the heterogeneity of Belfast English on the other.
But there is another reason why communities like Belfast are difficult to deal with, and this is that the phonology of such communities is not usually adequately described and codified beforehand, whereas more information of this kind is available for varieties closer to ‘standard’ English.
The result of all this is that because of the divergence of Belfast English from other varieties and the internal divergence within it, we do not know beforehand what is the correct lexical input to any phonological variable, we do not necessarily know what the variants of the variable are, and we may not be at all certain about what precisely might count as a variable.
Therefore, if we are to find out what linguistic variation means to in-group members and how it functions in the community, much more prior observation and analysis is needed than would be required for better described varieties.
In order to locate the variables that might be worthy of study, and to define the variants of the variables, a broad description of the phonological system has to be prepared beforehand.
A ‘practical phonological’ description of Belfast was prepared in March 1975 and updated while the research was in progress (J. Milroy, 1976a, b).
The main points arising from this are that:(1) the vowel system is totally different from mainstream British English in terms of vowel-length, vowel-height, diphthongization and other properties (for example, vowel-length is not usually contrastive, as it is alleged to be in RP, and so most vowel-phonemes, such as /e/, as in gate, save , are realized as considerably longer or shorter allophones according to consonantal environment);(2) allophones of phonemes can overlap phonetically with allophones of other phonemes in a manner that is not permitted by classical phoneme theory (Bloomfield, 1933);(3) lexical items do not necessarily belong to the same vowel phoneme classes as they do in RP and SBE (for example , whereas good and food have different vowels in most SBE, they have the same vowel in Ulster English); and (4) many sets of lexical items exhibit vowel alternations, in that the vowels in these items are realizations of two different phonemes.
More detailed accounts of Ulster phonology are now available in J. Milroy (1981) and Harris (1985), and we shall return to aspects of phonological variation at various points in this book.
Here, I want to discuss the principles on which variables are selected for quantitative analysis.
As there is probably a large number of variables that might be socially interesting, it is necessary to select a representative sub-sample of different types of variable in a well-motivated way, and to specify the range of potential linguistic variation that lexical items in these sets may undergo.
The second point is crucial for the reason that if we include in the set items that cannot undergo the variation in question, or items that undergo different patterns of linguistic variation, the quantitative results will be false.
A final point that has to be borne in mind is that in order to make generalizations based on the type of quantitative analysis pioneered by Labov, a large number of tokens must be analysed (usually thousands); however, it happens that some variables that are quite salient in the community occur relatively rarely, and so we cannot make reliable quantitative statements about these covering the range of speaker variables, even though they may be involved in linguistic change and may be important for historical projections on to earlier English.
It is for this reason that for the central part of the projects we selected representative variables that occur frequently and can therefore be quantified in terms of the full range of speaker-variables.
The main variables for the inner-city research (most of which were reported in J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1978) were therefore selected on the general principle that a large number of tokens must be identifiable in the data, and it is clear that this stark necessity must override any other consideration.
Within this general constraint, however, we  attempted to find representative variables that belonged to two broadly-defined types (the second of which can be subdivided) that we describe in terms of their linguistic (and not their social) characteristics.
These are:(1) variable sets in which the lexical items are very numerous and are distributed throughout all or most of the range of a phonemic class (we can call these ‘large-set variables’), and (2) variables that are restricted to a small class of lexical items (small-set variables).
Within this second class, there are two subtypes.
The first type (2a) is phonologically defined and includes variables such as(th), which concerns deletion of (ta;) intervocalically in a small defined set of lexical items of the type mother, gather, together .
If enough tokens occur, this type is the easiest one to deal with, and usually exhibits very sharp patterns of social divergence according to age and sex of speaker in studies such as ours.
The second type (2b) consists of lexical sets, the membership of which cannot be reliably predicted on phonological grounds alone, and this type is additional to the types of variable that were studied by Labov (1966) in New York City (these were types 1 and 2a).
We do not know for certain what the total membership of any such set is, how many items belong to it, or the extent to which speakers vary in assigning items to the set.
These are open-ended sets, and they can be called sets of phono-lexical alternants .
Realizations of the vowels in the relevant items belong to two different phonemes; these alternants (like type 2a variants) are usually extremely socially salient in the community, but for obvious reasons it can be difficult to deal with them quantitatively.
Of these, the set that I selected for careful examination within the main projects is the (pull ) set, which deals with alternation between [u]and [Δ]in a set of lexical items such as pull, put, foot, shook .
I shall return to the (pull ) set as an example of phono-lexical alternation, largely because such alternation appears to be typical of dialect-divergent communities, and is extremely important in the arguments that I shall develop in later chapters on phonological change and on the effects of strong and weak social ties in communities.
But the (pull ) set is only one of many: the others, although often salient, are usually unsuitable for quantification throughout the range of speaker variables because of the low numbers of tokens attested (many examples are listed in J. Milroy, 1981).
This is not a watertight classification, and it is not exhaustive.
It is procedural only: we used it in Belfast as a guideline to help us to select variables that would represent broader and narrower patterns  of lexical coverage.
However, the quantitative methods of the 1960s and 1970s had successfully dealt with large-set vowel-variables (type 1), quantifying them through the whole range (or most of it) in a single unilinear dimension of phonetic variation (such as raising or backing).
In the dialect-divergent community we found this problematic, and we located only two vowel variables that could be reliably quantified in this way.
These are the two categorically short vowel phonemes /Δ/, as in cut, dull (quantified as a binary counting rounded v non-rounded realizations) and /I/, as in hit, fill (counting front v centralized realizations).
The difficulty in finding such variables is in itself a measure of how internally divergent BV actually is, and it is striking that the variables that show the sharpest patterns of social variation are subsets within the larger sets.
For consonant phonemes, quantification throughout the phonemic range is of course impossible, since the potential for variation in consonants differs according to the position of the segment within the word or morpheme, but it is the difficulty with vowel variables that is most significant here.
In other studies, investigators have often been able to assume that they know the lexical input to commonly occurring vowel variables such as(e) and (a) and also that all the lexical items counted have the much the same potential for variation (that is , the direction of variation will be consistent throughout).
In Belfast (and in divergent dialect situations generally) the matter is much more complicated.
In purely linguistic terms, there are two reasons for this difference between Belfast and certain other studies.
The first arises from the fact that most BV vowels are long or short according to following consonantal environment.
The length difference is much greater than allophonic length differences in RP and is easily audible.
But the long and short allophones are also qualitatively quite different.
The low and mid vowels, such as /Ε/;(as in set, bed ), are short before voiceless stops and before any sonorant + voiceless obstruent (for example , in set, went ), but long elsewhere (for example , in mess, bed, men ).
They are also short in certain conditions in disyllables and polysyllables.
But for /Ε/, the short variant can be a low vowel ([a, ae]) and the long variant is a mid vowel that is easily heard to be qualitatively distinct.
The pattern, which is more fully described in J. Milroy (1981) and Harris (1985), is shown in table 3.1.
Table 3.1 MC Senior (53)‘formal’ style
This speaker shows a very regular pattern with certain environments categorically low and others categorically mid.
The result of all  this is that there are two subsets of /Ε/; with very different potentials for variation.
Our figures for short (Ε) in figures 3.5 and 3.6 show a pattern of variation between low and mid realizations with the mid realizations beginning to occur in environments that were formerly categorically low, and with females leading in this change.
The long allophone of /Ε/, however, cannot be low, but varies between mid and higher-than-mid realizations and can develop a centring glide.
In the simple type of quantification that we used, it is clear that we would need to quantify the long-vowel environments separately from the short-vowel ones, as the potential for variation is different in each case.
We can regard (Ε) as representative in two ways: it is representative of our method of analysis, but it also represents a pattern of linguistic change that is valid for all the mid and low vowels: /a/, /Ε/,; and /α/.; ic Where there is change in progress at the moment, we have found that it is manifested in all these vowels as a pattern of lengthening (or ‘tensing’) of previously short vowels.
Figure 3.5 Percentage low vowel in variable monosyllables and prefixed and inflected disyllables.
Figure 3.6 Percentage low vowel in all other disyllables.
The Hammer figures (which have been excluded) correspond closely to those of the Clonard.
The second reason for this relative complexity is that, as we have already noticed, given lexical items do not necessarily belong to the same sets as in ‘standard’ English.
Thus, because of the divergent history of the dialect, there can be subsets within larger classes (such as(Ε)) which do not vary in the same way as other items in the set.
In  the (Ε) set, for example, some short-vowel items (including get, never, ever, yes ) that should exhibit variation between [Ε]and [a]also have an alternant in [I].
Thus, occurrences in [I]have to be excluded from the main quantification, and the (get ) subset, provided that we can accurately specify its membership, can in principle be quantified separately as a set of lexical alternants of the (pull ) type (2b).
It is in fact  very common to find subsets like this within larger classes, and when we quantify them they usually show sharp patterns of social differentiation.
But, as we have noticed above, we often cannot quantify these subsets meaningfully throughout the range of speaker-groups and styles because occurrences of the relevant variants are relatively rare.
Yet, it often happens that these variables are socially salient and important for historical projection on to earlier states of language.
Therefore, as it takes a considerable amount of time to scan the tapes looking for rarely occurring variants, we have selected one particular variable of this kind, which we call meat/mate , and have studied this quantitatively outside the main projects in a different way.
The variation here concerns the incidence of [e]-type pronunciations in words of the type meat, leave, peace, easy, seize , and more particularly the question whether the [e]variants of this class are merged with the class of mate, save, lace, daze , or not.
We are not primarily concerned here with the distribution of this variable through the range of speaker-groups and styles, mainly because this is quite evident from our tape-recordings before we start, and without formal quantification.
The [e]variant is exclusively a casual style variant, which does not occur at all in more formal styles and is unobtainable in word-list elicitations.
It is also much less common in female speech than in male; therefore, our quantification is based on male speech alone.
And this selectivity is of course justified by my immediate aim, which is phonological rather than sociolinguistic — to discover whether we can reasonably speak of a meat/mate merger in Belfast English.
Clearly a number of factors that have to do with the history of English (chiefly the reported merger of meat/mate in the sixteenth century), with patterns of language maintenance, and with phonological theory and description, have also motivated the choice of this variable, and we shall return to these in chapter 5.
However, the main reason for mentioning it in this methodological discussion is to show how subtle and fine-grained our analysis must be if we are to give an adequate account of the function of language variation in close-tie communities.
The paradox here is that this variable is very difficult to access and would not be accessed at all if our field methods and analytic methods were inadequate; yet, the variation has strong social meaning within the community.
Indeed, our quantified results suggest that the [e]-type vowel of the meat and mate classes may have been maintained as separate since Middle English, functioning as a social marker, without merger, but with close approximation and overlap (J. Milroy and Harris, 1980; but see further chapter 5).
The discussion so far has focused on the sociolinguistics of dialect-divergence and the methods that can be used in order to establish in-group norms of language use that are not previously part of the knowledge of the investigator.
In the discussion I have taken the necessity of quantification for granted (although it sometimes happens in such communities that some patterns of variation are obvious without formal quantification).
Before we proceed in chapter 4 to discuss the interpretative phase of social dialectological research, however, it seems to be appropriate to add a few further remarks on the use of quantitative methods.
3.7 Excursus: On the Uses of Quantification
We noted in chapter 1 that when we observe language in use, what we actually observe is the speech of individuals in conversational settings — we do not directly observe overall patterns of use in the sociolinguistic dimension.
Thus, if — as an outside observer — you listen to ‘core’ vernacular Belfast speech, it will actually sound all much the same to you: you will not easily observe without systematic analysis many of the differences that exist and you will not usually be able to tell how far these co-vary with social factors, such as age, sex and area.
This is because the differences are in general not categorical: the ‘dialect’ is a property of the community, and every native speaker has roughly the same kind of access to it and roughly the same knowledge about it.
But the speakers that you are observing ‘know’ how to use the resources of variation available to them, and they use them for many purposes, including the marking of varying social roles and functions.
Thus, the incidence of particular variants differs according to these roles and functions.
This is why a very fine-grained analysis is needed, and why we will not get very far in synthesizing our findings in relation to large databases like this if we do not use quantification: as these differences are not categorical, we usually will not be able to demonstrate them convincingly unless we quantify.
Quantification is usually taken for granted in social dialectology, but it is not used in some other branches of sociolinguistics (for example, those researches that follow Gumperz's model), and there can be disputes about whether or not it should be used in given instances.
We shall briefly consider some criticisms from within sociolinguistics below.
But questions have also been raised about it in non-social areas of linguistics, and these are often attached to reservations about the theoretical nature of sociolinguistics as a discipline.
Chomsky (1975) expressed the view that sociolinguistics is a harmless activity like butterfly-collecting, but that it is not ‘theoretical’.
Although this was some time ago, similar dismissals have continued to surface in the work of those who adopt Chomsky's theoretical position.
A recent example is Smith (1989), who thinks that Labov's work is not theoretical because it does not address ‘any linguistic issue’.
It is surprising that remarks of this kind from influential linguists are still appearing, and that is why some comments are needed here, not only on quantification, but also on the relation between ‘method’ and ‘theory’.
Smith says that quantitative methods are inappropriate to linguistic inquiries and cites as a warning Labov's work in New York City, which he represents thus: ‘The classic example of a quantificational linguistic study is provided by Labov's investigation of the determinants (age, class and casualness) of New Yorkers’ pronunciation of /r/, pre-consonantally and finally, in words like ‘fourth’and ‘floor’' (1989: 180–1).
Apparently, this refers not to the Lower East Side survey, but to Labov's preparatory department store survey (Labov, 1966; 1972b).
This of course was not the main part of the work, but a pilot study used to test and refine some hypotheses about the wider sociolinguistic situation, which was then investigated more fully over a much longer period of time.
But the whole study was set up within a much more general theoretical orientation: the theory of linguistic change; it was not merely an attempt to demonstrate age, class and style differences, as Smith implies.
So this account seems to be based on a misunderstanding of what Labov's work has been about.
But other commentators have also had something to say about the use of quantification in linguistics.
Lass (1980), for example, has pointed out that stochastic (probabilistic) laws are not predictive, and has seemed to suggest that the quantitative paradigm is theoretically uninteresting for this reason.
There have also been criticisms using similar lines of  argument from within sociolinguistics (Romaine, 1981, 1984b; Cameron, 1990).
But there is nothing to argue about here, as the act of quantifying is not intended to be predictive, explanatory or theoretical: it is a methodological tool that is used by those who wish to make accountable statements about the distribution of linguistic forms in real speech communities in cases where this is not evident without quantification.
In many situations, you will not be able to demonstrate beyond reasonable doubt what the linguistic patterns in the community are — what speaker-knowledge of those patterns is like and which of the patterns show that linguistic changes are in progress — unless you quantify.
And you certainly will not be able to demonstrate these things by relying on your own introspections!
What must be understood, therefore, is that there is a difference between the act of quantifying data and the substantive claims made by the investigator after the patterns have been established by quantification.
These claims (for example, that such-and-such a change is in progress) are not in themselves quantitative claims: they are substantive and are independent of the quantitative method.
If the claims were made simply on the basis of introspection without systematic observation in the community, they would be of precisely the same order (except that they would be unaccountable and probably much less reliable).
So I have treated quantification here as methodological: it is part of the analytic phase of social dialectology, and it is parallel in this way to the use of quantification and statistics in certain other sciences.
Both within sociolinguistics and outside of it there have been discussions that appear to attack quantitative method for making claims about causation and correlation.
Romaine (1981, 1984b) and Cameron (1990), for example, specifically cite our Belfast research as an example of the ‘correlational fallacy’.
Clearly, this kind of work would not be undertaken unless it was thought possible that causal relationships between variables might exist, just as a medical researcher might hypothesize a causal relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, or as a historical linguist might hypothesize that a contributory cause of palatalization of [k]is an adjacent front vowel.
It is natural to look for causative factors, and we have treated causality much as it is treated in experimental research generally (see Plutchik, 1974: 174–87).
But we do not generally fall into the trap of believing that a statistical correlation between two variables demonstrates  that one is the cause of the other; it is assumed that the actuation of language change is multi-causal, and we have frequently demonstrated that the speaker-variables interact with one another(that is , that no speaker-variable all by itself can ‘explain' a given configuration of language).
However, the misunderstanding about quantitative method can be quite serious and can also get tied up with problems about statistical significance testing.
Smith, for example, further points out that Labov did not use ‘tests of statistical significance, so his interpretation of the figures is anyway suspect’.
It is surprising that an anti-quantitative linguist should advocate confirmatory statistical testing, but it is very important to understand that the proposition put forward here is simply wrong.
If Labov's interpretations were suspect (and of course they are not), this would not arise from the fact that he failed to test for significance.
There was no reason for him to do so because the claims that he wished to make were quite simple (they did not involve complex interactions of different speaker variables), and because in his analysis the same patterns were repeated for every variable studied, tending in the same direction in every case in terms of both class and style (several classes and several styles).
Thus, the results are very impressive: there is obviously a regular pattern in them, and as they are accountable to observed data, they are much more persuasive than categorical statements about language that are made on the basis of introspection alone.
The same applies to the examples that I discuss in chapter 4: some of these show gross differences between social groups on the basis of hundreds or even thousands of tokens, which would not be apparent without quantification.
Where there are dramatic differences of incidence for different groups, where the social pattern investigated is simplex (for example, class difference only), and where the differences virtually always tend in the same direction, it is often unnecessary to test for significance, because the patterns revealed are so clear that no one could believe they are the results of pure chance.
In fact, since social dialectology is an exploratory science, many important patterns of variation are adequately demonstrated by exploratory statistical techniques, which are designed to reveal patterns in the data rather than test for significance (Tukey, 1977; Diaconis, 1985).
The graphs and diagrams of the quantitative paradigm are, in effect, examples of this.
Where there are numerous relevant variables, however, confirmatory statistical testing will help to give us confidence in our results, and it is up to the analyst to decide in a given case whether these methods are needed.
In sociolinguistics they are normally used in cases where several different independent variables (such as sex, age and network) may be interacting, and therefore possibly cancelling out the effects of one another.
I explained this (J. Milroy, 1982b: 43) in relation to the simplification pattern in short /a/ (see chapter 4.5 for the findings of this study), which we measured by using a three-way analysis of variance.
To simplify: it might happen that there is no significant difference in terms of one social variable (such as class), but that this statistic conceals other differences or similarities within the results in terms of other social variables (such as age or sex).
Thus, it could turn out that a difference is best accounted for not by the first social variable that you quantify (for example, social class), but by a second or third one (for example , sex of speaker).
Since we carried out these studies, much more sophisticated computational programs have been developed for the social sciences.
There have also been considerable advances in ‘variable rule’ methodology, with the development of GOLDVARB (Sankoff, 1986), and the journal Language Variation and Change has been founded, with an editorial policy that concentrates on quantitative methods of linguistic analysis.
Properly used, it seems to me that quantitative methods can only lead to advances in our subject.
As for my own research, there are some areas of it in which quantification has not been used because in these areas it was not necessary or appropriate for the purpose I had in mind (see for example the discussions in chapter 5).
In the social dialectology carried out in Belfast, however, quantification was necessary: if it had been possible to do the work without quantifying, we would have done it that way!
3.8 Conclusions
The purpose of this chapter has been to outline the main principles of analysing language in the community, and I have paid particular attention to exploring dialect-divergence.
In such situations we typically do not know beforehand what all the linguistic variants involved actually are, so we must use very careful and accountable methods of selection and analysis.
But in previously unexplored speech communities, we do not have reliable social intuitions either.
That is to say, we do not know how these patterns of variation function within the community: we do not know what social meanings the variation carries for in-group members.
To explore the situation, therefore, and establish the relation of linguistic variables to speaker variables, we normally require quantitative methods, which in some cases may involve sophisticated statistical techniques.
But as quantitative method is not a primary interest of this book, I shall move on in chapter 4 to the interpretative phase of this kind of research.
4
Interpreting Variation in the Speech Community
4.0 Introduction: Investigating Community Norms
Up to now, we have been mainly concerned with analysis of data.
In this chapter the emphasis is on the interpretative phase of the work.
What does this linguistic variation mean, and what contribution can our analysis of variable states of language make to understanding variation and change in language generally?
We have approached this task by focusing on the question of linguistic norms , and it is relevant to recall here Principle 2 (chapter 1).
In the lay person's view, and in the view of some professional linguists, the norms of language are associated with notions of standardization and ‘correctness’ or with hierarchical dimensions of social structure (or all of these), and they are usually felt to be institutional : that is, they are thought of as being prescribed by authority through the writing system, the educational system and other agencies (for a relevant discussion, see J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1985a).
There is no doubt that factors like these are important in what we may call the social ‘life’ of language, and they are implicated in many aspects of linguistic variation and change.
To understand them properly, however, we need to relate them to wider social structures, and we shall consider this aspect of sociolinguistics in chapter 7.
However, these institutional norms do not tell anything like the whole story, and this is particularly true if we focus on spoken language in casual conversation and on phonetic and phonological variation: as we noticed in chapter 3, the norms of a superordinate  variety cannot be projected on to the norms of a speech community without distorting our description.
But more generally, if we use superordinate norms as our main reference point, we cannot explain why, despite superordinate pressures towards uniformity, varieties of English and other languages can still remain so astonishingly divergent from one another and so variable within themselves.
It must be the case that the norms of these variable states are agreed on by internal consensus in the communities concerned.
These divergent states are often subjectively perceived as having distinctive characteristics that mark them out as discrete varieties: people can recognize regional varieties such as‘Birmingham’ English, ‘Yorkshire’English and so on , and they often have a fairly clear idea of how such varieties are distinguished from one another .
If this is so, these varieties must incorporate within themselves sets of recurrent and distinctive norms , through which they can be characterized, but which do not usually coincide with the norms of the standard language.
This chapter is about determining the norms of usage that characterize real speech communities and about the relevance of this to determining the direction of change within the communities.
The kind of norms we are concerned with here are sometimes called community norms in order to distinguish them from the superordinate norms that I have mentioned, and I shall suggest below that a major difference between superordinate and community norms is that, whereas ‘standard’ norms are uniform, community norms are sometimes more aptly described as variable norms.
Underlying all this there is a more general question that impinges very directly on the explanation for linguistic changes.
This is the second principle for the social modelling of change that I discussed in chapter 1.
As I pointed out there, it seems to be impossible to give a full description of a linguistic variety (whether it is ‘standard’ English, or a dialect, or a style or register) without making decisions about what the ‘norms’of the variety are, that is, without making decisions about what the speakers agree on as structures that are appropriate for that variety.
To take a simple example: suppose we are comparing two dialects, one of which has the vowel /eI/ (in words of the type gate, place ) where the other has /aI/.
In an intra-linguistic description, we will simply state this difference as a structural linguistic fact (and do the same for the other differences we notice) and that will be the end of it: dialect A has one structure, and dialect B has another.
But this difference is  also a social fact: people are normally aware of differences of this kind, and they often attach the utmost importance to them.
We can easily understand this if we assume that dialect A is ‘standard SBE’, and dialect B is ‘Cockney’.
However, in an objective language-based description, one variant is just as ‘good’ or ‘efficient’as the other.
But, as we noticed in chapter 1, it is a social fact in a much more deep-lying sense, because these dialects are the possessions of their speakers .
The occurrence of /aI/ in one dialect and /eI/ in the other is a result of the agreement within each community on a consensus norm of usage within that community, and the difference cannot be explained without some reference to this fact.
There would be little point in having these different norms (which are arbitrary in linguistic terms) if they did not carry social meaning, distinguishing between one community and another and carrying a sense of community identity for speakers.
The same general point applies also to patterns of linguistic change, and is most evidently relevant in the case of sound -change.
Suppose that in the course of time the vowel /a: /in a particular language becomes open /α:/ , as it did in Southern Middle English in words of the type home, stone (OE há0m, stá0n ).
No purely internal linguistic explanation can account for the fact that the change happened in this way in some dialects and in different ways in others.
Nor can it explain why indeed the change should have happened at all: why did the speakers not simply retain /a:/?
Again, this change, like synchronic variation between dialects, is a social, as well as a linguistic, fact.
It came about through changes of agreement amongst speakers over the course of time involving greater and greater consensus on open /α: /as the appropriate realization, and it is not fully explainable in purely linguistic terms.
But just as speakers attach great importance to variation in the structural parts of language, so they must also attach great importance to change : if they did not, then there would be no reason why changes like this one should be accepted in speech communities.
But there is still more to be said about linguistic norms.
Although some of these community norms that we have mentioned above may be recognized by outsiders as regional or social markers, many others are better described as internal: they mark social differences inside the community.
These internal norms are the special property of the community itself, and they are not evident to the outside observer; therefore, to find out what they are, we must investigate the  communities in depth and at a fine-grained level of detail.
The three small inner-city communities that we studied in this way would have been assumed by traditional scholars to be homogeneous in language, and the fine-grained but systematic variation I am referring to here would not have been thought possible.
We were principally interested in how linguistic norms that are highly divergent from ‘mainstream’ English are maintained in communities of this kind.
As social class is irrelevant in this case (there is little, if any, difference in social class amongst our inner-city informants), the social groupings we used to approach the sociolinguistic structure of the community were the uncontroversial ones of age, sex and area, and social network was adopted as an additional speaker variable during the course of the research.
We used this in conjunction with the other variables to assist in exploring internal community norms of language.
4.1 Social Network
We have used social network in two ways within the research: first, as a quantitative speaker variable and, second, as an interpretative category, and its use in the projects arises from our interest in exploring these community norms.
As an interpretative category, it has important advantages over other social models that we might wish to use.
The fundamental one in an investigation of this kind is that we do not need to accept any prior assumption about how society at large is organized or structured, and so in our interpretation we do not need to import any presuppositions from theories of social class and social structure or taxonomies of class or status, which may of course be controversial.
We need only accept the fact that individuals have social contacts with other individuals, because social network is about individuals and the relationships that can be contracted between them, and not primarily based on pre-defined group structures.
To that extent it does not matter in principle whether the individuals are described in a particular society as ‘upper class’, ‘middle class’ or ‘lower class’, or whether the society is rural or urban: it is a universal that all individuals in all societies have contacts with other individuals (even the exceptional case — say, a hermit — has occasional societal contacts or has had them in the past, and ‘isolates’are special cases).
The advantage over stratificational social class (as in Labov, 1966) as  a principal variable is the universality of the network concept: whereas stratificational social class theory cannot be universally applicable to all historical states, to bilingual situations, or to language- (that is, speaker-) contact situations (and all of these are relevant in historical description), all speakers at all times have had ties of some kind — weak or strong — with other speakers.
Thus, unlike social class, social network does not require us to project at the initial stage a fully-fledged theory of social structure on to the linguistic data.
We can therefore view social network, or some similar model of relationships between individual speakers, as the basis of a strictly sociolinguistic theory.
Furthermore, the idea of network impinges fairly closely on the notion of sociolinguistic functions , as we have presented this in chapter 2, because it is a fundamental postulate of network analysis that individuals create personal communities that provide them with a meaningful framework for solving the problems of their day-to-day existence (Mitchell 1986: 74).
So the network relationships contracted between individuals are functional, just as linguistic variation is also functional (L. Milroy, 1987, discusses examples in which social network relationships are important enough to be viewed as survival mechanisms).
There are other conceptual similarities between network analysis and linguistic analysis.
One of these is the fact that the social networks of individuals are like language itself, open-ended and changing, and they cannot be precisely delimited for this reason.
Furthermore, social network is conceptually at a more generalized level than are definable groupings, such as church or political organizations or street gangs (and the model may in principle embrace these within it).
Thus, a person may be conscious of, for example, family and friendship relationships, or membership of institutional groups, but he/she is not fully aware at any point of the multiple web of (mainly informal) relationships that constitute a ‘social network’.
As it is conceptually so different from the idea of the ‘peer-group’ used by Labov (1972a) and Cheshire (1982), it is relatively difficult to operationalize social network as a quantitative speaker variable.
In order to adapt the idea for use in an monolingual urban situation, we have adopted for practical purposes certain procedures from ethnographic work, for example, the idea of measuring the intensity of network contacts; on the basis of this we can identify clusters of individuals within which the network links are relatively  strong.
Thus, for us, the idea of varying strength of network links is the nearest we can get to understanding the notion of a speech community .
I shall return to, and elaborate on, these points.
Here, the main issue arising is that, following Bott (1971), strong network ties can also be seen as norm-enforcement mechanisms .
In this way, social network gives us a model for demonstrating how states of language are maintained through normative consensus within the communities, leaving external influences out of the argument at this stage.
4.2 Variable Norms in the Speech Community
An important general finding of the inner-city research is that in most of the linguistic variables quantified, there is a contextual style difference for all twelve groups of speakers, and there is also a sex-based difference.
We have reported on the stylistic pattern quite fully in a number of places (for example, J. Milroy, 1981; L. Milroy, 1987), and I will not go into detail on it here.
Although in some instances the sex/style differences are very slight, they are quite consistent in that they usually tend in the same direction, much as Labov (1966: 7) found for social class and style: ‘Native New Yorkers differ in their usage in terms of absolute values of the variables, but the shifts between contrasting styles follow the same pattern in almost every case.’
The conclusion we are entitled to draw from these findings is that, in general, female usage tends towards the more ‘careful’ end of the stylistic continuum and male usage towards the more ‘casual’, and it seemed at this stage of our research that we had some justification for the claim that in linguistic variation, sex-differentiation is prior to class differentiation and need not be interpreted as subsidiary to class (as it normally has been).
Figure 4.1 is an example of clear sex differentiation in all three inner-city areas.
Notice, however, that although we may have views on the social class distribution of [ta;]deletion (it can be readily observed to be less common in middle-class Belfast English), social class is at this stage an external category.
We are interested here in finding out what the norms are within a single social stratum and how they function for the speakers: at this point in our work we have no justification for relating this pattern to social class differences.
Figure 4.1 shows only a difference according to sex of speaker, but as this is quite consistent  between generations, it has another quality: it is also a stable variable.
It is this stability, and not any externally imposed category, that gives us the important clue to how the sociolinguistic patterns are maintained in speech communities.
The norms of the community include stable differences between the sexes, with females tending towards careful style variants and males towards casual style (thus, when males are speaking in relatively formal settings, they will use a higher proportion of ‘casual’ variants than females will).
But the most general conclusion that we draw from this kind of pattern is that the norms of a speech community are not necessarily uniform within that community, with every group agreeing on a single appropriate realization.
We can therefore interpret our findings as evidence that what the community agrees on in this case is a pattern of stable differentiation over two generations between male and female usage.
Figure 4.1 Deletion of medial [ta;]in words of the type mother, together .
It seems, therefore, that focused patterns in real speech communities are not patterns in which all groups speak in the same way, but patterns of relatively stable differentiation within the community.
In Belfast, however, we found that the three inner-city communities differed in the degree of focusing they exhibited.
The community that showed the most stable and consistent patterns of gender-differentiation was the East Belfast Ballymacarrett community.
It was immediately hypothesized that the relative degrees of focusing and diffuseness might be related to different degrees of social stability in the communities.
In Ballymacarrett, there was less unemployment, traditional gender roles were more clearly differentiated, the population  was resident in traditional streets of terraced houses, and for the most part it had been established there for generations.
In the other communities, unemployment was rife, traditional gender roles were less clearly differentiated (with many women working while the men were unemployed), and there had been population movement.
Additionally, the Hammer community was in the process of housing redevelopment, and many in-group members had moved out of the immediate area.
Figure 4.2 shows the flattening-out effect — an effect that was also noticed (but usually to a lesser extent than this) in other variables: there is sharp differentiation in one community, but much less in the others.
In fact almost all the variables quantified display the sharply differentiated pattern most clearly in Ballymacarrett.
What this suggests is that if there ever were a completely stable community which was totally insulated from the outside world, there would be stable differentiation within it — and gender-difference might often be one aspect of this.
Stable differentiation is the normal state of affairs, and the existence of this variation is one of the things that makes linguistic change possible, in that the different variants can be latched on to by different groups and for different social functions: thus, the patterns of consensus can change in the course of time.
Conversely, a community in which large-scale quantification reveals blurred and uncertain patterns of differentiation is likely to be relatively unstable and, in Le Page's terms, diffuse.
Figure 4.2 ‘Flattening-out’ effect in gender variation in the Hammer as against Ballymacarrett.
The manner in which we used the social network variable has been fully described elsewhere (L. Milroy, 1987), and I shall limit my comments here to the question of focusing, stability and normenforcement.
Ballymacarrett was the only one of the three areas in which there was a clear and consistent correspondence between the strength of a person's network structure and his or her use of vernacular (or casual) variants.
It was this kind of evidence that led us to use the social network model in a systematic way: as Ballymacarrett is the most stable and well-established of the communities, we can conclude that the social conditions there are favourable to the emergence of a close-knit network structure of the kind often found in low-status communities (Young and Wilmott, 1962), and there is ample ethnographic evidence that a close-knit structure of this kind is capable of imposing normative consensus on its members.
In other words, relatively close socializing patterns have the effect of maintaining traditional norms, including stable patterns of internal differentiation, and resisting change from outside.
What we have tried to show here is that in this respect linguistic behaviour conforms to the same principles as the other patterns of social behaviour that have been studied by anthropologists.
But we have also noted that gender-differentiation in language is sharper in Ballymacarrett than in the other communities.
Here, male network patterns prove to be more close-knit (as measured by a network strength score: NSS) than female networks, whereas this contrast is not so marked in the Hammer and is cancelled and partly reversed in the Clonard (one of the highest-scoring groups for NSS in West Belfast is the young female group in the Clonard, and this largely accounts for the Clonard score in Table 4.1).
In fact, Ballymacarrett is the only area in which the gender difference in NSS is statistically significant.
This is clear in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1 Mean network scores (maximum 5)
Thus, as we have noted above, agreement on norms (as consequence of close-knit and stable social patterns) results not in uniformity of usage within a community, but on agreement on a pattern of stable differentiation.
In a relatively focused community such as Ballymacarrett, therefore, we observe much greater regularity in the patterning of the variable elements than we do in less focused communities, and we may further suggest that the variants used in such a focused community develop a clear and consistent pattern in their social functions.
That is to say, it is more generally agreed here than elsewhere that preference for back realizations of /a/, for example , indicate close personal ties, casualness of conversational type, and/or male identity, and that other realizations indicate greater social distance and/or female identity.
The less focused the community is, the less clear will be the relationship of specific linguistic variants to their various social functions.
These points are of the greatest importance in developing a social model for the study of linguistic change, and there is much more to say about relative degrees of network strength as they affect patterns of change: I shall, therefore, refer back frequently to these findings.
As our work has sometimes been interpreted as conflicting with that of Labov, it should be noted here that the above characterization of the speech community is fundamentally of the same type as his and can be seen as derivative from his insights.
Older characterizations of ‘speech community’, such as that of Wyld (1927: 47), assume that everybody speaking a ‘dialect’ speaks in the same way: these scholars would therefore have believed that inner-city Belfast is homogeneous and would simply not have expected to find the enormous diversity that actually does exist, so they probably would not have bothered to investigate it.
Labov's (1966) definition, like ours, is based on agreement on norms of variation within the community rather than on the absolute values of the linguistic forms themselves.
We can regard his clear statement as a hypothesis that can be empirically tested (and not a ‘tenuous abstraction’, as Lass, 1980: 121, views it), and our own investigation (as reported so far) as empirical testing of his claim.
The difference that emerges is that whereas Labov's statement is based on speaker-agreement within the dimension of social class (and hence derivative from the ‘shared value’ hypothesis of stratificational class theory, on which see chapter 7), the characterization that I have built up thus far is based on the variables of age, sex, area and network, within a single social class, and without reliance on a prior model or  theory of social class.
It is this, and not any dispute about the existence of variable norms, that leads in practice to a number of differences in our treatment of ‘speech community’ and to some differences in our model of linguistic change.
It follows from what has been said so far that, as stable norms can be observed through analysis of linguistic patterns, change in progress will show up as violations of the expected ‘normal’ patterns.
More generally, as linguistic stability consists in agreement on patterns of variation and on the social functions of the variants, linguistic change will appear as changes in agreement: as older patterns of agreement recede, so new patterns of agreement will emerge, and in the interim stage there may be some apparent randomness (or lack of agreement, or conflicting patterns) in the distribution of variants.
Linguistic change, therefore, is change in agreement on norms of usage , and what we observe in our quantified data is difference in the quantitative incidence of certain variants in particular social groupings.
This typically appears as a gradual pattern: therefore, from a sociolinguistic point of view, sound-change is most definitely a gradual process.
This view of what is meant by sound-change is very different from the traditional view, because it is speaker-based and not system-based.
Let us explain this briefly.
A language-centred description typically suggests that speech-sounds are objects that can actually change ([a]can ‘become’[o], and so forth), when this is not what happens at all .
Old English [a:], for example, did not actually ‘become’ open [α:]in Southern Middle English (as in OE há0m ME hom(e) ).
What happened was that speakers gradually and variably began to use open [α:]in environments where [a:]had formerly been used: the process was one of substitution rather than change sensu stricto .
For all these reasons, we have treated sound-change as something rather wider in scope than a simple unilinear process in a purely phonetic/phonological dimension.
It is accepted that change in this unilinear aspect will indeed appear in our quantified findings — as a crossover pattern which violates the pattern of stable norms (as in Labov's classic example of class/style overlap for post-vocalic /r/ in New York City), and I shall discuss examples of this in later chapters.
However, it is characteristic of quantified patterns that they can conceal what lies behind them and so they can be interpreted much more deeply than in this unilinear way.
In the remainder of this chapter, therefore, I am concerned with the wider patterns of  consensus and conflict in speaker-evaluation of the linguistic variants that we have studied, and I shall relate these to the concept of strong and weak ties in communities.
I shall start by considering in section 4.3 some variables which are characteristic of Belfast English, but which seem to function at a somewhat higher level of generality than those that we have mentioned so far — as identity markers for the community as a whole rather than for internal differentiation within it.
4.3 Variables as Markers: the Identity Function
As we have seen, linguistic variables may be markers of certain fine-grained social functions within the community, which can be broadly considered to be identity functions, and which may appear as age, sex or areal differences, for example.
However, it may happen that particular variables selected for analysis turn out to be especially markers of one of these functions rather than another: one variable may be chiefly a close-tie network marker and another a marker of gender-differentiation.
It is for this reason that in our quantitative analysis we have treated speaker variables as independent of one another.
In fact, a particular variable may have more than one function, but it is only by a close analysis that treats speaker variables as independent that we will be able to determine whether this is so.
I shall discuss an extended example of this in sections 4.6 and 4.7.
Here, I have another purpose: I want to draw attention to the fact that different variables may be used by the community to mark functions of higher and lower levels of generality.
For example, some variables (or variants of them) may be markers of gender-difference in the close communities, whereas others may not show fine-grained internal differentiation, but may be best interpreted as variables that mark Belfast vernacular as a whole as different from other varieties.
These are not so much part of the ‘inner voice’: in Cohen's (1982) terms, they are perhaps more readily interpreted as the ‘voice to the outside world’.
It is clear that some variables in English do function in a very general way: for example, variation between the alveolar and velar nasal in the present participle ending (ing) is universal and can be said to mark the whole English-speaking world as a single speech  community.
More narrowly, but still at a high level of generality, some variables may function as identity markers for whole status groups or for larger regions than merely an inner-city community.
In British English, examples of this are [h]-dropping and glottalling, which are regionally widespread and usually marked for social status or style.
As these broader functions are of importance in a theory of language change, I shall discuss them briefly here.
Some of Labov's New York City variables are of this broader type, and the larger number used by Trudgill (1974) are mixed in this way: some of them (such as[h]-dropping and (ing)) are common to many varieties, whereas others have social meaning only, or mainly, for Norwich and Norfolk speakers.
As our inner-city work was mainly focused on very fine-grained differentiation, we have so far paid less attention to these more generalized markers in Belfast English, and in some cases we have not published the quantitative findings that arose from studying these.
One such variable that has a wide distribution is the lateral consonant (L).
In a number of dialects in northern England and peripherally in southern Scotland (J. Milroy, 1982c) there is a high incidence of noticeably ‘clear’(palatal) variants of /l/, chiefly in pre-vocalic syllable-initial position, but also in other positions.
As for Irish English, commentators routinely state that clear [l]is ‘ubiquitous’.
For Belfast, however, this is certainly not so.
It is characteristic of the inner-city vernacular that a noticeably clear (palatal)[l]is pre-vocalic but that a noticeably dark (velar)[l]is post-vocalic.
But what is of interest here is that there is no difference between the three inner-city areas in the use of initial clear [l].
It is firmly established, and when there is a tendency to ‘darkening’ of initial [l], the conditions that apply are linguistic and not social: relatively ‘dark’[l]occurs mainly before relatively retracted vowels.
Thus, the clear [l]in initial pre-vocalic position is a broad regional marker, and we conclude from this relative invariance that it is not undergoing change.
The Belfast contrast between clear and dark [l], however, is not characteristic of all Irish English or of all Ulster English.
It is a feature of Belfast and surrounding areas and marks the speaker as a native of this region.
However, at a more fine-grained level, there are differences in the incidence of the dark [l]variant (but not initial clear [l]) in the inner city according to age, sex and area.
The findings for initial (L) are given in figure 4.3: as the total possible score is 200 (for maximum incidence of dark [l]), these scores show a very marked preference for clear [l]in initial position for all groups with no  significant differences, and only a tendency for the young females to increase in their clear [l]usage (Owens, 1977).
Figure 4.3 Average index scores by area for (L) in initial positions (maximum score: 200).
At a somewhat less general level, however, there are also variables that function as markers of BV (as against more general Ulster or Irish varieties) and that do not vary significantly within the inner city in social terms.
An example of this is variation between low and mid-front realizations of /a/ before velar consonants in words of the type rag, pack, bang , which show only slight differences in terms of age and sex within inner-city Belfast.
However, the front-raised realization is easily perceived to be a very salient marker of vernacular speech in Belfast: as an identity marker, therefore, it marks nativeness to Belfast and adjacent areas, and it seems to be very firmly established.
It contrasts in this way both with middle-class speech and with many of the dialect regions of south, mid and west Ulster.
I have discussed these matters briefly here because the broad distinction I have drawn is relevant to describing the ‘shape’ of the speech community and locating patterns of change within it.
The markers that are characteristic of a variety perform social functions at lower and higher levels of generality.
In the main parts of the Belfast projects we were more concerned with these lower levels of generality, because the findings have consequences for the notion of ‘speech community’.
As we have noted, if there were ever such a thing as a variety that was completely insulated and unaffected by external influence, these findings suggest very strongly that it would not be uniform and that there would still be variable community norms within it.
But in reality there is no such thing as a wholly insulated variety: however strong the links may be that bind a population together, there will always be some consciousness of external norms, and this will have two kinds of effect on in-group behaviour.
First, there will be resistance to external influence, and this will manifest itself as consensus norms within the dialect that affirm solidary behaviour.
The agreement throughout the inner city on the (bag ) variable can, for example, be interpreted in this way.
Second, the external influence will in some cases actually be successful, and we may therefore be able to demonstrate how the new forms penetrate the solidary community.
This implies that we need to take conflict into account here as well as changes in consensus.
I shall return in chapters 6 and 7 to consider these points more fully in the context of a model of weak and strong ties.
In the remainder of this chapter, I want to use the solidarity model suggested by ‘social network’ to help to interpret patterns of variation in Belfast, referring to the inner-city and outer-city community studies and to our random sample ‘doorstep’survey.
4.4 Investigating Patterns in the Inner City
In this section and the following ones I am concerned with the ‘shape’ of the Belfast speech community as a whole, and in particular with a kind of patterning that is not directly accessible by the classic methods of Labov (1966).
These methods typically use a hierarchical model of society and measure linguistic variation in a single phonetic dimension (such as, vowel-height) against a unilinear social dimension (in most cases socio-economic class).
The result of this is that linguistic variation and change can appear to be unidimensional.
For example, within a particular phoneme class, social groups can appear to be differentiated by greater or lesser preference for one particular phonetic realization of a single sound-segment.
In this respect, these methods fit in well with traditional views of sound-change also, for  these too are frequently unilinear (vowel A ‘becomes’ vowel B in the course of time).
What these methods do not directly tell us is how wide or narrow the range of internal linguistic variation is within each social group, and how much the groups differ in the range of variants used.
It may, for example, happen that social group A uses only two variants of a variable, whereas social group B uses three or four, and this type of difference may well be of just as much interest as an absolute difference in phonetic realization.
In fact, these differences in extent of variability within groups are sociolinguistically very important.
It was clear from a very early stage of our Belfast work that to describe the inner-city phonology was a more complicated task than to describe ‘middle-class’ phonology, because there appeared to be much more variability within inner-city language than in higher status language.
In this dimension, therefore, the speech community can be envisaged as being shaped like a pyramid, with greater variability at the lower end and greater convergence (or relative uniformity) at the upper end.
It seems to be worth inquiring why this should be so; and what generalizations about sociolinguistic variation and change we can draw from this fact.
To approach this question, we bear in mind the principle that variability in language is socially functional.
We also bear in mind the principles enunciated by Cohen (1982: 8) of ethnographic work on small solidary communities, which I have referred to in section 4.2 and which distinguish between the ‘voice to the outside world’ and the ‘much more complicated’voice of the community ‘to its own members’.
According to this view in-group variation (in social affairs generally) is not only functional within communities, but also subtle and complicated, and difficult for outsiders to access.
We are interested here in understanding the functional pressures that maintain these complex patterns of variation.
For our present purposes, there are two main senses in which the inner-city phonology can be said to be complicated: first, there is a much higher degree of ‘low-level’ allophonic variation in the inner-city than in outer areas, resulting in a wide range of variation and frequent overlap between phonemes; yet, this variation can be shown to be rule-governed; second, there is a high incidence of what I have called phono-lexical alternation (as measured in variables of type 2b) in the inner-city, which is much reduced in outer-city communities.
In chapter 3, we noticed that lexical alternants (of the pull type) are highly salient in the community, and it has been shown in various  studies (such as J. Milroy, 1981) that these alternants encode values of greater and lesser solidarity.
In what follows my main purposes are:(1) to demonstrate the patterns of simplification that can be traced by comparing our inner-city data with that of the city-wide random sample ‘doorstep’ survey and the outer-city community studies; and (2) to consider how far a theory of strong and weak ties can account for the maintenance of complex patterns and the development of simpler ones.
My first example concerns allophonic complexity.
I shall use here the data on short /a/, but similar conclusions hold true of other vowels (for greater detail, see J. Milroy, 1976a, 1981; Harris, 1985).
The Belfast /a/ system varies considerably in terms of length, height, backness, rounding and diphthongization, and shows variation to a degree not attested in standard accounts of English phonology: if we include pre-velar items (as in table 4.2), the range (in place of articulation) is from mid-front to low-mid back.
Table 4.2 is a simplified representation of the range of /a/, in terms of following consonantal environments.
It is simplified in many ways: it ignores patterns of length and diphthongization and excludes tokens of post-velar environments in which front-raising occurs (chiefly among older speakers).
Yet, it is still sufficiently detailed to make our main points.
The pattern displayed here incorporates variation, but notice that the distribution of variants is rule-governed.
The pre-velar vowel can vary between mid-front and low-front, but it cannot undergo backing.
Short vowels before voiceless stops (or sonorant + voiceless obstruent) are also front, but non-velar items cannot undergo front-raising.
Before fricatives (except palatal fricatives) and voiced consonants generally, a long back vowel is favoured, with labial and nasal environments most inclined to display the rounded back vowel.
In short, the heterogeneity in the system is orderly: it can, in principle, be described in terms of variable rules.
Similarly, it can be described phonologically in terms of a set of sub-scales, in which the potential for lowering and backing will vary in degree for different subsets.
Table 4.2 Range of realizations for /a/ in inner-city Belfast
We had much evidence during fieldwork that these complicated rules are maintained by community pressures: for example, when a young East Belfast informant applied a strategy of front-raising (similar to RP) to the item chap (on a word-list), he was loudly mocked by his companions, who perceived his pronunciation as an attempt at RP (which for them is an effeminate stereotype).
The item can be realized with a fully low front vowel, and a strategy of backing (but not of front-raising) can also be used in this social group.
To return to the main point about allophonic complexity: it is obvious, even from the simplified displays in the table, that these complex patterns are not easily learnable for outsiders, even though they are regular.
How, for example, could an outsider know that normative consensus in the speech community does not permit backing in velar environments or fronting in most other environments, or that sonorants followed by voiceless obstruents predict a front vowel?
It seems that these patterns are maintained by insider knowledge depending on the extent to which speakers belong to relatively close-knit groups.
To the extent that these close-knit social relations are weakened, we may expect that these linguistic complexities will be reduced.
In section 4.5 I shall adduce evidence from the outer city that suggests that this view is correct.
A second sense in which the inner-city phonology may be said to be complex is in the incidence of lexical items that have two alternative vowel pronunciations quite distinct phonetically and phonemically from each other.
There are many such sets, and most of them (such as the meet/meat alternation) are highly salient.
They are discussed in chapter 5 and by J. Milroy (1980,1981); J. Milroy and Harris (1980); Harris (1985).
As exemplification of this, we have usually used the (pull ) set.
These items can be realized with a low-mid back short vowel (unrounded or slightly rounded), alternating with a high central to  front rounded short vowel.
In one realization they rhyme with cut, dull , and in the other with good, pool (both of which have short [u]in Scots and Ulster English).
The set has deep historical roots and consists mainly of ME /u/ items with initial labials (such as pull, bush, full ), and certain ME /o: /items (such as shook, foot ).
Since 1860, as far as we can tell, three items that were formerly alternants have been reclassified as categorical [u]items (Patterson, 1860); thus, the speed of transfer has been very slow, and the set as a whole has been quite resistant to change.
As we noticed in chapter 3, the full membership of this limited set is not predictable by environmental phonological rules: for example, whereas shook, look belong to it,cook, book do not.
The items wood, wool, hood and probably soot used to belong to it, but do not now (Patterson, 1860).
Yet, although wood no longer alternates, the homophonous item would does alternate.
Furthermore, if hood could belong to the set, there seems to be no reason why good should not also have belonged to it; yet, as far as we know, it never did.
Nevertheless, inner-city speakers know that some /u/ items can alternate and that others cannot.
Thus, although some environmental phonological factors (such as initial labials) are involved in defining the set, speaker-knowledge of which items can alternate must depend largely on memorizing the items singly.
It seems that the best explanation for the survival of this kind of insider knowledge is that the knowledge is reinforced by frequent close contact with other speakers, and this is best accessed by a theory of network ties, which when they are strong function as norm-enforcement mechanisms.
Furthermore, as we might expect, these alternations are functional.
The existence of these sets provides an important sociolinguistic resource for inner-city speakers, and their survival must surely depend on this.
First, in a broad sense, the ‘in-group’ variant:[A], can be held to affirm group identity.
More importantly, I think, the alternative choices can encode messages of social nearness or social distance — or, if you like, degrees of social distance.
The in-group form encodes messages of intimacy and closeness, and, like the T pronoun (Brown and Gilman, 1960), can actually be required amongst close friends in casual circumstances: its strong affective meanings, however, are not easily accessible to outsiders.
The other alternant is the out-group form, and this of course is used in interactions with those who have relatively weak ties with the speaker, or in situational contexts in which social distance is present.
Again, we have evidence from fieldwork about the functions of these alternants: one man of 27  commented that during his years away from Northern Ireland, he had stopped using what I have called the in-group alternants of the (pull ) set.
The most obvious explanation for this is that during his years away from home, he would develop a large number of relatively weak ties: in such circumstances, the in-group alternant would cease to have any function for him and so could be abandoned.
This functional explanation seems to be more satisfactory than, and logically prior to, one based on prestige : as it happens, this individual's activities away from home had not been upwardly mobile.
If weak-tie situations can exist even in the inner-city communities themselves (L. Milroy (1987: 131) discusses the case of Hannah McK from the Clonard area who has a density/multiplexity score of 0), it is to be expected that within the wider social structure of a city, social distance between groups will develop even more.
In such circumstances, the norm-enforcement mechanisms that maintain the complex structure of inner-city variation (and other patterns of language use) will be weakened, and simplification is likely.
In section 4.5 I shall use some of the findings of the doorstep survey and the outer-city community studies to inquire further into this.
4.5 Linguistic Patterns in the Wider Speech Community
The traditional view of urban dialect was that it is not ‘dialect’ at all.
This term was reserved for the rural dialects, which had been legitimized by nineteenth-century investigations, and which were believed to be ‘genuine’ in a way that urban dialects are not.
The latter were widely regarded as corrupt and impure (see for example the views on Cockney cited in note 1, above).
This attitude to urban dialect seems to have been given further impetus by the view of Wyld (1927) that urban English can be described as the ‘Modified Standard’ of ‘city vulgarians’.
This implies that it can be characterized as an unsuccessful, or partly successful, effort by urban dwellers to achieve competence in ‘standard’ English (which for Wyld is the English of the upper and upper-middle classes).
Our work in Belfast, however, and that of colleagues in other cities, makes it clear that this cannot be convincingly demonstrated.
The language of urban people, to the extent that it is ‘modified’, is modified vernacular : it cannot be adequately explained in terms of modifications to the ‘standard’(in   which many speakers show no interest at all).
It is easier to understand it as an attempt to move away from something already characteristic of the community than as an attempt to move towards some outside idealization (compare my comments on avoidance of stigma in Chapter 2.6, above).
In this section, I am concerned with the modifications to the inner-city vernacular that can be observed in outer-city language.
In our second project, we selected our two outer-city areas rather carefully.
We wanted them to represent a section of the community that was quite close in the social hierarchy to the inner-city population, and in the event many speakers in the samples had inner-city social and family contacts.
The intention here was to test our theory by making things difficult for ourselves: it would have been much easier to select upper-middle class communities and to demonstrate gross differences between them and the inner city.
This, however, would have been to trivialize: the results would be of little interest.
But the speakers in Andersonstown and Braniel are strong Belfast speakers: an outsider would be unlikely to notice much difference between their speech and that of the Clonard and Ballymacarrett.
In order to show that there are differences in language, therefore, we have to listen to many hours of tape-recorded speech, select variables that we believe may pattern in some way, and quantify.
The most salient difference between these outer-city informants and the inner-city ones is not linguistic, but social, and of course we knew this.
As for the doorstep survey, this was carried out in order to generalize about the speech of the city as a whole, and in this way to be able to describe modifications to the vernacular that might be of general import.
Here, I shall first consider some results of the doorstep survey.
I have elsewhere shown (J. Milroy, 1982b) that the range of variation in (a) is greatly reduced in speakers outside the inner city.
Table 4.3, which is from the doorstep survey of speakers throughout the city, shows total convergence on a low front vowel for /a/, and table 4.4 demonstrates another interesting point.
In it the two front-raised items (castle, dabble ) appear to be randomly front-raised rather than governed by any systematic rule.
The vernacular rules predict that dabble will be subject to backing — certainly not front-raising — and it is unlikely that this speaker is following the highly recessive rule for front-raising after velars in the item castle (this has been largely abandoned by younger low-status speakers).
Table 4.5, based on the output of 60 speakers, shows that the reduction in range for this vowel throughout the city is clear and consistent (statistically, the pattern is very highly significant).
Furthermore, it is sex-graded: females are significantly more likely to simplify than males.
Although it is impossible in a doorstep survey to estimate network strengths for individuals, it is extremely likely that varying network strengths are also implicated in the simplification pattern.
The more dense and multiplex the ties, the more likely it is that complexity will be maintained.
Table 4.3 /a/ range for a middle-class Belfast speaker: Word=list style (random sample survey)
Table 4.4 /a/ range for a middle-class Belfast speaker: word-list style (random sample survey
Table 4.5 Range of variation in /a/ showing simplification pattern by status group and gender
In the doorstep survey, two further variables were fully quantified, and others less closely examined.
The pattern for (Ε)(as in went, bed ) proved to be virtually identical to that for (a).
Superficially, the results for the lexical alternant class of (pull ) were much the same also.
The lower-status group figures were again very much higher than those for the upper group (2.17 as against 0.91, out of a possible 4.00): this means that lower group speakers, on average, use the vernacular alternant for two or more of the four lexical items,even in word-list style — a surprising finding in terms of Labov's predictions on contextual style.
Word-list style is a careful style in his terms (but as we have shown in a number of publications, Labov's predictions about the stylistic continuum did not work in this divergent-dialect community  in the way that they had worked in New York City).
The figures for males and females are also consistent with our findings for (a) and (Ε): females lead in the move away from traditional vernacular forms, and this in the long term tends to reduce allophony and simplify alternations.
Thus, it may well be worth considering the possibility that sex-differentiation in language contributes to simplification patterns and hence to the establishment of supra-local norms.
We now turn to the findings of the two outer-city community studies, which also show a pattern of reduction of allophony.
The social characteristics of the two outer-city communities differ quite considerably from those of the inner city.
They are upper-working to lower-middle class.
The people were not necessarily born and brought up in the same neighbourhood; many are upwardly mobile (unlike the inner-city people).
Above all, very few of them meet more than one of the criteria used in the inner-city for measuring network strength, and the essential reason for this is that their network ties are not mainly territorial.
The inner-city indicators were based largely on territorial assumptions, for example that people might have close relatives living in the same street or the next street, and that people would work in the same places as some of their close neighbours (L. Milroy 1987: 141–2).
This was seldom true in the outer city.
Those people whose families had moved out from the inner areas still retained some ties with relatives in the inner city, but clearly such ties are by definition weaker in quality than ties with immediate neighbours, and they were dismissed as relatively weak in our inner-city network analysis.
In other cases, people had no inner-city ties, and ties with neighbours tended to be uniplex and open-ended, rather than multiplex and dense.
Sometimes people did not even know their neighbours.
Thus, although these outer-city neighbourhoods do not to a casual observer differ much from the inner city in language, they do exhibit clear social differences.
In our project this meant that measures of network strength that we used in the inner city could not be readily operationalized for these speakers.
In this respect, therefore, the outer-city studies lay the basis for the arguments about weak ties put forward in J. Milroy and L. Milroy (1985b) and further discussed in later chapters.
In such conditions, one important prediction is that the weakening of norm-enforcement mechanisms will bring about a reduction in the everyday functional value of the use of in-group linguistic variants.
Thus, we are prepared to find that the simplification pattern apparent  in the findings of the doorstep survey may also apply to the outer-city neighbourhoods.
In addition, the breakdown of inner-city consensus may lead to patterns of usage that are less predictable by linguistic rule or by sociolinguistic pattern.
Thus, some apparently random variation, or some lack of agreement on norms of usage (as in table 4.5) may be encountered.
It had been noticed in the inner city that many vowel variables could be described in terms of sub-scales according to following consonantal environments (as in table 4.5); we attempted, therefore, to operationalize this perception by distinguishing following environments roughly based on the sonority scales discussed by Taylor (1973) and others adapted to an ‘allophonic length’ dialect (J. Milroy, 1976a).
They were as follows:
T = voiceless stop (incl. affricate) or sonorant + voiceless obstruent
TS = environment described in T + a following syllable in same morpheme
D = voiceless fricative or any voiced consonant not immediately followed by a voiceless segment
DS = environment described in D + a following syllable in same morpheme
These categories were used in the quantification of (a),(α) and (Ε)(as in cap, stop, bet ) in the outer city (a modified version is used in sections 4.6 and 4.7), and a particular aim of the method was to distinguish between variation in quality and variation in length.
Hence, in the range diagrams (tables 4.6 and 4.7), tokens are listed in columns showing length as well as place of articulation.
It is immediately  obvious here that, for (α), the extreme left-hand column is empty, and that, for (Ε), both the extreme left- and extreme right-hand columns are empty.
In the inner city, however (see the Clonard figures in table 4.8), not only is the full range exploited, but the empty left-hand columns (for environment T in the inner city) are in the order of 100 per cent(that is , categorical) for virtually all the males (young and old) in the sample.
This compares with quantities close to zero in the outer city, for most speakers.
Similarly, the range from low to high-mid (in the case of (Ε)) is reduced to a much narrower range in table 4.7.
In this connection, Gunn (1982) reports that for (a) also the range in Andersonstown is reduced to variation between [ae]and [a](the latter sometimes slightly retracted), but he adds that this is particularly the case for young speakers; older people frequently retain the vernacular rules of the inner city.
Thus, these findings support the findings of the random sample, in which, as we have seen, the range of realizations is reduced in ‘upper group’ speakers.
Table 4.6 /α/; in Andersonstown
Table 4.7 /Ε/; in Andersonstown
There is also some indication that the appearance of particular items in particular columns is less easily shown as rule-governed than it is in the inner city.
It is rather surprising to find, in table 4.6, that the item shop appears with a low back slightly rounded long vowel, and the rounded vowel in the disyllable/polysyllables probably, bottom is also rather surprising.
These trends might of course represent the beginning of a change in progress, but if this is so, it is not yet established as a pattern that we can show by our methods as regular, and so we cannot demonstrate that it is a change.
But from this, and from table 4.8, it is reasonable to conclude that the situation is in this  respect less focused than in the inner city.
The agreement on norms that we noticed in the inner city seems here to have been weakened.
Table 4.8
Table 4.8 measures in broad terms low as against non-low realizations of (α) in the two outer-city areas as against the inner-city Clonard area.
Although this table ignores backness, roundness and other phonetic categories, it also shows us something of interest.
The rule constraining low v non-low realizations is much closer to being categorical in the low-status inner-city area than in the outer city; indeed, for the T and TS environments, it is categorical.
As we have noted above, it is qualitatively a near-front unrounded vowel categorically for most male inner-city speakers, but table 4.8 shows that, regardless of fronting, it is still always a low vowel in Catholic West Belfast.
This finding may be interpreted as supporting the view expressed above that the inner-city vernacular, although it shows more complex patterns, is more amenable to description in terms of linguistic rules than outer-city speech.
We can add that it may be the effects of network strength that maintain this relative consistency.
The general picture that emerges from these patterns of variation is one in which simplification patterns and loss of regularity and consistency are related to the weakening of network strength and the development of patterns of weak ties.
There may well be other patterns of simplification besides these, and one of these seems to be the merger of classes that were previously distinct.
The gradual loss of alternating classes, such as(pull ) is also related to merger patterns, as the end result of this long historical process is loss of a distinction which at the moment is still socially functional.
In the present perspective, I would propose that resistance to merger, lexical  transfer and restructuring is promoted by the existence of strong network ties, and that types of change that result in simplification are encouraged by weakening of ties.
Complex patterns, which (as we have argued) are functional, are maintained by the normenforcement function of dense and multiplex networks.
For those whose ties are uniplex and (relatively) open-ended, these patterns are no longer functional and it is for this reason, and not primarily because of speakers' desire for ‘prestige’, that they disappear.
The purpose of our discussion so far has been to demonstrate that there are important patterns of change that are not readily captured in a paradigm that measures a unilinear scale of phonetic variation against a unilinear scale of socio-economic class.
I have also avoided using the concept of prestige in the discussion because it appears that the patterns can be interpreted without reference to prestige.
If we argue, nevertheless, that prestige models can still account for the trend to simplification and uniformity that we have revealed, we have to explain in this case why simplification should carry prestige.
The trend to uniformity (not always necessarily simplification) that is often found in so-called prestige accents (such as RP) would seem itself to be related to functional factors.
As Jakobson perceived long ago, those varieties that have supra-local functions and that tend to develop in the direction of koines display simpler phonemic systems than varieties that have purely local functions (for an excellent discussion of simplification and complexity in a range of language situations, see Andersen, 1986).
It may well be that, in varieties that have supra-local functions, a high degree of complexity (at any level) is indeed dysfunctional.
In the social status dimension, of course, the network model is also explanatory, as different status levels in society are normally characterized by different degrees of network density and multiplexity (we shall discuss this more fully in chapter 7).
At the lowest and highest levels, network density and multiplexity is normally high: it is chiefly in the middle ranges of society that social and geographical mobility lead to the development of large numbers of relatively weak ties: individuals at these levels have more uniplex and diffuse ties.
At these levels, the complex variation which encodes rich social meanings to insiders simply becomes progressively more and more redundant: it is no longer functional for these mobile people.
Finally, in the dimension of sex-differentiation, it would appear from our studies of (a),(Ε) and the (pull ) alternant (in addition to many similar cases in the inner city) that females lead in the development of supra-local norms (including those that involve systemic simplification).
This perception seems to come closer to providing an explanation for sex-differentiation in language than explanations based on prestige.
In the following sections, we look more generally at patterns of change in two Hiberno-English vowels.
4.6 Reviewing Evidence for Change in Progress in Two Hiberno-English Vowels
In this section and the next I am concerned with tracking linguistic change in the vowels /a/ and /Ε/; in Belfast English, relating these changes both to historical/ geographical background and to network structure.
First, it is important to recall that in BV (as compared with textbook descriptions of standard English) many vowels have a startlingly wide range of realizations (see the range for /a/ in table 4.2).
This results in overlapping: thus, some realizations of /Ε/; are like /a/, and vice versa, and this applies particularly to the short vowel environments (following voiceless stop, following sonorant + voiceless obstruent).
For some groups of inner-city male speakers vowels in words of the type wet, went , are very consistently realized as [a, ae], and this often seems to be merged with /a/, as in sat, want .
First, we review the regional and social range of realizations of /Ε/.; ions Figure 4.4 shows the result of a quantitative analysis of /Ε/; realizations in two Belfast outer-city communities (Andersonstown and Braniel) and a smaller town (Lurgan) situated 17 miles southwest of Belfast.
The symbol T indicates a following voiceless stop or sonorant + voiceless stop cluster; CS indicates that the vowel is in the stressed syllable of a polysyllabic word (this environment tends to favour short realizations); D indicates following fricative or voiced consonant (excluding /r/).
Notice that the lowest short realization,[a], is not favoured, but that in Lurgan short and low realizations in short environments (T, CS) are more favoured than elsewhere (see also below), and that long realizations [ae:, Ε:]in these short environments are rarer in Lurgan.
The inner-city figures (Ballymacarrett, Clonard, Hammer) in table 4.9 clearly show some contrasts with the outer-city figures.
Before voiceless stops, a low short realization ([a],[ae]) is categorical for many male speakers, while the   women more often prefer higher and often lengthened realizations.
Thus, for typically low vowel environments, as in wet, went , females often have [w ,; w ]for ‘vernacular’[wat, want].
In this respect the inner-city female pattern is similar to that found generally in outer-city communities.
Figure 4.4 Percentage distribution of /Ε: /(bed, bet variants by following environment in outer-city Belfast (Andersonstown, the Braniel) and Lurgan.
(Adapted from Harris, 1985)
Table 4.9 Percentage low realizations of /Ε/; in typically ‘short’ phonetic contexts in three inner-city Belfast communities, Ballymacarrett (B), the Clonard (C) and the Hammer (H)
These variable data give us a basis for examining processes of change, since they suggest initially that either the higher or lower variants are innovatory, or — more properly — that the direction of change is either raising or lowering of /Ε/.; In fact, an examinations of historical documentation (real-time evidence) suggests that the direction of change is towards raising.
Moreover, it appears that mid realizations are gradually appearing in environments (such as pre-voiceless stop) where low realizations were once the norm.
It also appears that as the low variants are replaced by higher ones, the relevant vowels are lengthened and sometimes diphthongized: thus, as the rules are applied, conservative variants such as[rant, raent]: ‘rent’, are replaced by [rΕnt](raising and lengthening) and [rΕ? nt](diphthongization).
The options open to speakers for the realization of /Ε/; before voiceless stop or before consonant + voiceless stop may be described as follows:
1
Choose either mid or low ;
2
If low , realize as short ;
3
If mid , realize as long ;
4
If mid-long , realize as monophthong or diphthong.
This is of course an idealized and simplified account, and the aim of listing such options is descriptive only.
Nor is there any implied claim that all individual speakers have the same rules or rule-order — far from it.
Accepting this as a broad description of the current state, we now examine some real-time data in order to confirm the direction of change.
Patterson gives a list of five words of the /Ε/; class, which were then (1860) pronounced in Belfast with low realizations:wren, wrestle, wretch, grenadier, desk .
These few examples are enough to show that the low realization was then more widespread than today:wren and desk do not satisfy the voiceless stop or sonorant + voiceless stop condition in monosyllables, and are now categorical [Ε:]or [Ε?]environments.
Even the disyllable wrestle is unlikely to appear with [a], as the rule for raising and lengthening before [-s]now almost always overrides the tendency to lower and shorten in disyllables and polysyllables.
Items like wretch and grenadier are now variable.
Staples (1898) and Williams (1903) additionally give quite detailed descriptions of the vowel in the city, which allow us to infer that low variants had a much wider distribution then than they do today.
The complete list taken from those early writers allows us to see that the low vowel appeared in environments where it would not appear now — for example, before voiceless fricatives and voiced stops.
The distribution in present-day Belfast is quite different, as is shown by table 4.9 and figure 3.3.
In conservative working-class speech, low variants are maintained in ‘short’ environments, very much as in the nineteenth century: but low realizations have been almost entirely replaced in long environments by mid realizations of /Ε/.ions More ‘prestigious’and less conservative speakers are less likely to use ‘low’realizations, even in short environments.
It is evident that over the last hundred years or so mid realizations have been spreading at the expense of low realizations.
Mid /Ε/; has now almost totally replaced low /Ε/; in ‘long’ contexts (pre-voiced stop, pre-sonorant + voiced stop, and pre-fricative).
Low-status inner-city speakers (males) sometimes still have categorically low realizations in short environments, but in the more progressive outer-city housing estates the vowel is now categorically mid for some speakers.
Interestingly, the distribution of variants in Lurgan is more similar to that of the inner-city areas than that of the outer areas (a pattern that applies also to other vowel and consonant variables).
This relatively rapid linguistic change in Belfast has accompanied its rise in  population from about 120,000 in 1860 to nearly half a million in the early years of this century, and Belfast may be taken as an exemplar of linguistic change in fast-growing communities (while rural towns and villages adhere to older patterns).
The characteristic network structures of these different types of community are also relevant to the manner in which change may come about, in so far as urban growth tends at first to weaken strong pre-existing rural networks.
We may supplement our observations on /Ε/; by considering evidence from present-day Ulster dialects.
These are divided into two distinct types.
Ulster Scots dialects are found in east Ulster in a belt extending from around Coleraine in the north, through most of County Antrim and much of County Down (which is south of Belfast — see figure 4.5).
Most of Ulster to the west of this belt is English-based or mixed Scots-English.
Present-day Belfast dialect is often described as an intrusion of this Mid-Ulster type into the Scottish eastern belt.
Now, the long mid variants of /Ε/; are overwhelmingly associated with present-day Ulster Scots dialects (Gregg, 1972) and are characteristic of modern central Scots dialects generally.
Traditional Mid-Ulster English, on the other hand, is characterized by lower realizations in all environments.
The pattern of distribution in these dialects is remarkably similar to that of nineteenth-century Belfast vernacular as described in Patterson, Staples and Williams.
We may infer that this pattern is a residue of some earlier English vowel pattern that has not been well identified or described by historical linguists.
There is sixteenth-century orthographic evidence, which we shall further discuss in chapter 5, that suggests some distribution of low vowel realizations for /Ε/; in London English of the period: it seems possible that this pattern of lowering of historic short vowels has been overtaken in recent standard English and Central Scots by a pattern of raising and (in the latter case) lengthening.
The Mid-Ulster dialects may therefore have preserved to a great extent an older general English vowel pattern, and they may help us to project knowledge of the present on the past.
The historical and geographical evidence then both suggest that the low realizations of /Ε/;(conservative English in background) are giving way in a linguistically ordered way to the long mid realizations characteristic of present-day Scots.
It is clear that this change is highly evaluated in Belfast in terms of social class hierarchy and status, as it is the more prestigious groups that tend to adopt it and the more ‘advanced’(generally female and younger) group who introduce  it to the conservative inner-city communities (which are characterized by dense and multiplex network ties that tend to resist innovation and maintain conservative forms).
The tension between innovative and conservative social mechanisms gives rise to a identifiable pattern of gradual diffusion, which may be represented as a historical shift from an older English-type pattern towards a pattern characteristic of modern Scots.
As we have implied, the manner in which the change proceeds is conditioned by both social and phonological factors.
We now turn to a description of change in /a/, with which the /Ε/; system can be compared.
Figure 4.5 The ‘core’ Ulster Scots areas of north-east Ulster (shaded areas).
(Adapted from Gregg, 1972)
As indicated in table 4.2, the range of realizations of /a/ in present-day Belfast vernacular is considerable — from [e]through [a]and [a]to back raised and rounded [α].
Again, as for /Ε/,; patterns of lengthening and diphthongization are present, with long vowels being associated mainly with back realizations and with the higher front realizations before voiced velars (see table 4.2).
In what follows, we are concerned only with backing and retraction, and we therefore largely exclude the pre-velar environments (in which backing is not found).
Table 4.2 also shows that back realizations are favoured by following fricatives, non-velar voiced stops and non-velar nasals.
Nasals favour backing particularly strongly.
Middle-class urban speakers, as we have seen, tend to narrow the extreme range described above.
The widest range is found mainly in the speech of inner-city male speakers.
Furthermore, it is the males of Ballymacarrett (East Belfast) who use the backed variants most and who show evidence of spreading the backed realizations into voiceless stop environments (as in that, wrap ), where short, front variants are expected.
If there is evidence of change in progress towards backed  variants of /a/, it will therefore be male speakers who are leading it, rather than the females who lead the change towards raised /Ε/. 
Historical documentation suggests that /a/ backing is a recent trend.
Patterson does not comment on /a/ backing at all.
On the contrary, his remarks suggest that the Ulster tendency was towards fronting and raising and that the most salient Belfast feature was fronting and raising in velar environments (1860: 15).
In some places [presumably in the north of Ireland: JM]the short sound of e is improperly substituted for a , in almost every word in which it occurs; in Belfast, however, this error is almost exclusively confined to those words in which a is preceded by c or g , or followed by the sound of k , hard g or ng .
A very few of Patterson's spellings may indicate that /a/ backing and rounding had been observed sporadically in -r and -l environments: he has form for ‘farm’ and canaul for ‘canal’.
However, examples of this kind are so few that they indicate only a slight tendency (possibly confined to some pre-sonorant environments), which is not enough for /a/ backing to be discussed as a stereotype.
The item car appears in Patterson as ‘care’, in which the now highly recessive rule for  fronting and raising after velars is clear.
Items like hand, band , in which [α]is now stereotypically expected, are given simply as han, ban , etc.
Frequently, however, items that now have low and/or back vowels, are given with [Ε]: these include rether for ‘rather’(a rural Scots residue),e for a in single nasal environments in polysyllables such as exemine, Jenuary and in nasal cluster environments such as demsel, exemple, Entrim ('Antrim'),slent, bendy ('bandy'),brench .
Whereas Patterson's account indicates a system generally inclined towards front-vowel realizations, Staples (1898), writing nearly 40 years later, reports a ‘low back wide’ vowel before non-velar nasals, for example in man, hand, land .
Since Patterson's time — /r/ environments have become categorically back realizations.
Otherwise, the figures on present-day variations strongly suggest that since then it is nasal environments that have subsequently led the change, closely followed by fricative and voiced stop environments.
Thus, although raising and lengthening of /ε/; and backing of /a/ are both changes associated with modern Central Scots, the former is at present led in Belfast by females and the latter by males.
It is clear from patterns of stylistic variation that (as we might already have inferred) the two changes have different social evaluations.
As table 4.10 indicates, the backing of /a/ tends to be resisted by speakers in careful ‘interview’ style (whereas raising of /Ε/; is more likely in careful  styles).
Thus, men seem to be principally associated with a change that speakers do not consciously evaluate highly, while women are associated with one adopted by speakers in their more carefully monitored styles.
We shall return to the table 4.10 pattern in chapter 6.
Table 4.10 Incidence of retraction and backing of /a/ by age, sex and conversational style in two Belfast communities, calculated by an index score ranging from 0 (minimum) to 4 (maximum).
IS, interview style; SS, spontaneous style.
Our real time evidence confirms that the movement in /a/ is phonetically from front to back.
This means that sporadic frontraising (found mainly in West Belfast) in such words as flat, trap ([flΕt, trΕp]) must be seen as residues and not as innovations.
The fronting and raising rule in Belfast vernacular is virtually confined to velar environments and cannot apply to such words as bad, hand, stab (which are front in RP).
The diachronic evidence shows that, for a century or more, the trend has been towards retraction and backing.
The evidence also indicates that the rule for backing diffuses geographically from East to West Belfast (see table 4.10).
Scores for /a/ backing are higher for East Belfast males than for any other groups studied, and the range of environments in which backing operates is extended to voiceless stops amongst younger East Belfast males.
It appears to be inner East Belfast (Ballymacarrett) that provides the model for working-class speech in the city (L. Milroy,(1980), 1987); this is represented by the (relatively) fully employed Protestant population of East Belfast.
Both /a/ backing and /Ε/; raising are relatively recent phenomena in Belfast (but see below), and both are associated with a background in Scots.
Patterson's account of Belfast shows characteristics of conservative rural Scots lexical distribution, much of which appears to have been residual and is now obliterated by restructuring.
However, lengthening and raising of /ε/; and /a/-backing are modern Scots.
Gregg's (1972) account of Ulster Scots gives overwhelmingly back realizations of /a/ and describes /ε/; as often long in realization (contrast the very short low realizations in conservative Belfast vernacular, such as[stap, dzat]for step, jet ).
Similarly, /a/ backing seems to be a very general modern Scots feature (Lass, 1976).
East Belfast adjoins the Ulster-Scots region of North Down (where backing is strong), whereas West Belfast points south-west down the Lagan Valley, the speech of which is Mid-Ulster with less Scots influence; furthermore, immigration to West Belfast is recent and is largely from a Mid- West-Ulster non-Scots hinterland.
Present day quantitative studies in Lurgan, a small country town south-west of Belfast in the Lagan Valley, confirm the existence of an /a/ system with little backing (front vowels have  been noted in that area even before [r]and finally), which is quite similar to Patterson's (1860) account of Belfast in this respect (Pitts, 1982).
4.7 Social Network Structure and Speaker Innovation: an Analysis of /a/ and /Ε/s In addition to the variables of age, sex and status, a further social variable associated with a speaker's degree of integration into his close-knit community appears to affect the probability of his being linguistically innovative with respect to choice of vowel variants.
This variable is social network .
A major point emerging from our analysis of language/network relationships is that the variable network needs to be considered in relation to the variable sex of speaker .
Indeed, as Gumperz has remarked (1982: 71), the network variable is in general closely associated with many others, including generation cohort, geographical location, and social status.
Thus, our next task here it to pick out briefly the relevant parts of our analysis of the social distribution of innovatory realizations of /a/ and /Ε/,; as identified in section 4.6.
First of all, realizations of /a/ and /Ε/; are strongly affected by the variable sex of speaker .
Thus, although incoming variants of both vowels appear to have originated in the same hinterland Scots dialect, each has assumed a diametrically opposed social value in its new urban setting.
Raised variants of /Ε/; are, in the low-status inner city, associated particularly with women and with careful speech styles.
They are also associated generally with outer-city speech, and data collected by survey methods confirm that the higher the status of the speaker, the more likely he is to use raised variants (see J. Milroy et al., 1983).
Different levels of use according to sex of speaker are particularly evident in Ballymacarrett, where it appears to be younger female speakers who are most strongly associated with the incoming raised variants.
The incoming variants of /a/ show an almost perfectly converse pattern of social distribution.
High levels of backing are associated with males (particularly Ballymacarrett males, although levels in other inner-city areas are still quite high) and with casual styles appropriate  to interaction between areas.
The most extremely backed variants do not appear at all in outer-city speech.
Interestingly, the sex-differentiation pattern across the three inner-city areas is not as consistent for /a/ as it is for /Ε/; there is some indication that the young Clonard women are increasing their use of back realizations when compared with other female groups (see table 4.10).
They also use these variants more than their male counterparts, although they follow the expected sex-differentiation patterns with respect to other phonological variables (see chapter 6 for a discussion of the Clonard pattern).
In summary, then, it appears that incoming variants of /a/ are associated with core Belfast vernacular, while incoming variants of /Ε/; are associated with careful higher-status speech.
If we look at the relationship between speaker-choice of variant and individual network structure, the picture becomes even more complicated.
With respect to both vowels, choice of variant shows a correlation with personal network structure in some subsections of the inner-city communities; but the details of this correlation are quite different for each vowel.
The vowel /a/ is particularly sensitive to variation according to the network structure of the speaker; but women appear to correlate their choice of variant more closely with their personal network structure than do men.
This means that among women a relatively large amount of /a/ backing is more likely to be associated with a high level of integration into the network than is the case among men — a relationship analysed by Spearman's Rank Order Correlation (L. Milroy, 1987: 155).
Although, as we have noted, women are much less likely than men to select back variants of /a/, this generally lower level of use does not prevent individual women from varying their realization of /a/, within the female norms, according to their social network structure.
Thus, the degree of fit between phonological choice and network structure may be seen as an issue quite separate from the absolute level of use of a particular range of variants.
We may thus argue that /a/ functions for women as a network marker to a greater extent than it does for men; by this we mean that there is for them a higher correlation between choice of variant and network structure, a tendency to select relatively backed variants being associated with higher levels of integration into the community.
When we look at the relationship between choice of /Ε/; realization and individual social network structure, we find a pattern emerging  converse to the one described for /a/; recall also that the incoming variants of the two vowels showed an almost converse distribution with regard to status, sex of speaker and speech styles.
Most importantly, there appears to be no tendency at all for women to use /Ε/; as a network marker in the sense described above; but there is a significant correlation between network scores of male speakers (particularly young male speakers) and choice of /Ε/; realization.
A tendency to select relatively low (conservative) variants is associated with a relatively high level of integration into the community.
This complex relationship between network structure, sex of speaker and language use is summarized in table 4.11.
However, our interest here is in a generalization which we are now able to make concerning on the one hand the relationship between language and network structure, and on the other the social identity of the innovating group.
In the case of both /Ε/; and /a/ it is the persons for whom the vowel has less significance as a network marker who seem to be leading the linguistic change.
It is as if absence of this language/network relationship (a relationship that fulfils a cohesive social function) enables a particular social group to adopt the role of linguistic innovators.
This appears to be the case regardless of whether the innovation is evaluated by the wider urban community as being of high or of low status.
For although it is clear that /ε/; raising is diffusing on a much broader social front than /a/ backing, the generalization still seems to hold true that it is those persons in the inner city for whom the vowel functions less clearly as a network marker who are the principal innovators in their own communities.
Table 4.11 Contrasting patterns of distribution of two vowels involved in change, according to sex of speaker, relative frequency of innovatory variants and level of correlation with network strength.
It is important to note that even though back variants of /a/ are strongly emblematic of vernacular speech, they are nevertheless spreading to higher-status groups in the wider community.
But this diffusion is being implemented in a manner very different from that affecting /Ε/.g We have noted that [Ε]raising is characteristic both of low-status female speech and more generally of higher-status speech.
The diffusion of [Ε]raising on this wide social front is confirmed both by linguistic survey data and by more detailed outer-city community studies.
We noticed in section 4.4 that, by way of contrast, higher-status Belfast speakers avoid both extreme front and extreme back realizations, as they converge around cardinal vowel 4 in the middle of the phonetic range.
However, a very interesting group of young, male, middle-class speakers can be identified in the sample of speakers studied in the survey.
They also show the characteristic middle-class tendency to converge around a limited phonetic area, with relatively little conditioned variation.
However, phonetically, the point at which they converge is further back than that characteristic of older middle-class speakers.
It appears, therefore, that the mechanism of diffusion associated with each of the vowels is different.
Raised variants of /Ε/; are apparently spreading in a linguistically ordered way, with ‘long’ environments affected first.
For many outer-city and middle-class speakers, a raised vowel is already categorical in all environments.
Although back variants of /a/ appear to be diffusing historically and laterally (through the low-status inner-city communities) in a linguistically order manner parallel to the processes affecting /Ε/,; the mechanism of diffusion upwards (socially) through the community is quite different.
What seems to be involved here is a ‘drift’ phonetically to the back of the characteristic middle-class realization.
The data presented here suggest that social network structure is implicated in processes of linguistic change in at least two ways.
First, a strong close-knit network may be seen to function as a conservative force, resisting pressures to change from outside the network.
Those speakers whose ties are weakest are those who approximate least closely to vernacular norms, and are most exposed to pressures for change originating from outside the network.
Second, a detailed sociolinguistic analysis of [Ε]raising and [a]backing — processes which have a common dialectal point of origin  but have taken on very different social values in their new urban context — suggests that the vernacular speakers associated most strongly with the innovation are in each case those for whom the vowel functions least prominently as a network marker.
It is as if a strong relationship between the network structure of a given group and choice of phonetic realization of a particular vowel disqualifies that group from fulfilling the role of innovators with respect to that vowel.
Conversely, it may be the case that dissolution of the language/network relationship with respect to a group of speakers is a necessary condition for that group to fulfil the role of linguistic innovators.
4.8 Concluding Comments
We shall return to the question of linguistic innovation in chapter 6.
In this chapter we have been concerned with interpreting patterns of variation in speech communities with reference to the norms that can be shown to exist at varying levels of abstraction and generality.
We have also been concerned with locating patterns of change in relation to the social variables of sex and network, in particular.
In this discussion, however, we have found it necessary to turn to ‘real-time’ evidence (Patterson, 1860; Staples, 1898) in order to help us to locate the direction of change.
It is this time-depth that will interest us in chapter 5, in which we turn to evidence for vernacular variation in earlier English.
5
On the Time-depth of Variability in English
5.0 Introduction
My purpose in this chapter is to extend the scope of the argumentation developed in chapter 4 by projecting a variationist view on to past states of language change and variation.
The variationist account developed so far is built on the axiom that language is variable at all times.
The potential for change is therefore always present in variation, and may appear as a progressively greater or lesser favouring by the speech community of particular linguistic variants from among the variants that are available in the community at some particular time: to that extent change can be said to consist of change in community norms.
In this chapter I shall be concerned with the description and interpretation of past states of language, bearing in mind that these were variable states, and with ‘the use of the present to explain the past’.
However, although I am proposing a variationist view of language change, I have to deal with this in a context where the dominant tendency has been to focus on uniform states (Weinreich, Labov and Herzog, 1968).
In practice, the kind of uniform state that historical scholars have had in mind has frequently been the uniform standard language; for this reason it is appropriate to start with some comments on the tendency to envisage the history of English as a unilinear history of the standard language.
5.1 The Consequences of Standardization: 1 Projecting Backwards
We noted in chapter 2 that traditional accounts of language history from around 1550 have tended to be unidimensional and convergent.
We also noted, in chapter 3, that it can be misleading to apply the norms of mainstream and centralized varieties to the description of divergent language states.
Thus, just as it is dangerous to superimpose standard-based analyses on a present-day vernacular, so it must be at least equally dangerous to do this in dealing with past states, which are of course also divergent.
Indeed, the limitations of historical databases (noted in chapter 2) would seem to make it considerably more dangerous.
Despite this, standard-based interpretations have been used so frequently in diachronic description that they have greatly affected the conceptualization of language history that we inherit from older generations of scholars.
These scholars tended — seemingly without giving much thought to the matter — to accept the standard ideology and the doctrine of uniformity that is associated with it; indeed, as we have noticed in chapter 3, they were also influenced by ideological positions which they believed to be ‘common sense’.
To H. C. Wyld, for example— surely the best historian of English — it probably seemed to be common sense to believe that RP was the most important accent of Modern English, and that a historical account of English pronunciation should therefore be, in effect, a history of RP.
But only in certain areas of historical linguistic research is it appropriate to use standardization and ‘the standard language’ as our main reference point and focus of interest, and sound-change is not one of these areas.
It is justified to use the standard language in this way if our primary interest is in those developments that themselves largely depend on the standard ideology (J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1985a), for example, elaboration of vocabulary and certain developments in clausal syntax, because literacy — and hence standardization — are plainly involved in these, and their role can be investigated.
Indeed it is possible that we do not understand these things very well unless standardization is taken into account.
But it is a different story when we focus on phonological change.
As Dr Johnson observed: ‘sounds are too volatile and subtile for legal restraints’(Bolton, 1966: 152), and the history of English phonology is not a history of the standard at all, but a history of vernaculars.
Thus, the most general consequence of concentrating on standard English here is that a multidimensional history of phonology is made to appear as unidimensional — it becomes ‘a single-minded march’ towards RP and standard English (Lass, 1976, xi).
This unidimensionality is imposed on history by a backward projection of present-day standard phonology on to the past, and according to the theory of language standardization that we have tentatively advanced elsewhere (J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1985a), it can be seen as an attempt to historicize the standard language — to create a past for it and determine a canon , in which canonical forms are argued for and unorthodox forms rejected.
This in itself is part of the process of legitimization of the standard language, in which the accepted norms are determined, not primarily by consensus amongst speakers, but by legislation.
But the tendency to project backwards in a single (standard-based) dimension can be seen in the work of many scholars, and it has two consequences that are of interest here.
The first of these consequences relates to our knowledge of the structural forms of language in older stages of English.
The linguistic forms that are recorded in handbook accounts of change are, for the most part, those that lead to present RP, and not usually those that lead to other modern accents of English; as we shall notice below, the latter forms are often explicitly rejected from the historical account.
Furthermore, when dates are suggested for changes in these forms, they are usually given, without comment, as the dates at which the changes took place in this standard variety or its unilinear precursor, and not the dates at which they might have taken place in some other variety.
Despite this, however, they are then usually cited as the dates at which the changes took place ‘in English’.
Let us consider a simple example.
In many historical accounts, it is stated that late ME [a]developed into [ae]in the early seventeenth century (it does not matter here what date is cited; what is important is simply that a relatively exact date is cited).
However, it appears that this change must relate to certain dialects of Southern British English at that date, and not necessarily to other dialects.
After the given date, the same change may well have diffused to other dialects that were not affected at first, and Labov's well-known work (for example , 1980) on short /a/ in the northern United States suggests that this EModE change is still in progress  there today.
So — strictly speaking — it is not correct to say that it ‘happened’ in the seventeenth century and to leave it at that.
This caution is all the more necessary when we realize that there are varieties in which this change has not yet taken place, more than three centuries later, and that there are yet other varieties in which different changes have taken place.
Lowland Scots and Ulster Scots dialects, for example, have had backing of [a], and we have to work out from residues that in some ancestral forms of these, there may also have been front-raising (Lass, 1976; J. Milroy, 1981; and see chapter 4.6 and 4.7, above, and section 5.7, below).
Thus, in general, it seems that backward projection on to historical states of language has tended to be based on present-day standard English and SBE, rather than other dialects, and as in the examples cited from Dobson (below) there has been a tendency to think of a phonemic set (such as short /a/) as being invariant or nearly invariant within itself.
But what is important here is that where allophonic variation in a phoneme class is discussed in the main handbooks and histories, this is usually variation that leads to a present-day characteristic of the standard variety.
Typically, the changes discussed include such examples as the lengthening and backing process that led to ‘broad’[a]in the RP class of dance, path and the rounding after [w]that led in mainstream accents to present-day wasp, swan (many British English dialects do not have either the ‘broad’[a]or rounding after [w]).
The moral of all this, of course, is that, as language is variable at all times, there is something unsatisfactory about applying a unilinear and uniform-state style of interpretation to an account of language history.
This seems to suggest that EModE was consciously directing itself towards modern RP — in a state of ‘becoming’ RP, so to speak.
The second consequence of this unilinearity is that the idea of the standard is projected backwards on to states of language and society in which that idea may not have existed, or — if it did exist — may have been different in important ways from the idea of the standard as it exists today.
We can demonstrate this backward projection of the idea of the standard by referring to the influential work of E. J. Dobson on EModE pronunciation.
Dobson (1955, 1968) continues the tradition of his predecessor, Wyld, in focusing very closely on the history of ‘standard’ English.
It is pronunciation that Dobson is interested in, and the EModE phonological standard is referred to very frequently in terms that  suggest that such an entity had some real existence at that time.
Sometimes there are several references to the standard on one page, for example: ‘ME a had become [ae]in…less careful Standard English in the late sixteenth century…
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries there were two pronunciations of ME a in use in Standard English’(1968 II: 548).
These comments do not seem to be based primarily on the notion of standardization as a process (J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1985a) that might have been beginning to have an effect about this time: they present the standard language as a coherent entity — a variety , like any other variety.
But they do make sociolinguistic assumptions: in context it is clear that they also assume the early development of a socially elite variety, and we can see from the first sentence of the quotation that ‘carefulness’ is probably also involved.
But, although these concepts (standardness, eliteness, carefulness) are of different orders (and we shall return to these distinctions), Dobson does not apparently see any reason to keep them separate.
What is more interesting here, however, is the method of reasoning by which Dobson reaches his conclusions on how EModE pronunciation is to be codified and legitimized as part of the canon.
It is wise to bear in mind that similar reasoning has been used by many others — so much so that much of our supposed ‘knowledge’ of the history of English phonology is filtered through this kind of reasoning.
Essentially, any attested forms that can be characterized as ‘vulgar’ or ‘dialectal’are rejected, much as the apocryphal books of the Bible are rejected.
For example, Dobson notes that one source (Thomas Pery)‘shows the vulgar raising of ME a to [e]’.
This, according to Dobson, is not surprising because Pery's speech ‘was clearly Cockney…
The evidence of such a writer does not relate to educated StE’(1968 II: 551).
On the same page, evidence from the Paston Letters is rejected as ‘dialectal’, and the Diary of Henry Machyn is rejected on the grounds that Machyn was a Yorkshireman.
Dobson seems to be quite sure of this, but Machyn was almost certainly a Londoner, and his Diary is one of the most valuable primary sources for the study of EModE London pronunciation.
But as he was not an upper-class Londoner, we can guess that his testimony would have been rejected in any case.
Perhaps the most startling piece of reasoning occurs in Dobson's long argument against accepting early ‘occasional spelling’ evidence for raising of [a, ae]to [Ε].
It goes as follows (1968 II: 549):
The most important objection, and it alone is a decisive one, must be that no Englishman could conceivably use e as a means of representing [ae].
It may seem natural to a foreign scholar [presumably Zachrisson: JM]to suppose that the sound [ae]…might be spelt e ; but it is little short of incredible that native English-speaking scholars [presumably Wyld: JM]should have accepted this view.
No English-speaking child learning to spell…would write ket for [kaet]; the distinction between [ae]and [e]is an absolute one for him (since otherwise he could not distinguish, for example,man from men )…
But clearly this is not decisive, as no evidence is given to prove the negative — that English speakers do not ‘confuse’[Ε]with [ae, a].
In fact, native speakers do overlap here; they do have differential phonological rules controlling the distribution of /a/ and /Ε/,; and they do make spelling mistakes involving a and e .
Furthermore, it is likely that the allophonic distribution of these sounds in EModE was quite different from the RP distribution today, and that the doctrine of (retrospective) phonemic purity (as displayed in the remark about man and men ) is therefore inappropriate (supporting examples from the Belfast projects are cited in chapter 4.6 and below).
Moreover, it is also certain that English-speaking scholars do not have reliable retrospective intuitions about EModE pronunciation any more than they have reliable intuitions about divergent states at the present day.
There is no reason to think that their intuitions about /a/ are necessarily better than those of foreign scholars.
So this elaborate argument has no reliable foundation: in short, it is wrong.
But it is of great interest, because it demonstrates a familiar mode of argumentation that has been more widely used in historical descriptions and that can be found in many places, and I shall comment on a similar case in ME below.
The reasoning is not aimed at supporting a positive argument: it is negative and adversarial, and aimed at rejecting the arguments of other scholars and at excluding evidence that cannot easily be accommodated into a unilinear historical canon.
The underlying idea is simply that some forms are ‘genuine’ and some are not.
Ultimately, it does not matter very much what arguments are used to reject evidence: the point is that all possible post hoc arguments must be marshalled to defend one's position against other scholars: the more arguments that can be used, the better.
In this case the immediate position defended (contra the work of Wyld and Zachrisson) is that orthoepic evidence is better  than other evidence, such as‘occasional spellings’(Wyld, 1936), but the underlying assumption (which is more relevant here) is that it is possible to write a continuous unilinear history of ‘standard’ English pronunciation.
It is certainly true that some of the processes associated with standardization (on which see Haugen, 1972; Leith, 1980; J. Milroy and L. Milroy, 1985a) were well under way around 1600 (elaboration of function, use of a supra-regional writing system), but it looks as if some of them were still at the stage of being localized developments associated with the establishment of consensus on local norms, and this applies particularly to pronunciation, which is the level of language that is least uniform.
In the phonetic/phonological dimension, I do not think we should speak too readily of Early Modern ‘Standard’ English.
Perhaps I can make this clear by distinguishing tentatively between the notion of prestige and the notion of standard language .
5.2 Prestige Norms and Standard Norms
A standard variety or form is not conceptually the same thing as a prestige variety or form (on prestige, see J. Milroy, 1989): the main linguistic symptom of standardization is invariance.
Standardization comes about for functional reasons, and its effect is to make a language serviceable for communicating decontextualized information-bearing messages over long distances and periods of time.
In this respect its functions differ greatly from those of vernaculars (recall our discussion of functions in chapter 2).
It is imposed through its use in administrative functions by those who have political power.
Once it spreads into other functions, it acquires what we usually call ‘prestige’, in the sense that those who wish to advance in life consider it to be in their interests to use standard-like forms.
Prestige, however, is a different concept altogether, as it can be subjectively attached by speakers to forms and varieties which are very distant from, and in conflict with, the codified norms of the standard.
In recent years, Arab linguists (Abdel Jawad, 1987; Alahdal, 1989) have found it difficult to reconcile the concepts of ‘standard’ and ‘prestige’, because rural norms that are identical to standard Arabic are shown to be dispreferred in favour of urban ‘non-standard’forms.
Our own work and that of Trudgill (1986a) has tended towards very similar conclusions.
In this context, the well-known late sixteenth-century comments about the best English being spoken in the London area should be understood for what they are, and not necessarily as a sign of standardized pronunciation.
They arise from a consciousness of the development of a stable (but variable) vernacular norm in London, knowledge that its norms differ from those of other varieties, and a belief in the superiority of London norms over those of other regions.
What we are dealing with here is sociolinguistic: the development of supra-local regional and social attitudes to language.
What we are not dealing with is a fully-fledged ‘standard’ pronunciation that can then be most usefully described in terms of a unilinear history since that time.
If we do think in this unilinear way, we will be inclined to dismiss or devalue evidence that is important for our understanding of language history, just as some of our predecessors have done.
In order to understand the history of so-called standard English pronunciation, therefore, we need to assume — paradoxically — that there is no such thing.
Standardization is not primarily about varieties of language, but about processes.
Therefore, it must be treated as a process with an underlying socio-political motivation, which attempts to promote uniformity and suppress variability for reasons that are considered functional.
Similarly, the standard can be regarded as the ultimate in the development of a supra-local norm of language.
If we take this point of view, it seems that we will gain a better understanding of the history of what is usually called standard English, because we will be able to separate out those issues that primarily involve the development of standard (prescriptive or codified) norms from those that do not.
The history of pronunciation is one of those issues that do not primarily involve standardization, because it is about the history of speech in face-to-face interaction and because standardization has always had less effect on pronunciation than on other linguistic levels.
The history of standard pronunciations is not therefore something that we can usefully chart in a unilinear temporal continuum, as though co-existing varieties had no role except to ‘feed’ the standard ‘variety’from time to time.
This is an oversimplification — and a distortion — of language history.
Bearing these points in mind, the remainder of this chapter consists chiefly of a discussion of backward projection of variability, including case-studies from my own research.
I shall start by  considering the effects of the standard ideology on analyses of Middle English and go on to review aspects of variation in Middle English.
5.3 The Consequences of Standardization: 2 Variation in Middle English
One of the advantages of studying Middle English is that its written forms are highly variable.
Before that time — in late Old English — the West Saxon literary standard was well established, and afterwards — from around 1550 — most printed documents appear in a (relatively) standardized form.
The diversity of Early ME, however, is so great that — apart from the so-called AB Language — no two substantial literary documents are in exactly the same ‘dialect’.
If we compare two twelfth-century texts, such as the Peterborough continuation of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (East Midland) and Layamon's Brut (South-west Midland), we could not be blamed for believing that they are in different languages.
The differences between them are of the same order as the differences between modern Dutch and standard German: the Brut retains the OE case-inflexions and grammatical gender, whereas the Peterborough Chronicle , even though it is an earlier document, has lost most of these.
But not only is there considerable divergence between different texts, there is also normally great variability (particularly in spelling and inflexional forms)within the texts.
Thus, ME language states, being so variable, should in principle be suited to the same kind of analysis that we use in present-day social dialectology, and by using variationist methods we should be able to explore at least some of the constraints on variation that might have existed in ME.
In a present-day community, these constraints can be observed in spoken language: in ME we must locate these constraints initially through the writing system.
We can briefly demonstrate this point by comparing a modern case with a medieval case.
Suppose we show that in a present-day vernacular there is structured variation in verb-forms of the type he does/he do (see Cheshire, 1982, for a relevant study), with one form perhaps being preferred in formal styles and the other in casual styles: we may also — by comparing the speech of different social groups and age-groups — show that one form is progressing at the expense of the other.
As it happens, ME texts also frequently exhibit variation in  verbal inflexions.
Suppose, for example, a text (such as the Bestiary : thirteenth century, East Anglia) exhibits 3rd singular verb-form variation in -es ,-ep (such as standes ,standep ) and syncopated forms (such as stant ): this may indicate that the text is composite and has been copied by scribes from different dialect areas (for discussions of these scribal questions, see especially McIntosh, Samuels and Benskin, 1986; Laing, 1989; McIntosh and Wakelin, 1989).
But it could also be the case that all three forms (or perhaps two of them) were current in the underlying dialect of the scribe (or of the author), or — more properly — of the speech community to which he belonged.
Indeed, as the writing system was not standardized, it is likely that variation of this kind would enter more readily into the texts than it would today, and that it may therefore be possible by comparing texts to trace the pattern by which one variant recedes and another spreads.
However, we have to bear in mind that, because of the complexity of scribal histories and the fact that the provenance (date and place of writing) of the text is not usually divulged, the medievalist faces a number of difficulties that the present-day dialectologist does not face (for discussion see McIntosh, Samuels and Benskin, 1986 I; J. Milroy, forthcoming), but if these can be solved, the general similarity that I have suggested here is still valid.
Variability in ME, however, has sometimes been perceived as an obstacle rather than a resource, and as a result information that might be of some value to the historian has been rejected from the canon.
It is interesting that although no one suggests that there actually was a ‘standard English’ in Early ME times, the doctrine of uniformity has nevertheless been applied to ME.
In editorial and descriptive commentary, there are many comments about chaotic or ‘lawless’ spellings (for example, Sisam, 1915: xxxvii) and even editorial judgements to the effect that a given scribe could not have been a native English speaker, so variable is his spelling (Hall, 1920 II: 637).
This last judgement (although it is commonly made) is speculative, of course, as the scribe is normally anonymous, but it is analogous to rejecting live speakers from a random sample on the grounds that they do not speak as we think they ought to speak, or rejecting attested spoken forms on the grounds that they are not what we would expect in some particular location.
However, judgements of this kind can effectively block further investigation of variable constraints in the texts in question: they can be dismissed as ‘corrupt’ or ‘unreliable’specimens of language.
One way in which variation of this kind is discounted is  to claim that the scribe was Anglo-Norman, or that the spellings are Anglo-Norman and therefore not valid evidence for the history of English.
The Anglo-Norman argument goes back to Skeat (1897), who specified particular features of spelling as Anglo-Norman.
These are discussed by J. Milroy (1983), and it is noticeable that many of these features, such as w for wh (in words of the type what, which ), have reflexes in later English pronunciation.
The comments above by Sisam (1915) and Hall (1920) arise directly from Skeats's views, and, although these comments were made a long time ago, it would be a mistake to think that the Anglo-Norman argument has now been abandoned.
Clark (1990) has recently referred to the ‘myth’ of the Anglo-Norman scribe and has collected a large number of comments from early in the century up until very recently from the work of distinguished scholars, in which attested forms are typically said to be ‘Anglo-Norman’and therefore rejected.
As a result of this ‘myth’, however, the very fact of variable spelling in an Early Middle English document becomes in itself a reason for concluding that the scribe was Anglo-Norman and therefore that his spelling can be corrected by editors and ignored by historical commentators and dialectologists.
Even the work of scribes writing centuries after the Conquest has been dismissed in this way, seemingly mainly because it is variable , and not because we can (usually) know whether the scribe was a first-language speaker of Anglo-Norman, or whether it would have been relevant if he had been.
Leaving aside this argument, however, we must also recognize that scholars have sometimes been more generally influenced by the notion that written language should be uniform, even in a period in which it plainly was not uniform, and they sometimes appear to chide the scribes for spelling variably.
Scragg (1974: 26), for example, comments that ‘the existence of regional orthographies, and their confusion in the copying of texts resulted in a very lax attitude to spelling in most scribes.’
In the context, this ‘very lax attitude’ seems to be measured against circumstances (such as late Old English or the present day) in which there is a uniform standard of spelling: thus, what this really means is that in Early ME there was no uniform standard, and indeed Scragg adds that these scribes had ‘no conception of a spelling standard’.
But he further comments — much more dubiously — that they used ‘variant forms at will’.
However, if the scribes really had used variants ‘at will’, we would actually be unable  to read the texts, as there would be no system in the spelling; but there must always be some order in any spelling system that we can read, even if it is a variable system.
Therefore, the scribes did not spell ‘at will’, but according to variable (and historically mixed) conventions.
It is our task to attempt to specify the constraints on spelling under which they were working, always admitting that even after we have done this, there may well be residues of apparent randomness that we cannot explain.
5.4 Orderly Variation in Spelling
The existence of variable orthographies is an advantage to the ME dialectologist in exactly the same way that the existence of spoken variation is an advantage in present-day research.
Although the scribes no doubt made ‘errors’, it should be possible to investigate variable texts in extenso to determine the extent to which variation in spelling (or indeed in other linguistic dimensions) is in fact orderly, and whether this variation can help us to work out what might have been happening in spoken English at the time.
As an example, let us briefly consider some aspects of spelling in Havelok the Dane .
The Havelok text (Bodleian MS Laud Misc 108) is one of those sources that has been traditionally thought to be the work of an Anglo-Norman scribe (Sisam, 1915) on the grounds that the spelling is highly variable in the respects specified by Skeat and indeed in some other respects also.
However, although it doubtless contains some forms that are simply ‘errors’, it also exhibits the kind of orderly variation that could be captured within a variable rule framework, but in spelling variation rather than phonology.
The scribe does not have a free hand with spelling variation: there are constraints on the variants he uses.
OE post-vocalic /ht, xt/, for example— in words of the type riht, niht , PresE ‘right, night’— can be represented in the spelling of Havelok by st, ht, th, cht, cth , but not by, for example gt, ght , or by random and unpredictable forms such as tc or m .
The variation is constrained in much the same way as present-day phonological variation in speech communities is observed to be constrained.
For example, we can specify the constraints on /a/ before velars in inner-city Belfast by stating that it can be realized as a mid-front, low mid-front, or low-front vowel, but not as a low-back vowel.
Thus, just  as present-day phonological variation can be used as a clue to change in progress, so it may be possible here to use orthographic variation in the same way.
The spelling variants for OE (ht) overlap with spelling variants for other forms (from different sources in OE), just as phonological variants in present-day studies are found to overlap.
Thus, if we take the realization th , we find that this can be used word-finally, not only for (ht), but also for (t) and (th).
The result of this is that a spelling like with can realize three separate classes: OE wiht ('wight, person'), OE wip ('with'), and OE hwit ('white'), and this of course applies to other items of these types.
To formalize this: the following (OE) classes can appear with final th :
1
Final (post-vocalic) dental fricatives: /τ, η/,; for example with (OE wip PresE with );
2
Final (post-vocalic) dental stop: /t/, for example with (OE hwit , PresE white );
3
Final /ht, xt/: for example,with (OE wiht , PresE wight ).
The potential realizations of these three classes are, however, different:(ht) items can also appear with st, cht , etc. (such as wicht ): the other two classes cannot;(th) items can also appear with final p, ta;(such as wip ): the other two classes cannot;(t) items can appear with final single t (such as wit, whit ): the other two classes cannot.
Thus, ‘with, wight’ cannot appear as wit , whereas ‘white’can.
To this extent, therefore, the variation is constrained, and not random.
Applying the principle that change in progress is manifested in variation, let us consider its possible implications for spoken variation in ME.
The study of (ht) in Havelok is of course relevant to the date at which the velar fricative [x]before [t](in right, might , etc.) was lost in English.
The prima facie conclusion to be drawn is that in the variable phonology of the ‘underlying’(East Midland/East Anglian) speech community, loss of the fricative and merger of wight, white , or close approximation and overlap, had already taken place.
It is also possible that in this variable phonology there was some tendency to merge final /?/ with /t/.
If developments of this kind were not in some sense in progress, then there would have been less likelihood of the scribe observing precisely this pattern of orderly spelling variation, because, given the variable state of the orthographic conventions known to him, he could have chosen to vary in other ways.
Of course, it is quite  another matter to go on to argue from this very limited piece of evidence that loss of the fricative in /xt/ was embedded in the English language as a whole as a completed sound-change at this early date.
Yet, if we take this together with the fact that many other forms characteristic of modern English spread in these centuries from the East Midlands and the North, we can advance the hypothesis that this change was in progress in the East Midlands around 1300, and look for further evidence to support or refute this.
If, however, we insist that the scribes were simply careless or poorly acquainted with English, we shall be inclined (as many scholars have been) to reject the evidence and date this sound-change much later — at a time when it was actually completed in ‘standard’ English.
This, of course, will not bring us anywhere near the origin of the change.
Furthermore, bearing in mind the reservations about changes in different varieties that I expressed in section 5.2 above, the early date suggested here for the loss of the velar fricative does not affect the fact that there are dialects of English (in Lowland Scotland) which have not yet lost the fricative.
Loss of the velar fricative is a change that was finally adopted in near-standard vernaculars and formal styles.
ME sources, however, also contain variation that may be relevant to non-standard varieties and casual styles of speech; hence, there may be considerable time-depth to these variables also.
In Section 5.5, therefore, we consider some non-standard examples.
5.5 The Time-depth of Present-day Non-standard Variants
A number of present-day non-standard and casual speech forms appear to be indicated by some features of variable ME spelling.
Some of these are recognized as regional and have been studied as such (for example in Wakelin and Barry, 1968, a study of the voicing of initial fricatives in South-west England): others are more widespread in English.
One of these is ‘final stop deletion’(loss of /t, d/, and sometimes other stops, in final clusters in words such as mist, mend ).
This is today very common in many varieties of English (Guy, 1980; Romaine, 1984a), but not common in careful styles of RP (hence its exclusion from many accounts which claim to be accounts of ‘English’).
The maps of the Linguistic Atlas of Late Medieval English (McIntosh, Samuels and Benskin, 1986) show a distribution of final consonant loss also in medieval written English, and I have noted a number of examples in Havelok and other texts.
Thus, the phenomenon may have been part of variability in English for many centuries — more common perhaps in some dialects than in others, receding at some periods and progressing at others.
Yet, it plays little part in standard accounts of the history of English before about 1600, and in ME stop-deleted forms (such as bes, lan : ‘best, land’) are amongst the forms that are typically corrected by textual editors as errors.
There are other features that may have much earlier origins than is generally believed.
These include: 1) the (casual style)-in' ending on present participles (Houston, 1987; Labov, 1989); 2) certain widespread socially or regionally marked alternations in modern English, such as‘stopping’ of dental fricatives in, for example thick, that , and [h]-dropping.
I shall now consider in some detail this last phenomenon — variable loss of [h]in stressed syllables initially before vowels.
I selected this particular variable as a case-study for a number of reasons.
The chief one is that it is a very salient stereotype popularly characterized as non-standard or ‘vulgar’, and is extremely widespread in England and Wales.
The map (figure 5.1) shows that [h]is preserved in rural dialects only in the extreme north-east, and in parts of East Anglia and the West Country; but, if anything, the map probably understates the extent of [h]-loss.
Most large urban areas south of the River Tees have considerable [h]-loss in vernacular speech, and this includes even Norwich in East Anglia-an area shown by the map as, at least partly,[h]-ful.
As Trudgill (1974) has shown (see figure 5.2),[h]-loss in Norwich is socially stratified, with lower-class speakers tending strongly to loss of [h], despite the fact that surrounding rural dialects tend to preserve [h].
In general,[h]-loss is well established in urban vernaculars in England and Wales; thus, a majority of the population of the country have (categorical or variable) loss of [h].
However, it is also well known that social stereotyping of [h]-loss does not apply in Scotland, Ireland, North America and colonial Englishes generally, for the reason that [h]is stable in stressed syllables in these varieties (although [h]-loss is found in English-based Creoles).
In this sense, the English-speaking world can be divided into two broad speech-communities: one in which [h]-dropping is widespread and has social significance, and one in which it is so rare (if it happens at all) that it is socially irrelevant.
Figure 5.1 h -pronouncing areas of England.
(Adapted from Orton et al.1963–9)
Although scholars have noticed instability in initial h spellings in early English, the traditional view is that there is little reliable evidence for ‘[h]-dropping’ in English much before the end of the eighteenth century, and earlier instability in spelling is usually dismissed as unreliable in handbook accounts.
One reason given for the alleged lateness of the phenomenon is its apparent absence from colonial English (Wyld, 1927: 220).
From a variationist point of view, however, this is not necessarily conclusive, as language is variable at all times; thus, it could be the case that modern [h]-ful and [h]-less varieties are each equally derived from varieties in which [h]-loss was  variable — not categorically absent or categorically present.
In any case, colonial forms of English may have undergone change in (h); for example, there is evidence that, although Australasian English is [h]-ful now, it used to have [h]-dropping (Trudgill, 1986a: 138–9).
The evidence of variable spelling in ME seems to point to an early origin, and if the arguments for this can be sustained, they have a clear relevance to understanding historical patterns of variation.
Figure 5.2 Variable (h) by class and style in Norwich (LWC/MWC/UWC = lower/middle/upper working class; LMC/MMC = lower/middle middle class; WLS = word-list style; RPS = reading-passage style; FS = formal (conversational) style; CS = casual (conversational) style).
(Adapted from Trudgill, 1974)
In modern times [h]-dropping — like -in' for (ing)— is extremely widespread and well established: as we have noted above, it is not confined to a particular region (as voicing of initial fricatives is, for example).
In fact, most people in England and Wales drop their [h]s to a greater or lesser extent.
Therefore, if the origin of the phenomenon is as recent as the late eighteenth century, it is difficult to explain how it could have become so geographically widespread in so short a time: it was already highly salient and overtly stigmatized by the latter half of the nineteenth century (for some citations see Phillipps, 1984, 136–9).
Consider the following comment by the linguistic scholar Oliphant (1873: 226), made in the context of objecting to ‘Americanisms’:
I ought in all fairness to acknowledge that no American fault comes up to the revolting habit…of dropping or wrongly inserting the letter h.
Those whom we call ‘self-made men’ are much given to this hideous  barbarism…
Few things will the English youth find in after-life more profitable than the right use of the aforesaid letter.
Whatever we may think of Oliphant's views, we have to assume there would be little point in attacks on [h]-dropping by the educated elite unless it was highly salient and widespread, and it is reasonable to assume for these reasons that it probably has quite a long history in the language.
The late eighteenth-century evidence adduced by Wyld and others is therefore likely to indicate the date at which it had become stigmatized as a ‘vulgarism’, rather than its date of origin.
By that time — and not necessarily before —[h]-loss was recognized as an identifying characteristic of certain salient social groupings.
The most important reason for questioning the traditional view, however, is that variation in initial h usage is a very common pattern in ME texts.
Whereas we have discussed orderly variation in spelling (above) by looking at distribution within a single text, the evidence for early [h]-loss depends on spelling variation across a number of texts.
Many Early ME sources exhibit variable use of the letter h in syllable-initial positions before vowels (that is, in such words as hate, hopper ).
Sometimes it is omitted where it is historically expected to be present, and sometimes it is added where it is not expected.
This pattern of variation is widespread in Early ME, and the maps of the Linguistic Atlas of Late Medieval English also show a distribution at later periods.
It has been very widely noted by careful editors such as Hall (1920), and (although the atlas map shows some West Midland distribution) it seems in the early part of the period to be most common in texts originating in the East Midlands, East Anglia and the South.
It is quite common in southern texts of c. 1200, such as Poema Morale and The Owl and the Nightingale , and in early East Midland/East Anglian texts such as Genesis and Exodus ,King Horn ,Havelok .
It is found in the Otho text of Layamon's Brut , but not in the Caligula text, which is certainly south- west Midland.
It is not characteristic of early texts known to be West Midland, such as those of the Katherine Group.
The geographical distribution of relevant texts from c. 1190–1320 is from Lincolnshire or Norfolk (in the north) to the southern counties, but the instability seems to be greatest in the East Midlands.
Certain later texts, mostly of a non-literary kind, display the same phenomenon.
It is found in Kristensson's (1967) northern onomastic sources in the period 1290–1350 (he notes that it may be ‘Anglo-Norman’), and Wyld  (1927, 1936) documents a number of later examples, from sources that include the Norfolk Gilds (late fourteenth century), The Paston Letters (fifteenth century), and the mid-sixteenth-century Diary of Henry Machyn (for a fuller discussion, see J. Milroy, 1983: 48–9).
In my own investigations of many of these texts, I have noted additional examples.
The following selective lists are from the thirteenth-century Genesis and Exodus (Morris, 1873), which is believed to originate in East Anglia.
They include examples additional to those given by Wyld.
List A documents omission of h , and list B addition of ‘unhistorical’h :
List A a, adde, adden, as, aue, auede, aued, auen, aue (parts of the verb ‘have’: lines 239, 240, 1251, 1505, 1760, 2388, 2425, 2720, and very commonly — considerably more so than forms with h ;algen, aligen ,('hallow'): 258, 918:ail ('hail'): 3066, 3183;ate ('hate'): 373, 3638;alt (< infin ‘hold’): 924;atte  ta;('is called' < OE hatan ): 813;e ('he, they'): 2341, 2708, 4094;egest ('highest'): 143,1224;eld ('held'): 2999;elles ('of hell'): 4157;ere ('of them' < OE heora ): 2855, 3773;eδen ('hence'): 2188;eui ('heavy'): 2559;is ('his'): 482, etc.;opperes ('hoppers', that is, ‘locusts’): 3096;ostel ('hostel', that is , ‘lodging’): 1056;om ('home'): 2270;oten ('called'): 1131.
List B hagte ('wealth'): 431;hagt ('grief'): 486, 2044, 2082;halle ('all'): 2340;ham ('am'): 926;helde (that is,elde : ‘age’): 457, 1527;her ('before'): 801;herf (that is ,erf ‘cattle’): 2991;her  ta; e (that is ,erde : ‘land’): 806;hic ('I'): 34, 2783;his ('is'): 2935;hore (that is ,or : ‘before’): 958;hunframe (unframe ): 554;hunkinde (unkinde ): 534;hunne :('grant'): 2249;hunwreste ('wicked'): 537;hure ('our'): 322, 2206.
The most immediate ‘explanation’ for such substantial instability in the use of h is that syllable-initial [h]was not present, or only variably present, in the speech of the relevant regions.
The letter was, however, present in the orthographic tradition (regardless of the mixed origins of the tradition in Old English, Anglo-Norman and Latin orthography): thus, in the absence of strong orthographic standardization, the scribes would omit it on some occasions and insert it ‘hypercorrectly’ on others.
As instability of h is extremely common, it is remarkable that careful scholars could have been so much aware of this type of evidence, but could nevertheless have rejected it.
Wyld (1936), for example, cites a large number of spellings from around 1200 onwards in which the letter h is ‘wrongly’ omitted or inserted, but concludes  that there is no reliable evidence for ‘the present day vulgarism’before the eighteenth century (p. 296).
Writers of standard handbooks are also inclined to dismiss the early evidence.
Ekwall (1975), citing Walker, notes that [h]-loss might have occurred as early as 1791; Brunner (1963: 5) dismisses early ME spelling evidence with the remark that Anglo-Norman scribes were prone to use initial h ‘incorrectly’.
Dobson is also inclined, for similar reasons, to give the impression that ME evidence for [h]-loss is sporadic and unreliable (see, for example, Dobson, 1968 II: 991).
Many more authorities who accept the same view could be cited.
In fact, the evidence for [h]-loss in the texts I have mentioned above is anything but sporadic.
However, as the citation from Brunner suggests, h-instability is one of the putative ‘Anglo-Norman’ features distinguished by Skeat (1897), and this is another of the reasons why it has been dismissed.
Frequently, this orthographic evidence for variation in Middle English is rejected not on the grounds that the scribe was literally an Anglo-Norman (which is what Skeat argued), but that uses such as variable h are originally scribal importations from French or Latin usage.
However, the origin of scribal habits is not in itself valid proof that variable use of the conventions in written English do not also relate to variable usages in spoken English.
This is because variable scribal usage is likely to be functional in some way, just as spoken variation is functional (as suggested in chapter 2), and the most immediately obvious function of an alphabetic writing system is to relate writing to speech-forms, however complicated this relationship may be.
Thus,especially in a time of unsettled orthography , it is extremely likely that current sound-changes will be admitted into writing, whatever the historical origins of the writing conventions may be.
Moreover, the prima facie evidence for [h]-dropping continues well into EModE — long after there can be any suspicion of direct Anglo-Norman scribal interference.
In addition to the non-literary sources cited above, there is rather strong evidence in Shakespeare and Marlowe — especially in puns of the type air, heir, hair — that [h]-dropping was salient in the speech community: clearly, the puns could not have worked if the ‘groundlings’ had not recognized them (see, for example,Comedy of Errors , III.ii.122–3;Dido and Aeneas , I.i.10).
But as it was accepted into this relatively formal literary genre,[h]-loss seems to have been much less overtly stigmatized than it is today.
All this evidence strongly suggests that (h) has been a variable in English for many centuries:[h]-loss may have gone to completion  in some varieties at particular times and places, but in general speech communities have used the variation over these centuries for stylistic and social marking.
In other words, whatever the linguistic origin of the phenomenon may be — in phonotactic constraints (Lutz, 1985), in rapid speech processes, in language contact, or in a combination of these — variation in (h) has probably had social and stylistic functions in the language for centuries.
We should bear in mind, however, that underlying the ‘colonial’ chronological argument and the Anglo-Norman argument, there is a more fundamental reason why scholars have been so willing to reject the evidence for [h]-loss.
Many historians of English seem to have shared the attitude of Oliphant (above) and have therefore been inclined to think that apparently non-standard linguistic forms are somehow not to be taken seriously as evidence for ‘genuine’ linguistic change.
Even such an excellent scholar as Wyld, who was extremely interested in the social motivations of change, did not give sufficient weight to the evidence for [h]-loss.
What these scholars did was to place their own (negative)evaluations of [h]-loss on to the speech communities of earlier centuries in which evaluations of this phenomenon were not necessarily the same.
It was difficult for them to appreciate that [h]-loss could ever have been anything else but a stigmatized form: in so far as they knew of evidence for it in earlier centuries, they tended to dismiss it, seemingly in the belief that ‘vulgar’ and ‘careless’usage is not implicated in linguistic change.
This attitude to [h]-dropping is, of course, symptomatic of a more general attitude to non-standard English, and it can be seen as an effect of the ‘standard ideology’.
Plainly, there is no compelling linguistic reason why, in a particular language at a particular time, loss of a segment should be considered less beautiful or less ‘correct’ than its insertion.
For example, loss of pre-consonantal [r](as in car, card ) is widespread in many English vernaculars, but it is not stigmatized in southern Britain.
Although it is a consonantal loss, it is not said to be ugly or careless in England generally.
Unlike /h/, however,[r]seems to have been lost quite early in a forerunner of the institutional British accent (RP) at a time when consciousness of the standard ideology was beginning to develop, and it is this difference in the social evaluation of (r) and (h) which seems to be the explanation for dominant attitudes to it.
In dismissing [h]-loss in the manner described, however, scholars may also have dismissed important evidence for the study of how linguistic changes  are implemented and diffused.
It is also relevant to observe, in a wider dimension, that English is the only Germanic language that is widely subject to[h]-loss.
It has also been clearly established that in the course of time evaluation of particular variants can change or even be reversed.
It is therefore most unlikely that present-day stigmatized forms have always been stigmatized, or that present-day elite forms have always been elite.
Even the RP ‘broad’[a](as in path, dance ) seems to have acquired its high evaluation only recently: Mugglestone (1989) cites evidence from the nineteenth century to the effect that it was stigmatized as a vulgarism by some commentators: it looks as though it may have been ‘borrowed’ from a low-status dialect (such as‘Cockney’).
As for[h]-dropping — I have suggested elsewhere (J. Milroy, 1983) that in the Middle Ages it may have been a marker of more cultured speech.
What is clear is that, when compared with literary OE, some varieties of Early ME (including those that show variation in (h)) were contact varieties .
They were spoken in those parts of the country that had been massively subject to Scandinavian settlement in the late OE period, and they were subsequently used in areas where the elite language became Norman French.
It is not impossible that [h]-loss became fashionable because of its loss in French, but this cannot be demonstrated.
However, one outcome of contact is simplification and loss of distinctions, and [h]-loss results in loss of a distinction — as in the pair hall and all .
Thus, the loss of [h]could be associated with the contact situation in general, regardless of the specific properties of the contact languages.
But there is another circumstance that strongly suggests that [h]-dropping was not a low-status feature in ME, and that is its association at that time with East Anglian texts.
Figure 5.1 shows that East Anglia is one of those areas in which the rural dialects have remained generally [h]-ful up to the present day.
The evidence for early loss of [h], however, is quite strongly associated with this part of the country.
The texts of Genesis and Exodus ,Havelok the Dane and certain other Early ME works that I have cited, are almost certainly East Anglian.
As for late ME, among the best sources for variable spelling (including variation in h ) are the Norfolk Gilds (late fourteenth century) and the Paston Letters (fifteenth century, Norfolk).
The Gilds contain records from Norwich,(King's) Lynn and other towns, and these include some quite magnificent spellings such as alpenie ('halfpenny'),hoke lewes ('oak leaves'), and many more.
We might therefore advance the hypothesis that the medieval evidence (unlike the modern dialect evidence for [h]-fulness in Norfolk) is from a relatively high social stratum — this is certainly true of the Paston Letters at the very least — and that [h]-loss was current at that level but not amongst the rural population.
This is the kind of hypothesis that would be suggested by a specifically sociolinguistic interpretation of the evidence, but it is offered here as a suggestion, not as a definite conclusion.
In the following sections, I shall revert to questions that are less socially-oriented than this, but still variationist.
I want to consider how far we can use descriptions of the Belfast and Hiberno-English vowel system to reflect on the past — specifically on aspects of the Early ModE vowel system.
5.6 Projecting Backwards: Vowel Systems
So far we have focused on the time-depth of vernacular variants in English, using (h) as an example and treating it as a binary variable (we have assumed that in such words as hall, hit it is either pronounced or dropped).
In this section I turn to the configuration of vowel systems, and this of course is phonologically more complicated than (h).
As we noticed in chapter 3, vernacular vowel systems such as the Belfast one may display patterns that are not comfortably accounted for by standard or traditional methods.
In particular, traditional descriptive and analytic methods find it difficult to contemplate such phenomena as:(1) close approximation of phones without merger;(2) overlapping allophones;(3) flip-flops, and (4) reversal of merger.
Indeed, in some cases evidence that seems to point to one of these things may be rejected on the grounds that the phenomenon is impossible.
In what follows, I would like to bear in mind two general points.
The first is the difficulty of stipulating when a sound-change is completed (this is amply demonstrated by the history of (h), above), and hence the difficulty of saying precisely what is meant by ‘sound-change’.
The second is the traditional binary distinction between ‘sound-change proper’ and ‘borrowing’: this distinction, or something similar to it, still seems to  be assumed in many orthodox accounts.
That is to say that some changes are believed to arise internally within the system and are motivated by system-internal factors, whereas others are said to arise from the  influence of neighbouring languages or dialects.
Leaving these (and other) theoretical generalizations aside for the moment, we turn first to the history of what is usually known as short /a/ in English, and to possible historical patterns of overlap and merger with /Ε/; and /α/.; In later sections I present a fuller discussion of merger .
It is generally known, of course, that standard English enshrines sporadic residues of approximations between these vowels, for example in doublets of the type strop/strap ,catch/ketch , but there has been a good deal of dispute about EModE evidence for overlap and merger in this part of the vowel-system.
Orthodox accounts, as we have seen, tend to ignore or explain away evidence for variability when it does not have reflexes in present-day RP.
The systematic study of a non-standard system, however, supports the argument that there could have been orderly variation in EModE involving merger and reversal patterns of /a/ and /Ε/;(or /α/); in certain consonantal environments, and suggests that the usual account of the history of /a/ (fronting to [ae]and subsequent split into two RP phonemes) is oversimplified.
Amongst other things, this type of study can contribute to problems in English etymology, for example in dealing with pairs of the type:pack/peck .
The following account will suggest that many such pairs are etymological doublets, and we shall consider this further in an appendix to the chapter.
The history of ModE /a/ is a traditional bone of contention, and views have been expressed on it by a gallery of famous names from Henry Sweet onward (for a review, see Lass, 1976).
Some scholars have argued that despite the front quality of OE /ae/, ME a was a back vowel (or perhaps merely a fully low vowel: it is not always clear what is meant by ‘back vowel’), and on this basis have postulated a change around 1600 from a back (or low) value to front-raised /ae/, which is of course the modern conservative RP value.
Others (such as Lass, 1976) have preferred to argue that a generally front vowel had already existed in ME.
Much of this argumentation is, of course, concerned with very broad states of language, and, as I have pointed out, can apply only at a rather high level of generality, because it is likely that in EModE, as in PresE, there were varying conditioned allophones of /a/ (perhaps some front and some back, or some low and some low-mid).
The regular patterns of variability observable in (a) at the present day suggest this strongly.
In what follows, we focus on one particular modern vowel system, that of Belfast vernacular.
5.7 Orderly Heterogeneity in Vowels: the Low Vowels in Belfast
One of the purposes of the Belfast study of variation in (a) was to project our observations on to past language states in which patterns of heterogeneity must also have existed.
In the event, the inner-city study demonstrated that (a) in this vernacular is phonetically and phonologically much more complicated than standard accounts of EModE /a/ (such as Dobson, 1968).
It is more complicated also than (a) as studied in New York (Labov, 1966), and more complicated than descriptions of /ae/ in present-day RP (Gimson, 1970, etc.).
We noticed the wide range of realizations in chapter 4 (table 4.2, p. 97) and commented on its regularity.
The variation exhibited is constrained within definable limits: following velars predict a front vowel, following voiceless stops predict a low front vowel; fricatives and voiced obstruents allow variation between front and back, but strongly favour backing.
What table 4.2 does not show, however, is that there is also variation in length in the /a/ system, which is equally rule-governed.
As many of the apparent overlaps between the low vowels occur in environments where the vowel is short , a brief review of the vowel-length system is necessary.
Like Scots, the Belfast vowel system does not use length phonemically: most vowels have long and short allophones, and the variation in length can be very marked.
Thus, /a/ in monosyllables such as back, bat, can't (before voiceless stops and before sonorants + voiceless obstruent) is very short, whereas before fricatives and voiced obstruents (as in grass, mad, bag ) it is markedly longer.
We remarked in chapter 3, however, that within the vowel system as a whole (including /a/), length tends to co-vary with quality, that is, long-vowel realizations are usually noticeably qualitatively different from short-vowel allophones of the same phoneme.
Furthermore, whereas the short-vowel allophones commonly exhibit patterns of overlap, merger and near-merger with one another, the long-vowel realizations of different phonemes tend to be much more distinct from one another : short-vowel realizations of /a/ overlap with /Ε/; and /α/; in the same environments (for example , in pet, pat, pot ), whereas the long vowel realizations are fully distinct.
Thus, whereas pairs such as sat/set ,can't/Kent are commonly realized with the same, or very  similar, low-front short vowel, the pairs sand/send ,bad/bed have markedly different vowels, /a/ being long low-back and /Ε/; long mid-front in such pairs.
This commonly results in vowel alternations in morphologically related pairs with /Ε/; and /α/,; as in table 5.1.
Table 5.1
Within the /a/ system, and in terms of its overlap with the other low vowels, the areas most relevant to interpreting EModE data are:(1) the short-vowel environments; and (2) the velar-raising rules.
In section 5.8, we examine these patterns in Belfast vernacular in a degree of time-depth by appealing again to the evidence of Patterson (1860).
5.8 Short /a/ in Belfast Vernacular
One of the most salient characteristics of present-day Belfast vernacular is the rule for raising /a/ to [ae, Ε]before the three velar consonants /k, g, ng/ (these consonants are themselves normally fronted to some degree).
As we noticed in chapter 4.2, this is quite well preserved in BV as a stable marker of membership of inner-city communities.
However, there is also a rule for raising after /k, g/, which predicts that such items as cabbage, castle, cab will appear with front vowels.
Unlike pre-velar raising, post-velar raising is highly recessive.
A common inner-city pattern is for the fronting rule to be superseded by a lowering rule (before voiceless stops and in polysyllables), or a backing rule (in other environments) in the speech of younger speakers.
Thus cab for example will appear as [kΕb]for some speakers on some occasions and [ka.b]for others or on other occasions.
In the community as a whole, therefore, we can speak of  alternation between front-raised values and lowered (mainly backed) values, according to which of the rules is applied.
The ‘change’ here is phonetically sudden, not gradual, and the alternation is age-graded.
However,real-time evidence shows that in nineteenth-century Belfast raising of /a/ was well established both before and after velars: the rules are clearly stated by Patterson (1860) and cited in chapter 4.6.
Patterson attests that /a/ was raised after both velars (/k/ and /g/), and Gregg's (1964) lists for Larne (20 miles north of Belfast) indicate that the same pattern has applied there.
In present-day Belfast, however, we have attested no cases of raising after /g/ or before /r/.
Thus, although Patterson has gellon for ‘gallon’ and care for ‘car’, and although similar pronunciations are heard in Ulster rural dialects, our Belfast data show that the rule has receded in an orderly way through a series of environments.
It now remains as a variable rule after /k/ before all consonants except /r/.
The rule for raising before velars, however, is strong and active and does not seem to have begun to recede lexically: in word-list style (which is usually considered to be formal) it persists much more strongly than post-velar raising; neologisms undergo the rule, and it affects spelling (see the discussion of ‘occasional spellings’ below).
In 1976, for example, I noticed a car-park sign in West Belfast which displayed the legend:NO EXCESS ('no access'), and some of our inner-city informants refused to believe that there is an orthographic item fag ('cigarette') in the language: for them, it was feg .
The fact that velar-raising is, or has been, so well established, bears directly on the question of time-depth.
What we are observing is a late stage in the recession of formerly well-established rules.
And there is one well-known fact of present-day RP and SBE that points to the importance of the velars in the ancestral forms of those dialects also.
Just as the velar environments prevent backing in BV, so they have also prevented rounding after [w]in RP: hence,wax, quack , but want, swat .
This suggests that, as in present BV, so also at some point in the development of SBE, velar environments were fronted and raised ahead of other environments and were not accessible to the back-rounding rule.
However, if raising of /a/ is so well established in BV velar environments, the tendency to front-raising may formerly have been present in both BV and EModE in other environments also, receding from these environments before receding from the velars.
There are indeed indications in Patterson (1860) that raising of /a/ was, or had been, more widespread.
Patterson comments that the sound of e is substituted for a ‘in some places’ in almost every relevant word.
It is not clear what this means, but it is possible today to observe mid-front values of /a/ before all or most consonants in many rural west of Ireland dialects.
We shall see that there are other indications that the Belfast /a/ system was formerly more inclined to the front than it is now, and as we have noted above, the EModE front-raising rule may have affected some dialects later than others.
What we observe in Belfast may therefore be the reflex of a raising rule that was originally ‘metropolitan’ or ‘mainstream’, together with some admixture of Scots raising rules which account for Scots [glΕs, kΕrt]‘glass, cart’, and which are now partly superseded in Scots by lowering and backing rules.
Patterson's evidence plainly indicates that there has been a gradual swing away from front values in the past century or so.
What is relevant to EModE, however, is that Patterson's word-lists suggest that a raising rule still applied in pre-nasal environments (which often have a back vowel today).
Patterson spells many a words with e , and some of these (such as rether ‘rather’) are plainly sporadic residues of rural Scots (which has [Ε, e]in, for example,father, rather, gather and in other pre-dental/ alveolar positions); before nasals, however,e for a is more evident in Patterson.
It appears in polysyllables before single nasals in exemine, Jenuary , and before nasal + voiceless obstruent in demsel, exemple, Entrim ('Antrim'); it also appears in monosyllables before nasal + voiceless obstruent in slent, brench : all of these now have a fully low vowel in Belfast.
We shall see repeatedly in what follows that polysyllables are particularly resistant to change and that a following sonorant + voiceless obstruent is also relatively resistant.
For this reason, Patterson's data (being chiefly polysyllables) most probably attest to a late stage in the loss of raising before nasals, a change that had formerly affected a wider range of environments.
We shall not be surprised, therefore, to find evidence of pre-nasal raising in related dialects, at earlier times and in other environments.
For the moment, however, it is reasonable to conclude that raising of /a/ formerly affected other environments besides velars — the pre-nasal environment in particular.
In the next section, we proceed to consider variation in Ε/,; as our discussion up to this point has obviously raised the possibility that tokens of /a/ and /Ε: /can merge in certain environments.
5.9 Short /Ε/; in Belfast: Overlap and Merger
Although ‘classical’ phoneme theory does not allow allophonic overlapping and approximation without merger, the Belfast research suggests that overlap and merger of phones in particular environments are common, and that they are amongst the patterns noticed when linguistic change is observed in progress.
An example of this is the pattern of allophonic interchange between /a/ and /Ε/.; Just as /a/ can be raised to [Ε]in velar environments, so /Ε/; can be lowered to [a, ae]before voiceless stops and before sonorant + voiceless obstruent.
These latter environments are precisely those in which /a/ is also most likely to have a low front short value.
Thus, such pairs as sat/set ,bat/bet commonly occur with a vowel around [ae, a], and there is little, if any, difference between the vowels in ant, can't, want, dance , on the one hand, and those in Kent, went, rent, pence on the other.
The pattern of /Ε/; lowering in these ‘short’ environments is extremely well established: as table 4.9, p. 111, shows, it is categorical in some inner-city male groups.
However, the pattern of merger/approximation that this suggests is complicated by the existence of the raising rule by which /a/ is raised before velars.
The lowering and raising rules can be stated as follows:
Rule 1 /Ε/; > <a >/; voiceless stop 
Rule 2 /a/> <Ε >/; velar If these rules are interpreted categorically, they predict a flip-flop in the case of voiceless velar stops: whereas the vowel in neck will lower to [a](Rule 1), the vowel in back will raise to [Ε](Rule 2).
This does, in fact, happen very commonly in casual speech, as in the following examples from the Belfast data:
1
The b[Ε]ck of my n[a]ck;
2
Will you pay by [Εk]cess ('Access') card or by ch[a]que?;
3
T[a]xtile f[Ε]ctory.
These rules, however, are not categorical, but variable.
Thus, speakers can also realise /a/ as [a]and /Ε/; as [Ε], although inner-city  speakers very rarely do this in casual speech.
More importantly, speakers can also use a further strategy in this case:merger .
On word-lists inner-city speakers all merged pack and peck ; when pressed to differentiate, they often seemed unable, in the interview situation, to do so.
However, as items that were merged on word-lists were commonly differentiated in conversational styles (and speakers sometimes actually commented on that fact), it seems possible that some speakers may favour the flip-flop rule in casual style and the merger in word-lists.
Thus, the voiceless velar environment exhibits merger in some instances and flip-flops in others; no doubt, it would be possible to observe other varying patterns of approximation (as for the meat/mate ‘merger’, below).
Before we discuss further implications of these patterns, however, we need to look briefly at raising before voiced velars, and at the rules for short /α/.; Unlike the /Ε/; lowering rule, the velar-raising rule is not confined to short-vowel environments (that is, before the voiceless velar stop), but also applies when a voiced velar follows (that is , in long-vowel environments): thus bag, bang are realized with [Ε:].
When the vowel is long, it is usually front-raised much farther than when it is short and may be as high as [e:].
The routine application of the rule, however results in flip-flops with /Ε/,; so that jet-lag , for example, is realized with [a]in jet and [Ε:]in lag .
The short /α/; rules, however, are formally identical to those for /Ε/:; /α/; is realized as a short vowel near [a]when it occurs before a voiceless stop or sonorant + voiceless obstruent, for example in pot, font ; both /Ε/; and /α/,; therefore, show patterns of overlap with /a/ in these environments and, under certain conditions, in polysyllables, as we shall see below.
5.10 Syllabic Alternations
For the sake of clarity in the argument so far, I have largely ignored the disyllabic/polysyllabic rules that affect /a/, /Ε/; and /α/,; and have confined most of the discussion to monosyllables.
However, the effects of polysyllabic environments are of the greatest interest, both for the study of sound-change in progress and for historical exploration.
In the early stages of the inner-city study it was already evident that these rules were of historical and theoretical importance, as they lead to a regular series of alternations in derivationally related items.
(They are discussed in J. Milroy, 1976a.)
It seems that when a change is in progress, polysyllabic environments will be amongst the last to be affected: thus, the vowel observed in the polysyllable today may be the vowel that was formerly found in other environments.
It is possible to suggest an implicational series, using the symbols suggested in chapter 4.5: as the rule diffuses through the lexicon, monosyllabic T environments are the first to be affected by it, followed by monosyllabic D environments, with the polysyllables being the last to be affected.
In preserving the conservative form in polysyllables, the language enshrines time-depth differences in the phonology — a kind of ‘apparent time’.
In the inner-city data, the (synchronic) rule for shortening of /Ε/; and /α/; applies not only in the monosyllabic environments described, but also in the stressed syllable of disyllables, when that syllable is penultimate or pre-penultimate.
The rule applies in all preconsonantal environments including those that would have a long vowel in monosyllables (fricative and voiced obstruent environments and liquids), except apparently before [s]clusters (as in hospital ).
Thus, shortening applies to the stressed syllables of fellow, intention, intentional , but not to fell, intend (as in the last case the stressed syllable is not penultimate).
These short disyllabic realizations of /a, Ε, α/; converge on a vowel near [a](as in such monosyllables as went, pot ).
One result is homophony or near-homophony in such pairs as phonetic/fanatic ,erratic/erotic .
The rule is plainly phonological, as it affects phonetically similar pairs that are not morphologically or semantically related, as in table 5.2.
However, as it applies to all phonologically similar pairs, it inevitably has consequences for derivationally related items, such as in table 5.3.
The rule does not apply, however, in disyllabic/polysyllabic inflected forms.
Thus, while mess/message ,intend/intention have the alternation,mess/messing ,intend/intended , have [Ε:]in both items in each pair.
Furthermore, if /a/ is followed by a velar in these disyllabic environments, we again have a flip-flop: words like factory, access have [Ε], whereas intention, message have [a].
The remarkable predictability and regularity of these inner-city rules suggests that they have deep historical embedding: their existence in well-established form may help to interpret evidence for the configuration of the low vowels of EModE.
The evidence that we have briefly reviewed above for various patterns of flip-flop and phonologically conditioned interchanges  between adjacent vowels is much richer than anything we can hope to recover from history.
Nevertheless, we shall see in the next section that EModE evidence strongly suggests a vowel system that exhibits patterns of a similar type to those we have reviewed.
These are patterns which resemble vernacular states of language in which change and variation are inherent, and which do not resemble standard language states, which are uniform.
Table 5.2
Table 5.3
5.11 The Belfast Pattern and the Vowels of Early Modern English
Amongst traditional scholars, H. C. Wyld was particularly inclined to place a high value (for reconstructing EModE pronunciation) on ‘occasional spellings’ and rhymes/puns in written English, and to consider the evidence of contemporary commentaries (the work of the ‘orthoepists’) to be of less immediate value, as these can often be difficult to evaluate.
Dobson's study (1968) of orthoepic evidence, on  the other hand, relegates occasional spellings to a secondary position, and relies more closely on the descriptions of the ‘best’ orthoepists.
Although such testimony is important, it is a little unfortunate that Dobson's influence led for a time to an undervaluing of occasional spellings, rhymes and puns.
The kind of variation revealed by occasional spellings as primary evidence does not always fit comfortably into the standard historical linguistic mould, and so it has often seemed convenient to ignore it or explain it away, sometimes on the grounds that variability of the kind apparently attested is ‘impossible’.
The best-known difficulty of this kind is the apparent EModE merger of ME ‘open’ /Ε: /(the meat class) with ME /a: /(the mate class), followed by apparent reversal of merger and subsequent merger of the MEAT class with ME close /e: /(the meet class).
In the concluding sections of this chapter we briefly consider in sociolinguistic terms:(1) phonemic overlap of /a/ and /Ε/; in EModE;(2) the question of reversibility of merger, with reference to the meat/mate ‘merger’;(3) lexical diffusion patterns and the Neogrammarian problem of gradual versus sudden phonetic change.
The value of EModE occasional spellings is given considerable support by the Belfast evidence, put together as it is on the basis of detailed observation of the spoken variety and real-time evidence (Patterson, 1860).
In view of this, many of the spellings cited by Wyld from sixteenth-century sources (1936: 198–9) seem oddly familiar.
It is not necessary to be unduly selective to find indications of pre-velar and pre-nasal raising of /a/, and polysyllabic lowering of Ε/,; as in present-day Ulster English.
Spellings that fall into these categories are the majority of those cited by Wyld.
Velar items include wex ('wax'),seck ('sack'),thenking ('thanking'),wexe (verb),renk ('rank'),beck ('back'),ectes ('acts').
Pre-palatal raising may also be indicated by wesshe ('wash'): this would not be surprising, as it is also characteristic of stereotypical Lowland Scots and is found in the Belfast data.
Wyld also cites a number of such spellings in nasal environments that recapitulate Patterson's Jenuary, exemine : they are Jenewary, axemyne ('examine'),exemynyde, Crenmer, Frencis .
Apart from the proper names, the items cited are the same as those in Patterson.
All of them are in polysyllables before the single nasal and before nasal clusters.
It is possible that the range of the nasal-raising rule was wider than in nineteenth-century Belfast, as some other spellings indicate it in monosyllables before nasal + voiced obstruent: these are hendes ('hands'),bend ('band').
We cannot at the moment reconstruct with  certainty what the ordering of relevant environments in EModE might have been, or whether it was always nasals that were decisive: as Lowland Scots preserves evidence of a raising rule before dentals/alveolars (for example in glad, gather, Saturday ), it is not impossible that hendes, bend attest to pre-dental raisings.
However, there is no doubt that the EModE items cited coincide closely with Patterson's environments (many similar examples are cited by other commentators, such as Kokeritz and Dobson, and they are quite common in texts with non-standard spellings from the Paston Letters to the Diary of Henry Machyn ).
As the EModE evidence for /a/ raising is systematically related to the Belfast evidence, it is worth considering whether the flip-flop pattern affecting /a/ and /Ε/; in Belfast can also be paralleled in EModE.
Wyld (1936: 198) provides evidence for this.
He also cites a series of what he calls ‘inverted spellings’ that strongly suggest a ‘flip-flop’lowering of /Ε/; to /a/: these are also in the environments most affected in Belfast, namely polysyllables.
They include a for e in, for example,Wanysday ('Wednesday'),massynger, massage ('message'),zastyrday ('yesterday'),mantion ('mention').
The similarities to modern Ulster vernacular are very striking to anyone who knows Ulster vernacular: lowering of /Ε/; seems to have applied in polysyllables in EModE (as in BV), and there seems to have been a flip-flop, as the lowering of /Ε/; applies in environments where raising of /a/ also applies — again as in Belfast.
Thus, we have apparent flip-flops before nasals as between Jenewary, Frencis , in which /a/ is raised to [Ε], and Wanysday, mantion , in which /Ε/; is lowered to [a]: if raising before dentals also applied, then massage and others suggest a further possibility of a flip-flop rule, and a wider range of environments in which the mid and low vowels are exchanged.
Thus, there is strong evidence that EModE, like modern Ulster, had rules for raising of /a/ before velars, palatals and nasals, together with a rule for lowering of /Ε/; in certain polysyllabic environments, and possibly elsewhere.
It also appears that just as Belfast speakers can merge pairs like pack and peck , so it is possible that patterns of merger, or near-merger, of such pairs might have been observable in EModE.
The most celebrated case of dispute about an alleged EModE merger, however, is not pack/peck , but what we have elsewhere called the meat/mate problem (J. Milroy and Harris, 1980).
This is the problem mentioned above — the question whether the ME open /e: /class merged in EModE with ME /a/ , only to separate again and  undergo subsequent merger with ME close /e:/.
Evidence from rhymes and occasional spellings gives some support to this, and the view taken by Wyld (1936) and followed by Kokeritz (1953) and Dobson (1968) is that there was a merger followed by a reversal and re-merger.
Other prominent historical scholars (Jespersen, Luick and others) however, have rejected the evidence for the meat/mate merger by invoking the theoretical principle of irreversibility of merger .
This principle, which became strongly characteristic of structuralist thinking, continues into post-generative ‘mentalist’ historical linguistics.
Clearly, if the knowledge that classes A and B were once distinct is no longer present in speakers' minds, they cannot pick out the class B items and so cannot separate them from the merged class and then re-merge them with a completely different class.
Thus, if the historical evidence seems to suggest that meat merged with mate , this cannot be a valid interpretation according to this principle, because if it had happened then both meat and mate would subsequently have been eligible for merger with meet : speakers would not have known the difference.
The Belfast and general Hiberno-English system seems to display a situation similar to EModE, and they cast considerable doubt on the principle of irreversibility of merger.
Hib-E speakers appear to have access to two systems here, one in which meat merges with mate and one in which meat merges with meet ; that is, they know both mergers.
For most speakers the meat class belongs to both systems in that it is an alternating class; thus, on different occasions the same speaker may pronounce words of the type seat, peace, leave with [e:]or with [i].
Hib-E scholars have apparently always been quite happy to accept that the meat/mate merger is a true merger (see citations in J. Milroy and Harris, 1980: 200), and Bliss (1979: 208–10) cites evidence to show that these two classes had merged in Hib-E by around 1700.
Seemingly, they are also happy to accept that the meat/meet merger is also a true merger, and that some people alternate between these two merged classes.
If we take a social view of language, and accept that it is the possession of the community as well as internal to speakers' minds, we must be prepared to accept that reversal of merger can take place in this way, so long as speakers know that meat is an alternating class.
The EModE scenario as envisaged by Wyld, Kökeritz and others is therefore a possible scenario, and there is a sense in which merger is reversible.
Normal language states are not uniform, and in vernacular (non-standardized) states we expect alternations and other  kinds of variation to exist.
Thus, the potential for this kind of reversal is always likely to be present in vernaculars.
Whether a second merger (in this case meat to meet ) occurs in the community, and the direction it moves in, will be determined not linguistically but socially.
Generally relevant here also is the (pull ) set, which I discussed in chapters 3 and 4.
In BV the RP long and short /u/ classes (as in pool, pull ) are the same and are both realized as a short vowel; however, the restricted lexical set of pull, bull, foot etc., is an alternating set, rhyming alternately with cut, dull and with soon, pool, good .
As we also noticed in chapter 3, we cannot predict the full membership of the set on phonological grounds.
One group of alternants clearly originates with the extension of the general unrounding of ME u (as in cut, dull ) to initial labial items, such as pull , but it is not clear how the words originating from shortening in the ME o set can be predicted phonologically (for example, if took belongs to the set, why not cook ?).
I have listed the number of occurrences of each individual word occurring in the data in table 5.4.
Although it looks from this as though each word has its own history, certain generalizations can be based on these figures.
First, disyllables are in general more resistant to transfer into the incoming /u/ class than are monosyllables, and this is in line with our findings for other vowels.
The fact that in this case the transfer is trans-phonemic whereas the other cases are usually tensing rules within the same phoneme does not make any difference.
It seems that we reach a better generalization about direction of vowel change in BV if we override contrastive phoneme theory here.
Second, items with initial labials are more resistant to transfer than the other items; we can suggest, therefore, that the initial labial is a constraint on change — it encourages maintenance.
Finally, labial items with initial [b]are more resistant to transfer than other initial labial items.
We have noted elsewhere (J. Milroy, 1980) that the vernacular unrounded vowel is persistent in word-lists, that it also persists into middle-class speech, and that polysyllables are the most resistant environments.
A rough implicational ordering of resistance to change would be bulletin-bullet-bull-pull-football-foot , with the leftmost item the most resistant and the rightmost the most susceptible to transfer.
The disentangling of ancient mergers that we observe here has taken a very long time, and the best explanation for the persistence of this alternating class is again a social explanation: the ‘vernacular’ alternant carries an identity function and strong connotations of closeness and intimacy.
Table 5.4 The (pull ) alternating set in Belfast.
As we have shown elsewhere, however, it is not always the case in such examples that full merger within the language system has come about.
The unreliability of reported mergers has been argued for most strongly by Labov and his colleagues (Labov, Yaeger and Steiner, 1972; Labov, 1975 etc.), and for inner-city Belfast it can be  argued that meat is not really merged with mate , despite the fact that people believe that it is a merger.
We demonstrated this statistically (J. Milroy and Harris, 1980): the data in table 5.5, were subjected to the chi-squared test, and the difference between the distributions of meat items and mate items was found to be very highly significant.
This means that although realizations of these overlap and are sometimes identical, it does not really make sense to say that this is a merger in the language system in BV (of course, it may be in other dialects).
If it were a full merger, the variation observed (as in variation in RP meat/meet , for instance) would be insignificant and random.
Thus, at least one of the systems that children have been learning over the centuries in the ancestral forms of BV must have incorporated a three-way distinction of meet/meat/mate .
Table 5.5 Distribution of mate and meat items: vowel-height.