

1
The Dairy House at Blaise
Facts and fictions
The drawing that forms the frontispiece to this book is poised on the borderline between fact and fiction.
It could illustrate that symbolic episode, common to fairy-tales and Gothic novels, in which the heroine, lost in a dark wood, comes suddenly upon a sunlit clearing.
The cottage at its centre is all that such a refuge from a cruel world should be: modest, but not mean; quaint, but not peculiar; ‘antiqued’, but perfectly comfortable and convenient.
Heroines like Mrs Radcliffe's Emily in The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794) are used to living in much grander houses; but this little building is designed to reassure even the most genteel with a sense of arrival, so that the wanderer feels instantly ‘at home’.
The drawing does not, however, illustrate a fiction.
It is an actual design, almost contemporary with Udolpho , by the great Regency architect, John Nash, sketched by John Adey Repton (son of Humphry) in his brother's notebook.
The building itself exists, although it is rather more prosaic in its material than in its imagined form; it is close to the mansion and the brooding trees are gone.
Nevertheless, in a different sense, it remains a fiction, for appearances — as such stories themselves sometimes remind us-can deceive.
It is not the poor man's shelter it pretends to be, but a rich man's plaything, related to that larger Dairy House which Richardson's heroine, Clarissa, inherits half a century earlier from her grandfather.
Throughout her long seduction in city streets, Clarissa's mind returns continually to her Dairy House, both as an image of what might still be, but also of what was — her virginal nature.
Like the ‘graceful habit’ that Clarissa assumes to play the milkmaid's part, the Dairy House at Blaise is fancy-dress, but it serves to emphasize the fictional nature of more serious buildings.
Every new-built house or freshly furnished room is a fiction of the life intended to be lived there.
Every inhabited building or interior tells a different story, of how life is or was: ‘The joyous shot at how things ought to belong fallen wide’.
Moreover, a house, like a novel, is a small world defined against, but also reflecting, a larger one.
The plan and appearance of houses, the way they are  furnished, mirror the social values of their time; but the best define themselves against those values, inheriting the past, receiving the present, but shaping the future.
The same can of course be said of a great novel, for if houses are like stories, stories are also like houses.
It is no accident that many of the terms used in critical discourse —‘structure’, ‘aspect’, ‘outlook’, even ‘character’— are related to domestic architecture; or that the titles of so many great nineteenth-century novels were taken from the houses at their centre —Mansfield Park, Wuthering Heights, Bleak House, The Mill on the Floss .
Most of life, after all, is spent within four walls, and the space they define, the objects that fill them, the prospects on which they open, inevitably influence and express our consciousness.
Victorian writers often present themselves as speaking from their fireside to those of their readers, while the stories they tell, like those of Dickens's narrator, Master Humphrey, may be prompted by the objects that surround them.
Because the novel is invincibly domestic, it can tell us much about the space we live in; equally, designs for houses and their furnishings can reveal hidden aspects of the novelist's art.
From the beginning the house and the novel are interconnected, for the eighteenth century, which saw the rise of the novel, was also the great age of the English house.
‘Every Man Now, be his fortune what it will, is to be doing something at his Place , as the fashionable Phrase is,’ writes an enthusiast in 1739 ‘and you hardly meet with any Body, who, after the first Compliments, does not inform you, that he is in Mortar and moving of Earth ; the modest terms for Building and Gardening’.
Mr B, the hero of Richardson's Pamela , which began publication in the following year, is a man of his time.
Having failed to seduce his late mother's maid, he marries her, thus freeing his mind for more important matters.
He sets to work at once, restoring the chapel at his place in Lincolnshire, then moves rapidly on from his main house in Bedfordshire (already improved) to a third estate in Kent which needs attention.
There he is into the moving of earth as well as mortar: having repaired the house, he constructs a vista culminating in a ‘pretty alcove’ of his own design, thus providing a prospect to view through the large panes of glass he has let into his lattices (he disapproves of the new fashion for sash-windows).
Mr B's altered appetite — for improvements as distinct from ladies' maids — is proof of his moral reformation, for the villainy of Lovelace in Clarissa (1748–9) is signified by his neglect of his country seat; while the excellence of Sir Charles Grandison, Richardson's pattern hero, is indicated by his obsession with mortar, creating a little heaven on the earth of his estate.
On the smaller scale of his country villa, Richardson himself was equally active, earning the admiration of Miss Talbot who visited him there in 1756:
His Villa is fitted up in the same Style his Books are writ.
Every Minute detail attended to, yet every one with a view to its being useful or pleasing.
Not an inch in his Garden unimproved or unadorned, his very Poultry made happy by fifty little neat Contrivances.
Richardson is not of course the first great English novelist, but he is the first to be  interested in houses, for the characters created by his predecessor, Defoe, and his contemporary, Fielding, are too often on the move to develop much awareness of their living space.
In the first half of the eighteenth century the roads of England improved immeasurably, thanks to 400 separate Acts of Parliament, and travel became a popular pursuit with gentlemen.
Throughout the Georgian period, novels in part as a consequence — tend to divide between those who travel in order to broaden the mind, and those who choose to do so by staying at home.
The travels of Sir Charles Grandison are censured by his Harriet with the remark that the sight of ruins on the Tour, which most gentlemen (including himself) then made of Europe, is actually less instructive than the knowledge of them to be gained from books.
She has obviously learnt from her creator, who amended Defoe's actual Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain (1724–6), by introducing with the aid of books further description of historic buildings, without venturing further into the country than his garden.
Although the eighteenth-century house was essentially public with its absence of corridors and its interconnecting rooms, expressing what Henry Wotton had described in 1624 as ‘the fond Ambition of displaying to a Stranger all our Furniture at one Sight’, it nevertheless made generous provision for those who wished to make their journeys privately, within the mind.
Even a relatively small  building, like Fenton House in Hampstead (Fig. 1), is liberally provided with rooms of retreat, while Richardson himself rejoiced at having closets on each of the three floors of his house at Fulham.
The mid-century architect Robert Morris makes the case for them with fervour: ‘the Geographer can travel from one Country to another, through various Climates, over Sea and Land…and yet be only retir'd to his Closet’.
He even recommends their equivalent, like Mr B's alcove, in the garden: ‘Such Retreats would give unspeakable Raptures to a Soul capable to pursue a Tract of Thought in Infinity of Space.
Improvements and self-improvement are interrelated.
As that implies, Palladian architecture, which changed the face of England in the eighteenth century, is from one point of view a moral movement.
Pope's Fourth Moral Essay, addressed in 1731 to its great advocate, Lord Burlington, makes this clear in its subject title, ‘The Use of Riches’.
The new taste rejected Baroque extravagances such as Vanbrugh's Blenheim (Fig. 2) celebrating Marlborough's great victory in 1704, where architecture expresses pomp and circumstance, in favour of good sense, proportion, use, the harmony of a building with its site (Fig. 92).
It may seem strange that Vitruvius, a Roman architect in the first century BC, interpreted by Palladio, an Italian in the sixteenth century, should have made such a mark upon Georgian England, but the values of Augustan Rome and Renaissance Italy have much in common with those of the Enlightenment.
More specifically, Palladio's  clients were in search of the same satisfactions as many eighteenth-century aristocrats, who also wished, when called from town to their estates, to combine the life of a gentleman farmer with that of a cultivated humanist.
Palladian houses were not new in England — Coleshill in Berkshire, designed by Roger Pratt in 1650, already had many of their characteristics — but it was the publication of two books in 1715 that established the style as the dominant, even exclusive, taste.
One was the first volume of Vitruvius Britannicus with an introduction by Colen Campbell in which he attacked Baroque and called for a return to antique simplicity; the other a translation of the Quattro Libri of Palladio, to whose publication the mother of Lord Burlington subscribed.
At Chiswick Burlington built himself a villa, modelled on the Villa Rotonda of Palladio, but Pope at Twickenham had a villa too which was also expressive of Palladian principles (Figs 3a, 3b).
The eighteenth-century novel is concerned with much the same social range as the designs of architects.
Moreover, when its characters stay at home, the walls of their houses, though rarely described in any detail, reflect the values and aspirations of Palladian architecture.
That absence of detail is, however, most surprising, given this sensitivity to living space, for there are almost none of those sustained descriptions that become almost routine in Victorian fiction.
John Cornforth notes a similar discrepancy in painting, where the outsides of houses, particularly in relation to their setting, are frequently recorded, their interiors rarely so.
His explanation — that the emphasis falls on portraiture without the contextual detail of Dutch painting — is almost as insufficient as the literary critic's — that this ‘technique’ was not yet included in the novelist's repertoire.
In relation to literature at least, two other explanations suggest themselves.
Throughout the eighteenth century and into the Regency, houses were — to a modern eye — extremely bare (Fig. 7a).
Unless in use, both tables and chairs were ranged against the wall, where some heavier items might belong to a fixed position, forming a part of the mural decoration, while the rest were designed to be portable.
As Adam Smith remarks in 1759: ‘When a person comes into his chamber, and finds the chairs all standing in the middle of the room, he is angry with his servant, and rather than see them continue in that disorder, perhaps takes the trouble himself to set them all in their places with their backs to the wall.
The room, in consequence, is dominated not by its furniture but by its structural features — walls, floor, and ceiling; windows, doors, and fireplace.
As a result, the novelist tends to sense, rather than see, domestic environments, registering the definition of space and not its detail.
A second explanation may lie in what is often called the ‘Rule of Taste’.
Just as a gentleman was defined by his likeness to other gentlemen, so a house should resemble other houses of a similar standing; it would therefore be redundant to describe what every courteous author must assume was already known to his readers.
When Goldsmith writes in The Vicar of Wakefield (1766) of ‘an elegant house, situate in a fine country, and a good neighbourhood’, or remarks of a room in an unusually magnificent mansion merely that it was ‘perfectly elegant and modern’, he clearly feels that he has said enough, since every reader can gloss those adjectives himself.
It is the inappropriate context   that needs description, like the room in which Clarissa is imprisoned for debt.
In all the many pages of that novel, it is the sole interior to be described at any length, and in such detail that Richardson even mentions the rusty heads of tacks retaining scraps of a former wallpaper.
Even beyond the middle of the century, when Palladian architecture acquires some rivals, the description of houses does not become more frequent.
Those who travelled went further still and discovered Greece, but it too is ‘classical’ and altered the decoration of Palladian houses rather than their design.
The Gothic, a more formidable opponent, might have been expected to have had a greater impact on the depiction of fictional living space.
In the first place, it is the antithesis of the classical: its inspiration is indigenous, not foreign; Christian, not pagan; medieval or even Tudor, not antique.
Its structures, moreover, are irregular, supposedly answering to the needs of those within, not dictated from without by the demands of symmetry; their emphasis is vertical, aspiring heavenwards (as the Victorians frequently remarked), where that of the classical house is horizontal, connecting with the values of this earth.
One style directs itself to individualism; the other seeks harmony with a social whole.
Second, the affection for medievalism is literary before it is architectural, and architects themselves invariably refer it back to the same lines from Milton's Il Penseroso (c.1631):
But let my due feet never fail,
To walk the studious Cloysters pale,
And love the high embowed Roof,
With antick pillars massy proof,
And storied Windows richly dight
Casting a dimm religious light.
Throughout the social and satiric age of Augustan reason, poets continued to walk that way from time to time, indulging their anti-rational and unsociable propensities for solitude, melancholy, and intense emotion.
Pope's confidently discursive Essay on Man (1733–4) co-exists with his anguished Gothic soliloquy,Eloisa to Abelard (1717); while his Palladian villa at Twickenham with its open, balanced facade (Fig. 3a) concealed a subterranean grotto (Fig. 3b) connecting with his sombre garden across the road.
Horace Walpole describes the effect of walking through the grotto into the garden in language that both recalls Eloisa to Abelard and anticipates descriptions in the Gothic novel: ‘The passing through the gloom from the grotto to opening day; the retiring and again assembling shades; the dusky groves, the larger lawn, and the solemnity of the termination at the cypresses that led up to his mother's tomb, are managed with exquisite judgement.’
The Gothic, as can be seen, invites description, but in terms that are generalized and atmospheric rather than particular and domestic.
This may relate to its revival in the garden, where the style, as architecture, first secured a footing.
At the beginning of the century it is still a term of abuse, equivalent to ‘Hun’ or ‘Vandal’, denoting ‘barbaric’as its Renaissance originators intended: ‘Ah, rustic, ruder than Gothic!’
Millamant accuses Sir Wilful Witwoud in Congreve's Way of the World (1700).
But the taste for landscape gardening encouraged buildings as the focus for a vista, and these were not always (as Mr B's alcove probably was) classical in style.
Batty Langley, whose pattern books did so much to disseminate Palladianism, suggests in 1728 that ‘such Walks, whose Views cannot be extended,[should]terminate in Woods, Forests, mishapen Rocks, strange Precipices, Mountains, old Ruins, grand Buildings, & c .’.
For those whose grounds are not naturally endowed with these facilities, Paul Decker provides, in 1759, ‘Gothic Architecture Decorated, Consisting of a Large Collection of Temples, Banqueting, Summer and Green Houses; Gazebo's, Alcoves; Faced, Garden and Umbrello'd Seats; Terminari's, and Rustic Garden Seats; Rout Houses, and Hermitages for Summer and Winter; Obelisks, Pyramids, & c .’.
In 1755 Rousseau's discovery of the noble savage had made some men think twice before dismissing the barbaric out of hand, and Milton's ‘arched walks of twilight groves’ were thought to resemble the aspiring arches of the Gothic church.
The word began to mean ‘natural’ rather than‘barbaric’, and the style, in some circles at least , became respectable.
Horace Walpole also had a villa at Twickenham, Strawberry Hill; but he seems to have been inspired less by the Palladian principles of his neighbour's house than by Pope's grotto and the sensations of his garden.
He began to redesign and embellish Strawberry Hill on Gothic lines in the 1750s.
In 1764 he wrote there the first Gothic novel,The Castle of Otranto , which, in his Description of Strawberry Hill , he connects directly with the house: ‘A very proper habitation of, as it was the scene that inspired, the author.
Neither the novel nor the house, however, treat Gothic as more than a superficial application to values that remain essentially Palladian.
The Castle of Otranto is as unspecific (and discomforting) as Walpole's description of Pope's grotto: ‘An awful silence reigned throughout these subterraneous regions, except now and then some blasts of wind that shook the doors she had passed, and which grating on the rusty hinges were re-echoed through that long labyrinth of darkness.
The prose seems about to burgeon into satire on the very taste that it advances — reminding one that its author was himself convinced that all true poetry had died with Pope.
Strawberry Hill itself, like the Dairy at Blaise, is only superficially irregular, for the disposition of the house remains symmetrical.
The Gothic decoration of its rooms expresses a variety of moods, but in some instances, as in the library (Fig. 4), qualifies for the adjectives of the Gothic novel.
More importantly, the emphasis still falls on structural features, not on furnishing, inviting Sir John Soane's criticism of the Adam (classical) house — that its interior was too architectural, and insufficiently distinguished from the exterior.
William Beckford, Walpole's successor as both Gothic novelist and builder, carried his imaginings too far to have had as much effect on either fact or fiction.
In 1796 he began to replace his father's classical mansion, which he detested, with a grandiose creation, Fonthill Abbey (Fig. 5), whose tower was intended to rival his neighbour, Salisbury Cathedral.
Like the palace in his exotic novel, Vathek (1786), Fonthill Abbey both resembled Babel and suffered the same fate.
Beckford was as   impatient as Vathek to complete his building, but did not have a magical assistant; the tower twice collapsed, for the last time in 1825, and Beckford's contractor confessed upon his death-bed that he had not provided it with foundations, although they had been specified and paid for.
Nothing today remains of Fonthill Abbey, though Strawberry Hill is still more or less intact.
Like its predecessor, Fonthill Abbey is said to have been a symmetrical building in Gothic disguise, while Vathek provides even less domestic detail than Otranto — the adjective, indeed, scarcely applies.
The excesses of Vathek do have some emulators — in Matthew Lewis's The Monk (1796), and even in the Victorian novels of Sheridan Le Fanu — but it is the polite feeling of Otranto that flourishes in the hugely popular Gothic novels of the Regency.
Fonthill Abbey, however, was not a success that anyone would (or could) have chosen to emulate, where the playfulness of Strawberry Hill was infectious, and moreover suited to much humbler houses.
By the beginning of the nineteenth century, encouraged by the new taste for the Picturesque, Gothic had established its domestic footing, at least in a decorative sense, and had even imported with it other exotica — Chinese and Egyptian, Arabic and Indian.
It was, moreover, widely disseminated by a profusion of pattern books which concentrated upon smaller houses.
These were sometimes intended, as in the eighteenth century, both to provide an event in the garden and house a labourer; but they were also directed to those of the middle class who might want a retreat in the country or a retirement home.
The second type of house was described as a ‘cottage ornee’, ‘a new species of building’, according to one designer, ‘not the habitation of the laborious, but of the affluent, of the man of study, of science, or of leisure’.
Occasionally the same design could serve both purposes, as can be seen in Figure 6 where the single version is intended for a retired couple, the double for two families of labourers.
Its external appearance, ‘of a grotesque Gothic character…and pointed Gothic arches’, with those sharp contrasts of light and shade recommended by the Picturesque, is applied to the standard plan of a four-square Georgian house.
Most superior buildings also sustained their Palladian principles, but they became less formal: for example, the central salon, the grand reception room of the Palladian house (Fig. 14), lost some of its ceremonial identity and might even be occupied by a billiard table; women were no longer debarred from the library, as they had been for much of the previous century.
‘The Comfort of the Billiard Table here is very great,’ Jane Austen writes from her brother's house at Godmersham (Fig. 16).
‘It draws all the Gentlemen to it whenever they are within, especially after Dinner, so that my Br Fanny & I have the Library to ourselves in delightful quiet.’
Private rooms became almost a thing of the past, for closets went out of fashion; bedrooms, which had formerly existed on all floors, went upstairs, but, although their dressing-rooms were often furnished as boudoirs, these were out-of-bounds from after breakfast, except in times of illness.
When her mother is convalescing, the novelty of spending her days in a dressing-room appeals to Jane Austen: ‘I always feel so much more elegant in it than in the parlour.
To the novelist, that alteration in domestic mores seems at first sight to have had more significance than the increasing diversity of styles.
Where Richardson wrote his novels, and his heroines their letters, in little closets removed from the public eye, Jane Austen and her heroines spend their time in parlours which are anything but private.
The apprehension of the house thus alters from the personal to the social: his drama is the inward one of conscience; hers, the outward trial by social ordeal.
‘I should hardly like to live with her ladies and gentlemen in their elegant but confined houses,’ Charlotte Bronte writes in 1848, reporting the sensations of a reader rather than commenting upon description, for Jane Austen's contexts are, like Richardson's, still sensed rather than seen.
The definition of living space continues to be of more importance than its detail, and even Gothic novelists, who are fond of adjectives and often describe the landscape at some length, elaborate very little on interiors.
The model remains the great house, not the small one, and great houses still try to be like other great houses.
Even Hermsprong (1796), one of the first political novels, whose eponymous hero models himself on the noble savage, confines itself to great houses or to those that emulate them, while the savage himself, in true romance tradition, turns out to be an aristocrat, and the rightful heir to his wicked uncle's estate.
On the other hand, if one reads between the lines, or simply attends with care to domestic allusions, signs of incipient change are numerous.
It is not perhaps surprising that Sir Walter Scott, with his antiquarian interest, should have had a sharp eye for architectural difference, or even for interior detail, provided it could claim to be antique.
But even writers who have no historical sense, like Mrs Radcliffe (who provides Emily in 1584 with what is clearly a cottage ornee, complete with greenhouse, ‘two excellent sitting rooms’ and a rustic hall), are much more observant than their predecessors of different types of houses in the landscape.
Jane Austen is less descriptive than either the Gothic novelists or Scott, for although her letters are full of domestic detail and she enjoins her sister, Cassandra, to omit nothing in her account of a house —‘For one's own dear self, one ascertains & remembers everything’— novels are not written for ‘one's own dear self’, and she was not one to inflict what she did not enjoy —‘your descriptions are often more minute than will be liked’, she warns her niece, Anna Austen, an aspiring writer.
Nevertheless, her sparing detail is invariably more fully indicative of social change than that of her more prolix contemporaries.
The village of Uppercross in Persuasion (1818), for example, ‘had been completely in the old English style’, two houses only showing themselves to be superior to the dwellings of yeomen and labourers: the squire's mansion with its high walls and great gates, and ‘the compact, tight parsonage, enclosed in its own neat garden’.
That traditional patriarchy, two classes walled off from each other yet co-existent, is disturbed by the elevation of a farmhouse into a cottage ornee ‘with its viranda, French windows, and other prettinesses’, for this contends with the great house for the traveller's eye.
Those new French windows are favoured by Sir John Soane, the Regency architect, because they provide a cheerful effect, although he also complains that windows generally have become preposterously large.
A similar ambivalence can be sensed in Uppercross Cottage: on the one hand, its windows can relieve a social occasion by allowing those under stress to admire the view and recover their composure; on the other, the tendency of the younger generation to appear at those windows unannounced, and even to come in by them, suggests a social life that has become altogether too informal and erratic.
Even in the squire's mansion, a similar transition is in progress:
To the Great House accordingly they went, to sit the full half hour in the oldfashioned square parlour, with a small carpet and a shining floor, to which the present daughters of the house were gradually giving the proper air of confusion by a grand piano forte and a harp, flower-stands and little tables placed in every direction.
Oh! could the originals of the portraits against the wainscot, could the   gentlemen in brown velvet and the ladies in blue satin have seen what was going on, have been conscious of such an overthrow of all order and neatness!
The portraits themselves seemed to be staring in astonishment.
The formal circle of the old regime is represented in Repton's cedar parlour (Fig. 7a), where the servants have evidently not yet got round to setting the chairs back against the wall.
The new look, illustrated in his modem living room (Fig. 7b), is what the squire's parlour is becoming, and what the drawing-room at Netherfield in Pride and Prejudice (1813) has already become, for activities there include letter-writing, reading, needlework, piquet, singing, piano-playing, and strolling, as well as conversation.
‘The Musgroves, like their houses’, Jane Austen remarks of the family in Persuasion , ‘were in a state of alteration, perhaps of improvement.’
She is sharply aware of changing social patterns, but neither resents them, like the portraits on the wall, nor approves them with an automatic word like ‘progress’.
The domestic style of 1816 was partly owed to the Argand lamp, invented in 1783, popularized and improved during the Regency.
It was ten to twenty times more powerful than a candle, and thus encouraged the furniture into the room away from the fire, which had often served as supplementary lighting.
The old-fashioned objected that it was dangerous to eyesight, and that those who read by candlelight did not need spectacles, but one cannot imagine that Jane Austen was among them.
It is Catherine Morland, not her creator, who is disappointed when she discovers that the great fireplace in the common sitting-room at Northanger Abbey has been ‘contracted to a Rumford’, a more efficient way of producing heat that could be introduced into existing openings, invented by the American, Count Rumford, in 1796.
She rarely seems resistant to change as such, but scrutinizes its social and moral effects, deciding each case according to its merits.
Where, in Persuasion , the younger Musgroves' search for novelty gets them into trouble, other new ventures meet with approval, like Emma's introduction into Hartfield of a large modern circular table, as in Fig. 7b, in place of the smaller portable Pembroke (Fig. 41a) on to which her father's tea and supper have been crowded for the previous forty years.
This innovation alarms poor Mr Woodhouse, who would much prefer his guests — for medical, not mercenary, reasons — to confine themselves to gruel; but his daughter's hospitable instinct is prophetic, for that circular table becomes a standard piece of drawing-room furniture for the rest of the century.
Around it, people do their work and linger to chat as well as eat: ‘Tea passed pleasantly’ for Emma's guests, ‘and nobody seemed in a hurry to move’.
In Jane Austen's writing allusions of this kind are so succinct, and so well integrated with dramatized events, that they can easily pass the reader by.
But her novels are not nearly so remote from the realities of her time as is often claimed.
To explore Regency England in her company is much like taking Rural Rides with Cobbett a decade later, not least because they both detect in the details of domestic building and furnishing indications of much more comprehensive change.
But  where he spells out (sometimes in capitals or in italics) the implications of his observation, she leaves her readers to make their own deductions.
The fine brush strokes on her ‘little bit (two Inches wide) of Ivory’ require sharp eyesight, but repay minute attention.
By the mid-century, the novelist's art has entirely changed in this respect: extensive description of living space is no longer the rare exception but the rule.
When Charles Kingsley discovers in chapter 6 of Alton Locke (1850) that he has not yet described the home, entered in chapter 2, of his eccentric bookseller, Sandy Mackaye, he is quick to repair the omission which he regards as ‘unpardonable, in these days of Dutch painting and Boz’.
Dickens published Sketches by Boz in 1836–7, just twenty years after Jane Austen's death, and it is not difficult to discover, by a comparison, why Kingsley should have regarded that book as a watershed in the depiction of fictional living space.
Mrs Tibbs's boarding house in the first of the tales is characteristic, although it is not Dickens at his later best:
Mrs Tibbs was, beyond all dispute, the most tidy, fidgety, thrifty little personage that ever inhaled the smoke of London: and the house of Mrs Tibbs was, decidedly, the neatest in all Great Coram Street.
The area and the area steps, and the street-door and the street-door steps, and the brass handle, and the door-plate, and the knocker, and the fanlight, were all as clean and bright as indefatigable whitewashing, and hearthstoning, and scrubbing and rubbing could make them.
The wonder was, that the brass door-plate, with the interesting inscription ‘MRS TIBBS’, had never caught fire from constant friction, so perseveringly was it polished.
There were neat-safe-looking blinds in the parlour windows, blue and gold curtains in the drawing-room, and spring-roller blinds, such as Mrs Tibbs was wont in the pride of her heart to boast, ‘all the way up’.
The bell-lamp in the passage looked as clear as a soap-bubble; you could see yourself in all the tables, and French-polish yourself on any one of the chairs.
The banisters were bees'-waxed; and the very stair-wires made your eyes wink, they were so glittering.
This description is not only more extended and specific than any one would find in Jane Austen's novels; it conceives of a house in a totally different way, as the foreground, not the background, of a fiction.
We are told much less of Mrs Tibbs's appearance — only, indeed, that she is ‘somewhat short in stature’— while the opening sentence, which describes her personality, is comparatively so brief that she seems to reflect the house, not vice versa.
The process by which, in Dickens's later writing, objects become more animate than human beings is already under way.
An aggressive verbal life, which sets the visitor back, inheres in them; paint and woodwork, glass and metal, even stone, dazzle his eyes and threaten conflagration; the blinds appear to snap, the chairs French-polish him.
Like all great writers, but even more than most, Dickens's vision is idiosyncratic.
Where lesser imaginations, like that of Charlotte M. Yonge, can be adequately  described as ‘products of their time’(because, like mirrors, they reflect back to their world merely the domestic images they took from it), a vision as peculiar as Dickens's not only transforms the actuality, but subtly alters the reader's perception of it.
A book concerned with the influence of fiction upon taste in architecture and furnishing would properly concern itself with those lesser imaginations, because they popularize what they reflect.
But the major writer, where his imagination is responsive to environments, has an influence that is both less obvious and more profound, since it transforms awareness of the significance of domestic contexts.
In the person of Master Humphrey, Dickens acknowledges in The Old Curiosity Shop (1840–1) that it was external objects, rather than people, that first captured his attention as a writer.
Little Nell, perceived in a commonplace context, would have had no purchase on his imagination.
It is the ‘heaps of fantastic things’ in the old curiosity shop which, by making her exist in a kind of allegory, suggest her story to him, ‘holding her solitary way among a crowd of wild grotesque companions’.
When people begin to owe their significance to objects, or objects themselves begin to upstage people, not only the house, but the world of which it forms a part, has altered.
It would, however, be equally misleading, as that last sentence implies, to suggest that Dickens's extraordinary image of living space was achieved in total independence of its actual transformation in his time.
Twenty years earlier, he could not have seen it in quite the way he does, for even in Repton's modem living room (Fig. 7b) the structural features of a room, together with the figures of its occupants, still dominate the furnishings; these are sparse, and still tend to have their backs against the wall.
Twenty years later, the emphasis has changed.
In those intervening years, handmade furniture was gradually displaced, first by the products of woodworking machinery, then by mechanical production methods.
Upholstery became a separate trade, and seating began to put on weight in consequence.
Furniture not only became cheaper and more plentiful: many more objects could be presented to the eye and dispersed about the room as the Argand lamp was succeeded by gas lighting.
By 1823 Sir Walter Scott had already installed it in Abbotsford, his NeoGothic house (Fig. 53), and by the mid-century it had become quite common in urban houses of the middle classes.
A Victorian room, in contrast with both Georgian and Regency, is much more lavishly carpeted, festooned, upholstered, while most of the floor-space is occupied by ‘things’(Figs 96, 97).
It has been claimed that the confused clutter of furnishings and knick-knacks commonly associated with the Victorians became fashionable only after the 1870s; but that impression, if only by contrast with the Regency, is certainly made upon novelists at an earlier date.
In Thackeray's Pendennis (1848–50), for example, Lady Clavering, whose London house has been made over to the interior decorators, is put out of countenance by the result.
The dining-room has been fitted up (but she ‘couldn't for goodness gracious tell why’) in the ‘middle-aged style’, and the drawing-room, supposedly her province, has become a kind of.
Bedlam which assaults both eye and ear:
about the room were high chairs and low chairs, bandy-legged chairs, chairs so attenuated that it was a wonder any but a sylph could sit upon them, marqueterie tables covered with marvellous gimcracks, china ornaments of all ages and countries, bronzes, gilt daggers, Books of Beauty, yataghans, Turkish papooshes and boxes of Parisian bonbons…
There were muslin curtains and brocade curtains, gilt cages with parroquets and love-birds, two squealing cockatoos, each out-squealing and out-chattering the other; a clock singing tunes on a console-table, and another booming the hours like Great Tom, on the mantelpiece.
Not only has the furniture occupied the room, but the ‘Rule of Taste’ has been utterly confounded by eclecticism.
It is no accident that the ingenuous and unpretentious Lady Clavering should have left to professionals the task of deciding what is, and what is not, good taste.
It was a problem (to be discussed below in chapter 5) which was to perplex not only the wealthy but every level of the middle classes for the remainder of the century.
That problem, moreover, related not only to furnishing but to architecture, where the Rule of Taste was in similar disarray.
In the early years of the nineteenth century, the classical had sustained its peaceful co-existence with the Gothic and a variety of other styles, largely because each house remained at heart Palladian, assuming alternatives merely as decoration.
John Plaw's design in 1800 for a gentleman's country retreat on the Isle of Wight engagingly illustrates this coexistence: the south-east front (Fig. 8a)— to be seen against the harbour, a view that is socialized by boats and buildings — is Grecian in style and covered in stucco; while the north-west front (Fig. 8b), against a natural background, is ‘of Monastic character’ and built in local stone.
The plan of the family part of the house (Fig. 8c), from either point of view, remains symmetrical, although it has acquired a conservatory to one side, and a range of offices to the other.
But in the years between Jane Austen's death and the publication of Boz , the growth of interest in the actual past, promoted partly by the novels of Scott, began to disturb this peaceful co-existence by taking Gothic style more seriously — an alteration in attitude which can be illustrated by the difference between a Gothic novel like Udolpho , where ancient buildings are impressionistic, and an historical novel like Ivanhoe (1819), rooted in fact and actual place.
In 1836 war was declared upon the pagan styles by Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin, whose father, Augustus Charles, had been a devoted student of genuine Gothic architecture in the 1820s.
His impassioned Contrasts (1836) is a manifesto, both visual and verbal, for the Gothic, for it contrasts a town in 1440 with the same town in 1840 (Fig. 30), a comparison in which 1840 fails in every respect.
Contrasts , however, is more than a manifesto for the Gothic: it is, implicitly, a diagnosis of the social and cultural evils of the time, and a proposal for political and social change.
More will be said of its proposals in the next chapter on the houses of the great, but, as a sample of Pugin's diagnosis, the small print of his satiric illustration, ‘dedicated, without permission, to THE TRADE’, repays examination   (Fig. 9).
Its image of rampant eclecticism outside the house is quite as vivid as that offered by Lady Clavering's London interior.
Exotic models are not only Greek and Roman, but Moorish, Egyptian, Hindoo, and ‘Antideluvian’.
Indigenous styles are quite as shamelessly exploited, for they are not confined to Gothic but include Saxon, Norman, Tudor, Elizabethan, and Baronial.
The increasing professionalism of the architect, which culminated in the foundation of their Institute in 1834, only confirmed the divorce, already apparent in the Regency, between the style of a building and its function.
The architect who advertises for a pupil ('talent no consideration' but a premium of £100 required) might be Dickens's fictitious Mr Pecksniff, who has never himself designed or built anything real, and trains his pupils on similar lines, ‘constructing in the air a vast quantity of Castles, Houses of Parliament, and other Public Buildings’, a divorce between the idea and the actuality noted by Joe Gargery in the expressive phrase, ‘drawd too architectooralooral’.
At the root of this divide, as Pugin and Dickens both perceive, lie mechanical production and the profit motive, both of which are reflected in many details of the drawing, and are summed up in the subject of the lecture, advertised by the ‘Mechanicks Institute’, ‘on a new designing machine capable of making 1000 changes with the same set of ornaments’.
The Industrial Revolution had, of course, begun some twenty years before Jane Austen's birth, at a time when the Rule of Taste had established an unquestioned supremacy; but it was in the twenty years following her death in 1817 that it really began to change the face of England.
It was not only that, by 1837, the structure and contents of houses had begun to change as a result of early mass production, but that society itself had undergone a (technically) peaceful revolution, incidentally undermining the consensus that the middle-class house was a scaling down of the houses of the great.
In 1817 England was still, as it had been for centuries, an agricultural nation, only 20 per cent of the population living in towns.
In the world of fiction from the time of Richardson ‘home’ is, in consequence, almost invariably located in the countryside, where the great house of the locality is the model for the lesser houses of other gentlefolk.
Even an apparently new fortune like Sir Lewis de Bourgh's, displayed by his dictatorial widow Lady Catherine in Pride and Prejudice , enables Rosings to set the standard for Hunsford.
‘Home’ in Victorian fiction, corresponding to the actual shift in population, is mainly in the city or its suburbs, where there are no great houses to set the standard; and even when characters do live in the country, great houses no longer dominate rural communities in the same way.
Too many new ones, based on fresh industrial fortunes, had no connection with the land around them; too many old ones, succumbing to the profit motive, had abandoned responsibility and thus forfeited respect.
Their history will be traced in the next chapter.
With the gradual eclipse of the great house, however, many smaller ones came into focus.
No novelist writing earlier than Dickens would, for example, have concentrated on a boarding house — not that fictional characters don't stay in them occasionally, but they are not seen from the landlady's (or boarding house's) point of  view.
In 1833 J. C. Loudon, who has been described as the first architectural journalist, announced that the ‘great object’ of his Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture was ‘to show how the dwellings of the whole mass of society may be equalized in point of all essential comforts, conveniences and beauties’.
The basis was no longer to be the palace scaled down, but the cottage extended: ‘In this view of a villa, the dwelling is to be considered as only an amplification of the cottage.’
It is a point of view that very few, at the time of Jane Austen's death, would have comprehended.
Below a certain level of affluence, as Loudon himself points out, the word ‘architecture’ had had no application; at their best, the houses of the poor were the work of country builders, finding traditional solutions to simple needs.
It is true that the taste for the Picturesque which had developed at the end of the eighteenth century had led the educated to take a visual pleasure in the exteriors of vernacular buildings (Jane Austen pokes fun at the taste on more than one occasion).
It is also true that, in the later eighteenth century, many landowners had begun to build cottages for their labourers, and even to erect whole villages; but these were usually designed for the owner from the outside (not from the inside, for the occupant) as the focus for a prospect (Fig. 25) or, in the case of a village, as the approach to his park (Fig. 23c).
Until the time of Dickens, novelists likewise rarely entered houses below the ‘architectural’ levels of society; only misfortune, compassion or the pursuit of vice could take their characters into humbler buildings.
Much more will be said of the houses of the poor in chapter 3, but the basic contrast can be readily tested — one has only to compare the range of interiors in the novels of Richardson or Jane Austen with the range in almost any one of Dickens's novels.
With a few exceptions dictated by compassion, Jane Austen's visiting list extends no lower than ‘the smallest habitation which could rank as genteel’, while Richardson's, misfortune apart, is even more exclusive.
The fictional houses of Dickens are, moreover, not only of all types, but of all ages.
Eighteenth-century novelists, generally speaking, were no more interested than architects in the buildings that survived from earlier periods; some, indeed, were actively contemptuous of them.
When they are included, it is usually for the frisson connected with them as omens of mortality and transience, as in the poetry of melancholy: Clarissa, for example, is frequently threatened by her family with imprisonment in the moated house of her Uncle Anthony, if she does not agree to marriage with the odious Mr Solmes.
Even in the Regency, when Gothic had grown popular in architecture and literature alike, ancient houses are unspecific, atmospheric settings for the heroines of Gothic novels, inducing a depression of the spirits, if not worse.
Scott himself, at least in the view of Ruskin, is guilty of this sentimental vagueness, sensing his buildings rather than perceiving them.
It is of course very difficult for the eye to register detail when it is not trained to look for it; it is only when true students of the Gothic, like the elder Pugin, begin to distinguish the styles of different periods, that the buildings of the past really come into focus in the novel.
More will be said below of their history in fiction (chapter 4); for the present it is enough to notice that in this case, too,Sketches by Boz appears to mark a  divide.
When Dickens's narrator is left alone in a panelled and smoke-darkened parlour, he acknowledges the influence of the Gothic novel in remarking that he should have ‘followed the established precedent’ and ‘fallen into a fit of musing without delay’.
But the type of musing he entertains has a significant difference, for it is not, as that precedent would suggest, either moralistic or subjective.
Instead, objects start into life and tell their stories.
The convention, so familiar in the Victorian novel, that ancient things themselves have histories to relate, allows to long-inhabited places and well-used objects an individual being of their own.
Not only the last, but also those other alterations in attitude to domestic environment mentioned earlier, which seem to occur between 1817 and 1837, combine to give a building and its contents a quite different claim upon the imagination from their significance in Jane Austen's time.
For most historians of architecture and decor this transition is regrettable, since it is marked by the collapse of taste; but for the novelist it opens up many new territories for exploration.
It is not only that the social range of fiction becomes much more inclusive, allowing the writer to explore interiors that make no claim to architecture, but that living space itself develops individual character.
It has been said, for example, that Victorian interiors are not reflections of taste, they are memorials to personality.
But it is only from an aesthetic point of view that they merit, in consequence, much less attention; in the novelist's eyes they become, on the contrary, more revealing.
Great wealth can no longer disguise an absence of true values: the mirrors in Mr Dombey's ice-palace reflect the chilling image of a marriage based on purchase; the roses on his wallpaper and carpets are set about with thorns.
Conversely, vulgarity, if innocent, does not prevent the meanest of houses from becoming a home.
The illuminated castle and black velvet kittens on the mantelpiece of the Toodles' home in Staggs's Gardens do not detract from it, but rather add to its sense of welcome.
If the eighteenth century is often described by architectural historians as the great age of the English house, the Victorian period might equally well be called the great age of the English home.
Neither good taste nor wealth, as its novelists keep telling us, can transform a house into a home, for a home does not consist in the quality of its architecture or decor, but in the quality of the lives that it expresses.
The Victorian obsession with comfort has some relation to this conviction, for the first and even the final — test of a home is whether it makes the visitor feel at ease.
In an article written in the mid-century, ‘Home is Home, be it never so homely’, Henry Mayhew argues that ‘if the idea of ease be essentially connected with the English notion of home, certainly that of comfort forms a special part of it’.
He goes on to point out that words like ‘comfort’ and ‘home’are peculiar to the English language, so that the benighted French are driven to borrow confortable , since de la maison and chez nous relate merely to eating and sleeping places.
Because these qualities have no relation to aesthetics, a true home, in the eyes of the novelists, is not defined by its likeness to other houses of similar or superior social standing, but rather by its individuality expressed in unpretentious honesty; its contents, that is, are determined by the affections, not by conformity to an agreed standard of ‘taste’.
Although it   seems so fanciful, Wemmick's cottage ornee at Walworth in Great Expectations (1860–1), surrounded by a moat complete with drawbridge to ‘cut off the communication’, is the quintessence of the Victorian home: entirely true to its owner, radiant with contented domesticity, though without the slightest claim to taste or wealth.
With his pig and his vegetable patch, Wemmick even aims at  self-sufficiency as though the domestic affections were under siege.
His little castle is not part of a larger world, but exists in spite of it and is defined against it.
In fact as well as fiction the Victorian house had become more private than its Regency predecessors; one might even claim that it had developed distinct symptoms of Wemmick's siege mentality.
Country house visiting, which had been common in the eighteenth century and Regency when everyone liked to have their taste admired, became infrequent as even the greatest houses closed their gates to visitors, persuaded that the sanctities of ‘home’ were not for exhibition to the public eye.
Moreover, as will emerge in later chapters, segregation became the order of the day, not only in relation to the world outside the house, but in the arrangement of its internal plan.
So far as possible, the upper and lower orders of society were made invisible to one another by the separation, in towns of the prosperous from the indigent, in houses of the servants from their masters.
Private rooms and permission to retreat to them returned to fashion.
In The Young Stepmother (1861) Charlotte M. Yonge represents Mr Kendal as a positive recluse within his study; and even when his lively second wife contrives to drive him out of it into her morning-room, she has to prevent him from turning that room too into a ‘literal boudoir’, by which she seems to mean ‘a place to sulk in’.
It is often claimed, both by the Victorians themselves and by subsequent historians of design, that the impetus towards the formulation of new standards of taste in the latter half of the century was provided by the negative example of the Great Exhibition of 1851.
Although intended to demonstrate to all the world what the Industrial Revolution had achieved in England, the Exhibition seemed to the discriminating evidence rather of what it had destroyed.
Certainly many of the objects in its Catalogue (Figs 68d-e, 70, 74b) appear to be designed for purchasers like Dickens's Mr Podsnap, whom William Morris later took as a personification of the problem; for ‘Podsnappery’ had only one criterion: solid worth — in the financial, not the moral, sense.
It is possible, however, that the search which then began for communal standards was prompted not only by this evident nadir of design, but by a wish to re-establish contact between the house and the community.
As in the case of Pugin's Contrasts , new departures in design are also prescriptions for a new society.
Even Charlotte M.Yonge, who is not the most perceptive of Victorian novelists, is well aware that Mr Kendal's retreat into his study is part of the reason why certain areas of Bayham have degenerated into slums.
Within two pages of his translation to the morning-room, he sallies forth to raze Tibbs's Alley to the ground, and reconstruct it from the sewers upwards.
Such missionary zeal does not, however, pause to question the validity of those middle-class standards that it seeks to impose upon the poor.
More perceptive writers were not as certain that their own   houses were in order, and, in their search for some contrasting model, they turned, as designers did themselves, to those vernacular buildings which the Rule of Taste had once despised.
Here, if anywhere, was a domestic order that expressed community, a model for life as well as a model for art.
In his influential Hints on Household Taste (1868), Charles Eastlake, whose name is also linked with the Arts and Crafts Movement inspired by William Morris, describes the eagerness with which ‘many of us have peeped inside the threshold of a Welsh Cottage or Devonshire farmhouse, and longed to sketch its ample hearth’.
He succumbs to the temptation (Fig. 10), in order to illustrate the superiority of  rural interiors to those in cities, a difference which, he claims, did not formerly exist.
The finest novelists contemporary with him, particularly George Eliot and Hardy, are drawn to describe similar interiors for related, although slightly different, reasons.
Eastlake, in common with the Arts and Crafts Movement, preferred the simpler articles of household furniture — dressers, for example, as distinct from the sideboards of the middle classes — because they were made in traditional ways.
For George Eliot, the charm of similar objects inheres in the evidence they give of use:
Dorcas had led the way into the best kitchen, as charming a room as best kitchens used to be in farmhouses which had no parlours — the fire reflected in a bright row of pewter plates and dishes; the sand-scoured deal tables so clean you longed to stroke them; the salt-coffer in one chimney corner, and a three-cornered chair in the other, the walls being handsomely tapestried with flitches of bacon, and the ceiling ornamented with pendent hams.
If ‘things’, proclaiming merely material values, were unduly obtrusive in middle-class parlours, their display in such kitchens was sanctified by domestic labour and domestic pleasure.
Not surprisingly, George Eliot shared in the Victorian enthusiasm for Dutch interior painting, which dwells in a similar way upon the potency of objects, eliciting from the contemplation of such things the expression of useful lives (Fig. 81), almost in the manner of medieval Flemish painters for whom such details are invariably symbolic of spiritual states.
Even bourgeois rooms may come to express values other than the merely material, as in Figure 11, a seventeenth-century Dutch copy of the famous painting by Quentin Massys,The Money Changer and his Wife (1514), which in its turn may be based upon a lost original by the fifteenth-century Flemish artist, Jan van Eyck.
It is a painting which requires the eye to interpret objects, each of which is discrete, distinct, with its own meaning.
In the seventeenth century itself the well-worn books, the half-burnt candle, were emblems of the transience of life; while in the paintings of van Eyck similar motifs — candlestick, basin, perfect fruit, and carafe of clear glass — are used to indicate unfallen nature.
A balance between the things of this world and those of the next is represented in the scales to which the eyes are directed, an interpretation that was once confirmed by a quotation from Leviticus 19:36 inscribed on the frame: ‘Let the balance be just and the weights equal’.
Victorians like George Eliot did not need to be expert in iconography (the reading of this painting is still disputed) in order to sense in such interiors a spiritual meaning in material things.
Although the viewer's eye is won from a consideration of material possessions to the contemplation of transcendent values, it is ‘things’ themselves which, properly understood, call his attention to this higher truth.
Dutch painting thus suggests a vision of interiors more revelatory by far than that of ‘taste’.
To use the words of Henry James: ‘in the light, strange and coloured, like that of a painted picture, which fixed the impression for her, objects took on values not hitherto so fully shown’.
It must surely have been that quality, suggestive of significance, which drew so  many writers and designers to vernacular styles, in both the later Victorian and the Edwardian periods.
In houses built from local materials, furnished in traditional ways by country craftsmen, the imagination sought to rediscover a way of life in harmony with the human community that produced it: ‘In these English farms, if anywhere,’ E. M. Forster writes in Howards End (1910), ‘one might see life steadily and see it whole…connect without bitterness until all men are brothers.
That division in sensibility, which still haunts the English middle classes, between the unsatisfactory domestic environments of cities, and the idyll of a cottage in the country, will be the subject of a later chapter.
It is noted here because it indicates the increasing dissatisfaction of many Edwardian novelists with the high Victorian ideal of the exclusive ‘home’, despite (or because of) the fact that in that period, as Walter Crane observed, ‘the beautifying of houses, to those to whom it is possible, has become in some cases almost a religion’.
With the outbreak of the First World War, this dissatisfaction was to develop into a kind of domestic agnosticism.
In Lawrence's Women in Love , completed in 1916, Birkin contemplates the purchase of a ‘clear, beautiful chair’ which expresses for him the living thoughts of ‘England, even Jane Austen's England’, before these were destroyed by ‘sordid and foul mechanicalness’.
Ursula is angered by his characteristic preference for the past, and, though he does not deny the preference, he does reject the chair, along with the ‘hateful’ thought of a home: ‘a horrible tyranny of a fixed milieu, where each piece of furniture is a commandment stone’.
Instead, he proposes a new domestic freedom: ‘You must leave your surroundings sketchy, unfinished, so that you are never contained, never confined, never dominated from the outside!’
Women in Love, as Lawrence himself says, is a war book, and that conflict itself helped to induce this conviction.
When Christopher Tietjens, the hero of Ford Madox Ford's Parade's End, returns from the trenches to his eighteenth century London house, he inhabits a single room which he furnishes like an army tent.
The bitterness of war put an end to the beautifying of houses for a time.
But even in time the unfinished and the sketchy, an impermanence of setting that does not contain or define, became the characteristics of a new domestic agnosticism.
In 1958, fifty years after A Room with a View was first published, Forster added an appendix to it in which he described the fate of his characters after the First World War was ended:
The George Emersons now had two girls and a boy and were beginning to want a real home — somewhere in the country where they could take root and unobtrusively found a dynasty.
But civilization was not moving that way.
The characters in my other novels were experiencing similar troubles.
Howards End is a hunt for a home.
India is a passage for Indians as well as English.
No resting-place.
Beyond the Second World War, though the View remains, they find that they have lost the Room for good.
The First World War thus marks a real divide in the conception of fictional living space, a truth which perhaps is rather less evident in  the history of architecture and interior design.
It is for this reason that I have confined myself to novels concerned with the period before 1914.
Interiors do not of course cease thereafter to be important to the writer — but their nature has changed, partly in the way that Lawrence predicted.
It would be mistaken, however, as much in fact as in fiction, to assume that our sense of living space alters exclusively in response to events in the outer world, although their influence is considerable, as has been suggested.
In the seventy-seven years that divide the publication of Pamela from the death of Jane Austen, houses have a homogeneous being for the novelist.
If they receive much less description in fiction, it is because they are sensed rather than seen.
Certainly the Industrial Revolution, with its multiplication of domestic objects, reverses that emphasis between 1817 and 1837.
In the seventy-seven subsequent years that divide the publication of Sketches by Boz and the accession of Queen Victoria from the outbreak of the First World War, fictional houses are seen rather than sensed, until the burden of acquisition, despite attempts to redeem it, becomes a tyranny which ultimately destroys the Victorian notion of ‘home’.
But, as novelists are well aware, it is true, as I hope to show in the final chapter, that houses have an autonomous being of their own: ‘I've no control over the saucy things,’ Margaret Schlegel complains in Howards End , ‘Houses are alive.’
This autonomy is particularly apparent in older buildings, because they outlast generations of occupants: ‘It always seems strange to me,’ Fay Weldon remarks, ‘how different families serve shifts in the same house; as if the house owned them, sucked them dry, spat them out and tried again- and not the family that controlled the house at all.’
But even a new house, as freshly conceived as the Dairy at Blaise, in response to a fiction of how life ought to be, has a wayward personality of its own, produced by the subconscious, both individual and collective, of its makers.
To that extent, as novelists rather than designers are aware, the house has the upper hand from the beginning.
2
Aspects off Chesney Wold
The houses of the great
The houses of the great in England had for centuries served as the model for the aspiring middle classes.
The lives of the great had been the main subject of their stories, in romance, in drama, and subsequently in the novel.
Into the nineteenth century, as I have mentioned, I middle-class houses were regarded as a scaling down of the houses of the great, while a majority of novels still referred themselves to the dominant mansion at their centre.
Between the death of Jane Austen and the appearance of Sketches by Boz the emphasis does however begin to shift from the greatest houses to those below them.
Writers on architecture such as J. C. Loudon in the 1830s and George Godwin in the 1840s, interest themselves in the houses of the poor; while in the latter decade not only Dickens but many other novelists are concerned with a variety of living spaces for which the middle class home, rather than the aristocrat's, sets the standard.
But the dream of the great house endures well beyond its actual supremacy.
Into our own time, many architectural historians confine themselves to that subject; it has moreover continued to have a nostalgic appeal to novelists.
Brideshead Revisited (1945) is a prime example, and, although Waugh wrote it in a spirit of retrospection, he also added in a preface of 1959, ‘It was impossible to foresee, in the Spring of 1944, the present cult of the English country house.’
If one looks for the perfect image of a great country seat in the Victorian novel, it is hard to better this one, seen by middle-class eyes which have no place in the picture they present to the reader:
It was a picturesque old house, in a fine park richly wooded.
Among the trees, and not far from the residence, he pointed out the spire of the little church of which he had spoken.
Oh, the solemn woods over which the light and shadow travelled swiftly, as if Heavenly wings were sweeping on benignant errands through the summer air; the smooth green slopes, the glittering water, the garden where the flowers were so sympathetically arranged in clusters of the richest colours, how beautiful they looked!
The house, with gable and chimney, and tower, and turret, and dark doorway, and broad terrace-walk, twining among the balustrades of  which, and lying heaped upon the vases, there was one great flush of roses, seemed scarcely real in its light solidity, and in the serene and peaceful hush that rested on all around it…
On everything, house, garden, terrace, green slopes, water, old oaks, fern, moss, woods again, and far away across the openings in the prospect, to the distance lying wide before us with a purple bloom upon it, there seemed to be such undisturbed repose.
Out of context, even readers devoted to the Victorian novel may have difficulty in identifying that house, for they take from the novel that contains it a very different impression, one that has less to do with idyllic life than with decay and death.
It is Chesney Wold in Bleak House , Sir Leicester Dedlock's place in Lincolnshire where it is almost always raining.
Chesney Wold is supposedly based upon Rockingham Castle (Fig. 12a), a mainly Elizabethan house within its Norman walls, where Dickens had spent some pleasant periods of his life when staying with his friends, the Watsons.
But it is also reminiscent of Cobham Park (Fig. 12b), which had been his first glimpse as a child of the distant houses of the great.
Sir Leicester Dedlock retains many of the characteristics of a great eighteenth-century landowner.
He assumes that his family is not only as old as the hills, but rather more structural, and that nature, although on the whole a good idea —‘a little low, perhaps, when not enclosed with a park-fence’— is none the less‘dependent for its execution on your great county families’.
He is a gentleman of complete integrity, ‘disdainful of all littleness and meanness’, to whom honour has more importance than life itself.
When Harold Skimpole declares to him that ‘The owners of such places as Chesney Wold…are public benefactors…good enough to maintain a number of delightful objects for the admiration and pleasure of us poor men’, Sir Leicester receives the compliment as no more than his due.
Behind Sir Leicester's back, however, Skimpole is not so complimentary.
He derides particularly the Dedlock family portraits: ‘The whole race he represented as having evidently been, in life, what he called ‘stuffed people’,— a large collection, glassy eyed, set up in the most approved manner on their various twigs and perches, very correct, perfectly free from animation, and always in glass cases.’
The dreamlike house that Ada and Esther see, ‘scarcely real in its light solidity’, is, in many senses, a mirage.
As the view from its windows alters at sunset ‘into a distant phantom’, so too will the house, ‘not the first or the last of beautiful things that look so near and will so change’.
The serenity and peace that pervade Esther's first impression of Chesney Wold is not the living rest she takes it to be; as the reader already knows, it is the repose of death.
Those portraits, and the chill damp of the ominously vacant house that contains them, have already been so vividly impressed on us by Dickens that, for many readers, this remains their dominant, and perhaps exclusive, impression.
The long drawing-room at sunset, illustrated by Phiz (Fig. 13), is a place from which life has suddenly departed.
Although, in the novel, the house awaits the return of Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock, in the picture it   appears as if they have that moment left, abandoning their ordinary occupations.
As in the novel, the figures carved above the fireplace, the portraits on the wall, assume a macabre life of their own as the setting sun streams in through the windows.
If the dead live, the living are as dead as the focal statue of the mother and child, for Sir Leicester has no children, and the domestic affections, so prized by the Victorians, have departed from his house.
The destruction of Chesney Wold may be traced back, in more senses than one, to the family ghost, for it is haunted by one who represents the cause of commonwealth and people, as opposed to monarchy and the pride of privilege.
When, in the nineteenth century, Chesney Wold finally dies, it is not destroyed by demotic jealousy; it is simply displaced by the increasing power of the middle class.
Sir Leicester may think it appropriate to keep Mr Rouncewell waiting, ‘opposing his repose and that of Chesney Wold to the restless flight of ironmasters’, but it is his housekeeper's son who now wields the moral authority, for he has come to remove his future daughter-in-law, the lady's maid Rosa, from Lady Dedlock's charge because he thinks that position is unsuitable.
True repose is not to be found in that great house, and the flag that proclaims it a ‘happy home’ lies to ‘the lightsome air’.
The days of the aristocracy are past, and it is Sir Leicester's middle-class enemy, Lawrence Boythorn, who enjoys within the orderly limits of his modest neighbouring house a true ‘stillness and composure’.
The novel is not named from its great house (as are Mansfield Park and Northanger Abbey ), but from the comfortable home, no longer bleak, where John Jarndyce exercises his abundant hospitality.
When the orphans of the Chancery case find their way to Bleak House, they are guided by its ‘light sparkling on the top of a hill’.
When Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock reach Chesney Wold, although ‘fires gleam warmly through some of the windows’, they are too few ‘to give an inhabited expression to the darkening mass of front’.
The aristocratic house has become a mausoleum of sad secrets.
At the end of the novel it is closed to the public, and most of its stately rooms are shut up: ‘the light of the drawing-room seems gradually contracting and dwindling until it shall be no more’.
In contrast, the middle-class Bleak House admits the light and air of day through its open windows, and is so fertile in its humanity that it even gives birth to another, the ‘rustic cottage of doll's rooms’ which shares its name, prepared for Esther by Mr Jarndyce on her marriage to Alan Woodcourt.
Bleak House was first published in 1852–3, when the transference of power from the aristocracy to the upper middle class was already under way.
The idea of the great house as a pattern for everyone is already an anachronism in the mind of Sir Leicester.
Yet the radiant aspect of Chesney Wold as Esther first sees it had only just begun to lose its fascination for the English as the ideal that humbler men might emulate in a reduced form.
The different aspects of Chesney Wold thus seem to be deliberately contrasted, in order to dramatize Dickens's insight into the incipient decline of the great house.
The first signs of its waning authority can certainly be perceived (with hindsight) in earlier novels, particularly Jane Austen's; but novelists before Dickens do not write as though they are aware that the failures they criticize   are irreversible.
The origin of those failures may be traced even further back, in the altering plan and exclusive position of the eighteenth-century house, but neither creative writers nor architects elicit their portentous implications.
In the eighteenth century the possession of land was still, as it had been for centuries, the only firm basis of influence and power.
In country as in town, the aristocrat accepted — in theory at least-that wealth and position were indivisible from a commitment to the social good.
Although Richardson regarded himself as writing with a new realism, his novels gravitate towards the houses of the great as much as did the wealthier middle-class houses of his time.
It may be true, as Lord Chesterfield claimed, that ‘whenever he goes…into high life, he grossly mistakes the modes’, or, as Walpole did, that his are ‘pictures of high life as conceived by a book-seller’, but Sir Charles Grandison on his country estate nevertheless represents the middle-class idealization of the aristocracy.
He does not only improve himself and his estate, but his servants too, as Harriet remarks:
We went thro' all the Offices, the lowest not excepted.
The very servants live in paradise.
There is room for every thing to be in order: Every-thing is in order.
The Offices so distinct, yet so conveniently communicating — Charmingly contrived!
The low servants, men and women, have Laws, which at their own request, were drawn up, by Mrs. Curzon, for the observance of the minutest of their respective duties; with little mulcts, that at first only there was occasion to exact.
It is a house of harmony to my hand.
Dear madam!
What do good people leave to good people to do?
The housekeeper's room even contains a servants' library with books in three categories: ‘One of books of divinity and morality : Another for housewifry ; A third of history , true adventures, voyages and innocent amusement’— the last, one notes, does not seem to include the novel.
Sir Charles also operates a miniature health service, employing a salaried apothecary who ‘dispenses physic to all his tenants, who are not able to pay for advice; nor are the poor who are not his tenants, refused’, provided they are recommended by the clergyman.
He houses an eminent surgeon rent free for similar services, paying him handsomely for cures, but by the hour when the patient dies.
Richardson even defines the failings of his bachelor Mr B (who is not a pattern as a husband either), partly by comparison with an ideal of an English landowner.
During the lifetime of Mr B's mother, his great house has represented for Pamela, as a servant, the opportunity for an education in the morals, skills, and tastes of a true lady.
Morally speaking, it has raised her not only to Mr B's level, but above it.
In seeking to seduce her, he betrays those notions of responsibility that his mother had observed so fully.
Few who lived when the aristocratic rule of taste prevailed would have questioned Sir Henry Wotton's definition in the previous century of ‘Every Man's proper Mansion House and Home’ as ‘the Theatre of his Hospitality, the Seat of Self Fruition, the comfortablest Part of his own Life, the noblest of his Son's Inheritance, a kind of private Princedom; nay, to the Possessors thereof, an Epitomy of the whole World’, although, on occasions, this was not of course the reality.
Fielding's novels contain plenty of barbarous squires, who would as soon hunt down a parson as a fox, and whose houses are too muddy and unruly to be in any sense comfortable, much less seats of self-fruition.
Nevertheless, even for Fielding, Mr Allworthy in his Gothic mansion is an ideal as his name implies, a man whose estate epitomizes the whole world.
Because such houses set the standard, those who write upon architecture in the eighteenth century and Regency invariably regard houses of moderate size for more limited means as a scaling down of the houses of the great.
This applies not only to the independent middle-class dwelling, but to the working class too when part of a great estate.
The poor man at the gate, as in Harewood village, might inhabit a version of the rich man's house (Fig. 23c).
The persistent conviction that one should model one's house on houses superior to it is further emphasized by the popular practice of country house visiting.
Sir Charles takes his Harriet off to view ‘fine houses’ as an appropriate pastime for the newly wed.
Fanny Burney's heroine, Camilla, makes one of a similar party to Knowle.
Smollett even conducts the reader into his own house, ‘a plain yet decent habitation…kept in excellent order’, in the company of Matthew Bramble's party.
The practice persists into the Regency, for Jane Austen's heroines are frequently entertained with such expeditions, though sometimes with embarrassing consequences, as in the case of Elizabeth Bennett's visit to Pemberley, her future home, an early indication, confirmed in Bleak House , that this activity could be intrusive.
It may be significant, however, that Mr Allworthy's house is Gothic, and thus belongs to an older pattern of society and architecture with a rather different idea of human community.
Where great houses, from the middle ages into the seventeenth century, had been built to contain a single household in an ordered hierarchy beneath one roof, their classical counterparts in the eighteenth century and Regency became increasingly an expression of stratification into two quite distinct classes, though as yet on nothing like the scale of the grand Victorian house.
John Plaw's plan for a mansion house in 1802 (Fig. 14) might be Mr Palmer's ‘spacious, modern-built house’, Cleveland, in Sense and Sensibility (1811).
In many ways it is transitional between the eighteenth century and the Regency: there is still the odd closet, a bedroom and dressing-room are still downstairs, and the house itself perches on its semi-basement.
It is a cultivated house with a large library; it is a hospitable house, with spacious dining-room and emphatic portico; it is devised, like Adam's town houses, for ‘an elaborate social parade, a parade which was felt to be the necessary accompaniment of active and responsible living’.
But the servants have no place in a house like this, which is designed to make them as inconspicuous as possible down their passage to the offices.
Mr Palmer plants out his offices, with a ‘thick screen’ of fir, mountain ash, acacia, and Lombardy poplar; Plaw effaces them completely.
They appear from his plan to be attached to the house by a passage on the viewer's right, but there is no sign of them at all in his elevation.
The segregation of servants from the family had already begun at Coleshill, the   ancestor of the Palladian houses of the eighteenth century, where Roger Pratt, who believed that a house should be ‘so contrived…that the ordinary servants may never publicly appear in passing to and from for their occasions there’, had given them separate rooms, adjacent to their masters, so that they no longer slept at his door or at the foot of his bed.
During the eighteenth century they were further removed, elevated to the attic, sunk in the basement, and, in the Regency, planted out in wings.
Family privacy was also increased by the provision of back stairs, so that the master of the house on his main stairway might not meet his ‘last night's faeces coming down them’.
On the main floors, where the family circulated freely from room to room, corridors could be made in the thickness of the inner wall, communicating with the back stairs at either end.
The house was thus one structure for the family, horizontal and open in its plan; to the servants it was quite another, vertical and confined from attic to basement.
Pamela, the maid, is constantly beating a breathless retreat up and down back stairs, or pressing her back to walls to let the gentry pass; her ascendancy to wife is dramatized by her spacious and easy progress from room to room.
Nevertheless, the presence — and even the personality — of servants is a conspicuous aspect of Richardson's fictional world, where in Jane Austen's they are chiefly remarkable by their absence.
In properly regulated households they are invisible, as though the house were a magical place, ministered to by disembodied presences.
It is at Portsmouth, where Fanny constantly collides with the unsatisfactory Rebecca and Sally (not least so, perhaps, in the fact that they have names, which Jane Austen's servants normally do not, though Richardson's do), that her heroine discovers the true virtues of Mansfield Park:
At Mansfield, no sounds of contention, no raised voice, no abrupt bursts, no tread of violence was ever heard…
Here, every body was noisy, every voice was loud…
Whatever was wanted, was halloo'd for, and the servants halloo'd out their excuses from the kitchen.
Along with the servants has gone much of Sir Charles's sense of responsibility to a local community larger than the household.
While Mr Knightley in Emma displays one of his many virtues in his preoccupation with the land round Donwell Abbey, and, although he would not invite William Larkin and Robert Martin into his drawing-room, appears to enjoy their conversation more than that around his tea table, that community is one of interest; it does not extend to the cure of souls.
Where Pamela eagerly restores the chapel in the house in Lincolnshire, the one at Sotherton in Mansfield Park signifies an age that is past and irrecoverable.
Household prayers, both morning and evening, as conducted by Sir Charles Grandison, are regarded even by Fanny as a practice which, though desirable, is obsolete: ‘It was a valuable part of former times.
In Jane Austen's novels a community is defined by a village, rather than its great house, where it is proper that the parson should assume responsibility for the cure of souls.
Like Jane Austen's houses, John Plaw's mansion house (Fig. 14) is no longer designed as ‘an Epitomy of the whole World’.
Its site, significantly, is visualized as private; there are no buildings to be seen in the long perspective to the viewer's right.
Chesney Wold, as an older house, is close to the village church; but this proximity to one's neighbours came to be regarded as undesirable by the fashionable in the eighteenth century and Regency, due largely to the fashion for ‘emparkment’ which will be discussed in the next chapter.
It is these large-scale ‘improvements’ of the countryside that later lead Sir Leicester to assume that nature is dependent for its execution on great county families.
Thus William Gilpin remarks in 1791 that Petworth House is badly situated because it does not lie at the centre of its park, but at an extremity, where it is elbowed by the churchyard; Repton, whom Mr Rushworth thinks of employing at Sotherton, explains that proximity to a village may lessen dignity.
In this case, however, Jane Austen does not assume that past values are irrecoverable.
It is Maria Bertram, whose moral sense is dubious, who rejoices that the church at Sotherton ‘is not so close to the Great House as often happens in old places’(it is a full mile away), while the admirable Colonel Brandon's Delaford in Sense and Sensibility 'is close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile from the turnpike-road, so ‘tis never dull…
A butcher hard by in the village, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw’.
Jane Austen's brother's  secondary and older house at Chawton (Fig. 15), unlike his primary eighteenth century residence (Fig. 16), also lies close to the church, and in such instances her views on the relation of the great house to its village are evidently conservative.
For the same reason, Cobbett warmly commends Mr Evelyn's house in Rural Rides ; dating from the Restoration and ‘by no means magnificent’ it ‘stands on a little flat by the side of the parish church’.
Jane Austen, one feels, would not have been surprised to hear that Mr Evelyn both employed and reformed offenders among the poor.
The association between a great house and its local community was undermined because their traditional connection with the land was severed when, towards the end of the eighteenth century, houses based on new fortunes began to be built.
Beckford's Fonthill (Fig. 5) was one of these and, like many Victorian country houses, it was an individual's dream imposed upon the land, not an outward and visible sign of commitment to it.
As Summerson remarks of London, the Reform Bill of 1832 marked the final end of that tradition, and thereafter ‘social responsibility was gradually shaken out of the aristocracy without being shaken into the bourgeoisie’.
This change during the Regency may be noted even in the detail of interiors.
Furniture becomes more intimate and domestic, adapted to family life, not public display.
The aristocrat's furniture was an elaboration of the middle class's, where once the middle-class interior had been a reduction of the aristocrat's.
Despite his elevation of Pamela from maid to lady, a solecism that Jane Austen would never have committed, Richardson makes a much clearer distinction than she does between the genuine landed family and aspirants to that status from the middle class.
The vices of Lovelace are, for example, those of the traditionally aristocratic variety, where Clarissa's family, which aims at elevation, has developed the rabidly acquisitive instincts peculiar to their aspiring breed.
‘Everybody knows Harlowe Place,’ Lovelace comments dismissively, ‘for, like Versailles, it is sprung up from a dunghill, within every elderly person's remembrance.’
Jane Austen makes no such marked distinction in her novels between the old family and the new, with a new ‘place’.
Mansfield Park, for example, is no less a great house because it has recently arrived, or because the income that supports it is drawn from the West Indies and not from its own land.
Even the exacting Mary Crawford sees it as a desirable prize, ‘a park, a real park five miles round, a spacious modern-built house, so well placed and well screened as to deserve to be in any collection of engravings of gentlemen's seats in the kingdom’; the absence of family portraits does not deter her.
Where the new Lady Grandison exclaims, with an effusiveness Sir Leicester would have approved-'What pleasure had I in hearing the history of this ancient family, from this unbroken series of the pictures of it, for so many generations past!’— family portraits are rather put in their place by Jane Austen.
At Pemberley the ‘many family portraits…could have little to fix the attention of a stranger’; at Sotherton they are ‘no longer any thing to any body but Mrs Rushworth, who had been at great pains to learn all that the housekeeper could teach’.
Although in many ways conservative, Jane Austen tolerates and even welcomes change.
At the least, as in the case of her new families, she keeps an open mind and  judges each case according to its merits.
Nevertheless, in a final analysis, her older houses have an edge over the new, or relatively new.
The furnishings at Pemberley, ‘neither gaudy nor uselessly fine’, have ‘less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings’, which has been recently erected.
Pemberley's fine library is ‘the work of many generations’, and the house itself, as Bingley acknowledges, cannot be imitated; it can only be bought.
Despite its absence of prospect and its irregularity, Donwell Abbey, rather than Mansfield Park, is Jane Austen's ideal of an English country house.
Seen from the outside, the Abbey is in Emma's eyes: ‘a sweet view — sweet to the eye and the mind, English verdure, English culture, English comfort.’
Jane Austen had of course much more first-hand experience of ‘high life’ than Richardson, on her brother's estate at Godmersham (Fig. 16) and elsewhere.
Her view must in consequence be truer than his to the actualities of her time.
It is certainly less idealized, and less given to black-and-white distinctions.
If, for example, she sometimes finds the superfluities of Godmersham amusing —‘At this present time I have five Tables, Eight & twenty Chairs & two fires all to myself’ she none the less savours the ‘luxurious sensation’of sitting ‘in idleness over a good fire in a well-proportioned room’.
Even where they are not, her great houses should always ideally be theatres of hospitality, seats of self-fruition, and the comfortablest  part of life.
She strongly approves of her brother's attention to his second great house at Chawton, because he is ‘proving & strengthening his attachment to the place by making it better’, even down to a ‘solicitude’ for the inadequate dimensions of a pantry door; for an attention to domestic minutiae, if normally unstated, indicates a concern for other people, at least at one's own level of society.
Elizabeth attends most closely to the furniture at Pemberley where it suggests Mr Darcy's affection for his sister.
It is, however, obvious in her novels that the centre of gravity has shifted from the great house into the middle-class home.
Although the great house remains the focus of her village society of two or three families, their pervasive flaw is a pride and ceremony that detracts from comfort — that middle-class word which was to be so crucial for the Victorians.
This unease is intensely felt on Sir Thomas's return to Mansfield Park from the West Indies, a flaw in him which is finally accountable for Julia's errors and for Maria's exclusion from polite society.
Mr Knightley's defective sociability, Mr Darcy's pride, and the absurd arrogance of Sir Walter Elliot mark different degrees of frost on the same scale.
It is those rather less well-born Elizabeth, Emma, and particularly Fanny — whose livelier feelings will make Pemberley, Donwell Abbey, and Mansfield Park not merely great houses, but comfortable homes.
Sir Walter Elliot is beyond redemption, more atrophied even than Sir Leicester Dedlock.
That Kellynch Hall must be let, ‘a beloved home made over to others’, is deeply felt; but, within a few weeks of the Crofts' arrival as tenants, Anne ‘could not but in conscience feel that they were gone who deserved not to stay, and that Kellynch-hall had passed into better hands than its owners.’
Admiral Croft, who has made his fortune at sea, makes few alterations at Kellynch (minutiae apart, like an inconvenient laundry door).
It is the couple's happy capacity to make a home anywhere, due to the fact that sea-going men have no ‘place’ of their own, that alters Kellynch.
Their contribution to the great house is to restore to it its appropriate character, as a hospitable (but undeniably middle-class) home.
Jane Austen makes no sweeping judgements of her changing society.
She does not, like Repton, attribute ‘the increase of novel or fantastic edifices’ simply to the increase of new fortunes and a corresponding decay in the old families.
But a sense of social change is pervasive in her novels.
As I have said, to look in them around the countryside is much like taking rural rides with Cobbett.
They both express the same, slightly ironic, delight in the munificence of old houses: Cobbett, when walking through the Duke of Buckingham's park, remarks in a manner that anticipates Harold Skimpole's: ‘I, like POPE'S cock in the farm-yard, could not help thanking the DUKE and DUCHESS for having generously made such ample provision for our pleasure .
Both admire the cultivation and beauty of many country houses, old and new, modest and fine, but always in harmony with their surroundings and with themselves.
Both note the signs of alteration and transition — old houses for sale or to let, new ones being built — and both are aware of the encroaching tide of middle-class building.
It is no accident that Jane Austen's last, unfinished, novel,Sanditon , should take its name from a new resort of speculative buildings, and that  the leading speculator should have abandoned his contented old house, with its English verdure, comfort, and lack of prospect, for a new eminence and exposure in a villa ornee on a cliff-top, with an up-to-the-minute name, Trafalgar House.
Changes more radical were still to come.
In the 1830s, as we have seen, Loudon reversed the traditional orientation of architects, and in doing so turned society, by implication, upside-down.
His Encyclopaedia , though devoted to the cottage, farm, and villa, is nevertheless intended to contain ‘all that is essentially requisite for health, comfort and convenience, to even the most luxurious of mankind’.
Indeed, he states quite unequivocally, ‘in such dwellings every labourer ought to live, and any nobleman might live’ In the following decade, Pugin also enquires why the middle-class dwelling should be regarded as a scaling down of the houses of the great, for ‘the smaller detached houses which the present state of society has generated, should possess a peculiar character: they are only objectionable when made to appear diminutive representations of larger structures’.
In other words, the greatest houses no longer set the pattern for the nation.
Great houses did not of course cease to be built; on the contrary, almost as many were erected in the nineteenth century as a whole as in the three centuries that preceded it put together.
In 1835–9 the ratio of old to new families was three to one; by 1885–9 the new outnumbered the old by two to one.
The relationship of old and new was intricate.
On the one hand, the new owners of great country houses accepted the life of the landed gentleman, even where they had little land.
Severing their connection with the world of trade, they adopted the style of Arnold's barbarian-hunting, shooting, and fishing, rather than reading.
On the other hand, as Jane Austen's novels had already foreseen, aristocratic families adopted the morality of Arnold's philistines, the middle class, in cultivating the sanctity of home.
It is in making this adjustment that the last generation of the Dedlocks particularly fails:
My Lady Dedlock (who is childless), looking out in the early twilight from her boudoir at a keeper's lodge, and seeing the light of a fire upon the latticed panes, and smoke rising from the chimney, and a child, chased by a woman, running out into the rain to meet the shining figure of a wrapped-up man coming through the gate, has been put quite out of temper.
My Lady Dedlock says she has been ‘bored to death’.
Lady Dedlock, lacking the life of the affections, is not bored but frozen to death; the Victorian angel of domestic happiness has gone to shelter beneath a humbler roof.
Her view of the keeper's cottage is at once prophetic and anachronistic.
The lodge itself is still a feature in the landscape, possibly built in the style of the great house as those latticed panes would suggest; but the family within it is to displace with its architecture the great houses of the Victorians, whether old or new.
Writers on its history have sometimes seen the century from 1780 to 1880 as a protracted interlude between the aristocratic rule of taste and the modem uniformity of the masses, for, with the agricultural slump in the 1880s, the great houses of the past  lost their confidence in land and often their fortunes too.
Thereafter their path lay increasingly downwards.
Their displacement was not however immediately perceptible even to a writer like Disraeli, who was critically interested both in the architecture and in the social function of great houses.
When in 1831 he published his second novel,The Young Duke , the faults of the aristocracy lacked their social dimension.
The young Duke squanders his enormous fortune in commissioning Sir Carte Blanche to remodel his palace in town and his genuinely Gothic castle.
He also commissions M. Bijou de Millecolonnes, who despises the ancients, and whose ‘lightness, gaiety, and originality’ are the antipodes of the ‘solidity, solemnity and correctness’of Sir Carte Blanche, to build in a ‘wild sequestered spot’in Regent's Park a pavilion reminiscent of Nash's at Brighton, which gives rise to a rumour ‘that the Zoological Society intended to keep a Bengal tiger au naturel , and that they were contriving a residence which would amply compensate him for his native jungle’.
But Disraeli was later to criticize his own novel for its affectation, and in the following decade, when his trilogy (Coningsby, Sybil , and Tancred ) was published, his account of great houses had acquired a newly serious dimension.
If the aristocracy alone could heal the rift between the two nations, the rich and the poor, into which England had divided, they must, as a first step, quite literally put their own houses in order.
The quickest way to revive the principle that privilege was indivisible from responsibility was to build a Gothic house designed for a single household, not, like Palladian houses, for two separate communities.
Although it is doubtful that throughout the middle ages masters and servants ate at the same table, above and below the salt, as the Victorians supposed, the Gothic hall, entered directly from the outside world and accommodating every social rank, symbolized their ideal of social integration.
Jane Austen, whose attitude to the Gothic will shortly be discussed, would certainly have thought Disraeli's proposal ludicrous as a means of restoring authority to great houses; but the notion has its actual antecedents in certain aspects of eighteenth-century Gothic taste.
There is for Fielding, as we have seen, a felt connection between the humane attitudes of Mr Allworthy and the genuine Gothic of his house whose ‘air of grandeur…struck you with awe, and rivalled the beauties of the best Grecian architecture’.
Moreover, although the Gothic novel was largely escapist, its plebeian characters tended to be much more conspicuous than Jane Austen's servants, and to have a distinct character of their own.
In his preface to The Castle of Otranto , Walpole states that Shakespeare is the model for his domestics, and that, although their simplicity may excite smiles, it is drawn from nature.
Because they do not have the sublime sensations of princes, they do not express their passions in the same dignified tone; but that contrast, in itself, should make more truly pathetic the fate of their superiors.
Mrs Radcliffe too shows more interest than Jane Austen in her peasants and their dwellings: mirth may co-exist with poverty and ignorance in hovels without chimneys or windows where men and beasts shelter together, while her more fortunate poor live in cottages so arcadian that her wandering gentlefolk may even stay in them overnight.
Nevertheless, when one examines the actual design of a Regency Gothic house, like Pocock's ‘Mansion in the Castle Style’(Fig. 17), one can see how very little relation it has to Disraeli's aspirations.
Just as Robert Morris in 1736 recommended that the classical orders of architecture should be matched to the situation of a house (Doric for open country, Ionic for the ‘cheerful vale’, etc.), so Pocock matches the Gothic style to the wildness of woods, water, and hills.
His Gothic hall is, moreover, no more than a salon rechristened; there is a separate dining-room and the servants are kept firmly at a distance by the staircase.
Pocock does, however, strive to make his building irregular, and it was primarily this feature of the Gothic that Jane Austen disliked.
Although in her writing this objection is expressed in literary, not architectural, terms, it chimes exactly with Sir John Soane's criticism of NeoGothic: ‘Irregularity is…too generally admitted.’
Her own novels are structured like the classical house, either contained within a single place (under one roof), or, if wings are added by excursions elsewhere, the harmony of the whole — as in her brother's house at Godmersham (Fig. 16)— is sustained by symmetry and consistency of style.
In 1816 she satirizes the rambling, retrospective structure of the Gothic novel, producing a satiric plan for one such story, where the scene constantly shifts from one set of people to another, and the greater part of the first volume is taken up with a narration, by the heroine's father, of past events in his various life.
Moreover, the word ‘irregularity’ has moral connotations, and Gothic novels are often concerned with disreputable doings.
The heroine in her scenario is, for example, ‘often carried away by the anti-hero, but rescued either by her Father or the Hero — often reduced to support herself & her Father by her Talents & work for her Bread;— continually cheated & defrauded of her hire, worn down to a Skeleton, & now & then starved to death’.
Jane Austen was an avid reader of Gothic novels as her letters show, and eagerly awaited the arrival of the most recent productions at the circulating library.
A protestation like John Thorpe's, ‘I never read novels’(he does except The Monk)is smartly dismissed as ‘common cant’.
Nevertheless, such fictions are not meant to be taken literally, for it can be dangerous to indulge the Gothic imagination in ordinary life, as Catherine learns to her cost at Northanger Abbey.
Mrs Radcliffe may have charm, but is not a trustworthy guide to human nature in the midland counties of England.
It is no accident that two of Jane Austen's titles —Sense and Sensibility and Pride and Prejudice — should express symmetry and invoke proportion; while two others —Mansfield Park and Northanger Abbey — should not only be taken from houses, but can be read, respectively, as an apologia for Palladianism and a satire on the Gothic taste.
Thirty years, of course, divide the publication of Jane Austen's novels from the appearance of Disraeli's trilogy, and much had happened in the interim to make the Gothic house grow serious.
Scott's novels had created a view of the remoter British past as a time of high romance and chivalry.
Pugin's advocacy of the Gothic as a Christian, not pagan, architecture, had given it moral overtones.
The foundation of the Camden Society in 1839 had promoted much more careful study of medieval architecture.
Disraeli's fascination with the Gothic has, however, very little  relationship to scholarship of any kind; it is a curious mixture of Scott's romanticism with Pugin's social passion.
His notion of what (or even when) the middle ages were remains extremely vague; his conviction that the values they embodied could provide an answer to the Condition of England question was correspondingly intense.
Lord Marney, whose younger brother Egremont is the hero of Sybil , represents, in the context of his house, the irresponsible, self-interested aristocracy who have divided England into two nations.
He is not, in the first place, a ‘real’ aristocrat, but is descended from ‘a confidential domestic of one of the favourites of Henry VIII’who thus acquired the lands of Mamey (or Fountains) Abbey.
There, in the reign of James I, the family house (or Fountains Hall) was built.
The new Mamey Abbey had the appropriate symbolism, for ‘the portal opened to a hall, such as is now rarely found; with the dais, the screen, the gallery, and buttery-hatch all perfect, and all of carved black oak’.
But the reader is mistaken if he assumes that the humble eat below the salt in that great hall, or that the poor come to the buttery-hatch for alms.
The ‘lay abbots’ of Mamey recognize only one responsibility-promotion to the ducal strawberry leaves.
As to the poor, Lord Mamey's solutions are simple: emigration on a large scale and the destruction of as many cottages as possible so that the population of his parishes is not increased.
In this respect Lord Marney is even worse than his far more newly arrived neighbour, Lord Mowbray, whose father was a waiter and whose Gothic castle has been recently built.
The latter's daughter, Lady Joan, is certainly interested in ‘the Condition of England Question’, and his guests include the principled, High-Church, and well-born clergyman, St Lys, who retorts to Lord Mamey that war on the cottage does not at first seem so startling a cry as war on the castle.
As Disraeli had already made clear in Coningsby , it was possible to do still better: to build a new great house from a great fortune, in order to recreate the historic role of the paternalistic landowner.
Mr Lyle, a Catholic and a commoner, has built St Genevieve, ‘a pile of modern building in the finest style of Christian architecture’.
It has of course a ‘baronial’ hall (in addition to, not instead of , a salon), complete with ‘its rich roof, its gallery and screen’, not to mention its buttery-hatch which is, moreover, put to its proper use.
At Christmas Mr Lyle ‘holds his revel’ in that hall with his ‘beauteous bride’and their guests, from her noble parents to his faithful tenants, so that‘all classes are mingled in the joyous equality that becomes the season, at once sacred and merry’.
The buttery-hatch is open from dawn to dusk for the entire week; everyone may eat as much as he can, and take off in a basket as much as he can carry, including clothing, ‘for a Christian gentleman of high degree was Eustace Lyle’.
Not everyone can attempt reform on this scale, but established houses can also bridge the gap by showing themselves, like others, to be human, transforming their ceremony where ‘everything is as stiff, formal, and tedious, as if your host were a Spanish grandee in the days of the Inquisition's — Chesney Wold, in effect — into something like the easy welcome of a middle-class home.
Mr Lyle's neighbours at Beaumanoir contrive, despite its size, to make it seem intimate and domestic by   creating the ‘lived-in look’(which Jane Austen appears to be describing with some scepticism in Persuasion):
Such a profusion of flowers!
Such a multitude of books!
Such a various prodigality of writing materials!
So many easy chairs too, of so many shapes; each in itself a comfortable home; yet nothing crowded…
And the ladies' work!
How graceful they look bending over their embroidery frames, consulting over the arrangement of a group, or the colour of a flower.
The panniers and fanciful baskets, overflowing with variegated worsted, are gay and full of pleasure to the eye, and give an air of elegant business that is vivifying.
Even the sight of employment interests.
The scene is not dissimilar from the aquatint of the Great Library at Cassiobury Park (Fig. 18), based on a drawing by Pugin and published in 1838.
Disraeli's message is plain: the aristocracy is not only human, but even its women have their work to do.
It is clear, however, that in Disraeli's view, the middle classes take their key from the aristocrats, not vice versa.
His two mill owners, Mr Millbank in Coningsby and Mr Trafford in Sybil , conduct their enterprises on lines that are similarly feudal, but acknowledge the difference in their status by building themselves houses that are classical, not baronial.
Mr Lyle, although a commoner, has a very distinguished genealogy, for where the aristocracy are concerned, the further back they go, the better they get.
Pre-Conquest families have a special immunity to the contagion of capitalism, defined by Disraeli as the bankers who came into England with ‘Dutch William’.
Lord Valentine, who possesses a suit of armour which ‘stood by Simon de Montfort on the field of Evesham’, is one such.
He is able to talk man to man with the Chartist delegates, in the confidence that his family has worked through many generations for the common good — building churches and bridges, making roads, digging mines, planting trees, and draining marshland.
The working-class delegates are not left to kick their heels in an anteroom, but are ushered into the salon (it is a London house) which Lord Valentine evidently occupies.
There, among splashing fountains, brilliant mirrors, richly painted ceiling, walls hung with blue satin, rich furniture, and priceless folios, they settle down to discuss the Chartist demands.
Like Mr Lyle at St Genevieve, Lord Valentine clearly wishes the people ‘constantly and visibly to comprehend that Property is their protector and their friend’.
Such aristocrats are the antithesis of the Lord Mameys, who ‘mortgage industry to protect property’.
It is, however, noticeable that Disraeli models his new feudalism less on the great houses than on the monasteries of the past.
It is not the Jacobean Marney Abbey but the actual abbey from whose stones it was built which should become the model for the great houses of Victorian England, because the original abbey — in Disraeli's view — held its property for the common good.
Mr Lyle is modestly explicit on this point:'’ I have revived the monastic customs at St Genevieve,’said the young man, blushing.
‘There is an almsgiving twice a-week.’
Gerard in Sybil explains the advantages of the monastery as landowner to Lord Mamey's troubled younger    brother, Egremont.
It had no private property, could save nothing and bequeath nothing; as a result, revenues were expended for the common good.
It was moreover ‘a proprietor that never died and never wasted’, so that property was on the people's side.
This is identical with the view expressed in Pugin's Contrasts nine years before, where the Utilitarian measures for poor relief — of which, as Pugin depicts them, Lord Mamey would certainly have approved — are juxtaposed with the supposedly benign regime of the medieval monastery as Gerard describes it (Fig. 19).
One might think that the distance from the monastery to the great house was considerable, but Gerard, continuing, takes it in his stride: ‘How proud we are still in England of an old family, though, God knows, ‘tis rare to see one now.’
He must have sensed the connection in his bones, for Gerard, the man of the people and one of the Chartist delegates, turns out to be a descendant of the last Abbot of Mamey, and the rightful heir to Mowbray Castle, a claim that defies all legal and moral description.
The parallel between the monastery and the revival of feudal paternalism does not have to be quite so ingenious.
Carlyle's Past and Present (1843) verbally juxtaposes modem capitalism with medieval monasticism, just as Pugin's ‘Contrasted Residences for the Poor’ do visually.
Even Marx and Engels in the Communist Manifesto (1848) entertain the same idealized image of the medieval past:
The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations.
It has pitilessly tom asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to his ‘natural superiors’, and has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than callous ‘cash payment’.
That diagnosis is not far distant from Disraeli's own; it is in their prescriptions for the future that they differ.
Gerard appears to be Disraeli's spokesman: ‘Try to imagine the effect of thirty or forty Chatsworths in this country, the proprietors of which were never absent.’
It was easier to imagine the future as Marx and Engels foresaw it.
It is evident, nevertheless, that Disraeli's comments on architecture in the trilogy, as distinct from The Young Duke , become evaluations of the society that produced such buildings; and his comments on that society become, in their turn, a manifesto for his own time.
Moreover, improbable as such ideas of benevolent paternalism and renascent feudalism may appear, they were sometimes translated into bricks and mortar.
Canford Manor in Dorset, built by Sir Charles Barry in 1848–52, is not unlike St Genevieve, ‘a gathering as it seemed of galleries, halls, and chapels, mullioned windows, portals of clustered columns, and groups of airy pinnacles and fretwork spires’.
Like many others, it too had its great hall in which the classes did sometimes mingle for such festivities as Mr Lyle's Christmas celebration.
Mr Lyle had his critics, who realized — as seems evident to us — that his prescription would not resolve the problems of industrial England.
His views are taken to task by Lancelot, the hero of Kingsley's Yeast (1848): ‘It may suit the Mr Lyles of this age…to make the people constantly and visibly comprehend that property is their protector and their friend, but I question whether it will suit the people themselves, unless they can make property understand that it owes them  something more definite than protection.’
Kingsley has some sympathy with Lord Vieuxbois, his representative of Disraeli's group, the Young Englanders, but he also has sympathy with Lord Minchampstead, whose views resemble those of Mrs Gaskell's industrialist, Robert Thornton, in North and South (1855).
Lord Vieuxbois is paternalistic and feudalistic; he improves his estates on principles that are, like Mr Lyle's, ultimately religious.
He lives among ‘high art and painted glass, spade farms, and model smell-traps, rubricalities and sanitary reforms, and all inventions, possible and impossible, for ‘stretching the old formula to meet the new fact’’.
His principles, those of an old title, are contrasted with Lord Minchampstead's, those of a new one; the latter are economic, not religious, and are rooted in self-interest rather than charity.
Lord Minchampstead installs new steam-engines on his farms, enforces the new Poor Law to the letter, and will not give a farthing away in alms.
He does, however, set up a first-rate industrial school, give every man a pig and a garden, and rebuild his cottages.
Before the cholera outbreak in Two Years Ago (1857), where he makes a second appearance, he alone among the landowners takes the doctor's advice and sees that the pig keeps its distance from the cottage, and that the cottages themselves are thoroughly scoured.
As Kingsley says, ‘England has need of him as a transition-stage between feudalism and, for many a day to come.
He approaches the ideal of a landowner more nearly than all, save Lord Vieuxbois, who ‘has much to learn; and a little to unlearn’:
He has to learn that God is a living God now, as well as in the middle ages; to learn to trust not in antique precedents, but in eternal laws: to learn that his tenants, just because they are children of God, are not to be kept children, but developed and educated into sons.
Kingsley does not tell his readers what will be, but it is evident that he does not have the welfare state in mind.
One way of achieving lies through the marriage of the old and new, for Lord Vieuxbois marries Lord Minchampstead's daughter, thus symbolizing a synthesis of their different attitudes to the responsibilities of a great estate.
No one, least of all Disraeli when he came to power, really believed in Gerard's prescription for the future; but that connection between the former abbey and the great house adjacent to it, often actually constructed from its stones, continued to haunt the Victorian imagination, perhaps with a sense of unrealized possibilities.
Jane Austen has her abbeys too, but she values them for rather different reasons.
When she comes to Henry VIII in her History of England , she observes that ‘nothing can be said in his vindication, but that his abolishing Religious Houses & leaving them to the ruinous depredations of time has been of infinite use to the landscape of England in general’.
Her comment reflects the taste of the eighteenth century, in which the abbey is a highly desirable asset to the landscape gardener.
Fountains Abbey, which, as Christopher Hussey remarks, has since 1768 ‘provided the culmination of John Aislabie's elysium’, is a prime example.
Two of the great houses in Jane Austen's novels, Donwell and Northanger, have their origin in  abbeys; but they acquire no spiritual dimension in consequence, as they would do in the Victorian novel, where the proportion of great houses grown from abbeys must surely exceed the proportion of those that, like Fountains Hall, actually did so in fact.
Northanger Abbey is only tolerable because it has been modernized; like Sir John Soane, Jane Austen clearly feels that survivals of medieval ecclesiastical architecture are ‘little calculated for the common habits of life’.
Donwell Abbey remains her ideal of an English country house, but Emma's view of it recalls the landscape gardener's perspective.
Among Victorian novelists the abbey has a spiritual significance much closer to that with which Pugin, Carlyle, and Disraeli himself invested it, as an admonitory contrast with modem values.
But that contrast in later writers is retrospective; it is not a proposal for great houses in the future.
Perhaps the most striking example is Monk's Topping in Daniel Deronda (1875–6), acquired by the Mallinger family in the reign of Henry VIII: the ‘place was one of the finest in England, at once historical, romantic and homelike: a picturesque architectural outgrowth from an old abbey, which had still remnants of the old monastic trunk’.
To some extent it is still a feature in the landscape, for Deronda takes Gwendolen to admire it from a special window, round which ‘a sort of bower had been made…turning it into a recess’.
But it is in sight of that abbey, ‘the calm light and shadow, the ancient steadfast forms’, that Gwendolen makes her confession to Deronda.
Sir Hugo Mallinger, in life as in architecture, does not want to reproduce the old, but his house is specifically contrasted with Grandcourt's Diplow, ‘a comparatively landless place which had come into the family from a rich lawyer on the female side who wore the perruque of the Restoration’.
Diplow too is a beautiful house —‘the old green turf on the lawn; the soft, purplish colouring of the park beyond’— but it is not ‘homelike’ as Monk's Topping is.
When we see Grandcourt at breakfast there with Mr Lush, the scene is suggestively rendered as a ‘still-life’, artfully composed but with no vital principle, the room ‘seeming the stiller for its sober antiquated elegance, as if it kept a conscious, well-bred silence’.
Grandcourt is Sir Hugo Mallinger's nephew and his heir, but they are ethically as distant from each other as Disraeli's Lord Mamey is from his Mr Lyle.
Sir Hugo Mallinger, to a limited extent, uses his property for the common good, not least in raising Daniel Deronda; Grandcourt regards his inheritance as the means by which he can indulge his vices.
Even Trollope has his abbey, although he despised both Disraeli's challenge to Young England and his novels: ‘To me they have all had the same flavour of paint and unreality…a feeling of stage properties…and that pricking of the conscience which must be the general accompaniment of paste diamonds.’
Trollope does not suffer much himself from prickings of conscience (though whether his diamonds are real or paste is another matter).
But he does, on the middle-class and moral grounds to be described in chapter, condemn the ostentation of Gatherum Castle belonging to the Duke of Omnium, and favour the older, humbler Matching with its adjacent priory, where the Duke's heir, Plantagenet Palliser, lives.
Gatherum Castle is of immense size and quite new, having been built  by the Duke for a quarter of a million pounds.
It is ‘very cold, very handsome, and very dull’: ‘Who'd live in such a great, overgrown place as this,’ Lady Glencora asks, ‘if they could get a comfortable house like Matching?’
In the cloisters at Matching Priory, Lady Glencora, like Gwendolen, makes her confession — and nearly catches her death of cold.
The house itself-'not a palace, nor a castle, nor was it hardly to be called a mansion' — is ‘pretty’(Trollope's highest term of praise), unpretentious, and comfortable.
Although an older house, it moves with its time in that is expresses the highest values of the middle classes in words such as‘homelike’ and ‘comfortable’, those used to describe Monk's Topping as well as Matching.
Both Monk's Topping and Matching are ‘improving’— that is, they refine the spiritual states of the upper class.
But, even though Sir Hugo Mallinger holds parties for his tenants in the gallery he has built above his cloisters, the social dimension that Disraeli liked to imagine is not a conspicuous aspect of such houses as it is of St Genevieve.
Pugin had complained that Victorian Gothic was considered suitable only for some purposes, ‘MELANCHOLY, and therefore fit for religious buildings!!!’
But even where it was extended from churches to houses, a spiritual asceticism seems to be its distinguishing characteristic.
In retrospect, George Eliot even discerns this quality in eighteenth-century Gothic, which seems to us now comparatively playful and exuberant.
Cheverel Manor, in one of her Scenes of Clerical Life , has been transformed in 1788 by Sir Christopher Cheverel, from a plain brick family mansion into a Gothic manor house, thus anticipating (in George Eliot's view)‘that general reaction from the insipid imitation of the Palladian style’.
Inspired by his study of Milan Cathedral, his models are not domestic but ecclesiastical —‘pretty near like the churches, you know,’ as one character remarks — and his transformation, like Walpole's, seems to consist less in an alteration of domestic concept than in a face-lift to its exterior and interior.
Despite its casing of stone, its castellations, and its mullioned windows with their many-shaped panes, George Eliot comments on the ‘too formal symmetry’ of the front, while the effect of its dining-room (no communal hall, one notes) is formidably decorative, not unlike that of Eaton Hall (Fig. 20), where similar alterations began in 1803.
George Eliot clearly admires the one at Cheverel Manor, ‘which was so bare of furniture that it impressed one with its architectural beauty like a cathedral’.
She delights particularly in this dominance of architecture over furnishing, ‘a piece of space enclosed simply for the sake of beautiful outline’, so that the small dining-table appears as ‘an odd and insignificant accident’.
To Victorian eyes, any interior from that earlier period might have seemed underfurnished; but the construction that George Eliot puts on the dominance of walls and ceiling is decisively Victorian in its moral emphasis: ‘in walking through these rooms with their splendid ceilings and their meagre furniture, which tell how all the spare money had been absorbed before personal comfort was thought of, I have felt that there dwelt in this old English baronet some of that sublime spirit which distinguishes art from luxury, and worships beauty apart from self-indulgence’.
As at Matching and Monk's Topping, one is   struck by the personal nature of the virtue expressed by the house.
It completely lacks the social dimension that Pugin and Disraeli both intended.
The many Victorian great houses had developed in the contrary direction, separating themselves progressively from the ‘other nation’ on whose labours they depended.
During Queen Victoria's reign, many that had been formerly open to the public closed their gates, preferring to cultivate the sanctity of ‘home’.
It is an indication of the anachronism of Chesney Wold that, until the final pages of the novel, it is accessible to casual visitors — sometimes very casual, for they seem to form a category much less exclusive than Jane Austen's.
Dickens regards the behaviour of Mr Guppy as ‘usual’ in people who go over houses: ‘They straggle about in wrong places, look at wrong things, don't care for the right things, gape when more rooms are opened, exhibit profound depression of the spirits, and are clearly knocked up.’
The respect to which Sir Leicester undoubtedly feels that his house is entitled is evidently waning; Mr Guppy is in fact intruding on his privacy, for his interest lies in Sir Leicester's family secrets, not in his house.
Furthermore, the separation of the great house from its neighbours, which had developed in Jane Austen's lifetime, became the rule in Queen Victoria's reign: ‘A solitude in the centre of a wide park is now the only site that can be recognized as eligible.’
Loudon, as one might expect, and Trollope, as one might not, both comment on it adversely.
But the separation of the two nations from each other is most evident of all in the internal plan of the great Victorian house.
As the architect, Robert Kerr, states unequivocally: ‘The family constitutes one community: the servants another.’
His plan for Bearwood (Fig. 21), executed in 1865–74 for John Walter, chief proprietor of The Times , and included in The Gentleman's House , is an expression of what Mark Girouard describes as the Victorian ‘genius for analysis and definition’, a genius which led them to classify everything from insects through households to societies.
As a beginning, it illustrates the division, acceptable to Kerr, of England into two nations, both in its external appearance, where the servants' quarters are reduced in size and in ornament, and in the detail of its plan:
Primarily the House of an English gentleman is divisible into two departments; namely, that of THE FAMILY, and that of THE SERVANTS…
As the importance of the family increases the distinction is widened — each department becoming more and more amplified and elaborated in a direction contrary to that of the other.
Bearwood is so designed that the ladies get no closer to the offices than the door between the transverse and the butler's corridor.
Gentlemen may venture as far as the gun room, but the door at the end of the housekeeper's corridor prevents an encounter with any but upper servants of their own sex.
What passes on either side of the boundary ‘shall’, Kerr declares, ‘be both invisible and inaudible on the other’; even encounters in passages are to be avoided.
Divisions do not, however, end with the green baize door; on either side of it the   sexes are strictly segregated.
Bachelors have their staircase at the front of the house off the entrance hall; young ladies theirs from the mistress's boudoir on the first floor to their bedrooms above it.
Particular rooms are appropriated to the different sexes.
The library doubles as a gentleman's room, or, failing that (for Kerr remarks elsewhere that ‘the ladies are not exactly excluded’ from it), they are sure to have the billiard-room to themselves, while the young of the sex may ‘do as they like’in the odd room.
Conversely, the morning-room was generally a female preserve.
Disraeli comments favourably on an exception to this rule at Beaumanoir: ‘How delightful was the morning room…from which gentlemen were not excluded with that assumed suspicion that they can never enter it but for felonious purposes.’
In the other nation, the sexes are as strictly segregated.
The women have their own staircase to the first-floor bedrooms, where they sleep under the housekeeper's eye; male servants have a staircase and rooms at the back, off the brushing room.
Divisions are drawn by function as well as by sex: ‘There are thus three chief Departments among the Offices, namely, that of the Butler and the men on one side, that of the Cook and the Back-Offices in a manner central, and that of the Housekeeper (including the Women's-room) on the other side.’
There is a fourth division, of grooms and gardeners, which is literally off the map; it is above the stables where, Kerr advises, smells should be prevented, although the men themselves will be indifferent to them.
Not only this, but the servants have a rigid class structure of their own.
At the very top are those superior employees — librarian, tutor, governess, lady's companion — who not only work but live on the family side of the house, and may sometimes even eat at the family table.
Inferior to these, and lodged behind the green baize door, are the upper servants.
The butler and housekeeper have their own rooms, but these must be open (by invitation) to visiting partners of the same rank, ‘not including, however, any persons of the lower grade, which is thus very clearly marked’.
The lower servants, if male, are to congregate in the servants' hall; if female, in the women's workroom.
Outside workers, the lowest of the low, are to have their own ‘mess room’ over the stables, though head gardeners and grooms may use the servants' hall.
One might have thought that these divisions would at least cease to operate in church, but there too Kerr advocates a rigid hierarchy: ‘The best of all systems of arrangement is to place the family and their guests in front, strangers of position next behind them, and the upper and lower servants, together with strangers of their classes respectively, in successive order.’
One notes, however, that family chapels, neglected in the Regency, have returned to fashion, though ‘Private Chantries, stalls, and so on, are all affectation.’
Bearwood is built in the Elizabethan style and has a hall with screen, but it is no expression of community; rather, like other houses of its type, it is a microcosm of Victorian society.
Its various divisions — by function, class, and sex — correspond to the analysis of that society as Marx and Engels presented it.
The house, moreover, has its relation to the industrial town as Engels describes it, which is also planned so that the paths of the separate nations need never cross.
The gradation of its  rooms in terms of area, aspect, and ornament, relates closely to the various types of housing in towns.
Kerr includes a table of estimates in which it is clear that the ceilings of servants will be several feet lower, the cost of their rooms a mere quarter, and their floor space — despite their larger numbers — less than two-thirds of that allowed to the family.
Aspect and prospect will be ‘makeshift at the best’; ‘Elegance, Importance, and Omament, it would be quite out of place to notice’; but 'Cheerfulness, so far as this quality can be conferred upon the offices, will still be desirable’.
The plan of houses like Bearwood also has its relation to the structure of many Victorian novels, which are as rambling and intricate in their connections, as Jane Austen's, like the houses of her time, are frankly open and proportioned.
In the great Victorian house, lives are inevitably connected because they are passed beneath a single roof, depend on the same resources, and cannot but have an effect on one another; yet the planning of the great house does all it can to obliterate these connections.
Girouard mentions that the Duke of Portland sacked any housemaid he met with in the corridors, and that a certain Lord M in Wiltshire never spoke to a servant unless to give an order.
Such cases may have been exceptional, but a great many servants seem to have passed their lives in households where their employers knew them by their functions, not their names.
In a similar way, the lives of all in a novel like Bleak House — from Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock, through the whole gamut of society, down to the outcast Jo of Tom-all-Alone's — are intimately connected, yet are unaware of that connection.
Social analysts and novelists alike seem determined to make these connections visible — hence the detective element in many Victorian novels.
But the great Victorian house, like the cities of the period, is built in defiance of these connections, and resolutely refuses to acknowledge them.
In the English house privacy is a major preoccupation in the period.
Rooms did not interconnect or have folding doors, as they did on the Continent; they had a single door that could be shut.
But where privacy in the little closets of the eighteenth-century house is the individual's privilege, for the Victorians the emphasis falls much more upon exclusion.
There are numbers of rooms that an individual cannot enter at all, or only at certain times, for reasons of status, sex, or even age.
Those that are open to him are usually devoted to a purpose, not appropriated to a person: ladies congregate in the morning-room or mistress's boudoir; men in the odd room, billiard-room, or library.
Only the master of the house has a room that can be described as a personal sanctum, because he alone (it would seem) has to spend his mornings ‘more or less…in practical affairs’.
Rooms bear the mark of those who spend most time in them.
‘Woman alone can organize a drawing-room; man succeeds sometimes in a library,’ Disraeli declares.
While the dining-room, according to Kerr, should have an air of ‘masculine importance’, the drawing-room should be ‘entirely ladylike’.
The new built mansions of Victorian England were undoubtedly much closer to Gatherum than to St Genevieve or even Beaumanoir, exhibiting the principles of  Lord Minchampstead, not Lord Vieuxbois, in their disposition.
‘What foolish rabbit-warrens our well-to-do houses are obliged to be,’ William Morris complained in 1884; ‘instead of being planned in the rational ancient way…a big hall, to wit, with a few chambers tacked on to it for sleeping or sulking in.’
Why, he asks, can this ‘mean and shabby custom’ not be changed?
But he answers the question himself:
Because we cannot: because our servants wouldn't have it, knowing, as we know, that both parties would be made miserable by it.
The civilization of the nineteenth century forbids us to share the refinement of a household among its members!
The living quarters of servants undoubtedly improved.
A pride in the quality of one's offices is already perceptible in General Tilney of Northanger Abbey.
Thirty years later even the sceptical Thackeray remarks the improvement, contrasting it with Clavering Park, a Jacobean house with a Georgian face-lift:
I do not know any more cheering mark of the increased philanthropy of our own times, than to contrast our domestic architecture with that of our ancestors, and to see how much better servants and poor are cared for at present.
Yet this ‘philanthropy’ has in it a considerable element of Minchampstead self interest.
As Cobbett had noted in 1822: ‘Society is in a queer state when the rich think, that they must educate the poor in order to insure their own safety .’
Part of that safety lay in accommodating them well — at a safe distance.
In the great house, where relationships with servants are mentioned — Lady Dedlock and Rosa, Mrs Transome and Fenner in Felix Holt are examples — they signify a perilous moral isolation.
It is in the middle-class home that a sense of genuine community is created — by the Hales in relation to Dixon in North and South , by Esther with Charlie in Bleak House , or Maggie and the Jakins in The Mill on the Floss .
Kerr deplores the invasion of privacy in small houses, where visitors rub shoulders with the tradespeople, where the sounds of the scullery can be heard in the dining-room, where the kitchen can hear what goes on in the drawing-room, and the dresser or cooking-range may be seen in the kitchen.
But these ‘evils’, as he calls them, are seen by many novelists to have their advantages.
Although a number of minor Victorian novelists continue to weave romances round great houses (the popular Heir of Redclyffe [1853]by Charlotte M. Yonge is one example), in the view of the major Victorian writers, Disraeli excepted, the great house had had its day.
Where it is clear from Jane Austen's novels that those of humbler birth, if they had something to teach them, also had something to learn from them-Fanny, William, and Susan are all improved by their contact with Mansfield Park — in the reign of Victoria even Mrs Gaskell, who was certainly gifted with what Charlotte Bronte described as ‘the organ of veneration’, is less inclined to revere great houses than to laugh at them.
When Molly Gibson in Wives and Daughters (1866) has been to visit the Towers, her father declares that he had expected to find her so ‘polite and ceremonious’ that he read a few chapters of Sir  Charles Grandison in order to bring himself up to concert pitch.
But his daughter proves to have been very properly ill-at-ease among its dazzling lights, long corridors, great staircases and phalanxes of ladies' maids; that his second wife should revel in them is an indication of her moral inferiority.
When Mrs Gaskell herself went to stay with a duke, her daughter, Meta, suggested that they should dress themselves up in the bed curtains ‘of thick white satin stamped with little rosebuds’.
Few, however, go quite as far as Dickens, who is apt to bum great houses down.
Although Sir John Chester (who lives in sumptuous lodgings in London) is his prototype of the cold-hearted aristocrat in Barnaby Rudge (1841), while the brother he persecutes is both principled and humane, the family house the latter inhabits (significantly named ‘The Warren’) is ripe for destruction, ‘the very ghost of a house, haunting the old spot in its old outward form, and that was all’.
It is not irrelevant that Barnaby Rudge is concerned with the Gordon Riots of 1780, although The Warren is not consumed with quite the virulence that destroys the chateau of Monseigneur in A Tale of Two Cities (1859) during the French Revolution:
In the roaring and raging of the conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight from the infernal regions, seemed to be blowing the edifice away.
With the rising and falling of the blaze, the stone faces showed as if they were in torment.
When great masses of stone and timber fell, the face with the two dints in the nose became obscured: anon struggled out of the smoke again, as if it were the face of the cruel Marquis, burning at the stake and contending with the fire.
The English aristocracy have, it seems, rather less to answer for than the French; they are merely as redundant as the dinosaur.
Their salvation lies in the adoption of middle-class values; it is even possible that the heir of Monseigneur can find his — in a quiet, modest, comfortable English home.
If other Victorian novelists do not set fire to their great houses with as much frequency as Dickens, they tend in other ways to undermine them, suggesting that they too perceive them, not merely as fabrics, but as expressions of an outmoded system.
Although the Gothic novel and the Gothic taste helped to give such houses a new lease of imaginative life, they also assisted in their demolition.
The connection between ancient houses and mysteries of a shameful kind has its origin in Gothic romance.
Although Trollope once remarked that ‘when we have once learnt what was that picture before which was hung Mrs Ratcliffe's solemn curtain, we feel no further interest about either the frame or the veil’, his remark is valid only for her species of the Gothic.
In the Victorian novel such mysteries have their social value, whose interest endures — as in the case of Chesney Wold — well beyond their solution.
Their Gothic origin is, for example, apparent in the novels of the Bronte sisters: the mystery of its tenant makes Wildfell Hall both an appropriate setting and intrinsically interesting; the segregated upper storey of Thornfield Hall shadows the radiance of the fairy palace below, for all the light of its candles, fires, and lamps, reflected in mirrors or gleaming brass or polished wood.
But when the veil is  removed, the interest of its necessity remains, for in both cases it has covered the inadmissible aspects of that social institution, marriage.
Such well-kept secrets more frequently relate to legal disputes about possession, and it often turns out that the estate in question does not belong to the family that lives there, but to a claimant of undistinguished origin.
Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange do not belong (ultimately) to the Earnshaws and Lintons, but to Heathcliff, originally a waif from the city slums.
Transome Court in Felix Holt (1866) does not belong to Harold Transome, but to the tramp, Tommy Trounsem, who dies in a ditch.
Restored by Harold's money, the home looked like an eminently desirable one.
The white frost lay on the broad lawn, on the many-formed leaves of the evergreens, and on the giant trees at a distance.
Logs of dry oak blazed on the hearth; the carpet was like warm moss under his feet.
It has become ‘such a home as many women would covet’, but Esther has good reason to be oppressed by its ‘well-lit solitude’, for Transome Court is built on the sands of extortion and duplicity, and at the price of many lives; she is felt to do well in electing to marry poverty along with Felix Holt.
In Daniel Deronda , Gwendolen's enjoyment of ‘her own furlong of corridors’ at Ryelands, with its ‘rich glow of light and colour’in numerous rooms, is destroyed by her awareness that, although each detail is superficially right, the whole is profoundly wrong, for this house too rests upon the ruin of other lives, those of Grandcourt's mistress and her unacknowledged children.
Secrets are not confined to the great houses of antiquity: Mr Merdle in Little Dorrit has his own new secrets, and is uneasy beneath the eye of his butler in his new London palace: ‘He would have clasped himself by the wrists in that constabulary manner of his, and have paced up and down the hearth-rug, or gone creeping about among the rich objects of furniture, if his oppressive retainer had appeared in the room at that very moment.’
This recurrent unease within the houses of the great suggests a dissatisfaction, wider than each particular case, with the social order that they represent.
The only form in which the great house seems acceptable to the imagination of the novelists is in a state of decay.
The very shabbiness of Hamley Hall in Wives and Daughters endears it to the reader; its neglected beauty makes it a home as the grand and prosperous Towers is not.
But it is not merely that shabbiness makes the great house seem less daunting: in its decay, it becomes acceptable as part of English history.
Such houses, Trollope wrote, ‘explain more fully, more truly than any written history can do, how Englishmen have become what they are’.
This is not because of their magnificence — Grex Castle in Yorkshire, built in the reign of James I, although very wild and very uncomfortable, is compared favourably by the Duke of Omnium himself with Gatherum — it is because of the social traditions that they represent.
Trollope thus praises Mr Thorne for continuing to inhabit the great hall at Ullathorne Court (there is no dining-room), with no more concession to modernity than a modem grate, although it is now only the socially acceptable, not the humble, who come to the great front door that opens into it.
Similarly, he celebrates the great house at Allington, which is early Stuart and built next to the road, with the comment: ‘To be near the village, so as in some way to afford comfort, protection, and patronage, and perhaps also with a view to the pleasantness of neighbourhood for its own inmates, seemed to be the object of a gentleman when building his house in the old days.’
Trollope evidently shares Jane Austen's preference for past community to present isolation; but where she felt those sites to be alternatives, he knows that the first is a part of history.
The imaginative response to historical houses, as the expression of an order that is past, thus has none of Disraeli's optimism, for it is persistently pervaded by the sense of an order passed quite beyond recall.
It seems ironic that where, in the eighteenth century, novelists and architects alike look out of their elegant windows on to the cottages of the poor as pleasing little features in the landscape, the Victorians, for whom the dwellings of the middle class tended increasingly to set the standard, should view the great house itself from that perspective — from the outside, as the focus for a landscape, much as the eighteenth-century painters had done (Fig. 24).
George Eliot, although hard on the picturesque view of decaying farmhouses, sees her great houses to best advantage in that perspective, much as Esther does when viewing Chesney Wold.
Jane Austen also approaches her great houses from the outside, but, as I have said, they are sparingly described; more importantly, there is nothing to suggest that their facades do not accord with their interiors.
For George Eliot, as for Dickens in the case of Chesney Wold, to stand outside and look in is to perceive a perfect picture; to stand within and look out is to experience a moral chill.
Brackenshaw Park in Daniel Deronda forms a picturesque background for an archery contest: ‘The castle, which stood on the highest platform of the clustered hills, was built of a rough-hewn limestone, full of lights and shadows made by the dark dust of lichens and the washings of the rain.’
But in its softly lit ballroom, scented by the adjacent conservatory, Grandcourt's lethal contest with Gwendolen is begun.
Diplow Hall, with ‘its fine elms and beeches, its lilied pond and grassy acres specked with deer’, is another idyll until the reader sits down with Grandcourt at his breakfast table.
Gwendolen's first glimpse of Ryelands is also a picture — a ‘white house…with a hanging wood for a background, and the rising and sinking balustrade of a terrace in front’— but this graceful place, despite the warmth and light inside it, is the context in which she faces the chilling implications of ‘getting her choice’.
Where George Eliot tends simply to employ terms from painting in the description of her great houses, Henry James, for whom they have retreated a stage further, actually presents them in the two dimensions of paint.
Medley is ‘everywhere infinitely a picture’; Lockleigh, ‘as they saw it from the gardens, a stout grey pile, of the softest, deepest, most weather-fretted hue, rising from a broad, still moat…a castle in legend’, is another ‘noble picture’.
Lord Mark's house is the centre of ‘an almost extravagantly grand Watteau-composition, a tone as of old gold kept ‘down’ by the quality of the air, summer full-flushed but attuned to the general perfect taste’.
One could name many more.
But James's great houses are rarely inhabited by ancestral  families: Lord Mark is an exception, and Lord Warburton offers to move from Lockleigh if Isabel (however mistakenly) argues damp from its moat; in any event, his family's hold on the house is so frail that his sisters seem no more than faded chintz figures among the faded chintz of their drawing-room.
Many of James's houses have been rented: Medley and Fawns are both examples; while no one even knows whom Mertle belongs to, from which Mr Longden argues that society has grown vulgar.
Sometimes, like Gardencourt and possibly Poynton, they have been bought up by those who admire their antiquity, but have no connection with their land or history.
For Henry James the great house is a presence by itself, ‘a serenity of success, an accumulation of dignity and honour’; ‘the spectacle of long duration unassociated with some sordid infirmity or poverty’; ‘a place of which the beauty would have had a sweet odour’ even in the absence of ‘flowers in rare vases’; ‘the ache of antiquity’; ‘the sign of appointed felicity' .
In the three decades before the First World War, the great house appears more and more often as a picture, with a dream-like, self-sufficient existence of its own.
It is surely significant that the enchanting country houses designed by Edwin Lutyens at this period should often be described as ‘dream houses’.
They are not the high expression of a society and its order; they seem intended, though newly built, to be what older houses had become — a nostalgic, retrospective vision, a painting in brick or stone.
Ivy Compton-Burnett, who wrote beyond the First World War of ancestral houses in the 1890s, the setting of her own childhood, once declared that ‘when an age is finished you see it as it is’.
181 What she saw in retrospect, with the eyes of an insider, was a nightmare rather than a dream.
Her houses, too, have taken on a life of their own.
In A Heritage and its History (1959 , Julia, the mistress of the house, acknowledges its traditional sanctities: ‘It is the one house I know where the present has not ousted the past.
Everything is as it has been and will be.’
The younger generation is more sceptical: ‘We have known the place and served it.
We have seen it regarded as something it could not be.
As a force in the background, with human lives helpless in the fore.’
Her houses, too, are dogged by destructive secrets: murder and worse are done to secure inheritance.
In its growth, the ancestral house had meant more than property.
The ideal is splendidly expressed in the seventeenth century by Ben Jonson in his poem ‘To Penshurst’:
And though thy walls be of the countrey stone,
They'are rear'd with no mans ruine, no mans grone,
There's none, that dwell about them, wish them downe;
But all come in, the farmer, and the clowne.
But in its decline, as Ivy Compton-Burnett depicts it, the ancestral house becomes a mere rapacity for lost estate.
The absence of description in her novels is functional, for it denies her houses any intrinsic claim on the imagination.
The external view of the great house, seen with middle-class eyes, continues, however, to be more sparing.
Both Groby and Branshaw Teleragh, in the novels of Ford Madox Ford, are nostalgically conceived, for they express the passing  of the possibility of that kind of order that Disraeli had hoped to see revived in them.
Even before Branshaw is let to an American, to whom his tenants do not raise their hats in the same way, the house has already begun to alter:
The whole of that familiar, great hall had a changed aspect.
The andirons with the brass flowers at the ends appeared unreal; the burning logs were just logs that were burning and not the comfortable symbols of an indestructible mode of life.
The flame fluttered before the high fireback; the St Bemard sighed in his sleep.
Outside the winter rain fell and fell.
That fire, like the light in the drawing-room at Chesney Wold, also ‘seems gradually contracting and fading until it shall be no more’.
When families like those in the novels of Ivy Compton-Burnett hold on to their houses at all costs, it is only to discover that their houses hold on to them.
When they are deserted, like Branshaw, and Breadalby in Women in Love , though ‘silent and forsaken’ they are ‘unchanged and unchanging’.
They become history and art, ‘sunny and small like an English drawing of the old school, on the brow of the green hill, against the trees,’ as Lawrence describes Breadalby; complete and final ‘as an old aquatint’.
But Gudrun's admiration for Breadalby is grudging, perhaps because it is still in private hands: ‘she spoke with some resentment in her voice, as if she were captivated unwillingly, as if she must admire against her will’.
When the great house becomes the possession of a nation, it can more easily be accepted as ‘a noble picture’, ‘a history in stone’, preserving in art, if not in life, that radiant aspect of Chesney Wold as Esther first sees it, that remembered notion of human community which has gone for good.
3
Dorothea's cottages
The houses of the poor
In the novels of the eighteenth century and Regency, the great houses of England occupy the foreground, while its cottages, when seen at all, are merely glimpsed as details in the scenery.
In the novels of Queen Victoria's reign the converse comes to be true: the cottage begins to assume centrality, while the great house dwindles in an ever lengthening perspective.
If Disraeli failed to persuade the aristocracy of England to provide every county with forty St Genevieves, each with its Mr Lyle, he with others (many of them novelists) did much, especially in the 1840s, to draw the attention of those more privileged to the destitute houses of the poor.
It is ironic both that the new architecture of the masses should eventually have ended the dominance of great houses, and that more ordinary men and women should have become protagonists in the novel, for these were not the developments, either in life or in art, that Disraeli had in mind.
Nevertheless, they were ones he helped to foster.
The difference between Regency attitudes and those of the mid-Victorians to the houses of the poor can be focused in George Eliot's Middlemarch , first published in 1871–2, but set in 1829–32.
When its heroine, Dorothea, first entertains the illusion that marriage to Mr Casaubon will confer upon the everyday-the aspect of great things, she makes one exception to the frustration of her efforts as a single woman to lead a significant life in that period in England: ‘I don't feel sure about doing good in any way now; everything seems like going on a mission to a people whose language I don't know;— unless it were building good cottages — there can be no doubt about that.’
Modern readers of Middlemarch sometimes find it perplexing that significant social action, even for a woman in a provincial town in 1829, should be precluded, and that the single exception — the building of cottages — should be so inadequately dramatized within the novel.
The explanation of these apparent omissions seems to lie in the forty years that separate the story, which extends to include the first Reform Bill in 1832, from the date of its publication shortly after the passing of the second Reform Bill in 1861.
Both Dorothea's discomforting sense of an almost impassable gulf dividing rich and poor and their peculiar confidence in the building of cottages are slight anachronisms in the early 1830s; by the 1870s they are pervasive  assumptions, indicating that, in the forty intervening years, attitudes to the poor and their houses had undergone a radical change.
Privileged characters in eighteenth-century fiction do not share Dorothea's discomforting sense that the poor are another species, as remote from their experience, as incomprehensible, as an African tribe.
Servants are sometimes actually protagonists, and even in subordinate roles they are represented as men and even brothers.
For Smollett they have as much to say as their masters, if less well spelt, while one even gives his name to the title,Humphry Clinker .
In Sterne's Shandy Hall the similarity of its servants Obadiah and Susannah to the rest of that eccentric household might almost be described as a family likeness.
The case is quite altered by the Regency.
As I have mentioned, servants are normally invisible for Jane Austen, who identifies ministering hands only when, as at Portsmouth in Mansfield Park , they bang the doors and clatter the cutlery.
But it is not until the 1840s that an awareness, not only of the gulf between rich and poor, but of its dangerous significance in the lurid light of revolution, comes into being.
By the close of that decade even writers like Thackeray, who are content to believe that all is well in the other nation, are none the less keenly aware of the divide — though he sees no reason to cross it — between a gentleman and his servants, ‘who live with us all our days and are strangers to us: so strong custom is, and so pitiless the distinction between class and class’.
Dorothea's distress at her distance from that other nation is thus in advance of her time, but the absence of scenes in Middlemarch showing her within the houses of the poor is quite appropriate to the period in which it is set.
George Eliot's restraint in this respect is the more striking, for she delights elsewhere in describing simple interiors.
In fact and in fiction, not only in the Regency but in the eighteenth century as well, the upper classes seem rarely to have ventured beneath an impoverished roof, much less imagined what it would be like to live beneath one.
A novelist like Fielding, who is on familiar terms with the other nation (he married his deceased wife's maid and friend, Mary Daniel), may sometimes take his gentlemen into such rooms, but not for moral reasons: Molly Seagrim's narrow garret, shaped like the great delta of the Greeks, is a setting for sexual comedy, not social concern.
The philanthropist Albany in Fanny Burney's Cecilia (1782) is regarded even by his creator as ‘partially deranged’, and in any case spends less time with the authentic poor than with the middle-class Belfield, fallen on evil days.
In the Regency, Emma and Harriet certainly visit the poor, but Jane Austen keeps the reader in the roadway, to observe no more than ‘the outward wretchedness’ of poverty, and ‘recall the still greater within’.
Even in the case of Harriet's visit to Robert Martin's pleasant farm with its two parlours, the reader waits with Emma at the gate.
The novels of the 1840s are in this respect a total contrast.
It is part of their purpose to open the eyes of their readership to the true conditions of working-class life, and many scenes are set in impoverished interiors.
The importance of this (literal) step is emphasized rhetorically by Dickens in Hard Times (1854):
For the first time in her life, Louisa had come into one of the dwellings of the Coketown Hands; for the first time in her life, she was face to face with anything like individuality in connection with them.
She knew of their existence by hundreds and by thousands.
She knew what results in work a given number of them would produce in a given space of time.
She knew them in crowds passing to and from their nests, like ants or beetles.
But she knew, from her reading, infinitely more of the ways of toiling insects than of these toiling men and women.
To enter such houses, to know at first hand such interiors, was to give a face to the masses, mitigating on the one hand the terror of revolution, satisfying on the other the promptings of Christian conscience.
Dorothea's confidence that the gulf can best be bridged by the building of cottages, although again somewhat anachronistic, is not eccentric.
To the first readers of Middlemarch , however, an elaboration of her plans might have seemed redundant, for if her ambitions were unusual in her own time, they were routine responsibilities by the 1870s.
The days when Disraeli's Lord Marney was not afraid to admit that he built no cottages, but, on the contrary, pulled down as many as possible, were by then well over.
Trollope's witty Duchess of Omnium, Glencora, is led by the collapse of her husband's ministry to lament: ‘Then everything is over for me.
I shall settle down in the country and build cottages, and mix draughts.’
No doubt the Duchess, like George Eliot's readers, would have possessed her own copy of Dorothea's sourcebook: ‘I have been examining all the plans for cottages in Loudon's book, and picked out what seem the best things,’ she tells Sir James.
One of his plans, of two cottages for country labourers, that Dorothea might have chosen, is shown in Figure.
Each has an entrance lobby (a), a kitchen (b), back kitchen (c), parlour or best bedroom (d), dairy (f), fuel-store (g), cow-house (h), privy (i), and pigsty (k), not to mention two upstairs bedrooms.
With their conveniences and their pleasant facades, the two cottages justify her affirmation, which exactly echoes Loudon's own conviction, that ‘Life in cottages might be happier than ours, if they were real houses fit for human beings from whom we expect duties and affections.’
Although Loudon's Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm, and Villa Architecture first appeared in 1833, its presence in Dorothea's hands in 1829 probably went unnoticed by George Eliot's early readers, so firmly was it then established as a household classic and indispensable sourcebook.
Loudon's avowed objective, ‘the amelioration of the great mass of society in all countries’, may appear to a modem reader grandiose, but to the Victorian reformer a bloodless revolution in housing seemed the best way of avoiding the carnage already witnessed on the European mainland.
Under the guidance of Loudon, Disraeli's reformist landowners and manufacturers could find their way from fiction into fact, as Jane Loudon suggests by this incident, recounted in her biographical note upon her husband:
These hints were followed up by many gentlemen: and I think I never saw Mr Loudon more pleased than when a highly respectable gardener once told him that    he was living in a new and most comfortable cottage, which his master had built for him; a noble marquess, who said that he should never have thought of it, but for the observations in Mr Loudon's Gardener's Magazine , as they made him consider whether the cottage was comfortable or not, and that, as soon as he did so, he perceived its deficiencies.
The way in which the privileged were eventually led, not only by writers like Loudon but also by some of the greatest Victorian novelists, to consider whether the houses of the poor were comfortable or not, together with the consequences of their interest, will be the theme of this chapter.
Even in country areas, and in provincial towns like Middlemarch, largely untroubled by the growth of industry and the independent proletariat it generated, there are obvious reasons why the gulf between the two nations should have begun to open during the Regency.
As was explained in the previous chapter, the architecture of upper-class housing itself became increasingly divisive.
Servants no longer slept within earshot of their masters, but were banished to garret or basement, and subsequently planted out in separate wings.
The invention of back stairs and corridors rendered the family rooms increasingly private, since they now needed to be entered only for specific purposes, and no longer functioned as thoroughfares.
The introduction of bell-hanging in the late eighteenth century made it possible to station servants quite out of earshot, behind the green baize door.
The poor man was also banished from the grounds of the house to take up his station either at the gate or beyond it.
The fashion for ‘emparkment’, which started at the beginning of the eighteenth century, involved the transplantation of entire communities which were then rehoused outside the park in new-built villages.
‘Why may not a whole estate be thrown into a kind of garden?’ asked Joseph Addison in 1712.
Goldsmith, having seen the results, explains why not in 1770:
The man of wealth and pride Takes up the space that many poor supplied;
His seat, where solitary spots are seen,
Indignant spurns the cottage from the green.
But in the following year William Whitehead, a poet laureate, defends the village of Nuneham Courtenay (possibly one origin of Goldsmith's Auburn), built in the previous decade to replace the old, which stood much too close to Lord Harcourt's new Palladian mansion:
The careful matrons of the plain
Had left their cots without a sigh
Well pleased to house their little train
In happier mansions, warm and dry.
‘Mansions’ seems a slight exaggeration, since the cottages, two-up, two-down, were small by later standards, and the ‘little train' would need to be minute.
Nevertheless, given the one-roomed hovels many lived in at that period, there may indeed have been a real improvement.
The objection made to such settlements was more usually to their artificiality.
They did not express community, clustered around the green and church, in the adventitious manner of the true village; they were drawn up in parallel lines to each side of the road.
Uvedale Price objects in 1810 to villages like Nuneham Courtenay (Fig. 23a) on aesthetic grounds, as might be expected from an advocate of the picturesque: ‘Such a methodical arrangement saves all further thought and invention; but it is hardly necessary to say that nothing can be more formal and insipid.’
Moreover, although such villages were often described as ‘model’, they were evidently built more for the lord than for the labourer.
The one at Harewood (Fig. 23c), erected by Carr in 1760 for the first earl, is designed to form an appropriate approach to the great gate (Fig. 23b) of the new Palladian house.
As Loudon later comments, cottages built like this in a continuous row often had many of the inconveniences and nuisances of impoverished back streets in a country town.
Like Jane Austen, he is also well aware of the social divide that had been created by such villages, for he observes that ‘the possessors of extensive parks abhorred the appearance of a human habitation, however humble or however distant; and the first object of a new settler, of the rank of a gentleman, was, generally, to purchase everything around him; and to seclude himself in a sort of artificial forest, for his own exclusive enjoyment and that of his friends’.
This practice, he adds, is not at all understood by landowners in other countries.
He favours instead proximity to the village, not only for the improvement of the villagers, but because it will remove for the proprietor ‘that unpleasant feeling of cheerless solitude’.
Similarly, when Dorothea exclaims, ‘Instead of Lazarus at the gate, we should put the pig-sty cottages outside’, she seems to be planning to build her model ones within the grounds of the complaisant Sir James.
The majority of the rural population did not, however, live either in the parks of the landowners, or just outside them; and if estate housing did begin to improve, the situation elsewhere was far otherwise.
As the enclosure movement gained impetus towards the end of the eighteenth century, many of the poor could not afford the fences necessary to confirm their claim to the land, and therefore sold it to the wealthy; those who could were often unable to raise a living on the poor land they acquired, and sold it too; those who were squatters had no right to land at all and none to sell.
A class of landless labourers developed, wages fell, and from 1795 many parishes adopted the Speenhamland system, which relieved the congestion of the workhouse by supplementing the income of the able-bodied when wages fell below the level of subsistence.
In the 1820s William Cobbett passes some beautiful parks with principled owners on his rural rides; but these are the exceptions, for he adds,'The labouring classes = = God knows, have very few friends amongst the rich.’
Throughout the rides, he comes everywhere on evidence quite contrary:
In all the really agricultural villages and parts of the kingdom, there is a shocking decay ; a great dilapidation and constant pulling down or falling down of houses.
The farmhouses are not so many as they were forty years ago by three fourths…
The labourers' houses disappear also.
And all the useful people become less numerous.
Cobbett can himself recall the days when labourers ate bread and meat, not potatoes; when they drank their home-brewed beer by their own fireside; when young people could purchase decent furniture for a house when they married, without appealing to the parish for a miserable nest.
In his delightful account of a Methodist preacher, ‘talking very loud about houses! houses! houses!’,
Cobbett indicates that, at least in Kent, the working class was not yet reconciled to exchanging a cottage on earth for a mansion in heaven: ‘they appeared to me to be thinking much more about getting houses for themselves in this world first : just to see a little before they entered, or endeavoured to enter, or even thought much about, those ‘houses’of which the parson was speaking;houses with pig-styes and little snug gardens attached to them, together with all the other domestic and conjugal circumstances.’
The preacher's enquiry, ‘Do you KNOW…do you KNOW, that you have ready for you houses, houses I say; I say do you KNOW; do you KNOW that you have houses in the heavens not made with hands?’ falls on ears preoccupied with earthly buildings and builders.
Such sermons, Cobbett concludes, have power only over the minds of the many miserable.
Ironically, it was just as such images of contentment began to vanish that the taste for the picturesque caused the upper classes to fall in love with the idea of the cottage.
The difference between Cobbett's perspective and theirs, one often reflected in idealized contemporary painting, is indicated by the contrast between the direct, unmannered prose of Rural Rides , and James Malton's distanced, florid sentences in his Essay on British Cottage Architecture in 1798:
The greatly affluent in sumptuous equipage, as they pass the cheerful dwelling of the careless rustic…involuntarily sigh as they behold the modest care-excluding mansion of the lowly contented; and often from the belief that solid comfort can be found only in retirement,forsake their noisy abodes, to unload their oppressing inquietudes in the tranquil retreat of the rural shelter.
Often has the aching brow of royalty resigned its crown, to be decked with the soothing chaplet of the shepherd swain.
The picturesque taste invariably distances and romanticizes, viewing the cottage from the outside, not the inside; regarding it as a feature in the landscape, not as a place to live in.
This is particularly marked in The Mysteries of Udolpho , for when Mrs Radcliffe describes the cottage in which her heroine has taken shelter, she writes of this ‘bower of sweets’ as though the reader stood outside it, although Emily, whose view he shares, is indoors, at her bedroom window: ‘The cottage, which was shaded by the woods from the intenser rays of the sun, and was open only to his evening  light, was covered entirely with vines, fig-trees, and jessamine whose flowers surpassed in size and fragrance any that Emily had seen.’
Richard Payne Knight, in his Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of Taste (1805), observes that the ‘objects and circumstances called picturesque ’ can ‘afford no pleasure, but to persons conversant with the art of painting’.
When Dorothea cannot admire the sort of painting her uncle likes to praise —‘They are a language I do not understand’— Mr Brooke attributes her inability to defective education.
Her indifference to art lies rather in her sensitivity — unusual in that period — to the reality of poverty.
‘I should like to make life beautiful — I mean everybody's life,’ she later remarks.
‘And then all this immense expense of art, that seems somehow to lie outside life and make it no better for the world, pains one.’
Prompted by this wish, Dorothea approaches her cottages from the inside, beginning with the plan; but the enthusiasts of the eighteenth century and Regency began with the elevation, and often effectively ended there as well.
They were not seeking, as she was, to improve the living conditions of the labourer; they were concerned with the visual beauty of an estate.
The many enchanting designs from that period are almost wholly devoted to external appearance, to cottages as features in the landscape.
They function as a diversion to the eye, a focus for a view, a foretaste of grandeurs to come at the entrance to a park.
Their role as accommodation is strictly secondary.
In his ‘Red Book’ for Blaise Castle (1795), Humphry Repton describes the  creation of one such picture.
Although he feels that the view from the dining-room of the new house will be relatively unimportant, he takes great pains to render it interesting, if not allegoric (Fig. 24).
Beneath the castle he proposes to open a bay in the woods and build there a cottage that ‘will give an air of cheerfulness and inhabitancy to the scene which would without it be too sombre, because the castle tho’ perfectly in character with the solemn dignity of the surrounding woods, increases rather than relieves the apparent solitude’.
The smoke from the cottage chimney will lend a ‘vapoury repose’ and motion to the scene which a painter himself might strive in vain to capture, making the valley seem larger than it really is.
The cottage itself must seem to belong to the owner of the mansion and the castle, but without imitating the character of either, exciting notions rather of ‘la Simplicité soignée’.
Raising his eyes from his mutton, the owner may see inscribed upon his own horizon the acceptable difference between the rich and the poor.
One did not, moreover, have to be very rich to cultivate such an outlook.
John Plaw's design in 1800 for a cottage or small farmhouse, ‘Intended for a Gentleman in the New Forest…as an object to be seen from his Mansion’(Fig. 25), has a much less extensive landscape than that of Blaise Castle in mind, but it is typical of many at about the turn of the century.
It makes an enchanting picture, formed from those features that the pastoral poetry of the period had established as the attractions of rural life: thatched roof, ascending smoke, mimic antiquity in Gothic window and    drip-course, contented swains and kine, over-arching trees.
It only lacks the overgrowth, which refuses to be mimicked, that delights both Emily in The Mysteries of Udolpho and Richard Payne Knight in his poem,The Landscape (1794):
Nor yet unenvy'd, to whose humbler lot
Falls the retired and antiquated cot;
Its roof with weeds and mosses cover'd o'er,
And honeysuckles climbing round the door;
While mantling vines along its walls are spread,
And clustering ivy decks the chimney's head.
No plan for the upper floor is given, and the ground floor plan is very simple, with none of those carefully considered amenities that Dorothea might have looked for in Loudon's Encyclopaedia .
The picturesque taste certainly had its satirists: William Combe's poem The Tour of Doctor Syntax in Search of the Picturesque (1809) is one example.
It is illustrated by Rowlandson who takes evident delight in depicting the encounter of the gentry with peasant life (Fig. 26).
Neither writers nor architects were wholly unaware that these were to be houses for human beings to live in.
In Sense and Sensibility Jane Austen's sensible Edward much prefers a ‘snug farmhouse’ to ‘ruined, tattered cottages’, a preference which amazes Marianne, who cultivates her sensibilities.
Repton himself comments in his Enquiry that ‘the ‘antiquated cot’, whose chimney is choked with ivy, may perhaps yield a residence for squalid misery and want’; and an awareness develops that cottages do not have to be ruinous to be picturesque.
John Papworth, for example, remarks that their genuine adornments are neatness and cleanliness, for these suggest industry and cheerfulness, whereas ‘the broken casement, the patched wall, the sunken roof, the hatch unhinged, the withered shrub, are corresponding testimonies of the husbandman's relaxed energies and broken spirit’.
When it came to planning, however, very little seemed to follow from these observations.
Joseph Gandy, who claims in 1805 that his designs originate ‘in the humane desire of increasing the comforts and improving the condition of the Labouring Poor’, makes little provision for them.
The family he proposed to house within a single room (Fig. 27a) could scarcely have cultivated the ‘habit of neatness, and attention to cleanliness’ which, he suggests, should do much to form ‘the dispositions of the Labouring Class’.
His priority remains external appearance, for ‘the advancement of Public Taste requires more than this — that we should combine convenience of arrangement with elegance in external appearance; a point of much consequence to the general aspect of the country’.
As a result, the labourer has no view down the vista of which, from his master's point of view, he forms the conclusion, his windows being so arranged that he cannot overlook it.
William Shenstone, writing forty years earlier, explains in more realistic terms that the privileged interest themselves in the cottage ‘partly on account of the variety it may introduce; on account of the tranquillity that seems to reign there; and perhaps,(I am somewhat afraid) on account of the pride of human nature’.
Even the most conscientious writers did not find it easy to part with the picturesque view.
Jane Austen may seem in Sense and Sensibility to join with Edward in preferring cottages in good repair, even at the cost of the picturesque; but on another occasion, in Northanger Abbey , she appears to side with Catherine, who is so delighted by the view of ‘a sweet little cottage’ among apple trees which she sees from the windows of the parsonage at Woodston that her enthusiasm even saves it from demolition.
Loudon himself, though anxious to ‘discard those fanciful comfortless dwellings which are often erected as ornamental cottages’, admits that he would ‘scarcely have courage to pull down a fine old specimen of a picturesque cottage, unless in a case of extreme necessity’.
Even the socially conscious Victorians allow their principles to waver on this question.
Mrs Gaskell, who knew much better than Jane Austen how the poor really lived, and saw that her readers knew it too by taking them inside (at least in towns), nevertheless allows her heroine, Margaret, to take pleasure in sketching the exterior of a squatter cottage which is due for demolition in the New Forest.
When Margaret returns once more to Helstone, educated in reality by the industrial north, she is still grieved to find that it has disappeared and that a new one, tidy and respectable, has been built in its place.
Dickens's Will Fern, with first-hand knowledge of life inside one, complains of this female tendency: ‘It looks well in a picter, I've heerd say; but there an't  weather in picters, and maybe ‘tis fitter for that than for a place to live in.’
One might add, however, that there is generally very little weather in most of Dickens's country cottages either, although one finds a good deal of it in his towns.
George Eliot too is not without sympathy for the picturesque, and admits that ‘the stray hovel, its old, old thatch full of mossy hills and valleys with wondrous modulations of light and shadow’, is an element of joy in landscape to her midland-bred soul; yet her attack on the picturesque view of the decaying farm, owned by Mr Brooke and ironically known as ‘Freeman's End’, shows her to be substantially in sympathy with Dorothea.
The place has all the appropriate externals, chimneys choked with ivy, windows with jasmine, worm-eaten shutters, mossy thatch, all of which ‘under the quiet light of a sky marbled with high clouds would have made a sort of picture which we have all passed over as a ‘charming bit’, touching other sensibilities than those which are stirred by the depression of the agricultural interest, with the sad lack of farming capital, as seen constantly in the newspapers of that time’.
The impoverished tenant farmer, Dagley, with his pitchfork and milking hat, cuts an appropriate figure in such a setting; but his sentiments are not those of ‘the lowly contented’, and his house is anything but a ‘care-excluding mansion’.
His exchange with the negligent Mr Brooke is abrasive, and the price paid for upper-class ignorance in human misery — the worn wife, the thieving child, the drunkenness throws into unsparing relief his landlord's enthusiasm for the fine arts and social reform.
He wonders at Mr Brooke's advocacy of the first Reform Bill, for in Dagley's view its purpose is ‘to send you an’ your likes a-scuttlin'; an' wi' pretty strong-smellin' things too’.
With the passage of the Poor Law Amendment Act in 1834 the condition of labourers deteriorated still further.
Outdoor relief was removed, and the indsigent were consigned to workhouses which were designed to be punitively unattractive.
In 1839, the year of the Chartist petition to Parliament (itself precipitated by the Act), Disraeli's delinquent Lord Marney is pulling down as many of his cottages as possible so that the poor do not become a charge upon his parish.
He regards eight shillings a week for those in work as quite sufficient, even for a family with eight children, for after all people who work in the open air, a healthy life, do not require as much food as those in manufacturing districts.
Nevertheless, even beyond the 1840s, when the novel had begun to venture into the houses of the poor, rural interiors are almost invariably pleasant; it is those in towns that more often reveal indigence and misery.
The picturesque view, which envisages life as art, took a long time to die.
An increasing number of architects had, however, begun to explore the distance between poetry and fact.
The process had already begun in 1775 when Nathaniel Kent wrote:
The shattered hovels which half the poor in this kingdom are obliged to put up with, is truly affecting to a heart fraught with humanity.
Those who condescend to visit these miserable tenements can testify that neither health nor decency can be preserved in them.
Whatever the poets might say, no children could ‘run to lisp their sire's return’ and climb his knee in a hovel, measuring 7 feet by 12 feet, housing five people, the bed's end within a foot of the fire and the floor no better than the pavement of a street.
Edmund Bartell, who describes the realities in his Picturesque Improvements of 1804, is fond of quoting from Thompson and Cowper, in order to illustrate the discrepancy between the actuality and their poetic view of rural life.
Some years earlier, John Wood tries ‘however quaint the thought may appear…to feel as the cottager himself; and for that end to visit him; to enquire after the conveniences he wanted, and into the inconveniences he laboured under’.
His account of the ‘shattered, dirty, inconvenient, miserable hovels’ that he entered has little relation to the picturesque idyll.
He lists the ‘inconveniences’ he found to be most common, some of which are directly attributable to picturesque design.
The dwellings were often damp as a result of their situation; not only was this chosen to please the owner's eye, but the cottage was sometimes actually sunk in the earth, in order to preserve a humble outline.
Rooms were too few and stairs too narrow; ceilings were too low or, on the upper floor, did not exist, so that sleepers stifled in summer and froze in winter.
They tended to face north and west when they should have faced south and east, because they were there to be looked at, not to be looked from, and the windows of the mansion faced in the contrary direction.
Since entrances were not screened and materials were poor — many of them one brick thick or built in pisé , a version of mud  — they were cold and cheerless, with rain actually driving in through the walls.
The frailty of such buildings is indicated in William Godwin's novel,Caleb Williams (1794), for Mr Falkland seems to be able to demolish a cottage with little more than his bare hands in order to prevent a fire from spreading.
This was the actuality of the pretty designs so liberally provided by the cottage enthusiasts of the time.
Wood's principles are those of Loudon more than three decades later: ‘a palace is nothing more than a cottage IMPROVED’, he wrote.
Both consider that house design should be based upon the cottage scaled up, not the palace scaled down.
Conditions were, however, slow to improve.
If one-roomed cottages were rarely built in the nineteenth century, those with two were common, though very few survive today.
A reporter in the Morning Chronicle , 24 October 1849, describes one vividly: the mud outside, the low doorway, the dark and chill interior, the sparse and derelict furniture.
A similar room is sketched by John Brown in 1854 for George Godwin's London Shadows (Fig. 28).
But the writer in the Morning Chronicle , although a punctilious recorder, only alludes in his final sentence to the worst feature of such dwellings: ‘And yet you fancy you could put up with everything but the close earthy smell, which you endeavour in vain to escape by breathing short and quickly.’
That earthy smell, though keenly sensed, is euphemistic.
It is not until the 1860s or even later that details of plumbing are really considered, even by architects.
Henry Roberts, an important reformer, is statistically most precise in his Dwellings of the Labouring Classes (1850), but is entirely unspecific in his discussion of defective drainage.
Novelists writing for a ‘polite’ audience are even more evasive: Dickens, for example, and even Mrs Gaskell, tend to avoid smells and do not define the nature of the ‘stickiness’they sometimes mention underfoot.
Kingsley is almost alone in saying what he means in this respect.
As his Colonel Bracebridge remarks to the hero of Yeast :
What a yet unspoken poetry there is in that very sanitary reform!
It is
the great
fact of the age.
We shall have men arise and write epics on it, when they
have
learnt that ‘to the pure all things are pure’, and that science and
usefulness
contain a divine element, even in their lowest appliances…
Smells and the Man I sing
There's a beginning at once.
Why don't you rather, with your practical
power,
turn sanitary reformer-the only true soldier — and conquer those real
devils and
natural enemies' of Englishmen, carbonic acid and sulphuretted hydrogen?
River, meadow, and woodland may lead the spectator to predict ‘Arcadia among fertility, loveliness, industry and wealth’, but the illusion can be sustained only by those who keep their distance, for such ‘picturesque villages are generally the perennial hotbeds of fever and ague, of squalid penury, sottish profligacy, dull discontent too stale for words’.
The contrast between the remoter, romantic view and the actuality when seen close up is illustrated by George Godwin in Town Swamps and Social Bridges , published in 1859 (Fig. 29), a decade after Yeast .
As  Kingsley's hero comments: ‘No wonder you have typhus here…with this filthy open drain running right before the door.’
But when he asks why it is not cleaned out, he is told that the man of the house is in no humour for it, after the fourteen hours of his day's labour, and that there is in any case no water for the purpose since the poor must pay to fetch it up the hill.
It was not until the second half of the nineteenth century that houses for the rural working class really began to improve.
Even the reforming Wood designs a one roomed cottage (Fig. 27b), intended to accommodate a family with one or two children in a space of only 13 feet square.
When his plan is compared with Gandy's (Fig. 27a), the main difference lies in the care he has taken to consider what it might be like to live inside.
There is a privy (D) separated from the rest of the cottage and reached from–the outside — a necessity with an earth closet.
There is a separate pantry (C), and a porch (A) which both screens the front door and acts as a fuel store.
Both fireplace and bed are placed beyond the reach of draughts.
His ceilings are a generous 8 feet high (not 7 feet); the walls are almost three times the normal thickness (not 6 but 16 inches, if made of stone), and the building, far from being sunk in the ground, is raised 15–18 inches above it to avoid damp.
But where available floor space and amenities are concerned, there is no comparison between his design and the one that Dorothea might have chosen (Fig. 22).
Wood indeed advocates three bedrooms, but it is clear from the majority of his designs that he does not expect his labourers to achieve them.
Beyond the mid-century standards improved considerably.
The three-bedroomed cottage was certainly rare in Dorothea's time, but by the close of Queen Victoria's reign the majority of those new-built were of this type.
The impetus for change was to come, however, less from acknowledging the true condition of rural cottages, than from discovering what working-class housing in towns was really like.
As a single woman living with her uncle, the negligent landlord Mr Brooke, Dorothea has good reason to concern herself with cottages, although she intends  them for the estate of the obliging Sir James, having presumably abandoned her uncle as a hopeless case.
Marriage to Mr Casaubon is, in many senses, another matter.
The double cottages under his care in Lowick, with their low rents, their livestock, their back gardens, and gilliflowers, make Dorothea ashamed of her desire to live in a parish with a greater share of the world's misery.
Because the 1830s marked the translation of much of the rural population- and with it the problem of housing the poor-from the country into the cities, Dorothea's second, more satisfactory marriage to Will Ladislaw seems symbolic: she turns her attention, one assumes, from rural to urban housing, as he does his from pictures to politics.
In 1801 the population of London had been 900,000; by 1831, at 1,654,994, it had nearly doubled.
During the decade 1831–41, the number of those living in industrial towns increased by over 40 per cent, and the population of England was, for the first time, dominantly urban.
1832 was, moreover, not only the year of the first Reform Bill, but of a major epidemic of cholera.
The condition of the urban poor could no longer be ignored.
The context of Milton's ‘glittering spires and pinnacles’, over which Uvedale Price had enthused at the close of the eighteenth century as the desirable outline of a Gothic city, was at last identified as Pandemonium, the creation of the ‘dark satanic mills’.
The true Gothic city, as Pugin indicates in his contrasting townscapes of 1440 and 1840 (Fig. 30), was a thing of the past, not only because its architecture had largely been destroyed, but even more because the spirit that had animated it had been wholly lost.
Where the skyline of the town in 1440 is composed of spires, expressive of religious aspiration, the vertical accent in 1840 is provided by factory chimneys, whose smoke ascends as incense to the new God of Mammon.
Where the town in 1440 has 13 churches, in 1840 it has 7, all new-built, for in nineteenth century England more churches were erected than in any other century since the middle ages.
But these have fragmented into seven different denominations, and are no longer— like Grey Friars or St Maries Abbey — sanctuaries for the indigent and outcast, who are consigned instead to the lunatic asylum and new jail, both expressions of Utilitarianism.
Where in the old town education was the province of the church, and even the mercantile ethic assumed a religious form in the Guildhall, in the new one secular and technological structures dominate: gas works and iron works, new town hall and socialist hall of science.
Humanitarian ideals have totally vanished.
Rural housing had been the first to receive attention because it could be regarded as the responsibility of each landowner; but the housing in towns was literally nobody's business and could pass unnoticed, just as factory hands could be laid off in a recession, as farming labourers with tied cottages could not.
For Robert Thornton, Mrs Gaskell's honourable industrialist, this indifference is almost a matter of principle: ‘The masters would be trenching on the independence of their hands, in a way that I, for one, would not feel justified in doing, if we interfered too much with the life they lead out of the mills.’
Margaret, who comes from a rural background, and whose sympathies have much in common with Dorothea's, objects to this as ‘an   unchristian and isolated position’.
So, too, thought many others, especially Disraeli, who in Sybil and Coningsby constantly urges the point that property, in land and the means of production alike, is indivisible from responsibility.
Mr Thornton's position may be more sympathetically received today, when ‘paternalism’ has become a dirty word; but if, as a later critic was to claim, such philanthropists as Dorothea wished only to fulfil their own personal sentiment of pity and justice, and could not escape the disability of their arbitrary self-appointment, they undoubtedly had a great deal to contribute in the absence of state measures to fill the gap.
In his London Shadows Godwin even finds a function for the voyeurs who made it fashionable to tour the slums ‘and wonder at the peculiarities of that strange land’, because ‘it was partly owing to these visits that some improvements were carried into effect’.
By the 1840s the influence of the philanthropists was considerable.
1842 saw the Poor Law Board's Report on the Sanitary Conditions of the Labouring Population , and also the foundation of the magazine,The Builder , edited by George Godwin and devoted to housing and sanitary reform.
In 1843 the Government set up a Royal Commission on the Health of Towns; in 1844 the Health of Towns Association was founded, whose central committee included Disraeli and Lord John Manners, the other moving spirit in the Young England Movement, characterized as Lord Henry Sydney in Coningsby .
Whatever their political persuasions, it was the early work of such reformers and philanthropists which created a climate of opinion that began to see the housing of the very poor as part of the social purpose of the state.
It was far easier than might now be supposed to remain ignorant of the deplorable housing in English cities, even where it affected the great majority, as in the London of Little Dorrit , with its 10,000 responsible houses and 50,000 lairs, ‘where people lived so unwholesomely, that fair water put into their crowded rooms on Saturday night, would be corrupt on Sunday morning’.
The responsible houses, ‘frowning heavily on the streets they composed’, could remain irresponsibly ignorant of the 50,000 lairs.
As was pointed out in the previous chapter, the plan of the Victorian house and the Victorian city have this in common: that both are so designed that the few who live on the privileged side of the divide need know nothing of the many who are crowded beyond it into a fraction of the space.
‘In many instances,’ writes Godwin, ‘these hotbeds fever and vice are so effectually hidden by goodly houses that the inhabitants of the latter are scarcely aware of the poverty and disease which exist within a stone's throw from their own doors.’
Mrs Gaskell, when living in Manchester, need never have set foot (had she so chosen) in the slums of Miles Platting and Ancoats with their crowded courts.
As Engels wrote in 1845:
The town itself is peculiarly built, so that a person may live in it for years, and go in and out daily without coming into contact with a working-people's quarter or even with workers, that is, so long as he confines himself to his business or pleasure walks.
This arises chiefly from the fact, that by unconscious tacit agreement, as well as with outspoken conscious determination, the working-people's quarters are sharply separated from the sections of the city reserved for the  middle-class…
And the finest part of the arrangement is this, that the members of this money aristocracy can take the shortest road through the middle of all the labouring districts to their places of business without ever seeing that they are in the midst of the grimy misery that lurks to the right and the left.
On a less generalized scale, these contrasts are part of the experience of Mary Barton , where, for example, the workman, unemployed because times are bad, observes the manufacturers in their carriages visiting shops that contain expensive luxuries; or where Jem Wilson leaves the destitution of the Davenport cellar to seek an infirmary order from Mr Carson in his luxurious library, at his well-spread breakfast table.
The only feature of the city shared by rich and poor alike was the atmosphere, and as time went on the manufacturers stopped living next to their mills, as Robert Thornton does, and retreated further and further into the suburbs.
In part the slums of Manchester were created, as slums so often are, by this departure of the prosperous to modem houses of improved design in healthier areas.
Engels vividly describes the decay of the old town, its once spacious houses crammed with tenements, ‘dirty, old, and tumbledown, and the construction of the side streets utterly horrible’.
But a great deal of new building was also needed to accommodate the influx from the country — Ancoats itself was developed in the nineteenth century — and this could be equally substandard before it was well up.
Much of it was erected by small speculators with limited means, who came themselves from the working class.
Engels quotes from a description of one such development, produced by the cooperation of a carpenter and bricklayer, in which a whole street followed the course of a ditch to save the cost of excavating cellars in which people were to live.
As a result, not a house in that street escaped the cholera.
Conditions elsewhere, with dung-hills in the middle of unpaved streets, were little better.
The artisan Wodgate in Sybil , one ‘vast squalid suburb’, its alleys ‘seldom above a yard wide, and streaming with filth’, is evidently no exaggeration; many such ‘gutters of abomination, and piles of foulness, and stagnant pools of filth’ existed.
Godwin describes a similar street in London, Paradise Row, behind the new-built Paddington station, where the heaps of refuse before the pitiful buildings were a cause of wonder to all visitors.
It would be mistaken to assume, however, that developments on a larger scale, financed by more prosperous contractors, were necessarily an improvement.
With their broader streets and freshly painted houses they might appear to be so, but, as Engels remarked, those streets were often unpaved and lacked a sewer, the paint was bound to fade within a decade, and their apparent solidity of build would then be revealed as no more than that of bricks laid end to end.
In the novels of Dickens, slum housing invariably goes upon crutches, but that does not necessarily mean that it is advanced in years.
Whether old or new, these undesirable buildings were always overcrowded, housing not only people, but animals as well.
‘London cows’, as Godwin observes, ‘are, in many cases, kept in places where the poor brutes are not only destroyed  themselves, but are made the cause of destruction to those living around.
(Fig. 31a) The sheep in his other illustration (Fig. 31b) seem equally reluctant to enter one of the cellar-dwellings already referred to, which could prove uninhabitable by both animals and human beings.
The Davenports’ second cellar in Mary Barton , though described as a ‘back apartment’, and making a difference in the rent of threepence, is fit for neither with its floor of evil-smelling mud and its grating through which drop ‘the moisture from pigsties, and worse abominations’.
Two rooms to a family of five would indeed be a luxury.
In his London Shadows , Godwin removes the facade from a house (Fig. 32a–d ), so that the reader may see for himself how many people are crammed in behind it.
The room on the second floor houses fifteen people, and the other three little less, all at the same rent of 2s. 3d. per week.
Conditions like these were not exceptional.
Both Roberts and Engels, for example, make specific mention of the aristocratic parish of St George's, Hanover Square.
According to Engels, two-thirds of its working people possess no more than a single room per family, and Roberts's figures are even more specific:929 families have only one room,623 only one bed.
In St Giles he visits a room,22 feet by 16 feet, which houses 40 to 60 people, not to mention cats and dogs.
Sometimes conditions could be even worse: Godwin, for example, describes a London court where ‘the basement story of nearly all the houses was filled with foetid refuse, of which it had been the receptacle for years’, and one water barrel of 50 to 60 gallons is intended to serve two houses, containing between them at least a hundred people.
In such conditions the inadequacies of rubbish disposal, water supply, sewage, and drainage became insuperable problems on a scale unknown in country villages.
What are possibly the rubbish heaps of Our Mutual Friend loomed even larger in fact than they do in fiction.
They are illustrated by Godwin (Fig. 33) with the caption given.
This suburban mountain, the parkland of the poor, was composed not only of soot, ashes, and household detritus, but possibly of excrement as well.
Water supplies, invariably inadequate, were often polluted.
Godwin illustrates on a small scale the proximity of cesspool and pump (Fig. 34a) which an investigator in the town of Stafford in 1866 found to be a more general rule: ‘The water supply of the whole town is obtained from wells, many of them in close proximity to receptacles of filth; and I am in the habit of saying, partly in joke, but principally in earnest, that the persons living at No. 6 drink the water that is made at No. 7.
Moreover, when Dickens alludes in Bleak House to ‘a hemmed-in churchyard, pestiferous and obscene, whence malignant diseases are communicated to the bodies of our dear brothers and sisters who have not departed’, he is not being metaphorical.
Godwin illustrates the crowded and shallow graves of St Pancras's churchyard (Fig. 34b) with the comment, ‘The retention of burial-places in the midst of the living is a costly wickedness and a national disgrace.’
The disposal of sewage was, of course, a related problem of equal magnitude, which the invention of the water-closet exacerbated rather than solved, because the available sewers could not accommodate the increased volume.
A smell from the   drains preoccupied even the most prosperous, due to the consequent backing up, but conditions among the poor were infinitely worse.
In his discussion of The Legal Aspects of Sanitary Reform , Edward Jenkins includes an account of newly built cottages in the East End of London in the 1860s, where the contents of an adjacent cesspool were actually being used to make mortar for further dwellings, crammed into the back gardens of the first.
In Alton Locke Kingsley takes the reader into a house like the ones depicted by Godwin with the caption given (Fig. 35), where the rushlight picks up reflections through the broad chinks in the floorboards of the sewer below.
That sewer, with its ‘phosphorescent scraps of rotten fish…bubbles of poisonous gas, and bloated carcases of dogs, and lumps of offal, floating on the stagnant olive-green hell-broth’, is also the occupants' water-supply.
Accounts as overt as Kingsley's are, as I have said, most unusual in Victorian novels.
The pitiful rooms of the labouring poor are more often detailed, though real  destitution like that of the Davenports is rare.
It is the domestic courage and creativity of the poor in the most adverse circumstances that is usually emphasized.
Although the Hexams' Thames-side tenement, a former mill, in Our Mutual Friend , is in itself atrocious —‘roof, and walls, and floor…alike had a look of decomposition’— it is the effort to make the place a home —‘a small dresser, making a spare show of the commonest articles of crockery and cooking vessels’ that is drawn to the reader's attention.
In the same vein, Mrs Gaskell commends the order and arrangement of Alice Wilson's cellar dwelling in Mary Barton , the check curtain at the modest bedhead, the ‘little bit of crockery-ware…ranged on the mantelpiece, where also stood her candlestick and box of matches’.
Godwin describes a similar room, measuring only 7 feet by 6 feet, containing no food but a small crust on a shelf beside the teapot.
But above the fireplace are several framed prints that offer happier perspectives: a middle-aged couple in a richly furnished room; two lovers walking on a terrace, overlooking trees and gardens bright in the light of a clear sky.
‘Poor as this place is,’ Godwin concludes, ‘it is still a home .’
But, as Godwin comments, the room he describes is not an example of the direst stage of London poverty, for it contains various objects that could be sold.
Nevertheless, in fact as well as in fiction, even those almost totally indigent retained their pride.
In his formidable survey of 1849–50,London Labour and the London Poor , Mayhew describes a room in the poorest of his three classes of costermonger.
The roof, which is stripped of tiles, provides the water-supply; the chimney smokes so thickly that the opposite wall is barely visible; the few remaining window-panes are stained and the majority are stuffed with rags and paper.
There is very little furniture: a mattress on the floor; three chairs, of which the best has no back and only half its stuffing; and three or four old mats to stop objects dropping through the cracks in the floor on to the donkeys below.
Yet even here the fireplace is carefully ‘dressed’, with an earthenware sugar-basin in the centre, and a cracked teacup and saucer to each side.
But it too is a home, which some might starve to death rather than leave:
Deceased died on Saturday morning.
The family never had enough to eat.
Coroner: ‘It seems to me deplorable that you did not go into the workhouse.’
Witness: ‘We wanted the comforts of our little home.’
A juror asked what the comforts were, for he only saw a little straw in the corner of the room, the windows of which were broken.
The witness began to cry, and said they had a quilt and other little things.
The deceased said he never would go into the workhouse.
This is no fiction, but a report from the Daily Telegraph of 1864 which so impressed itself upon Ruskin that he reprinted it in red type in Sesame and Lilies : ‘Be sure, the facts themselves are written in that colour, in a book which we shall all of us, literate or illiterate, have to read our page of, some day.’
An assault on the conscience as direct as Ruskin's may prove to be a two-edged weapon, eliciting self-justification rather than remorse.
The reformers were normally more circumspect.
It is difficult, with twentieth-century hindsight, to appreciate just  how many obstacles stood in their way.
No one, for example , was quite certain how diseases were disseminated.
At the mid-century there were three conflicting theories — by germs, by spontaneous production, by atmospheric (miasmic) generation (Fig. 34c).
The last (held by Florence Nightingale and Charles Kingsley, to name only two) was for a time more popular than the first; and although to some extent the preventive measures suggested by each did overlap, their priorities were somewhat different.
The vagueness of novelists is sometimes due to these uncertainties, but they can capitalize imaginatively upon them.
When Charles Kingsley writes in his description of the sewer of ‘the slow sullen rows of oily ripple…sending up…hot breaths of miasma’, he is being quite specific; but in Dickens's Little Dorrit the word is virtually symbolic of confusion, as the pervasive fog is in Bleak House .
A sense of diffused uncertainty, of groping in the dark for remedies, associates itself with the theory even where it is accepted.
Charlotte M.Yonge, one such believer and a literal writer, associates the miasma from a pond with a hysterical state of neurotic dread in The Young Stepmother .
This uncertainty might, on the one hand, encourage social commentators in the attitude expressed by a writer in The Economist in 1848: ‘In our condition suffering and evil are nature's admonitions; they cannot be got rid of; and the impatient attempts of benevolence to banish them from the world by legislation, before benevolence has learnt their object and their end, have always been productive of more evil than good.’
On the other hand, the mysterious passage of disease can be made in fiction to serve God's judgement on the rich.
In Kingsley's social novels particularly, the diseases of the poor have a way of transmitting themselves to the other nation by way of their omissions — neglected ponds or the products of tailors’ sweat-shops.
If, in the Victorian novel, a disproportionate number of working-class interiors are attractive, it is partly because the theorists of infection were all agreed that cleanliness was the first step towards prevention.
Moreover, many writers took the opportunity to stress that the other nation was quite capable of home-making, the root of all goodness in that period.
‘Oh! if those who rule the destinies of nations would but remember…how hard it is for the very poor to have engendered in their hearts that love of home from which all domestic virtues spring, when they live in dense and squalid masses where social decency is lost, or rather never found,’ Dickens exclaims in The Old Curiosity Shop .
Environmental determinists are also numerous among the social commentators of the period: ‘Wretched houses make wretched homes; and while immoral or slatternly habits convert fine dwellings into styes, it is almost as true that dirty and unhealthy habitations transfer a taint to the character and habits of the persons who occupy them.’
For a nation of monetarists, however, more than this was required.
Others therefore argued that improved housing would bring financial benefits by lessening the number of the ‘dangerous classes’ and allowing the rest ‘to play their proper part in increasing the sum of general wealth and general happiness’.
Even rewards such as these were a shade oblique for those who expected a direct return upon money invested.
Just as the poor could not expect to get something for nothing, so the rich did not expect to get  nothing for something.
The most powerful argument of all, which, despite its futility in a large proportion of cases, was advanced repeatedly from 1840 to 1880, was that working-class housing could be made to pay.
Henry Roberts, who has been described as the motivating force behind housing improvements, makes this –he first of his contentions; his second is health, and his third moral improvement.
When one considers that the rents for the poorest housing were often as high, per square foot, as those of the wealthy middle class, his argument may seem less unconvincing; but of course, the area per person regarded as model involved a greater number of square feet.
Where such projects did produce their ‘fair return’(a minimum of 5 per cent), their tenants were drawn from the relatively prosperous upper working class of artisans, and not from the truly indigent for whom they were intended.
The second might be found in greater numbers among the inhabitants of lodging houses in great cities.
Mayhew describes a spectrum of these, some quite appalling, with 6 or 7 to a single verminous bed, a few others almost home-like.
The model lodging houses were, he found, neater and more sanitary but much stricter; indeed, they seem sometimes to have been not too far distant from the workhouse, scarcely calculated to engender the love of home.
Mrs Gaskell, writing to an American friend in 1860, certainly thought that those in Streatham Street were not designed to be so: ‘There is but one sink & c for every floor; the fireplaces were the poorest kind of parlour grate, over or by which there was not the least [hope]of cooking; there was not a peg, a shelf, or a cupboard, or even a recess in which one might be cheaply made.’
Moreover, she states quite emphatically that ‘they don't pay as an investment’, despite a rent of.
for two bare though good-sized rooms.
Thanksgiving Buildings (Fig. 36), which Roberts designed himself, so named because they were built with money given in thanksgiving for the removal of the cholera, were less expensive, ls. per person in a double room.
They were not, however, fully tenanted, perhaps because the ‘stringent regulations as to the hours of closing and constant supervision’ discouraged the single women for whom they were intended.
The first of the Peabody buildings, financed by a trust founded by an American philanthropist in 1862, charged 2s. 6d. per week for a room for a single person; while tenements for families, some of 2 rooms each, some of 3, cost a maximum of 5s.
The rents seem low, but when one considers that Mayhew's seller of songs with a dependent wife earned less than 10s. a week and sometimes less than 5s., it is easy to see why he might cling to his far from model room, where he has his own ‘bits and sticks’, even at an exorbitant rent of 2s. 3d.
Despite its lack of amenities, he might in any case have preferred it to Peabody accommodation, with its ban upon wallpaper and its walls bare of plaster to prevent vermin.
When in 1857 something new began to grow in Nova Scotia Gardens, financed by Angela Burdett-Coutts at the prompting of Dickens, the residents protested so vehemently that they had to be pacified by the architect and restrained by the law.
Not only was their dustheap to be removed, but much of the slum building that surrounded it.
Columbia Square was built on principles similar to the Thanksgiving and Peabody buildings; but it did allow for a club room and a covered area where  children might play on wet days, where Roberts had avoided communal amenities, questioning whether the working class would have time to enjoy them.
Dickens, who was always convinced like his Mr Sleary that people must be amused, certainly took an active interest in its planning.
In this role he was more specifically practical than his novels might suggest, advising Angela Burdett-Coutts to consult with the Board of Health, rather than simply trusting to her architect, in order to ‘get good sanitary arrangements on the most efficient and simple terms’.
But, although it was well designed and firmly built, Columbia Square was also grim.
It was followed by the much more extravagant and fanciful Columbia Market, but this overawed potential vendors, who were not allowed to do too many things (like sticking bills on the columns inside), while potential buyers of the poorer classes did not dare to put a foot inside it.
It became successively a fish market, a cheap restaurant, and finally a store for the London County Council.
Buildings designed to accommodate families as independent units were more individual and less institutionalized.
Although almost all working-class housing in the novel is of that type, since it can better be represented as a ‘home’, it was for that very reason much too expensive for the very poor.
The little terraced houses, with gardens front and back, that Loudon advocates have now doubtless been   demolished as substandard, for each floor could measure as little as 12 feet by 12 feet; but they were not only a great advance on the slum housing in industrial towns; they provided interiors that could give the domestic virtues at least a chance of growth.
Even they, however, were intended for mechanics, the upper level of the working class.
Prince Albert, who did much to promote a concern for working-class housing, not least by dying himself from typhoid, gave his name to a model building for four families which, although again intended for artisans, had been rejected as too ambitious by the organizers of the Great Exhibition (Fig. 37).
The dimensions of the flats are almost as modest as Loudon's, but they make the maximum use of the space provided, as the key to the plan suggests.
The three bedrooms cater ‘for that separation which, with a family, is so essential to morality and decency’; moreover, ‘the children's bedrooms…opening out of the living-room, an opportunity is afforded for the exercise of parental watchfulness’.
With so much vigilance about, it is surprising how human and mature the working classes appear to be in many novels.
The facade of the building at least escaped from rigour.
Designs for artisans did not in any case reach to the root of the problem-the housing of the poorest.
In the 1850s Godwin wrote: ‘The problem how capitalists are to provide such accommodation as will be liked, with a pecuniary return, is not solved yet’; it never was.
As he noted at the time, new houses intended for single families were subdivided into tenements on their first letting, for the very poor simply could not afford to pay their landlords a realistic return on their investment.
Slum clearance was no answer, since the indigent were simply displaced from the centre of cities to make slums of the suburbs; it was useless, and moreover dangerous, to destroy the housing of the poor without replacing it, as Godwin again remarked, with his eye on Paris.
In an effort to find a solution to the problem in its widest sense, realism began to replace the idealism of the 1840s.
Robert Kerr caused outrage in the mid-1860s by suggesting that the doctrine of three bedrooms (stipulated in the 1840s when the blue books revealed a high incidence of incest) should be abandoned; but, though the moral problems did not of course vanish, his view came to be increasingly shared.
Where Roberts had commended Prince Albert's provision of three bedrooms because the use of the living-room as sleeping quarters led to unwholesome crowding, the realists began to point out that the crowding occurred in any case, since even those who could afford to rent the extra rooms, could not afford to furnish them.
All in all, it was better to have a tolerable tenement than the ideal which no one could afford.
A more plausible alternative was the renovation of existing buildings, some of which had originally been solid structures.
A group of such houses, Wild Court in Lincoln's Inn, is described in the 1850s in Household Words , the weekly run by Dickens, in which a number of Mrs Gaskell's novels first appeared.
Built 200 years before as legal chambers, they still bore traces of their former grandeur: beams, joists, and bearing timbers of sound oak; wainscoting and lofty rooms.
Thirteen of them were purchased by the Society for Improving the Condition of the Labouring Classes, chaired by Lord Shaftesbury.
When first visited, their condition was nauseating: ‘there were open troughs of ordure passing through the upper rooms into a half stagnant open sewer in the parapet, immediately below the uppermost windows…the cellars were full of refuse filth…the open stairs were the night haunt of the filthy, and the back yards of a morning deep in all abomination’.
It was calculated that, after their ‘return to Christianity’, they would yield no less than 15 per cent profit, as against the maximum of 6 per cent for model lodging houses; During renovation that figure dropped to 12 per cent, because 150 cartloads were necessary to remove sewage from the 16 cesspools, 350 to clear the ‘accumulated filth, animal and vegetable, collected in the basements and elsewhere, including vermin’, and a ton of bugs.
At the end of the process, the 13 houses, once inhabited by 200 families, their numbers swollen to 1,000 people by transients who made their way in and slept on the stairways at night, were reduced to lodging 300 or 400 people in 108 rooms, only a quarter of whom were the original tenants, although the rents apparently had not been raised.
One wonders what became of the dispossessed.
Such schemes had advantages other than the 12 per cent.
If they did not reach the very poorest, they went further down the scale than most model buildings, and provided the sort of accommodation the poor were used to, despite the introduction of a guardian and a gate to keep the transients at bay and the tenants up to scratch.
In 1865 Octavia Hill gave the realists further impetus when, with Ruskin's help, she bought slum dwellings at Paradise Place to which she acted as manager, visiting the tenants frequently, in part to collect the rents which she spent on improvements.
Like the Society, she intended to help the poor to help themselves.
Her experiment was successful because she exacted high standards of cleanliness and co-operation; but it also involved her exceptional degree of commitment, and although her success was often cited and sometimes emulated, it could no more serve as a general prescription than the 5 per cent philanthropy of Peabody and others.
In any case, it was concerned only with slum housing which eventually had to be cleared.
Although it set a standard, model housing of any description could only touch the fringes of the problem; the vast majority of the poor continued to live in houses far from model.
The Code of Building, introduced by the Public Health Act of 1875, set higher general standards of construction, for it specified a minimum width of street, adequate drainage, and sufficient light and ventilation to the rear.
Nevertheless, in 1883 Andrew Mearns's Bitter Cry of Outcast London described conditions all too similar to those that outraged Engels in the 1840s and Godwin in the 1850s.
Neither philanthropists nor speculators could solve the problem of the very poor; there were too few philanthropists, and no speculator could make housing for the poorest pay.
As Sir Patrick Geddes, an early sociologist, commented in 1904: ‘Whether, under favourable circumstances and the rare public spirit of private owners, much can be done, or to any wide extent, so long as absolute individual ownership in land and ground values is allowed, seems to me very doubtful.’
The responsibility lay ultimately with the local councils and the government.
Others continued to argue, as they had done before, and as they do today, that the indigent could never be adequately housed because they did not know how to live with cleanliness and decency.
This account of urban housing in the reign of Queen Victoria has been protracted for three reasons.
In the first place, by juxtaposing novelists with social commentators, it becomes evident that fictional accounts are not exaggerated, but often the reverse.
Secondly, a comparison indicates the centrality of housing to the political thinking of the time, and the extent to which some novelists, notably Dickens and Disraeli, became actively involved in practical measures.
Finally, this background provides an explanation of the idealization and occasional vagueness of which some writers, like Dickens and Mrs Gaskell, are sometimes accused.
Due to a multiplicity of problems, the ‘proper course of action’ was not as evident as it might seem to be in retrospect.
There was really only one ground on which the reformers could agree, in fiction as in fact: that cleanliness, above all, was the answer, and that the working class could achieve it in conditions where it was possible to make a genuine home.
It is for this reason that in Victorian novels the description of working-class interiors, as I have mentioned, invariably emphasizes their hard-won decency.
There are of course some deliberately emphasized exceptions: destitution, like that depicted in Alton Locke and Mary Barton , precludes decency; moral turpitude may have the same effect, as in the case of Mrs Brown in Dombey and Son —‘In an ugly and dark room, an old woman, ugly and dark too’.
Generally speaking, however, novelists are much more likely to celebrate the domestic virtues that, given half a chance, the working class can be expected to display; and, in order to produce that image, a certain amount of cleaning-up goes on.
It is revealing, for example, to compare Engels' description of Manchester courts close to the Irk, ‘from the depths of which bubbles of miasmatic gas constantly arise and give forth a stench unendurable’, with Mrs Gaskell's account of a Manchester court in Mary Barton .
Engels' emphasis is primarily upon ‘the piles of debris , the refuse, filth and offal from the courts’, coupled with derelict, overcrowded conditions, each house ‘packed close behind its neighbour…all black, smoky, crumbling, ancient, with broken panes and window-frames’.
Mrs Gaskell's account is comparatively anodyne: ‘a little paved court having the backs of the houses at the end opposite to the opening, and a gutter running through the middle to carry off household slops, washing suds, & c .’
She does not define ‘&c.’, or mention crowding, though this, in the reports of the time, was the main objection to such courts; her emphasis falls instead on neighbourliness, cleanliness, and laundry.
In town and country alike, working-class interiors in fiction are curiously uniform in consequence.
In The Old Curiosity Shop little Nell tentatively asks if she and her grandfather may rest in one of a ‘cluster of labourer's huts’, a good five miles from the nearest town or village.
They are instantly welcomed inside (Fig. 39), and Nell's grandfather is invited to sit in the elbow chair while the child looks around her:
The furniture of the room was very homely, of course— a few rough chairs and a table, a comer cupboard with their little stock of crockery and delf, a gaudy tea tray, representing a lady in bright red, walking out with a very blue parasol, a few  common, coloured Scripture subjects in frames upon the wall and chimney, an old dwarf clothes-press and an eight-day clock, with a few bright saucepans and a kettle, comprised the whole.
But everything was clean and neat…[with]a tranquil air of comfort and content.
If one compares this relatively brief account with Mrs Gaskell's much more detailed one of the Barton lodgings off that court in Manchester, the eye picks up very similar detail.
The ‘houseplace’ is entered directly from the court, and is in almost total darkness, ‘except one bright spot = = a red-hot fire’.
When John Barton stirs it into life, ‘the effect instantly produced was warm and glowing light in every comer of the room’.
Since they have visitors, Mrs Barton supplements it with a dip in a tin candlestick, although its light is lost in the glow of the fire, before pausing to look about her:
The room was tolerably large and possessed many conveniences.
On the right of the door, as you entered, was a longish window, with a broad ledge.
On each side of this, hung blue-and-white check curtains, which were now drawn, to shut in the friends met to enjoy themselves.
Two geraniums, unpruned and leafy, which stood on the sill, formed a further defence from out-door pryers.
In the corner between the window and the fireside was a cupboard, apparently full of plates and dishes, cups and saucers, and some more nondescript articles, for which one would have fancied their possessors could find no use — such as triangular pieces of glass to save carving knives and forks from dirtying tablecloths.
However, it was evident Mrs. Barton was proud of her crockery and glass, for she left her cupboard door open, with a glance round of satisfaction and pleasure.
On the opposite side to the door and window was the staircase, and two doors; one of which (the nearest to the fire) led into a sort of little back kitchen, where dirty work, such as washing up dishes, might be done, and whose shelves served as larder, and pantry, and store-room, and all.
The other door, which was considerably lower, opened into the coal-hole — the slanting closet under the stairs; from which, to the fireplace, there was a gay-coloured piece of oil-cloth laid.
The place seemed almost crammed with furniture (sure sign of good times among the mills).
Beneath the window was a dresser, with three deep drawers.
Opposite the fire-place was a table, which I should call a Pembroke, only that it was made of deal, and I cannot tell how far such a name may be applied to such humble material.
On it, resting against the wall, was a bright green japanned tea-tray; having a couple of scarlet lovers embracing in the middle.
The fire-light danced merrily on this, and really (setting all taste but that of a child's aside) it gave a richness of colouring to that side of the room.
It was in some measure propped up by a crimson tea-caddy, also of Japan ware.
A round table on one branching leg, really for use, stood in the corresponding comer to the cupboard; and, if you can picture all this, with a washy, but clean stencilled pattern on the walls, you can form some idea of John Barton's home.
Cleanliness and neatness are always the keynotes in such descriptions, whether in the country or the town, a point implied by Mrs Gaskell but made by Dickens quite explicitly.
From those two virtues derive the tranquillity, comfort, and content of domesticity.
Occasionally a very clean housekeeper, like Mrs Joe Gargery in Great Expectations , may possess ‘an exquisite art of making her cleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself’, rather as some people do their religion; but for the most part both cleanliness and godliness are of the comfortable variety among the working classes.
Even in the eighteenth century, when interiors (and people) were at every social level a great deal dirtier than they became in the Victorian period, Defoe's Moll Flanders can forgive a multitude of sins, where everything is ‘so handsome and so clean’.
By the mid-nineteenth century, a dirty and disorderly room signifies vice.
Millais's painting of Christ in the House of his Parents was deeply offensive to Dickens, apparently because its workaday imperfections implied a far from Holy Family.
Part of his objection may also have been that one's trade and one's home had in most cases parted company by that date, a development that William Morris was later to deplore.
The hand-loom weavers were among the last to be driven into the factories.
When one considers Godwin's illustration (Fig. 38) and Disraeli's description in Sybil of such a room, where the loom is placed centrally ‘so as to gain the best light which the gloomy situation could  afford’, and the ailing wife and children lie on mattresses in the comers, it is not difficult to see why many, as well as Dickens, might have thought such a separation an improvement.
There were, as we have seen, quite practical reasons for valuing neatness and cleanliness in working-class homes: only neatness could make their narrow rooms in any sense comfortable (perhaps that is why the Bartons' houseplace seems crammed with furniture), and only cleanliness could preserve them — and hence their betters from disease.
It was not a lesson, according to Mayhew, that the poor in fact needed to learn, for he finds the same scrupulous cleanliness in the poorest of London tenements, where every object in sight from chairs to children seems to have been that moment newly scrubbed.
But the representation of such interiors in the novel posed some problems.
On the one hand, novelists like Disraeli and Kingsley, who wish to stress that the one nation has responsibilities towards the other, can sometimes seem unduly patronizing.
The intrusiveness of attitudes like these is registered in Anne Bronte's Agnes Grey (1847), when the poor widow, Nancy Brown, feels badly caught out in a moment of negligence:
But the next day, afore I'd gotten fettled up — for indeed, miss, I'd no heart to sweeping an' fettling, an' washing pots; so I sat me down i' th' muck — who should come in but Maister Weston!
I started siding stuff then, an' sweeping an' doing; and I expected he'd begin a calling me for my idle ways.
On the other hand, those like Mrs Gaskell and Dickens, who represent the poor as helping themselves, are liable to diffuse the intensity of the impression they wish to create.
Alice Wilson's cellar dwelling with its brick floor ‘so damp that it seemed as if the last washing could never dry up’ would not be far distant from the Davenports' if the nature of that ‘dampness’were defined.
But since, against the odds, Alice keeps her cellar as ‘the perfection of cleanliness’, the image is pleasing and does not impose itself in the same way on the reader's imagination.
Frequent whitewashing or repapering, like John Barton's ‘clean stencilled pattern’, is often alluded to, no doubt because it made damp and derelict rooms look fresh and dry but that is the way that they remain for the reader.
By an irony, Disraeli and Kingsley, who have less intimate sympathy with the poor, tend to create more enduring impressions.
The frequency of fires in rooms like these is a related phenomenon; those that smoke or empty grates are much more frequent in the writing of social commentators.
As William Atkinson observed in 1805, cottagers were more intelligent and industrious where fuel was cheap, for a comfortable fireside on winter evenings ‘promotes social mirth, and instructive conversation’.
In The Old Curiosity Shop it is high summer, and Dickens himself does not mention a fire, but it is featured by one of his illustrators, within a chimneypiece much too solid and grand for a labourer's ‘hut’(Fig. 39).
One might with only slight exaggeration claim that firelight illuminates virtually every positive page in Victorian novels.
Its importance lies not only in its welcome — and sometimes literally life-giving — warmth, but in the   light it provides.
Mrs Barton only lights her redundant tallow candle because there are to be visitors, and Mrs Gaskell would prefer the room without it.
To those for whom gas was out of the question, and candles or lamps were expensive luxuries, firelight was often the single source of light as well as heat, as George Eliot notes in Adam Bede : ‘It was a pretty scene in the red fire-light: for there were no candles; why should there be, when the fire was so bright, and was reflected from all the pewter and the polished oak?’
She is particularly fond of describing interiors seen by its light, for the fire elicits the good housekeeper's virtues by its reflections in wood, pewter, and copper, the ‘few bright saucepans and a kettle’ noticed by little Nell.
Rooms without fires are correspondingly bleak, as though the heart of the house had ceased to beat (a not infrequent simile).
Although it seems in actuality to have been common enough, the empty hearth or inadequate smoking fuel, like Alice Wilson's ‘damp coals, and half-green sticks’, is a poignant symbol in the novel, suggestive of every kind of deprivation.
It was no doubt because the fire was so important that the fireplace was so carefully tended and its mantelpiece lovingly ‘dressed’ both in fact and fiction.
Even the blind, according to Mayhew, ‘take great pride in their chimney-piece’ because ‘they like other people to see it’.
In Sylvia's Lovers , Mrs Gaskell emphasizes this well-kept hearth, ‘of the same spotless whiteness as the steps; all that was black about the grate  was polished to the utmost extent; all that was of brass, like the handle of the oven, was burnished bright’.
Penury, moral as well as physical, is signified in the Barton household when money is wanting to purchase the soap and brushes, black-lead and pipe-clay which had given the houseplace its cheerful look in more prosperous days.
Godwin illustrates a well-dressed mantelpiece (Fig. 40) which somewhat resembles the Toodles' in Dombey and Son : ‘the castle on the mantel-piece with red and green windows in it, susceptible of illumination by a candle-end within; and the pair of small black velvet kittens, each with a lady's reticule in its mouth; regarded by Staggs's Gardeners as prodigies of imitative art.’
It is in these prodigies of imitative art that Godwin discerns one of his social bridges, for he regards the love of art, exhibited even by the most miserable, as ‘agreeable and cheering…evidence of striving upwards’, even though the former ‘barbaric favourites’ of the middle classes that have found their way to the firesides of the poor are not art ‘of a very refined character’.
Although the many pages of Mayhew are positively crammed with evidence that the poor had created a culture of their own, he seems none the less to share Godwin's view of art ‘as a social bridge of no ordinary size and strength’.
If the poor in model lodging-houses ‘are kept in bondage, and made to feel that bondage’, a more enlightened view in relation to art wishes to persuade them ‘to adorn their rooms plentifully with a better class of pictures’.
Loudon himself proposes a picture library, and the simple furniture he designs for cottages (Fig. 41), like Mrs Barton's Pembroke (Fig. 41a) and her round table with a branching leg (Fig. 41b), are direct descendants of Emma's two tables at Hartfield.
Conversely, he does not design a dresser like Mrs Barton's, a genuine piece of working-class furniture, but substitutes a sideboard for a neat cottage ‘in which there is not much room’(Fig. 41c).
In course of time the poor seem to have accepted the image of their domestic life created by their betters.
The Chartist, William Lovett, quotes with approval a description, written by a labourer's son in 1840, of the cottage of a (symbolic?)
Widow Nest: ‘I was so struck with the neatness of the cottage, the taste and order of the garden, the cheerfulness of the widow, and industry of the son, that on leaving the place I resolved to profit by what I had  witnessed.’
The whole description is an embodiment of middle-class values, not only in its moralistic conception of what such a home should be, but even in its prose.
It is clear evidence of ‘striving upwards’.
When little Nell enters the labourer's hut, we supposedly look around it with the eyes of the child.
When Mrs Gaskell introduces us to the Bartons' lodging, we supposedly see it through the eyes of Mrs Barton.
But neither passage is really written from a working-class viewpoint, for they impose middle-class values on working-class taste.
No one could have been more attentive than Mrs Gaskell to that interior; one feels that she writes with a precise remembered image in her mind.
No one could have been more sympathetic to the detail of the poor man's need, or more capable of vicarious imagination.
Dickens knew at first hand from his own childhood what it was to live the life of the poor.