

8
WELFARE STRATEGIES
The third part of Mrs Thatcher's strategy of creating an enterprise culture, which massively rewards those at the top while penalizing those at the bottom of the income pile, has been the launching of a series of reforms of the welfare state.
This strategy has at different points in time involved the abolition of certain benefits, a reduction in the numbers eligible to those that remain, the curtailment of the rate of increase in the value of benefits and real cuts in their financial worth.
This chapter looks at how each of the different aspects of this strategy has been employed, not only to free money from welfare for tax cuts but also to gain an appreciation of the extent of the disenfranchisement from an insurance-based welfare that has occurred.
The ‘cost’ of the Government's overall strategy of creating an incentive-based society has been high — quite apart from the hardship caused to the millions of individuals affected.
Cutting the value of, or abolishing national insurance benefits, and a much increased reliance on means-tested assistance, has played a crucial part in trapping the underclass into long-term dependency, although such an outcome is in stark contradiction to the Government's stated long-term objectives.
Uprating Formula
The most significant welfare change, both in terms of numbers of people affected and the sum saved in public expenditure, has been the method by which this Government has calculated increases in social security.
The 1974 Labour Government insisted that what are known as long-term benefits, such as old-age pensions and invalidity benefit, should increase in line with prices or earnings, whichever was the more  advantageous for the claimants.
This dual safeguard, which was designed not merely to maintain the real value of benefits, but also to guarantee that they paralleled any increase in the real incomes of the working population, was removed in 1980.
Since then, the Government has had a statutory responsibility to increase benefits only in line with prices.
Had the previous policy been continued, the single pension would now be £9.80 in excess of what has, in fact, been paid since April 1988.
For a married couple, the loss on the weekly pension amounts to £15.70.
The most obvious result of such ‘cuts’ has been to affect most adversely those without any other pension provision, and has led to an increase in the numbers claiming means-tested support.
The effect of this on the Government's aim of making more people independent of the state, as well as the effect on increasing disincentives, is considered in Part III.
Earnings-related Supplements
The second major change to the welfare state that has taken place since 1979 has been the abolition of the earnings-related supplements (ERS).
In 1968, the Labour Government introduced a series of earnings-related supplements which were paid on top of the existing flat-rate national insurance benefits of unemployment pay, sick pay, industrial injury benefit, maternity and widow's allowances.
Those supplements were reduced in January 1981, and finally abolished a year later, in January 1982.
There was, however, no concomitant reduction in each worker's contribution to the National Insurance Fund.
The working population has thus continued to make contributions for which they gain no benefit.
The estimated average ERS paid along with unemployment benefit in 1981 was £8.00, with an upper limit of £14.00.
Had the changes brought about by the 1980 Social Security Act not taken place, the maximum payment in 1981 would have been £19.25.
Had the supplements still been in existence, they would, of course, have been reviewed each year.
The Government estimates that a third of the savings in public expenditure created by the abolition of these supplements was lost in a resulting increase in supplementary benefit payments.
This is another say of indicating the number forced to resort to means-tested assistance as a result of the abolition of their earnings-related benefits.
Phasing-out of Child Additions
The third change, or cut in welfare provision since 1979 has been the phasing-out of the child additions, which were paid to claimants of national insurance unemployment and sick pay, and the significant reduction in the value of the additions paid to other insurance benefits.
This reduction was achieved by a change in the calculation of the uprating of these additions.
The intricacies of the alteration itself, begun in 1980, are not directly relevant here.
What is of concern is the size and impact of this reduction.
This change had by the November 1983 uprating resulted in the abolition of short-term child support.
Child Benefits
The fourth of the welfare alterations centres on the child benefit scheme.
This benefit, phased in over a number of years, came fully into operation in 1979, and replaced child tax allowances and family allowances.
The value of the new benefit was significantly enhanced by an additional £1.5 billion of revenue that was pumped into the scheme at the time.
Over the past eight years, Conservative ministers have projected an image of themselves as the party of the family.
Since 1979, however, their record has not always conformed to this declared objective.
Child benefit, the principal family benefit, has not been increased in line with pensions and other benefits.
In the Government's first review of social security benefits in 1979, pensions were increased by 19.5 per cent, in line with price rises, but there was no increase whatsoever in child benefit.
This omission was offset in November 1983 by an increase of a little over 11 per cent, while pensions and other benefits increased by 3.7 per cent .
However, the November 1985 review saw a return to a policy of discriminating against child benefit.
Long-term benefits such as pensions were increased by 7 per cent, whereas child benefit was increased by a mere 2.2 per cent .
In the November review of both 1987 and 1988, the Government announced the freezing of child benefit payments since the 1988 statement there have been numerous ominous statements, all stressing that the future of the benefit is ‘under review’.
Benefits into Tax
Under the National Insurance Act of 1945, all welfare benefits were made taxable.
This position remained unchanged until 1949 when, for reasons of administrative convenience to the Inland Revenue, short-term benefits were excluded from tax liability.
In the 1980 budget, the Government announced that unemployment pay, sickness and invalidity benefit would be liable to tax.
The primary reason for this move was not a desire for increased tax revenue, welcome as this no doubt was, but, rather, an expression of the Government's opposition to people enjoying a larger income when out of work than they could take home in a wage packet.
Moreover, the Government proposed different ways whereby these three benefits could be made liable to tax.
The most novel approach related to sickness benefit.
It was decided that state sickness benefit was to be taxed by its abolition!
From April 1983, the first eight weeks of sickness benefit were to be met by the employer.
While many workers continued to enjoy full pay, at least in the initial stages of illness, others were less fortunate, and gained only the statutory minimum.
Whichever option was adopted, employers include sickness benefit as part of their employee's taxable income.
Since April 1986, the whole of the twenty-eight weeks of sickness benefit has been the responsibility of employers, and all twenty-eight weeks is taxable.
The benefit currently paid is below what would have been the level of state sickness benefit.
The Government initially laid down three rates of sickness benefit, covering those on very low, low and modest earnings.
In 1986, this structure was altered by a merging of the middle and lower rates.
Those who previously qualified for the former, therefore, have lost out substantially, as their sickness pay has been cut by almost 20 per cent.
The DSS estimates that around 5.5 million people each year receive statutory sick pay, and that 15 per cent of this total belonged to the bottom and middle earnings bands.
Almost half a million workers will, therefore, be adversely affected annually by the Government's ‘simplification’.
Hardest hit are those on lowest incomes, as employers are allowed to pay them at a specially designed low rate.
The Government discovered an equally ingenious way of taxing invalidity benefit.
When announcing the increase in such benefits for 1981, it disclosed its intention to increase invalidity benefit by 5 per cent less than the rise in prices.
This reduction, or, as the Government  preferred to call it, abatement, was in lieu of taxation.
For good measure, the Government also announced that, while waiting to introduce the statutory sick pay scheme, sickness benefit would be similarly ‘abated’, as would unemployment benefit.
A year later, the Government restored the 5 per cent abatement in that year's uprating of benefits, conceding that it was experiencing considerable difficulties in making invalidity benefit liable to taxation by the following year.
Initially, the Government accepted that the 5 per cent abatement would also be lifted from other short-term benefits when these became taxable.
The Government did not honour this commitment when unemployment benefit became taxable in July 1982.
According to the new rules, eligible claimants continue to draw benefit, from which no deduction of tax is made.
At the end of a period of unemployment, however, the unemployment benefit office notifies the claimant of the amount of taxable benefit that has been paid to them.
This sum is then included as part of a claimant's taxable income during the relevant tax year.
Similarly, those unemployed claimants drawing income support have found that their benefit, up to the standard rate of unemployment benefit, is liable to taxation.
The revenue derived from taxing unemployment benefit, and the relevant part of an unemployed claimant's supplementary benefit stood at an estimated £600 million in 1985–6.
Housing Benefit Scheme
Changes in the value of housing benefit constitute the sixth reform of welfare since 1979.
In fact, the housing benefit scheme only came fully into operation in April 1983.
The scheme replaced the rent allowance and rebate scheme, the rate rebate scheme, and the payment of rent to supplementary benefit claimants.
The scheme does not cover owner-occupiers who require assistance with mortgage interest payments, or boarders requiring help with their board and lodging charges, although the Government has given notice that it intends to review these payments.
Both of these categories may be helped under the income support scheme.
In 1984–5, over 7 million households, or one in three of all households, were in receipt of housing benefit, and the cost was equal to more than 10 per cent of the entire social security budget.
There has been a whole series of changes to the scheme since its introduction in April 1983, with additional reforms a likely prospect.
Many of these changes have centred on what are called tapers.
Where  a claimant's income rises above the ‘needs allowance’, tapers are applied so that, as income rises, the size of benefit falls in direct relation to the excess income over the needs allowance.
A similar process operates in reverse for those with incomes below the needs allowance.
By 1988, the Government had already made five changes to the tapers, each of which reduced the amount of benefit paid to those whose incomes are above the needs allowance level.
A further major ‘saving’ in the scheme has been achieved by increasing the contributions that non-dependants are expected to make towards their housing costs.
The total cuts in housing benefit deriving from such changes have reduced the projected expenditure by £950 million.
In February 1984, the Housing Benefit Review was established by the Government which, subsequent to receiving the Review's report, published a Green Paper detailing a series of reforms (Reform of Social Security , Cmnd. 9518, HMSO, 1985).
Some of the reforms are eminently sensible and have been introduced.
The suggestion of a common income test, based on net income, with incomes below the suggested new income support level gaining full relief with rent is a welcome change.
But accompanying this reform, which was aimed at lessening the disincentive effect of moving from benefit to work, are provisos like the requirement that recipients of housing benefit will be expected to meet 20 per cent of their rates bill which are cuts in welfare payments.
Other proposed changes included the simplification of the various existing tapers by creating a single taper, which withdraws housing support from those whose incomes are above the income support level at a faster rate than before.
These changes have all been implemented, and have resulted in a reduction of housing costs on what was the projected level by £450 million in 1988 — 9.
Latest Changes
Supplementary Benefit was replaced by income support in 1988.
Under the old system, a person was eligible for supplementary benefit if their resources were below their requirements.
The requirements were approved annually by Parliament, and were determined by a scale rate of benefit, together with a whole series of regular weekly additions.
As was seen in Part I, while some claimants would qualify  for the ordinary rate of benefit, others would be eligible for the long-term rate, which for a married couple was valued at 25 per cent higher than the ordinary rate.
All other claimants under pensionable age — except the unemployed — qualified for the long-term rate after being on benefit for a year.
In addition, some claimants of both the ordinary and the long-term rates were awarded weekly additions to meet special needs such as extra heating, diet or laundry costs.
There were also additions to cover housing costs such as water rates, and owner-occupiers received help with mortgage interest, and an allowance towards insurance and repairs.
Tenants on supplementary benefit automatically received 100 per cent rent rebates, and both owner-occupiers and tenants received payments to cover their rates in full.
As mentioned above, against these requirements would be put a claimant's resources, and a person became eligible for supplementary benefit if their resources were less than their requirements, the difference between the two being the sum paid in Supplementary Benefit.
Under the income support system, if a person's resources are less than what is deemed to be his or her ‘applicable amount’ of Income Support, then eligibility is gained.
However, the applicable amount does not make a distinction between those eligible for a long-term as opposed to an ordinary rate, nor is there a distinction between a householder and non-householder, although there are additions for special needs.
Under the income support system, as opposed to housing benefit, the only major housing costs that will be met in part or in full will be mortgage interest.
Housing costs will only be covered if claimants are eligible for housing benefit.
A claimant's rates bills will not be met in full; only 80 per cent of this sum will be covered by housing benefit.
The Government claims that income support rates have been increased by an amount to cover what on average is the 20 per cent rate bill for the entire country.
This sum is £1.30; in Birkenhead only 272 tenants pay less than this sum on a 20 per cent contribution.
In contrast, 1,100 tenants are being asked to pay more than £2.40 as their 20 per cent contribution.
The Government's claim that the new income support scheme is more generous than the now-defunct supplementary benefit system will be considered below.
It is important to stress how these changes — whatever their merits — have played a structural role in helping sustain an underclass.
Their role has been structural in the sense that it is the social security rules, rather than personal failure or character defect, that are the relevant factor to be considered.
The group that has been most adversely affected under the new scheme is the unemployed under the age of twenty-five.
Under the supplementary benefit scheme, many of this group would have qualified for the householder rate — valued at £30.40.
Under the new scheme this group of claimants gain a weekly benefit valued at £27.40 but from this the claimant has to pay both 20 per cent of his or her rates bill and, similarly, 20 per cent of the water rates bill.
At the same time as introducing the new income support scheme, the rules for eligibility to housing benefit have been tightened.
Claimants with capital below £3,000 will have this sum ignored, whereas those with capital in excess of £8,000 will find themselves ineligible for benefit.
A weekly tariff income is used to make deductions from income support for capital between these two sums.
If income is at or below the applicable amount (the eligibility rates for income support) the maximum rebate will be paid, which is 100 per cent for rent and 80 per cent for rates.
If a person's income is above the applicable amount, these rebates will be reduced, producing a loss of 65 per cent of the difference between their income and the applicable amount for rent, and suffering a 20 per cent tapered reduction for rates.
In total the withdrawal rate for some claimants with incomes above the applicable amount is over 80 per cent.
The significance of these changes can be seen from the numbers disqualified from benefit and the total saving in public expenditure.
A House of Commons Library reference note on the latest housing benefit changes points out that these cuts alone will result in an annual saving of £1.8 billion (Public Expenditure White Paper , Cmnd. 228 — II, table 15.6), while reducing by about a million the number of people eligible for housing benefit.
What then of the Government's claim that it is spending more money in income support than it would have done had the previous supplementary benefit system remained in place?
It is impossible to check the validity of this statement, as the Government has consistently refused to provide the key information necessary to make this calculation, namely details on what would have paid out in the uprating allowance of supplementary benefit had it still been in force in April 1988.
Not surprisingly, therefore, the Government's claims regarding who is better off have become an issue of intense dispute.
Because income support was introduced at a time when there would otherwise have been an increase in supplementary benefits, and because  transitional protection has been provided for some groups of claimants who have been transferred to income support, the Government claims that relatively few people suffered an actual cut in benefit in April 1988.
But how is ‘relatively few’ defined?
On the Government's own figures this total is almost a million people — 960,000 in fact.
However, as Julia Lourie points out in a House of Commons Brief:
the structural reform will create 3,650,000 losers (i.e. their income will be lower than it would have been if the old system had continued and been up-rated in the normal way, and there had been no transitional protection) compared with 3,190,000 gainers (the Government claims that 5,000,070 gained) while 1,680,000 people remain unaffected.
(Social Security Changes , April 1988, House of Commons Library Research Note 385, 1988, p. 10)
Since these calculations were made the government has raised the capital level for those qualifying for housing benefit.
Summary
While the reform of the welfare state has not attracted the same consistent media attention as other issues, the changes made in the scope of welfare provision since 1979 nevertheless amount to a mini-revolution, and have played a part in creating an underclass.
The Government's overall aim has been threefold.
The first has been to reduce the rate at which welfare expenditure was increasing.
Since 1979, cuts on the national insurance benefits, such as old-age pensions and unemployment pay have resulted in savings in excess of £15 billion.
Currently, the annual saving is in the region of £5 billion, only slightly more than the sum that the Government gave away in tax cuts to the richest 1 per cent of taxpayers in the 1988 budget.
The second aim has been to reduce the attractiveness and the scope of the welfare state, in order that people begin seeking private or company provision.
An important side-effect of both these objectives has been the significant increase in the numbers caught in the dependency culture of means-tested assistance.
Denying entitlement to whole groups of the population has been the third aim, and this has been particularly noticeable in the case of young claimants.
While these changes do not alone amount to a decisive shift in the social and political culture, they none the less have a crucial role in shaping people's feelings about themselves and their own worth.
Means-tested assistance is equated  by the customer with second-class citizenship.
Moreover, the severity of the treatment meted out to this underclass, who have borne the brunt of the welfare changes, is in stark contrast to the benevolent attitude demonstrated by the Government in its welfare policies for the most privileged.
The system of tax welfare is considered in chapter 10.
9
POLL TAX
Local government services are currently financed from three sources: rates on domestic property; rates on business property; and a revenue support grant from central government.
From 1990 local government services will still be financed from three sources, but the nature of the Funding will be radically different.
Domestic rates will be abolished and in their place local authorities will levy a poll tax.
Whereas rates were levied on property, the poll tax will be levied on individuals.
Whereas rates were indirectly related to income, or at least past income (in that they were proportional to the value of the home in which people lived), the poll tax will take no account of the financial circumstances on whom the tax is levied.
A central government grant will continue to be paid to local authorities.
A business rate will also be levied, but both these two components of local authority finance will be radically restructured.
Limiting Local Funding
The Government has three objectives in mind in its near-revolutionary reform of local government finance.
It is determined that local businesses, who have no direct vote to the local authority, unless the owners live within the same district as their firms, should not be driven out of inner-city areas by an ever-escalating rates bill.
Hence the Government will set a national business rate.
Once this rate has been set, the only revision allowed will be to keep its value in line with inflation.
There is no possibility, therefore, of local authorities being able to increase the size of the business rate in an attempt to finance an expansion of local services.
Nor will the second element in the new system of local government support — the central government grant — be open to a similar revision.
Previously the support from central government was to some extent related to the provision of services, which were themselves related to local needs, at least in the view of the local authority.
The Government now intends to draw up its own inventory of local needs and set a contribution to the local authority that will allow for the provision of those minimum needs in year one.
Changes in the level of support in future years will only be made to take account of inflation or changes in the size and composition of the total population within each local authority area.
There is to be no discussion with local authorities on how this needs index is drawn up, and there will be no appeal against the size of the government grant that results from using this calculation.
As one of the aims of the reform of local government is to impose a ceiling on local authority expenditure, it is unlikely that the formula drawn up by the Government will allow a generous provision of local services.
The only flexibility in a local authority's ability to raise finance will be the poll tax, which on current reckoning is intended to make up only 20 per cent of a local authority's revenue base.
Raising additional funds on this narrow tax base will mean very significant increases in the tax.
Those authorities most likely to be in need of raising additional finance will be those with large numbers of people on low incomes living within their boundaries.
Yet it will be those on low incomes who will be most affected by any additional increases in the size of the poll tax.
The Government's reform of local authority finance is therefore likely to lead to a deterioration in local authority services, be they health, education or welfare.
And because these services play a more important part in the lives of people on low than on higher incomes, the move is likely to reduce still further the relative living standards of the poor, and particularly the most vulnerable in the underclass.
Redistribution
The poll tax will bring about a significant redistribution of income between different households and individuals within those households.
In presenting who gains and loses, the Government has been careful to cite figures based on the number of households.
It claims that whereas 7.9 million households will be losers under the poll tax, there will be  11.1 million households who gain — in other words, pay less in poll tax than they do currently in rates.
Overwhelmingly those who gain live in small households, and particularly single-person households: 2.5 million single-pensioner households will gain, whereas the Government estimates less than a half a million losers amongst this group.
In contrast, of households with three or more adults only half a million will be gainers, whereas 1.5 million will be losers.
The picture changes dramatically, however, if adults rather than households are used as the basis of the calculation.
While 18.3 million adults are shown on the Government's figures to be gainers, 17 million are shown to be losers.
These losers are heavily concentrated in two-pensioner households and other households with two or more adults.
The Government data show that the numbers of gainers and losers also varies in different parts of the country.
In the South-East (excluding London)— one of the richest areas of the kingdom —Government data show that 73 per cent of households will be gainers under the new tax.
In contrast, in the North, 61 per cent of households will be asked to pay more towards local government services.
All the Government data are based on ‘averages’, which do not give an accurate picture of the effects of a poll tax, either on local authorities or on individuals within those local authorities.
A number of local studies have been undertaken on what the impact of the poll tax would be had it been implemented in the 1988 — 9 financial year.
Some of these surveys, for example the one carried out in Birmingham, illustrate the different impact of the tax if individuals rather than households are chosen as the basis for the calculation.
Whereas a majority, 54 per cent, of households in Birmingham would have gained under the poll tax if it had been levied in 1988–9, only 39 per cent of adults are shown to be gainers.
A very similar picture emerges in Haringey, but here the local authority has worked out the numbers whose income will be affected by more than £2 a week.
In the 1988 — 9 financial year, the poll tax would have resulted in 53 per cent of households paying less tax in Haringey than under the old rating system.
However, on the basis of individuals, the numbers of gainers falls to 36.5 per cent.
But of the winners only 2 per cent are shown to be better off by £2 a week, whereas 39 per cent of losers will be asked to pay a local poll tax that is more than £2 above their then current rate contribution (Poll Tax Facts , no. 9, Local Government Information Unit, 1988).
The Government claims that the poor will be protected from finding  themselves amongst this group of losers by the national system of rebates that will operate alongside the new scheme.
The Government made clear when introducing its reform of the housing benefit scheme in April 1988 that it will be adapted to provide community charge rebates for low-income groups.
The rebates will operate in a similar way to rate rebates, and will be administered by local authorities as part of the housing benefit scheme.
As with rates, the rebates will be available for up to only 80 per cent of the community charge.
As with the present system, there will be help for those who receive the full rebates: additional payments are to be made to Income Support rates to cover the 20 per cent minimum community charge.
One group on low income who will lose out consists of those people living in areas where the poll tax is levied at a higher rate than the Government calculates, and who in consequence will have to meet a 20 per cent poll tax bill that is larger than that calculated by the 20 per cent met by the Government.
Another group who will lose out will be those on low incomes who are ineligible for income support but qualify for housing benefit.
This group will have 80 per cent of their poll tax met but will be required to meet 20 per cent of the tax from their own income.
A further group will also lose, despite the existence of a rebate scheme.
Under the current system the Government calculates that large numbers of those eligible for housing benefit do not claim.
The latest official figures were for 1984 when about one in four eligible claimants failed to register for a rebate.
Loss of Citizenship
Each local authority must compile a register containing the names and addresses of those within the area who are liable to pay the tax and the dates from which they become, or cease to be, liable.
The first register has to be completed by 1 December 1989.
Its compilation will probably run in tandem with work on the 1989–90 electoral register.
Chief finance officers of district councils, London boroughs and the Isles of Scilly and the City of London have been designated as ‘Community Charge Registration Officers’ for their area.
These officers have the power to inspect the electoral registration register, and electoral registration officers have a similar power to compare names on their list with those that may or may not be appearing on the poll tax register.
The Government has ensured, therefore, that if a  person enters his or her name on the register in order to vote, he or she will also be billed for the poll tax.
One way of making it more difficult for the Community Charge Registration Officers to trace people will be if they disappear from the electoral register.
Avoiding the poll tax will be costly in terms of universal political citizenship.
The group most likely to opt for non-registration will be the very poorest, and particularly those in the underclass.
While other economic and social changes are undermining full economic and social citizenship for the underclass, any retreat from universal political citizenship results in the underclass losing the little political clout they have to reverse this trend.
Summary
The introduction of the poll tax will doubly exacerbate those forces that are giving rise to an underclass in Britain.
The tax will shift the burden of local taxation between different households and different income groups.
The Government's claim that those on low incomes will be better off under the new scheme, or at least see their financial position protected, is unlikely to be borne out by events.
A number of those on income support will find that the compensatory payments to cover their 20 per cent poll tax contribution will be less than the actual contribution they have to make.
Similarly, those who are in work and on low income, or who for other reasons are ineligible for income support, may be eligible for the equivalent of a rate rebate under the existing system.
Under the scheme as it was originally cast, let alone before the Government began reducing both the numbers eligible and the value of the benefit paid, many low-income poll tax payers would have found themselves making a substantial contribution after receiving whatever the rebate to which they are entitled.
A third group will similarly lose out under the poll tax proposals: one in four of those currently eligible for housing benefit do not claim.
This group will have to meet its poll tax contribution in full.
The one redress any of the members of this group have is to try not to appear on the poll tax register.
Given the link the Government has forged between the collection of data for the local tax and the registration of the very same individuals for the vote, the cost of non-payment will be the loss of the remaining political clout the underclass has with which to fight its way back into mainstream Britain.
10
BOOSTING MIDDLE-CLASS WELFARE
Much of the Government-initiated debate on welfare centres on the size of the income support payments made to claimants.
Less is heard of the other welfare state, which runs parallel to the ‘traditional’ welfare state, and is financed by tax concessions, such as mortgage interest relief and pension contribution relief.
The Government has curtailed the growth in expenditure on the traditional welfare state, and, as has been seen, abolished some benefits and made real cuts in the value of others.
However, no similar effort has been made to limit the growth of tax welfare.
The overall effect has again been to widen still further the gap in living standards between those at either end of the income scale, and to expose still further the underclass, who benefit least from tax welfare.
Indeed, there could be no greater contrast than that between the social security benefits that have been made liable to tax, and therefore reduced in value, and the way in which the Thatcher Governments have allowed the value of tax benefits to escalate.
These benefits are not confined to mortgage interest relief and pension contribution relief; there are over a hundred.
Here we look at the current cost of tax welfare.
Tax Benefits
The cost of the tax allowance welfare state has risen substantially.
Mortgage interest relief, for example, which cost £1.25 billion a year in lost revenue at the time Mrs Thatcher was elected in 1979, is currently running at a total of £6.5 billion annually.
One reason for this increased loss of revenue to the Exchequer has been the raising of the ceiling on the size of mortgages that qualify for tax subsidies.
The  1983 budget increased the ceiling from £25,000 to £30,000, on the grounds that the lower limit was ‘beginning to hinder a growing number of families who want to buy their first home, or to move’(Hansard , 15 March 1983, cols 145–6).
Another, more important reason for the escalating cost of this form of welfare has been the increasing number of people buying their own home.
A third factor in the huge growth in this welfare budget is the rapid rise in interest rates.
A rise of 1 per cent in interest rates adds £400–500 million annually to the cost of mortgage tax relief.
Paradoxically, the tax subsidy cushions the borrower from the full effects of a restrictive monetary policy.
From June 1988 until February 1989 interest rates rose by 3.75 percentage points, but a quarter of this cost was borne not by the borrower but by the Exchequer.
In order to restrict consumer credit by a given amount, the Government is forced to raise interest rates to a higher level than it would have to in a non-subsidized market.
Conversely, the higher the rate of interest, the greater the additional cost to industry of financing new capital investment.
Mortgage interest relief is not the only tax subsidy available to houseowners.
The revenue lost through exempting the sale of an individual's home from capital gains has risen from £1.5 billion to £2.6 billion since 1979.
The third subsidy to owner occupation comes from the abolition of the Schedule A tax.
Calculated on the imputed rent of the building, a rough updating of the tax suggests that, had it still been in effect today, something in the region of £1.3 billion would be raised annually.
The public subsidy to home ownership from these two tax benefits, plus the abolition of Schedule A, is now over £10.5 billion per annum.
Tax benefits to private pension arrangements have risen at a similar rate, although the growth has been from a smaller base.
The total subsidy to private pensions amounted to £9.8 billion in 1987 — 8.
This sum equals more than half the entire health and personal social security budget.
The main cost of this benefit comes from the subsidy to approved pension schemes costing £1.6 billion in 1987–8; subsidizing employers' contributions to funded pension schemes (£2.9 billion); exempting investment income of occupational pension schemes (£4.1 billion); and exempting lump sum payments (£1.2 billion).
A key fact about the tax benefit welfare state is that those on the highest incomes gain most.
The distribution of mortgage interest tax relief, which stood at £4.9 billion before the rise in lending rates during the second half of 1988, is indicative of all tax benefits.
Of the  2.4 million taxpayers earning less than £4,000 a year, or 11 per cent of all taxpayers, only 0.5 million are eligible for relief, and this group gain an average tax benefit of £110 a year, or 1 per cent of the entire benefit.
At the top end of the income range, of the 430,000 taxpayers earning over £30,000 a year, 250,000 claim tax relief.
This group represent 2 per cent of all taxpayers, yet gain an average payment of £1,480, or 8 per cent of the total cost of the benefit.
The extent to which a planned use of tax benefits reduces a recipient's tax burden is illustrated in the answer to a Parliamentary Question tabled by Gordon Brown, relating to the 1986. -7 tax year.
Married workers on a salary of £30,000 and £100,000 a year paid a marginal tax rate of 38.9 per cent and 51.2 per cent, respectively, on these earnings, if no tax allowances were claimed, other than personal ones.
However, once the £100,000-a-year worker made an annual investment of £40,000 of his earnings under the Business Expansion Scheme, claimed mortgage tax relief on a £30,000 loan, made an annual investment of £5,000 into an approved pension scheme and a £1,000 life assurance premium, his marginal tax rate fell, from 51.2 per cent to 21.6 per cent.
The £30,000-a-year worker, making a £5,000 investment under the Business Expansion Scheme, together with relief on a £30,000 mortgage, £1,500 into an approved pension scheme and a £200 annual premium for a life assurance policy, reduced his marginal tax rate from 38.9 per cent to 19 per cent.
The man or woman on average earrings, with no tax benefits other than the personal tax allowance, faced a marginal tax rate of 28.5 per cent in 1986–7.
Summary
Half of all personal income is exempted from taxation as a result of the hundred or so tax allowances, or, more accurately, tax benefits.
While the vast majority of those in work claim the relevant personal allowances — such as the single person's or the married man's tax allowance — even these are of most value to high earners who are able to set the allowances against the top rate of tax for which they are liable.
The other tax benefits are even more clearly linked to income, with those on highest income claiming the lion's share of their value.
Tax benefits are consumer led, unlike traditional welfare payments, which are subject to the Government's control of public expenditure.
Over the post decade, tax welfare has played an increasingly important part in boosting the living standards of the rich, while welfare cuts have reduced the income of those at the bottom of the pile.
CONCLUSION
Some people believe that Adam Smith's ‘hidden hand’ is at work in society, bringing about the most favourable productive outcome from the economy.
A more appropriate image of Britain as it approaches the twenty-first century is of the economy governed by a not-so-hidden engine, working for greater inequality, both in rewards and life chances.
The power of this engine can be seen during the decades following World War Two, when, despite a bipartisan political approach aimed at mitigation, class differences on many fronts remained as wide as ever.
Since 1979, it has been the declared aim of the Government to ‘let the children grow tall’.
In operating an incomes policy on low pay, by changing the incidence of taxation on income and wealth, by cutting the rise in the welfare budget, while letting tax welfare be consumer led, the Government has brought about a revolutionary polarization in income and living standards, which can now be seen not only in the official data on income distribution, but also in widening class differences.
Individually, none of these developments are responsible for the advent of an underclass.
Taken together, with rise of mass unemployment, the explanation becomes more comprehensive.
The developments described in this section will continue to have a cumulative impact, and, as differences in income, wealth and welfare are widened still further, Britain's underclass will become even more vulnerable, particularly when part of this strategy may disenfranchise this group from citizenship.
Simultaneously, other forces have been at work, locking or fixing the underclass into place.
Our discussion now turns to this aspect of contemporary Britain.
PART III
FIXING THE UNDERCLASS
The emergence of an underclass in Britain is no accident.
The significant increase in the number of people without work, the exclusion of the very poorest from the country's rapidly rising living standards, the hardening of attitudes towards this group amongst those who feel they are ‘making it’, together with the Thatcher Governments' determination to widen class differences, are the root causes.
Nor will this underclass disappear without the implementation of a series of policies aimed at re-establishing full citizenship.
The strategy will also require measures to counter the six forces currently at work locking this underclass firmly into place, and which are considered in this section.
The first is the dramatic increase in unemployment and the concentration of recent job losses on those at the bottom of the social hierarchy.
Second, while the post-war upward social mobility for working-class youths has continued, this is now paralleled by a downward social mobility, out of the working class into unemployment.
Third, the major restructuring taking place in the labour market is increasing the number of part-time, temporary and often low-paid jobs, while the numbers of full-time and better-paid jobs have declined.
Fourth, the interaction of the tax and benefits system, which gives rise to the poverty and unemployment ‘traps’, operates to destroy the initiative of many poor people.
Fifth, the Thatcher Governments have made major changes to owner-occupation and share ownership and this has resulted in many small wealth holders believing that their interests are now more closely allied with the rich, to the exclusion of people on low incomes.
Moreover, the resulting decline in council housing has begun to lead to the rise of the ghetto.
Sixth, the Thatcher Government's pension reforms will result in a return to a ‘cradle to grave’ condition of unremitted low income for the most disadvantaged.
11
UNEMPLOYMENT
Unemployment locks the underclass into place in three ways: it is more likely to hit those who are poor; the poorest are likely to be unemployed longest; and, in addition, instead of compensating the unemployed, the welfare state penalizes them more than any other group on welfare.
Hitting the Poor the Hardest
Unemployment does not fall gently and evenly across the whole population.
It hits hardest those who are poorest, and, in this group, those who are struck by unemployment suffer the penalties for longer and longer periods.
Nicholas Bosenquet was one of the first to demonstrate the unequal impact of unemployment.
Analysing the 1966 data, at a time when the average level of unemployment stood at 2.6 per cent, he found that the rate for professional workers and those in supervisory grades was 0.6 and 1.3 per cent , respectively (‘Is there a dual labour market in Great Britain?’,
Economic Journal , vol. 84, 1973).
At the other end of the scale, the unemployment rate for personal services and unskilled manual workers was 4.9 and 6.8 per cent, respectively.
This differential impact has worsened with the rapid rise in unemployment.
Adrian Sinfield has brought this analysis up to date by using data from the General Household Survey for 1975–7 and 1984 to measure the proportion of different social groups experiencing unemployment (Press notice, 30 March 1987).
The unemployment rate for male professional workers, employers and managers has increased from 4 per cent in 1975–7 to 6 per cent in 1983–4.
For semi-skilled and  unskilled manual workers, the proportion of members experiencing unemployment almost doubled: from 18 to 32 per cent.
Using the same source of information, Sinfield looked at how unemployment has disproportionately affected blacks and young whites, the two groups from which many members of the underclass are being drawn.
In 1975–7, 9 per cent of young white workers had been unemployed during a twelve-month period.
By 1983–4 the proportion so affected had risen to 17 per cent.
For black workers, the figures are 17 and 27 per cent, respectively.
Moreover, workers aged between 18 and 24 in 1975 — 7 were more than twice as likely as older workers to experience unemployment, and this ratio has been maintained despite the massive increase in the numbers of unemployed during the following decade.
In 1983–4, 33 per cent of young workers told interviewers from the GHS that they were unemployed or had experienced unemployment during the previous twelve months.
These findings from the GHS are averages for the whole country, and underestimate the seriousness of long-term unemployment for young people in those areas most affected by unemployment.
In the North, for example, a team from Leicester University's Labour Market Studies Group has found that job prospects are so bleak that clear signs of an underclass are apparent for those for whom ‘normal morality is inverted and educational achievement is undervalued,.
Interviewing people aged between eighteen and twenty-four in Sunderland, the team found 31 per cent of males and 26 per cent of females had never had full-time paid employment.
Figures for the equivalent groups studied in St Albans, in the South-East, were 3 per cent.
The team found whole communities in Sunderland for whom unemployment was a way of life, and among whom a
new ‘culture’ was emerging….
People who have to exist on social security [over a long period of time]have a different set of values.
Morality starts to change.
Small scale thieving is seen as part of everyday life.
(Observer , 25 January, 1987).
The Poor are Without Jobs the Longest
As the dole queues have lengthened, so too has the time the unemployed have been without work.
The growth in the numbers who have been without work for a year or more has been perhaps the most  disturbing aspect of today's unemployment, despite the Department of Employment's interviewing of all the long-term unemployed, and the Government's recent recognition of the need to direct job appointments at those who have been standing in the queue longest.
In 1958, with unemployment at 408,000, the numbers of long-term unemployed stood at 38,700, or 9.5 per cent of the total.
In 1968, when unemployment had passed the half-million mark, the long-term unemployed total stood at 88,400, or 16.5 per cent of the total.
The most recent figures show a dramatic change, with the proportion of long-term unemployed now constituting a disturbing 41 per cent of all unemployed people.
By April 1986, 186,711 men had been without work for more than five years, a sum nearly five times greater than the same group four decades earlier.
Fewer women register for Unemployment Benefit, so their rate of unemployment is heavily disguised.
The poorest people experience the longest periods of being out of work.
The longer a person (here defined as the head of the household) is unemployed, the more likely it is that he or she will belong to the general labourer or other occupational groups.
Of managerial and professional workers unemployed in 1985, 18.1 per cent had been without work for up to six months, compared to 12.2 per cent of those who had been without a job for between two and three years.
The equivalent figures for manual workers other than general labourers show a reverse pattern.
While 39 per cent of those unemployed for up to six months were manual workers, this group made up almost half the unemployed who had been without work for between two and three years.
In fact, the Labour Force Survey underestimates the extent of this discrimination.
Those who have been unemployed for three or more years are not asked about their previous employment, and are thereby excluded from the survey.
Similarly, because the IfS considers the number of weeks a person has been without work since their previous job, those who have never had a job are also excluded.
The evidence cited earlier shows that it is those from the poorest homes who are most likely to fall in either of these categories.
One reason why the poorest endure unemployment longest is that their share of the job market is shrinking, while those from higher social groups confront radically different job prospects.
From 1979 to 1986, the number of people in full-time employment fell by 1.25 million (Hansard , 4 February 1987, cols 683–4).
During the same period, the Department of Employment Labour Force Survey shows  professionals, employers and managers as a group increasing their share of the total labour force: from 14.7 to 19.1 per cent.
Meanwhile, the semi-skilled and unskilled manual workers' share of the much smaller total of numbers in full-time work fell by over 3 percentage points: from 26.7 to 23.3 per cent.
This finding is confirmed by the vacancy figures (that is, the number of job vacancies that are officially notified).
Since the counting of unemployment was transferred from Job Centres to Unemployment Benefit Offices in November 1982, the Government has ceased carrying out an analysis of vacancies by occupation.
However, recent estimates have been made by Adrian Sinfield and Neil Fraser on the assumption that the current occupational distribution of the unemployed, and of unfilled vacancies, has not changed since they were last published, in 1982 and 1985, respectively (note supplied by Adrian Sinfield and Neil Fraser, 1 June 1987).
The evidence already cited on the worsening position of the poorest in the unemployment stakes suggests that these assumptions will lead to an underestimate of the difficulties the poor have in finding work.
Even so, by 1987, the Sinfield and Fraser estimate shows an overall ratio of eighteen unemployed to every job vacancy.
For the general labourer category, the figure stands at 177.
Once a person has become unemployed for any length of time, the chances are that he or she will continue to be unemployed.
The reason for this is quite simple.
As the researchers from Leicester University noted, the unemployed
become cut off from the world of work….
They don't hear about job opportunities because these are mostly passed around by word of mouth among those who are in work.
So the unemployed, living on social security, usually on big council estates, are cut off from the rest of society.
(Observer , 25 January 1987)
The Unemployed are Penalized Most
It is this hard core of unemployed — that is, those who have been out of work longest — that makes up a large part of the new underclass.
It is not only the length of time that someone has been unemployed that is important, but also the fact that it affects a person's lifetime income.
Both young and old, people are punished in a number of ways for the failure to achieve.
First, because the dole is significantly below earning  levels, the income of the unemployed drops, often dramatically.
As mentioned above, income support only has an ordinary, and not a long-term rate.
Instead of this two tier rate, claimants may qualify for premiums — if they are disabled or have children, for example.
While this move is more favourable than supplementary benefit was to some of the unemployed, the new system discriminates heavily against the young, single unemployed.
Second, other parts of the social security system actively discriminate against the unemployed.
Unemployment benefit is limited to only one year, and, unlike other national insurance benefits, such as an old-age pension, cannot be drawn for as long as needed.
Moreover, unemployment benefit is paid at a lower rate, and, for a married couple, is valued at only 54 per cent of the level of the pension paid to a retired couple.
The earnings-related supplement, which was introduced in 1966 so that the value of unemployment benefit would more accurately reflect the income that a claimant enjoyed while employed, has been abolished.
Finally, a lack of work often excludes claimants from occupational pension schemes, which, together with owner-occupation, constitute one of the two most important forms of capital accumulation for the majority of the population.
Summary
The current high level of unemployment has been crucial in bringing an underclass into existence.
As the number of jobs in manufacturing has fallen, people who could previously expect full-time work have found themselves excluded from paid employment, often for considerable periods.
Moreover, unemployment has not been evenly distributed.
It has fallen most heavily and for the longest periods on the most vulnerable members of society, with a particular concentration on the young, and on unskilled or semi-skilled workers.
It should come as little surprise that some of those who feel they have no stake in ‘official’ society should react in a way that demonstrates their exclusion.
It is important not to lose sight of the fact that the main aim of this non-revolutionary group is to win a place back in society by gaining a job.
The disenfranchising effect of unemployment has worked on a number of fronts.
In financial terms, the income of the unemployed drops, usually by a significant amount.
This is likely to cripple a  person's ability to follow his or her group's round of normal social activities.
Moreover, not having a job strikes at that aspect of citizenship which involves the carrying out of social duties, one of which is to earn a living for oneself and one's family.
Unemployment also disenfranchises in other ways.
Those without work are excluded from building up savings, whether in the form of a house or an adequate pension, and thereby gaining a stake in society.
Unemployment has also had an important effect on the direction of social mobility.
12
TWO-WAY SOCIAL MOBILITY
One of the dominant social characteristics of Britain over the past fifty years has been the degree of upward social mobility of those whose parents held traditional working-class jobs.
This upward movement in the social hierarchy by many working-class boys (significantly none of the studies has looked at girls) has not been achieved at the expense of the opportunities of children from middle-class backgrounds, but by an explosion in the number of middle-class jobs — or an expansion in the service class or the salariat.
This predominantly one-directional social mobility was the pattern up until the quadrupling of oil prices in the winter of 1973 — 4, an event which, for the purposes of this book, is accepted as marking the end of the post-war period in Britain.
Since that time, a major change has occurred with respect to social mobility that has had a direct bearing on the emergence of Britain's underclass, and this is considered in this chapter.
The Nuffield study on the direction of social mobility from the 1930s is considered, together with the latest updating of this work following the 1983 election.
The recent sharp rise in the number of unemployed people is also taken into account.
The effect of the growth in school leaving qualifications on the success of the least qualified in the job market is examined, together with the role of the various Government training schemes for the young unemployed school-leaver.
To understand the significance of these most recent changes, it is first necessary to review the main trends in social mobility in Britain over the past fifty years, before considering those developments that have become more marked since the mid-1970s.
Pattern of Mobility
There have been a number of major studies measuring the degree of social mobility in British society, the most recent of which was carried out in 1972 by Nuffield College, Oxford.
This survey, which examined the degree of social mobility in Britain from the period prior to World War Two, came to three major conclusions.
The first was that, from the inter-war years up to the year of the study, men of all class origins have become progressively more likely to move into professional, administrative and managerial positions — or into the service class of modern British society.
Matching this change, the survey shows that men from working-class backgrounds were less likely than their fathers to be found holding manual wage-earning positions.
Second, the direction of social mobility was largely, though not exclusively, an upward one, due to the change in the structure of the class system itself; the service class continued to grow while the manual working class contracted.
Third, downward mobility from positions in the service class to other class positions has steadily decreased over the same time span (A. H. Halsey, A. F. Heath and John Ridge,Origins and Destinations , Oxford University Press, 1980).
Material collected for the study on the 1983 general election has been used by two researchers, John Goldthorpe and Clive Payne, to update the Nuffield study, and to examine the extent of social mobility a decade after the end of the post-war period (John H. Goldthorpe and Clive Payne, ‘Trends in intergeneration class mobility in England and Wales, 1972 — 83’,Sociology , vol. 20, no. 1, February 1986).
The most significant change recorded between the 1972 and 1983 surveys has been the advent of mass unemployment.
In 1972 the official unemployment rate was under 4 per cent, and of those questioned in the Nuffield survey, only 5 per cent told interviewers that they were currently out of work.
This total included men who, although unemployed, were between jobs.
By 1983, unemployment had reached over 12 per cent, and long-term unemployment (defined as being without work for over a year) had emerged as a significant economic and social issue.
Almost 9 per cent of the men aged between twenty and sixty-four resident in England and Wales during the 1983 survey reported that they were unemployed, and this total excluded those who were waiting to take up jobs.
Of the total sample, 5 per cent had been without work for more than a year.
Those unemployed in the 1972 survey had been classified by their last job.
Goldthorpe and Payne believed it
would be unwise for us in analysing our 1983 data to treat the unemployed in the same way as in 1972 without at least considering whether this might not seriously distort our results; more specifically, it would seem important to examine what effect it would have on he 1983 mobility [results]if unemployment, or at all events long-term unemployment, were itself regarded as a mobility ‘status’ or outcome.
(p. 15)
The result of this special analysis
is something that might not have been anticipated: the principle finding concerning trends in class mobility since 1972 can stand unchanged even when in…1983…unemployment is regarded as a separate mobility status.
That is to say, it still remains the case that men of all social origins have become more likely to be found in service-class positions and less likely to be found in working-class ones.
(p. 15)
It would be wrong to deduce from this conclusion that unemployment has had no effect on mobility.
Unemployment is still largely a working-class experience.
Not surprisingly therefore, the results of the 1983 survey show that mass unemployment ‘has created a serious new risk of what can only be regarded as downward social mobility —and that risk is much greater for men in working class positions, by whatever route they come into them, than it is for others ’(p. 17).
In 1972, less than 16 per cent of this age group had been found to be upwardly mobile as against 60 per cent who retained their working class positions (p. 18).
Taking men of working-class origin of the same age group in 1983, and signifying unemployment as a separate category, the survey found 22 per cent were upwardly mobile, 40 per cent remained in working-class positions, while a further 11 per cent had been pushed down into unemployment, and over half of this last group had been without work for over a year.
A decade after the end of the first post-war period in Britain (that is, during the sharp oil price rise mentioned above) social mobility was characterized both by heightening opportunities of rising socially, as well as increased risks of being caught in a downward spiral — particularly for those of working-class origin, who are among those who most easily fall prey to recruitment into the underclass.
Effect of Education Changes
This downward mobility is now being reinforced by educational changes that operate not only to prevent the most disadvantaged children from benefiting from the increased degree of upward social mobility, but also prevent many of them entering the labour market at all.
Until recently, the crucial question centred on the role schools played in determining which children rise socially (Anthony Heath and John Ridge, ‘Schools, examinations and occupational attainment’, reprinted in Achievement and Inequality in Education , ed.
Jane Purves and Margaret Hales, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1983).
Since the 1972 Nuffield Survey was carried out, three major educational changes have occurred.
Comprehensive reorganization began in 1965, although most schools were not reorganized on this basis until the mid-1970s.
The school-leaving age was raised to sixteen in 1974, thereby lessening the chance of pupils leaving school without the opportunity of taking qualifying examinations.
Also, the advent of the CSE, and more recently the GCSE, has significantly changed the character of the output of secondary education.
These changes mean that, in studying the emergence of Britain's underclass, it is necessary to change the focus of attention, away from the traditional topic of selection for secondary education, to one of selection at entry into the labour market.
The earlier mobility studies showed that access to the grammar school was crucial in gaining a service-type job.
In the post-war period the acquisition of O-level certificates became similarly crucial in gaining a foothold onto a career in the growing service sector.
A comparison between the 1972 and 1983 studies shows a large increase in the numbers from all social classes gaining O-level qualifications.
But important changes are occurring now that 91 per cent of the children of working-class backgrounds gain similar qualifications.
‘The likelihood here is that, as fast as the working class catches up at O level, qualifications required in the labour market will move upwards with A levels becoming the key qualifications for a successful career in the salariat’(Anthony Heath, ‘Class in the classroom,’New Society , 17 July 1987, p. 15).
Children from working-class homes have now come under two new pressures.
Those who compete successfully under what they saw as the rules of the game — that is, to obtain O-level qualifications, find the  rules have changed; A levels had become the required entry into those jobs offering the greatest upward social mobility.
But at the same time another pressure is being applied to the least gifted children from working-class homes.
This new pressure, in fact, comes from the very success of more children gaining paper qualifications.
This change puts at greater risk those working-class boys and girls who fail to acquire any such paper qualifications.
The subsequent growth and proportion obtaining O level, and even more so of those obtaining CSE, means that school-leavers are now more heterogeneous in their qualifications.
The youngest group has in effect become more stratified in educational terms and there are now new gradations of educational attainment that mirror differences in social background.
Whereas most working-class children were once alike in leaving school without qualification, differences are now emerging between the skilled and semi-skilled section of the working-class.
(p. 15)
As it is from the children of the semi- and unskilled working class who leave school without any qualification that the underclass is being recruited, it is important to ask which children are most likely to fall into this category.
Chapter 3 detailed the educational performances of the poorest children.
While some performed well — although not as well as their intellectual peers who were from better-off homes — the vast majority of the poorest children gained few, if any, qualifications from their schooling.
Training Schemes
Matching the change in the range of qualifications of school-leavers has been a dramatic transformation in the youth labour market in a little over a decade.
Whereas in 1974 well over 60 per cent of male sixteen year olds were in work, today that total is only 16 per cent.
For seventeen year olds the equivalent figures are 70 and 44 per cent.
The changed outlook for young women workers is similar (see table 1 in ‘Education and the labour market status of young people’,Employment Gazette , September 1987, p. 460).
Not surprisingly, therefore, with youth unemployment so high, some school-leavers with qualifications fail to find jobs.
They, along with their peers who have no paper qualifications at all, compete for places on the Youth Training Schemes (YTS).
These schemes, which originally ran for one year, have now been extended to two years.
As 30 per cent of YTS graduates fail to find employment at the end of their course it is crucial to understand which groups are able to use the YTS to gain a foothold in the labour market, and those which are unsuccessful.
Those young people who gained places on what were called ‘employer-led courses’, or mode A courses, were the ones most likely to gain employment at the end of their training.
Those young people undertaking YTS at colleges, or on community-based schemes, which were called mode B schemes, were less likely to be successful in entering the labour market when they graduated from their courses (see the transcript of the BBC TV Panorama programme ‘Fair play for Britain's Blacks’, 6 July 1987, p. 3).
The differences between types of YTS schemes has now been eliminated on paper — but the differences in courses, whether employer led or not, and the outcome for employment, remain.
The Government does not publish any breakdown of the social background of those YTS graduates who fail to gain employment.
Studies of how black youths fare after completing YTS have, however, been made public.
While the underclass is composed of both black and white workers, black workers, in Elizabeth Burney's phrase, act as a barium meal in an X-ray — highlighting the weak points — or, for our purposes, the fate of the most disadvantaged, those most likely to find themselves in the ranks of the underclass.
Two such reports on the fate of black workers on the YTS have been published.
A team of researchers from Bristol University was commissioned to examine what the YTS had to offer young black people and to indicate how they got on during the first six months of the scheme (S. Fenton,Ethnic Minorities and the Youth Training Scheme Research and Development Series, no. 20, MSC, 1984).
This report was published along with a study by the Commission for Racial Equality (CRE) entitled Racial Equality in the Youth Training Scheme (CRE, 1984).
The most significant finding of these reports was of the over-representation of black youths on mode B schemes — or on schemes that were less likely than mode A schemes to lead to a job.
For a summary of the findings, see Steve Fenton and Paul Burton, ‘YTS and equal opportunity policy’, in Back Youth Futures , ed.
Malcolm Cross and Douglas I. Smith, National Youth Bureau, 1987.)
In some instances the researchers accepted that this pattern might be explained by the preponderance of mode B schemes ‘but more often a process of ‘guided drift’ could be detected, based on a stereotyping of both  young people and mode delivery’(pp. 38 — 9).
Partly in response to these criticisms, the Youth Training Board (YTB) carried out a review of the training schemes during the summer of 1984.
One aspect of this review was to examine whether the MSC's commitment to an equal opportunities policy was being fulfilled in both the letter and spirit of the agreement.
The results of this review came to the disturbingly complacent conclusion that, as blacks experience discrimination generally in society, ‘it would perhaps be more surprising if there was no evidence of discrimination’ in YTS schemes (pp. 40–1).
Summary
Since the inter-war years, Britain has been for many people an upwardly mobile society, with children from working-class homes winning jobs in the expanding service class.
Even with the advent of mass unemployment, this trend has continued, if anything more strongly.
Unemployment, however, has brought about a simultaneous and contrary downward social movement.
Those most likely to be caught in this new, downward flow are young people from the poorest homes.
The means by which people are caught and recruited into the underclass has changed.
Just as selection via the 11-plus, was the decisive influence, the gaining of school-leaving qualifications is now crucial in deciding who gains the best jobs.
The most vulnerable young people now leave school without qualifications and are selected for the underclass through one of the Government's YTS schemes.
While class-based information does not exist for all those students who fail to gain work after graduating from a YTS, the conclusion about how the scheme operates in the case of black youths is probably equally valid with respect to white youths without qualifications coming from poor, unskilled, working-class homes.
Because the poorest are directed to those schemes least likely to result in gaining a job, they are in fact being selected for unemployment and possibly membership of the underclass at the end of their courses.
This outcome of the YTS courses completes the process of marginalization to the fringes of society; from the poorest homes, to the poorest school performances, to the greatest difficulty obtaining work, to placement on those training schemes least likely to lead to full-time paid employment.
Once in the adult world of work, the underclass faces further discrimination when it comes to selection for the primary or secondary labour market.
13
THE RISE OF SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
The third force forging Britain's underclass stems from the labour market itself.
The advent of mass unemployment has largely been brought about by the destruction of full-time jobs in manufacturing industry: a fall of 2 million since 1979 (Hansard , 30 November 1987, col. 398).
As the number of full-time jobs has declined, there has also been an increase in the number of what are called ‘flexible workers’, that is temporary, part-time or home workers.
The Financial Times reports that, by 1985, one in three of those in employment were in this category (Financial Times , 27 February 1987) and according to national estimates published by the Department of Employment early in 1987, the number of flexible workers rose by 16 per cent between 1981 and 1985, while those in permanent, full-time employment fell by 6 per cent.
This trend is likely to continue, restructuring the job market into two distinct tiers.
It is important, of course, to recognize that the secondary, or flexible part of the labour market is itself neatly divided into two parts.
One arises from the adaptation to new skills required to man the information technology revolution through which we are now living.
The other is dominated by workers with few skills, other than their willingness to work the hours required by their employers.
This discussion focuses on this second group.
What chances there are of the underclass obtaining any work are largely confined to this secondary and flexible labour market, and that part which is characterized by less security of employment, low pay and little or no pension or fringe benefits.
This section of the labour market is also virtually non-unionized, providing for almost no representation on pay and working conditions, or health and safety regulations.
The increase in the number of working women is disproportionately  concentrated in this sector, and while the rates of pay are low, it would appear that many of these workers are, in fact, the main breadwinners.
This chapter looks at the rise in the secondary labour market, studies what the future trends are likely to be, and examines how limited the scope of traditional trade union action will be in countering the consequences of this job market restructuring.
The Secondary Labour Market
An important part of this secondary labour market is composed of what are known as flexible workers.
It is important to stress, however, that not all flexible workers can be classified in the same way.
As well as the growth in the number of low-paid jobs, a significant group of flexible workers find themselves in great demand, and consequently gain high salaries.
The secondary labour market considered here is made up of poorer-paid workers, undertaking part-time or home work.
It also covers a number of those workers who appear in the self-employed statistics.
The Government attaches a great deal of importance to this unprecedented growth in self-employment and small businesses: it is seen as the main drive to create an enterprise culture that will hopefully lead to an increase in the numbers in work.
Yet the Government's own figures show that in most cases what has occurred is the creation of single-person businesses, that is self-employment by individual workers who do not employ any assistants as part of their business activities.
It is for this reason that this group should be included in any study of the flexible workforce.
Between 1981 and 1984, the number of those for whom self-employment was the main employment rose by almost 0.5 million to a little over 2.5 million — a growth to 11.2 per cent of the total employment figures.
The growth in part-time jobs from 1981 to 1985 records the smallest growth in the ranks of the flexible workforce — totalling no more than 300,000 for the whole period.
This increase, however, needs to be seen in a longer time-scale.
In the two decades up to 1981, the numbers in part-time work doubled to over 4 million, while the numbers in full-time employment fell by 2 million.
By the spring of 1985, 4.5 million, or 21.7 per cent of all those in employment, were in part-time jobs, and the UK currently employs over 40 per cent of all part-time workers in the EEC (Income Data Services Part-timers, Temps and Job Sharers , April 1985).
The third part of the flexible workforce is composed of those undertaking what is called ‘temporary work’.
While a range of jobs now make up this sector, they neatly divide into seasonal, temporary or casual work on the one hand, and, on the other, work contracted for a fixed period of time or for whatever time it takes to complete a defined task.
Agency and professional workers are to be found in this second category.
When temporary workers responding to the British Labour Force Survey were themselves invited to differentiate between these two groups, two-thirds placed themselves in the first category.
Members of this, the larger group of temporary workers, were most likely to be unskilled or semi-skilled.
A special analysis of the overall extent of the temporary workforce carried out on the British/European Communities' Labour Force Survey bears on the changing structure of the labour market and its likely repercussions on the outlook for Britain's underclass.
While a higher proportion of temporary workers than of the total labour force were found to be women workers (6 per cent compared to 41 per cent), temporary workers were also ‘considerably younger’ than the generality of workers, largely because a high proportion of the former are still teenagers.
One in five were found to be under twenty and ‘a quarter of all teenagers in the labour force work on a temporary basis’(B. Casey, ‘The extent and nature of temporary employment in Great Britain’,Policy Studies , vol.
VIII, part 1, July 1987, p. 67).
Many, although not all of these young workers would be occupying relatively low-skilled positions.
Of concern for future employment prospects was the finding that the ‘extent of formal training given by employing organisations was usually minimal’(p. 73).
While there has been a dispute about how quickly, if at all, this temporary sector of employment is on the increase, the results of the Spring 1985 Labour Force Survey are unequivocal about the extent and direction of change.
They reveal an enormous growth in this sector.
The number of temporary workers rose from 621,000 in 1981 (including some people on Government schemes) to 1,314,000 in 1985 (excluding people on Government schemes).
Commenting on the Labour Force Survey results, Catherine Hakim remarks: ‘The importance of the ‘flexible’ sector has clearly been underestimated; it is hardly a narrow and insignificant fringe on the edges of the labour market’(‘Homeworking in Britain: key findings from the national survey of home-based workers’,Employment Gazette , February 1987, from which all of the above relevant information has  been taken).
Hakim concludes by observing that: ‘By the mid-1980's, the labour force divided neatly into two-thirds  ‘permanet ’ and one-third ‘flexible’.
On this measure, one quarter of all men in work, and half of all women in work are now in the sector offering numerical flexibility’(p. 93).
Future Trends
This marked trend, from ‘inflexible’ to ‘flexible’, and from manufacturing to the service sector, will continue, according to a study published in 1986 by the Institute of Manpower Studies.
In that year, the IMS estimated a further 650,000 job losses in manufacturing between 1985 and 1990 being only partly counterbalanced by the creation of 500,000 jobs in the private service sector.
In a further study published a year later, the IMS considered in detail seven private sector service industries identified as the fastest growing job creators: retailing, wholesaling, hotels and catering, banking, building societies, insurance and business services.
Commenting on the report, the Financial Times remarked that these sectors are identified as dominating the thrust towards a post-industrial society, and as: ‘spearheading the second industrial revolution, and settling employment trends, such as part-time working, job sharing and decentralisation’(Financial Times , 5 February, 1987).
Three sectors in particular are identified as the predominant job creators to the end of the decade: business services (215,000 jobs), hotel and catering (120,000 jobs) and wholesale distribution (70,000 jobs).
This trend towards a greater reliance upon jobs in service industries does not by itself, however, hold out a great deal of hope for the long-term male unemployed, or the emerging underclass.
The main beneficiaries of the new jobs in this sector are likely to be female: it is forecast that they will gain two-thirds of these jobs.
Part-time workers will claim about a third of the projected increases, while young workers gain only about one quarter of the jobs.
On the other hand, the number of part-time female employees alone is likely to increase by an estimated 122,000 during this period.
About 10 per cent of the new jobs are likely to go to the self-employed, most of them coming from the ranks of those already in employment.
Moreover, a significant proportion of the jobs are likely to be low paid.
Hotels and catering are notorious for their low rates of pay.
Low pay is also common in  wholesale distribution and, when the details of the job become available, this many also apply to business services.
In its conclusions to the study, the IMS sounds another note of caution.
While the seven sectors examined were expected to continue to create jobs until the end of the decade, that rate of increase is predicted to be lower than in the recent past, as new technology and industrial concentration increase productivity.
Significantly, the study draws attention to one of the causes of fairly rapid growth in these sectors, namely the transfer of jobs from the production industries as contracting out to the service industries continues.
To say that we are in the midst of a second industrial revolution, propelled by a rapid growth in services is not a misnomer; this growth has been exceptional since 1975.
However, the claim begins to look exaggerated in the context of the causes of the growth; in particular, the contracting out of services from the productive industries.
The IMS's final comment is important: ‘If economic revolutions are about wealth creation rather than redistribution, this latest one still has a long way to go’(‘Services: the second industrial revolution ?’ by Amin Rajan, Report by the Institute of Manpower Services Group, Butterworths, reported in the Financial Times , 5 February 1987).
The trend towards privatization, or contracting out, not only results in jobs being reclassified from one industrial sector to another, but often to a substantial growth in the numbers of part-time, low-paid positions.
I quote the case of my own area of the Wirral, again not because it is unique, but rather for the very opposite reason.
Here, as elsewhere, hospital cleaning services were won by a private contractor.
Workers who had previously had full-time jobs, security of employment and a full range of fringe benefits, including the right to an occupational pension, were offered part-time employment at a lower hourly rate of pay without any occupational pension entitlement.
For most of the workers previously employed by the health authority, their social security entitlement became higher than the wages they could gain from such part-time employment.
Trade Union Weakness
A further change in the nature of the labour market is being brought about by the decline in the strength of the trade unions.
In part, this  decline has been effected by the successful ideological battle waged against them by Mrs Thatcher.
For the time being at least, she has managed to change the attitude of a significant proportion of the population towards the legitimacy of crucial parts of normal trade union practice, although opinion polls now show a growing esteem for trade unions shorn of some of the pre-1979 powers.
Trade union strength has also been curtailed by the rise in unemployment and the consequent fall in the number of trade unionists.
This decline has been faster than the decline in employment, dropping from 13.3 million in 1979, to 10.7 million in 1985, a 19.5 per cent decline since 1979.
The fall in employment has been much more marked amongst male than female workers and this has affected the composition of union membership; females now comprise almost 35 per cent of the entire membership.
Generally speaking, female workers are less likely to undertake traditional forms of industrial action, and this may have a growing impact on the role of the labour movement in future decades.
Here a note of caution should perhaps be added about the conventional wisdom that falling membership automatically leads to a decrease in trade union influence.
‘Depending on what set of figures you employ, it is possible to arrive at quite different estimates of the impact of the recession on trade unions’, writes Dr John Kelly, a labour economist (reported in the Financial Times , 11 November 1987).
The figures often used in public debate measure trade union density against the number of employees in employment plus the unemployed.
Such data are relevant when looking at the impact trade unions may be able to have on the national political process.
But in the local bargaining situation, trade union strength is more effectively measured in terms of their following in the workplace.
Despite these cautionary remarks, it appears unlikely that union power will revive as soon as the economic climate improves.
In a new study on the future of trade unions, P. F. Beaumont examines a number of structural forces, all of which are working against a re-establishment of the growing status quo ante (see The Decline of Trade Union Organisations , Croom Helm, Beckenham, 1987).
The main forces that work against trade union interest, according to Beaumont, are the difficulties experienced by unions in using the favourable industrial relations procedures laid down by the last Labour Government; moves in the public sector that have made trade union organization difficult, and, in the case of GCHO, unlawful; and the  Conservative Government's continuing drive against the closed shop.
The study also draws on existing published data about current practices and predictions about where growth in jobs is most likely to take place, as a basis for projections on likely trade union growth.
Such an analysis reveals, firstly, that the industrial relations ‘pace-setters, in the UK are no longer the large corporations that establish paternalistic relations with trade unions, but are, instead, predominantly non-trade union companies, of which Marks and Spencer is a prime example.
Second, past trends in Scotland and North-West England suggest that a relatively high proportion of newly established firms are non-union, and this is particularly so in new-town locations.
By and large, these new firms are: ‘overwhelmingly British-owned, single, independent establishments of relatively small size’, in which employee relations are generally seen as involving good informal communications and flexible working practices (quoted in the Financial Times , 20 February 1987).
Similar findings on the decline in the strength of trade unions has been highlighted in a report on labour performance in the North-West — an area traditionally strong in trade union organization.
Surveying 150 companies — half UK owned and half foreign owned — it was found that while 69 per cent of companies recognized trade unions for the purpose of collective bargaining, non-recognition was higher in the newer industries, i.e., those likely to supply most of the new employment in the decades ahead.
Summary
Whatever the causes, the rise in part-time work has had a profound effect on the employment conditions and prospects of a growing number of workers.
While for some this is a welcome development, for many others this structural change in the labour market reduces the income and the company welfare benefits of those concerned to such an extent that they are made inferior to their colleagues in the primary labour market.
All too often, flexible working also entails the loss of entitlement to an adequate occupational pension, and hence the possibility of real hardship during retirement.
The lack of security of employment makes flexible working a kind of half-way house, and this half-way house contains a number of workers struggling to keep themselves from dropping into the abyss of the underclass.
Being in work, no matter how poor the conditions, opens up the possibility of  recruitment into the primary labour market.
Being part of the secondary market, however, carries a substantial risk of being pushed back into unemployment, and possibly into the ranks of the underclass.
The likelihood of the trade unions being able to counter these trends is non-existent, despite the brave attempts by some trade union leaders to convince potential recruits otherwise.
In addition, the secondary labour market also poses major incentive problems, and these are now considered.
14
DESTROYING INITIATIVE
The fourth way in which the underclass is immobilized at the bottom of our society has been through the spread of means-tested assistance, which has a devastating effect on the initiative of people on low incomes.
A combination of means-tested assistance being withdrawn as income rises, together with an increased tax bill, has created a particular disincentive for those of the poor who try and improve their own position by personal effort and initiative.
This disincentive usually goes under the name of the ‘poverty trap’.
Similarly, for those workers moving off unemployment pay and into work, the effects of tax, loss of income support, plus the additional cost of going to work, have given rise to what is called the ‘unemployment trap’.
Each of these traps is considered in this chapter, which begins by examining the increase in the numbers subjected to means-tested assistance in recent years.
Means Tests
In 1948, the old Poor Law was abolished.
In its place, the Attlee Government instituted a range of national insurance benefits — such as old-age pension, unemployment pay and sickness benefit — together with a scheme of national assistance.
The aim was that as a greater number of the population became eligible for national insurance benefits, fewer people would be dependent on the safety net of national assistance to provide them with a minimum income.
As we saw in Part I, the opposite has occurred.
Throughout the post-war period, there has been an increase in the numbers dependent on means-tested national assistance, or, as it was called from 1966, supplementary benefit.
In 1948, a little less than a million households were drawing national assistance.
By 1979, the number had risen to 2.8 million.
The increase in the numbers claiming benefit since 1979, is, as was pointed out in Part I, greater than the whole of the increase in the years up to the election of the first Thatcher Government.
By November 1979, there were 2.8 million regular payments of supplementary benefit, and these payments determined the living standards of 4.4 million people.
The equivalent figures for May 1987 are 4.9 million claimants, and 8.2 million people dependent on supplementary benefit (Hansard , 25 November 1987, col. 245).
Throughout the 1960s, local authorities introduced rebate schemes for council tenants unable to meet their full rent.
Accompanying this measure was a national scheme, operated by the local authorities, for rate-payers unable to meet a full rates bill.
During 1981 — 2, the year before the national housing benefit scheme came into operation, 1.6 million tenants gained rent rebates, a further 250,000 tenants in private property gained a rent allowance, and 3.7 million rate-payers gained rate rebates.
When these local authority schemes were standardized into the national housing benefit scheme, the numbers claiming a rent rebate or a rate rebate increased to 3.26 and 5.3 million, respectively (Hansard , 13 July 1987, col. 373).
Simultaneously with the preparation of the new housing benefit scheme, the Government began operating a policy of significantly increasing the level of council house rents, and a threefold increase has occurred in the nine years since 1979 (House of Commons Library Note, 19 July 1988).
Not surprisingly, therefore, the numbers of people eligible for housing benefit increased, and so did the total cost of the scheme.
By 1985 — 6, the numbers claiming rent rebates had increased to 4 million, the numbers claiming rent allowances to 1.2 million, and the number of householders claiming rate rebates to 7.3 million.
While continuing a policy of pushing up rents, the Government began to curtail expenditure on the housing benefit scheme, and by 1987–8 the numbers claiming rent rebates had fallen to 3.7 million, and those claiming rate rebates to 7.1 million.
The numbers claiming rent allowances had marginally increased to 1.2 million (Hansard , 13 July 1987, col. 373).
By April 1990 the Government intends to replace the system of local rates with a community charge.
The poll tax will increase the numbers eligible for housing benefit.
In the Green Paper,Paying for Local Government (Cmnd. 9714), the Government estimated that the housing benefit case-load in Britain would rise by  over 1 million when the community charge is fully in place (Hansard , 10 November 1987, col. 153).
The Conservative Party went into the 1970 election with a pledge to increase family allowances (renamed child benefit in 1979).
In the event, the Heath Government introduced a new means-tested benefit, called Family Income Supplement (FIS), which could be claimed by working families on low incomes.
By 1979, there were 77,000 recipients of FIS, and these payments helped determine the family income of 214,000 people.
The equivalent figures by April 1986 were 200,000 and 530,000, respectively (Hansard , 9 February 1988, col. 186w).
In 1988, FIS was replaced by family credit.
This benefit is more generous than FIS, many more people are eligible to claim, and the average value of payments is expected to be significantly higher than under FIS.
Table 14.1 brings together the available information on the growth in the numbers of people dependent on means-tested welfare.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to state what the overall dependency total is, as most supplementary benefit claimants will also be drawing housing benefit.
Even so, the direction of change is clear — a massive increase   in seven years of the numbers caught in the means-test trap.
The number claiming help with their rent jumped from 1.4 million to 5 million, and the number gaining help with their rates has grown from 3 million to over 7 million (again, there is an overlap between these two groups).
There are no details on the number of dependents, as opposed to claimants of housing benefit.
Data on dependants is available for supplementary benefit, and, as noted above, the number has shot up from 4.4 million to 8.2 million.
Just how important a role means-tested assistance plays in the Government's overall strategy is seen not only in the numbers claiming this form of social security, but in its growing share of public expenditure.
Expenditure on national insurance benefits, benefits for which claimants become entitled because of their contribution record, covering a range of help from unemployment to old-age pensions, has risen by 400 per cent over the past thirty-five years up to 1984. -5.
Expenditure on what are termed non-contributory benefits, benefits paid to whole groups of claimants irrespective of their level of income, such as invalidity benefit and the attendance allowance, has risen by 290 per cent.
While the increase in both these benefits is substantial, it is dwarfed by the increase in money spent on means-tested benefits such as supplementary benefit and housing benefit.
These benefits have recorded a 1,010 per cent increase since 1949–50.
This increase has, however, largely occurred since 1979.
Not surprisingly, therefore, whereas in 1949–50 means-tested benefits accounted for only 12.7 per cent of the social security budget, they now command over a quarter of all social security expenditure (Reform of Social Security: Background Papers , Cmnd. 9519, pp. 28–9).
It is against this background — of the growing importance that the Government attaches to means-tested assistance — seen both in its rising share of public expenditure, and the significant rise in the numbers claiming such assistance, that we need to consider the operation of the poverty and unemployment traps.
Poverty Trap
The poverty trap has been brought about by the interaction of the paying of tax and the loss of means-tested assistance on each £1 of additional earnings.
Particularly important in this respect is family credit, which replaces FIS.
In its extreme form, the poverty trap resulted in a situation where a £1 increase in income from work  resulted in a reduction in net income, that is the worker was faced with a marginal tax rate in excess of 100 per cent(for the first use of the term, see Frank Field and David Piachaud,New Statesman , 3 December 1971).
There is no single point in the income scale where the poverty trap begins to operate.
Because family credit and housing benefit are withdrawn over a large band of income, and because low-income families begin to pay tax at a low threshold, there are now whole bands of income over which it is difficult for low-income families to improve their net income.
For example, a family with four dependent children on gross earnings of £75 per week, paying average rent and local authority rates, would gain an income of £123.25 per week, after taking into account means-tested assistance.
However, to raise this income to £140.90 per week the family would need to more than double their earnings, from £75 a week to £165 a week (Hansard , 28 July 1988, col. 509).
Over the past decade or so, there has been evidence to show that an increasing number of low-paid families in work were caught in the poverty trap.
In 1974, the loss of FIS and the payment of tax and national insurance amounted to an 89 per cent marginal tax rate.
In that year, according to a report from the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee, of the 75,210 FIS recipients, only 15,000, or 20 per cent, were estimated to be above the tax threshold when FIS was claimed in the previous year (Treasury and Civil Service Committee,The Structure of Personal Income, Taxation and Income Support , House of Commons Paper 2021, HMSO 1982, table 11, p. 15).
By 1986, however, there was a total of 200,000 families in receipt of FIS, and of these, 69 per cent were paying both tax and national insurance contributions, and 25 per cent were paying national insurance contributions only (Hansard , 23 February, 1987, col. 128).
The Government estimates that 78 per cent of families drawing family credit are currently above the tax threshold (Hansard , 29 July 1988, cols 823–4w).
So, not only are more families drawing family credit than FIS, but a larger proportion of this group pays tax and insurance on each additional £1 of earnings, as well as losing part of the family credit payment.
One of the aims of the Government's 1988 benefit reforms was to ensure that no working families were faced with a marginal tax rate of over 100 per cent.
This objective has been met, but at a price; an increasing number of poor families are faced with high marginal tax  rates.
At the current time, the vast majority of income-tax payers (95 per cent) face a marginal tax rate of 34 per cent (25 per cent income tax, combined with 9 per cent national insurance contributions).
However, the loss of family credit and housing benefit ensures that some poor working families face a marginal tax rate of three times this level.
‘For a full-time working family paying income tax and national insurance contributions, and receiving income-related benefits, an extra £1 of gross earnings can lead to an increase in income tax of 25p, a 9p increase in national insurance contributions, a 46p reduction in family credit, and a 17p reduction in Housing Benefit — a total of 97p’(Hansard , 28 July 1988, col. 509).
While it is correct, therefore, for the Government to claim that poor families are not theoretically faced with marginal tax rates in excess of 100 per cent, it is clear that low-income families as a group face marginal tax rates of double, and sometimes treble, what the majority of the population pays.
The Treasury and Civil Service Committee ended its deliberations on the poverty trap by recording: ‘It is clear from the foregoing that the extreme version of the poverty trap, so called— i.e. the problem of working families facing a marginal rate of 100% — is only the tip of an iceberg’(p. 23).
‘Why Work?’
Syndrome
It is also the tip of the iceberg in another sense, for this complex of wage levels and tax rates that we have been examining also leads to another obstacle for those on welfare being able to improve themselves by taking a job, even if one is available.
Ralph Howell was the first politician to draw attention to the narrowness of the gap between the income of many low-wage earners when in work, and their benefit entitlement when they were without a job.
(See his Low Pay and Taxation , Low Pay Paper, no. 8, p. 20, LPU, 1976.)
The ratio of a person's net income when in work compared to their income on benefit is measured by what is called the ‘replacement ratio’.
If a person's replacement ratio is high, it means that their income from benefit is near to their net income from work.
On the other hand, if the replacement ratio is low, this denotes that benefit income is considerably below that which a person would receive when in work.
Since 1979, the Government has taken three measures to lower the replacement ratio — that is, to increase the gap between a person's  income when in work compared with when he or she is drawing the dole.
The earnings-related supplement, paid to eligible claimants during the first six months of unemployment, has been abolished; unemployment pay is now taxable; and tax rebates are not now paid immediately to those losing their jobs.
Other factors also have an effect on the level of the replacement rate, for example wage increases and the movement of rent and rates, together with benefit levels.
How these measures have affected the replacement rates can be seen in table 14.2.
Between November 1978 and November 1986, short-term replacement rates have fallen; for example, whereas 65 per cent of claimants had an income below 80 per cent of their normal earnings in 1978, this had risen to 87 per cent of claimants in 1986.
So, too, have long-term rates, but not to such a significant degree.
This has led a number of commentators to argue that the unemployment trap is now of little importance to the real world.
Using the data in the table, an argument is advanced that, whereas 21 per cent of working families had a short-term replacement rate of up to 60 per cent of their normal earnings in 1978, by 1985 — 6 this had risen to about 44 per cent of families.
Despite the reassuring noises made by the Government, the poverty and unemployment traps play an all too real and oppressive role in the  lives of those on low incomes.
It is unfair, to say the least, in a country that increasingly believes that incentives should be the dominant motive force, that the interaction of taxation rates and benefit eligibility levels should preclude the least privileged from being able to improve their own lot.
More importantly, this interaction is now playing a crucial part in excluding the underclass from the mainstream of society.
While the poverty trap affects very large numbers of workers —including some who are part of the underclass — the unemployment trap is one that particularly operates against this group, especially those at its margin.
One way open to the individual to beat these two traps is to make dishonest returns to the tax office, the benefit office, or both.
Participation in the black economy may produce substantial short-term gains for the individual concerned, but these gains have to be offset against the ‘rights of citizenship’ that go with a complete national insurance contributions record.
Such exclusion from citizenship is again the mark of the underclass.
Reforming the tax system in order to reduce sharply the standard rate of tax is considered in Part IV.
Summary
Large numbers of people in Britain are reduced to subsisting on a low income once they are unable to work.
To prevent these people becoming poor, the post-war welfare reforms enacted a series of national insurance benefits to cover those periods when people were excluded from the labour market — in old age, during sickness or unemployment.
These benefits, however, were never paid at a generous enough level to prevent many of those without work from having to resort also to means-tested assistance.
While the number of people drawing such assistance grew steadily during the post-war period, the size of this group has exploded since 1979.
So, while the Government claims that it is targeting help on those in greatest need, it is simultaneously increasing the numbers caught, in the Government's terminology, in a ‘dependency culture’.
This fundamental contradiction, between wanting to target help — which means increasing the numbers on means-tested assistance — and breaking the dependency culture, is one that has thwarted the whole of the Government's welfare and tax policies.
While no working poor families are now subjected to 100 per cent marginal tax rates, large numbers of them face the combined effect of tax and loss of means-tested benefits, which withdraws over three-quarters of any increased income they earn.
Similarly, because of the loss of full housing benefit once a person moves off income support, a large number of unemployed families face what has been called an unemployment trap.
While the numbers affected by these disincentives are far greater than the membership of the underclass, the underclass is the most severely affected.
The other ‘fixing’ agents, which have been described in this chapter, act to create a catch-22 situation.
They prevent most of the underclass from being able to free themselves from welfare dependency.
But it is only with the chance of full-time work that this group can build up its rights to social insurance benefits, which prevents any further misfortune resulting in an automatic relegation to dependency on means-tested assistance.
Reforms aimed at refashioning the welfare state, so that it acts as a floor on which the underclass can build by their own efforts, rather than a ceiling through which it is impossible for them to pass, are considered in Part IV.
15
CAPITAL DIVISIONS
There are currently a number of changes at work that are likely to prevent the poor from acquiring capital assets.
These same forces will also further distance the underclass from the vast majority of the population, many of whom now have a stake in what is called ‘people's capitalism’.
Paradoxically, the moves to widen the number of people holding capital assets is being accompanied by a determined attempt to reverse the sixty-year-old trend towards greater equality of wealth.
Recent fiscal changes affecting the ownership of wealth have been considered in Part II.
In this chapter, the discussion is concerned with how the Government's privatization measures, together with the sale of council houses and the change in the relative prices of different forms of capital assets, interact to isolate still further the underclass.
Relative Values
Two moves are in progress that are likely to have reversed the slow move towards equality in the ownership of wealth.
First, industrial wealth, signified in the form of stocks and shares, has increased rapidly in value, despite recent fluctuations on the stock market.
This change has, however, been accompanied by a rise in home ownership and an explosion in house prices, which has been the second force at work affecting the distribution of wealth.
Much of the owner-occupation sector represents a recent addition to national wealth; from 26.6 per cent in 1957 to 36.5 per cent of all wealth by 1985 — a 37 per cent increase in thirty years (Sam Brittan, ‘Keeping an eye on the national wealth’,Financial Times , 16 July 1987), and this wealth has been much more equitably spread than has industrial wealth.
So, while the stock  market boom has played a crucial part in entrenching the wealth position of those who own most, the spread of owner-occupation, coupled with the rapid rise in house prices, has been largely responsible for extending the scope of capital ownership to well over 60 per cent of the population.
This latter move was accelerated by Mrs Thatcher's policy of council house sales.
With the spread of home ownership, a process that began in earnest during the inter-war years and has accelerated since the 1960s, the passing on of the family home will become an increasingly important aspect of defining who owns what, and confirming the advantages enjoyed by some groups of the population.
The inheritance factor is already taking two forms.
There is the sale of the family home by grandparents and the transfer of what are often quite large sums of capital to grandchildren in the form of a down payment on a new home.
Alternatively, these assets are left untouched, and are inherited by the grandparents' children.
Practically all of this latter group are the owners of their own home.
Inheritance therefore benefits those who already possess substantial capital assets.
A similar trend is also developing whereby parents sell their home when their children have established an independent existence.
Trading in for a smaller house or flat again releases considerable capital, which is often shared with the offspring.
Without such a capital gift, it is now impossible for many young people to make a first-time purchase in most areas of London and the South-East.
The rise in house prices, which has recently done so much to increase the capital owned by a sizeable group of the population, has made it increasingly difficult for other people, and particularly those whose parents are poorer and who do not own a house, to join the ranks of the upwardly mobile, capital-accumulating home-owners.
The market has well and truly raised the drawbridge against any advance by the less privileged.
The only means of advance now is for those able to buy the council house in which they live.
Council House Sales
The sale of council houses has also had an important effect on the distribution of wealth, increasing the amount of wealth in the possession of part of the working class.
But the way these sales have been conducted has simultaneously given rise to housing ghettos, along the  lines of those in North American cities.
The reason for this, not surprisingly, is that the sale of the better properties, and the partial freezing of capital derived from such sales, has resulted in the continued decline, in both quality and quantity, of the remaining housing stock.
The sale of council houses has taken place against the background of an allocation policy that has done much to lay the basis of the emergence of ghettos.
Historically, the vast majority of housing departments screened their tenants, putting the ‘better class of person’, as many housing officers described them, onto the best estates, while ensuring that the poorest tenants were housed in sink areas.
It has been this policy of screening tenants over the decades before the main sale of council houses was pushed through by the Government that has resulted in the buying of houses largely on the best estates, and has helped to reinforce the emergence of the ghetto in many areas of Britain.
Failure to improve the condition of the remaining housing stock has also played an important part in the rise of ghetto conditions.
A report by the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1985 drew attention to the very poor physical condition of much of the remaining stock in the public sector (Decaying Britain , Royal Institute of British Architects, 1985).
After a survey of 140 local authorities, the RIBA concluded that the total backlog of repairs and  maintenance work to the public sector housing stock was in excess of £10 billion.
An even larger problem has been cited in a Department of Environment inquiry into the condition of local authority housing in England.
Carried out in 1985, the inquiry found that 3.8 million dwellings, or 84 per cent of the stock, were in need of expenditure totalling £18.8 billion (An Inquiry into the Condition of Local Authority Housing Stock in England , DOE, 1988).
The housing conditions of Britain's underclass, who are now largely housed in what remains of the council sector, were described by the report of the Archbishop's Commission,Faith in the City (Church House Publishing, 1985), in the following graphic terms.
The Commission reported that their visits to the inner and outer areas of the main conurbations convinced them that it is now the large housing estates in the inner ring, or on the fringes of the city, that present the most pressing urban problems in the mid-1980s.
Huge impersonal housing estates, many post-war, can be found in all our cities.
They are often spoken of as being ‘microchrome’— that is, drab, dreary, depressing, with no vitality, colour or beauty.
Many outer estates are nothing less than the architect-designed, system-built slums of our post-war era.
They suffer from poor design, defects in construction, poor upkeep of public areas, no ‘double-defensible space’; with packs of dogs roaming about, filth in the stair wells, one or two shuttered shops, the main shopping centres a 20-minute expensive bus journey away.
Unemployment rates are typically 30–40 per cent and rising.
Bored, out-of-work young people turn to vandalism, drugs and crime, and the spiral is given a further twist.
(p. 176)
Unemployment on the estates themselves is much higher than the average for the surrounding areas.
The Commissioners, for example, visited the Bidston area of Birkenhead, which has a 48 per cent male unemployment rate: ‘but within this [area], there are parts of the Ford Estate…where we had evidence that 80 per cent were out of work’(p. 199).
The ghetto effect of these areas was plainly stated in the Commissioners' report.
It is not simply that these areas suffer from deprivation and poverty, but there is a danger of many outer estates, in particular, becoming areas which have a quite different social and economic system, operating almost at subsistence level, depending entirely on the public sector, where the opportunities for improvement either through self-help or through outside intervention are minimal.
(p. 175)
The issue of local economies being spun into what becomes a self-perpetuating decline has been highlighted in a recent report from the Centre for Environmental Studies (Outer Estates in Britain , CES Paper, 1984).
The findings of this report on four inner-city areas in Liverpool, Glasgow, Hull and  Middlesbrough are essential to any record of an emerging underclass in Britain.
Reporting on the decade of change following the 1971 Census, the CES found: first, in those areas under consideration, there has been a population decline of 20 per cent, whereas the population at large has grown.
The balance of this reduced population has changed dramatically: the proportion of under-fives has dropped by a quarter, and the numbers of those at school leaving age by just under a quarter, giving an overall decline of 15 per cent in the population aged under fifteen.
In marked contrast to this fall amongst younger age groups, the number of retired people had increased by 39 per cent.
Second, the report concluded that unemployment in these estates had almost  doubled during the intervening decade, and, while the proportion of women working in the area remained roughly stable, the national trend revealed a substantial rise.
It has been demonstrated that the dominance of unemployment in these outer estates has had a growing impact on the relative decline in income in each of these areas.
This is because benefits are below, and sometimes substantially below, current wage levels.
Further, this growing number on welfare have seen their income since 1979 increase only marginally above the rise in prices, while earnings have risen substantially above the rate of inflation.
Overall, the Census data suggest not only that the standard of living for those already on state benefits in 1971 has fallen further behind, ‘but that many more of the residents have become dependent upon benefits and have so little disposable income as to be unable to participate in the consumer society at all,(p. 17).
The CES went on to assert that:
It could be that the outer estates are approaching some kind of basic ‘subsistence, level, where disposable income has reached such a low level that future increases in unemployment will begin to have a smaller effect in reducing local incomes per head, simply because so many people are already dependent on state benefits.
(p. 17)
The isolating effect for whole areas caused by a fall in income to subsistence level is explained in the CES report in the following way.
The absence of significant disposable income in the community would mean that it would be difficult for new economic activity to develop, there being no local income to compete for.
It would lead to lack of competition in local retailing and an increasing reliance on basic ‘no frills’ stores, selling only a restricted range of products.
The fact that fewer people were participating in the ‘cash’ economy, since more and more were having their rent, bills etc. paid directly by one public agency to another would also tend to debilitate the private sector, and may have serious social repercussions by producing a culture of dependence, alienation and apathy.
(p. 18)
Share Capital
Current moves to encourage wider share ownership will again distance the underclass from higher-income groups.
While the efforts of the  Government's privatization proposals have been weighted towards the small investor, there is little evidence that the poor have been beneficiaries.
True, the number of shareholders has increased, from 2 million in 1979 to an estimated 7 million in 1987.
The latter figure allows for those who played the market: those who, having bought shares as a result of one or more privatizations, sold them in order to realize a quick capital gain.
However, as the Stock Exchange itself observed: ‘Shareholders currently have an ‘up market’ profile,[with]42 per cent of them falling into social grades A or B….
Within the adult population as a whole, only 17 per cent fall into these two social grades’(The Changing Face of Share Ownership , Stock Exchange, 1986, p. 4).
In the case of working-class families who have bought shares — and this group in no way overlaps with the underclass — such purchases are likely to be small in value.
The Stock Exchange does not provide a class distribution according to size of holdings, yet the 23 per cent of shareholders who own stock valued at less than £500 are unlikely to be found at the upper end of the income scale.
Similarly, for many lower-income groups, the spread of companies in which they have shares will be very limited.
One survey found that over half of all shareholders (4.1 million) owned stock in only one company (Ku Rogerston, report in the Financial Times , 13 December 1986).
A further force for polarization appears to be at work.
A poll, specially commissioned by London Weekend Television, examined the attitudes of different age groups to wealth distribution (‘The rich in Britain’,New Society , 22 August 1986).
The elderly, who have already lived most of their politically active lives, were more favourably inclined to redistribution than were the younger people in the sample.
The formative years of many of the elderly who were surveyed was a ti-me of popular demand for greater equality.
Today, many young people, with most of their voting years ahead of them, are more likely than before to feel that they can make it alone.
The political challenge for those on the left is how to meet this self-assertiveness, which is clearly linked to self-fulfilment, while at the same time building support for policies that favour those on low incomes and the underclass.
Summary
Paradoxically, ‘people's capitalism’ has been ushered in at a time when the long-term trend towards a greater equality in wealth may have been reversed, and in a manner that has firmly excluded the poorest from acquiring capital assets themselves.
Despite the fact that the rich have become considerably richer in the recent past, due largely to the relative rise in the value of industrial capital, combined with an array of favourable tax changes, large numbers of other citizens are in the process of acquiring the ownership of their own homes, considerable pension rights and a small portfolio of shares.
This policy has not, however, become universal, and the sale of council houses in particular has been conducted in a way that is creating ghetto areas of very poor public housing, populated largely by the very old, the unemployed and single mothers on welfare.
This underclass has been isolated further by a crucial change in the political climate.
Young people are more likely than older voters to be against egalitarian measures favouring those who have yet to gain a capital stake in our society.
This change in attitudes plays a crucial part in the development of a drawbridge mentality, which is replacing the more collective outlook of previous decades.
16
COMPLETING THE CYCLE OF DEPRIVATION
Whereas until now we have been considering changes that are forming an underclass, we now turn to examine a reform already enacted that will ensure that the underclass, and other vulnerable groups, continue to be the least privileged in old age.
This section begins by looking at the changing fate of old people during the past century as they have retired.
It considers the various pension reforms aimed at breaking the link between poverty and old age, and concludes by examining how the Thatcher Government's scaling down of SERPS (the State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme) will ensure that today's underclass take their poverty into old age.
Old Age and Poverty
As was seen in Part I, the link between poverty and old age has changed over time.
When Seebohm Rowntree carried out his first study of poverty in York in 1899, he found that around I per cent of the poor were old people, largely because most working-class people worked until they died, or were incarcerated in the workhouse.
By 1936, the year of Rowntree's second survey in York, 15 per cent of the poor were found to be old people, but this was still adjudged to be a far less significant cause of poverty than unemployment or low wages.
Rowntree carried out his third survey of living standards in York in 1951.
This recorded a dramatic decline in the total number of poor, largely due to the implementation of the Beveridge Report in 1948.
However, of the significantly reduced number who were found to be poor, 68 per cent were pensioners (table 5.1 of A. B. Atkison, ‘Low pay and the cycle of poverty’, in Low Pay , ed.
Frank Field, Arrow  Books, London, 1973).
Ironically, the number of old people who were poor would have been greater but for the action of the Attlee Government.
The Beveridge Report advocated the payment of old-age pensions on an actuarial basis, which would have meant the building up of contributions over a twenty-year period.
The Labour Government was not prepared to let those who were pensioners at the time die in poverty, while awaiting the gradual implementation of a new scheme.
It therefore ruled that the new pensions should be paid to existing pensioners, but at a value below that advocated by Beveridge.
This move had a dramatic effect on the income of pensioners in 1948, but flawed the Beveridge scheme in the long run by ensuring that many pensioners would have to continue resorting to means-tested benefits.
(For further details see chapter 4, ‘What went wrong?’, of Freedom and Wealth in a Socialist Future , Frank Field, Constable, London, 1987.)
Throughout the 1960s, a number of surveys that highlighted the growing problem of low income and poverty amongst pensioners were carried out.
(See, for example, P. Townsend and D. Wedderburn,The Aged and the Welfare State , Bell, London, 1965, pp. 125–6.)
These findings were confirmed by two official surveys.
In the report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Impact of Rates on Households , it was stated that 900,000 old people, living in 800,000 households, had incomes at, or below, the official poverty line (Cmnd. 2582, HMSO, 1965).
Another report, by the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, provided statistics revealing the number of old-age pensioners who had no other income, apart from their old-age pension or supplementary benefit: 1 in 9 married couples, 1 in 4 single men, and 1 in 3 single women had no additional income whatsoever.
In total, 1 in 5 old people were dependent upon state benefit for their sole income (Financial and other Circumstances of Retired Pensioners , HMSO, 1967, p. 11).
Since these reports on the aged poor were first published in the 1960s, two changes have occurred that have radically changed the financial position of many of those who have retired.
As illustrated in Part I, there has been a growth in occupational pension schemes.
In addition, there have been major reforms in state provisions for pensioners.
Both of these changes are of sufficient importance to warrant individual consideration.
The General Household Survey collected information on occupational pension schemes in its 1975, 1979 and 1983 surveys (reported in  GHS 1983 , HMSO, 1985).
These showed an increase, between 1975 and 1979, in the proportions of both men and women who are members of occupational pension schemes, rising from 63 per cent to 68 per cent for the former, and from 47 per cent to 55 per cent for the latter.
However, the proportion of men covered by occupational pension schemes had fallen slightly by 1983 to 66 per cent, while the proportion of women in schemes remained constant (table 7.42).
Coverage by occupational pension schemes is not, however, evenly distributed amongst all social classes.
Membership is consistently higher in the non-manual socio-economic groups.
There is also a significant difference in membership between full- and part-time workers.
In 1983, for example, men working full time were three times more likely to be covered than were men working part time.
The difference was even more marked among women, where women working full time were four times more likely to belong to such a scheme than those in part-time work.
Part-time workers were more likely to work for an employer who did not offer an occupational pension scheme.
Moreover, ‘even where there was a scheme, they [i.e. part-time workers]were less likely than full-time workers to belong’(p. 99).
This finding is significant in itself, but it becomes even more so when matched against the changes in the labour market already described, where part-time working is increasingly important, and not only for women.
There is an increasing correlation between membership of an occupational scheme and level of earnings: the higher the level of earnings, the greater the chances of being a member of such a scheme.
Among full-time male workers, fewer than 20 per cent of those with gross earnings of £75.00 a week or less were covered by a current employer's scheme, compared with 80 per cent of those with gross weekly earrings of more than £150.
An equally strong income gradient exists for female workers (p. 100).
Information relating to the size of pensions derived from occupational schemes is provided by the Government Actuary Department (GAD).
The latest report is for 1983, and it demonstrates that the average weekly pension paid to men covered by a public occupational pension scheme was £44; the corresponding figure for those in a private occupational scheme was £30.
The respective figures for retired women in 1983 were £35 and £15 (table 3.3,Occupational Pension Schemes, 1983, GAD, HMSO, 1986 ).
This information indicates that occupational schemes provide an important coverage for many pensioners.
The coverage of these schemes is, however, incomplete, and those least likely to enjoy coverage are those on the lowest incomes.
Almost half of all workers are still left without occupational coverage, and, for some of those who do gain an occupational pension, the value is often small (Occupational Pension Schemes, 1983 , table 3.3).
Not surprisingly, the state has also interested itself in providing additional pension coverage.
The first attempt at building an earnings-related element into the flat-rate retirement pension came in 1958.
Known as the Boyd-Carpenter scheme, employees made graduated contributions towards a graduated pension.
The scheme was modest, so modest in fact that a number of experts were quick to point out that, even when the scheme was fully mature, it would still provide inadequate pensions to guarantee most beneficiaries, without any pension other than the state retirement pension, an income above the official poverty line.
(See A. B. Atkison,Poverty in Britain and the Reform of Social Security , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1969, pp. 52–4.)
In the 1966–70 Parliament, the Labour Government introduced the most ambitious of state pension schemes.
Known as the Crossman scheme, it failed to gain parliamentary approval before the 1970 election.
After 1974, the Labour Government introduced a measure known as the State Earnings-related Pension Scheme, or SERPS for short.
This came into effect in 1975, and held out the prospect that, once full pensions became payable under the terms of the new scheme, no qualifying pensioner would face poverty in old age.
The Thatcher Government initially decided to abolish SERPS on the basis that the country could not afford it, a view contested by the Government Actuary's report on the proposed changes (Report by the Government Actuary on the Financial Effects of the Bill on the National Insurance Fund , Cmnd. 9711, HMSO, 1986).
Under pressure, not least from some of the Government's own back-benchers and the pension industry, the Government buckled, and introduced a more ‘modest’ reform.
The original Conservative proposal had been to unload all secondary or graduated pensions on to the private sector.
The private sector, however, had no intention of extending coverage to those who could offer it little or no return on their balance sheet.
The ‘compromise’ approved by Parliament made a two-pronged attack on the state scheme.
In the first place, the pension being offered was roughly halved in value.
Further, instead of taking the average of the  twenty best years' earnings after 1978, SERPS will now take an average earnings of all years worked.
The maximum pension will now be 20 per cent, rather than 25 per cent of average pensionable earnings.
The pension offered to widows has been cut in half.
The second attack on SERPS comes in the form of incentives given for contracting out.
Employers have always been able to contract out their workers from the scheme if they offered an acceptable alternative.
Now, individual workers will be able to leave the state scheme even if they do not belong to a recognized scheme.
A minimum contribution, equal to a part of the national insurance contributions paid by both employees and their employers, will be invested in a pension plan, and for this the employees will gain tax relief on their national insurance contributions.
In addition, until April 1993, a further 2 per cent subsidy based on earnings will be paid.
Joanna Slaughter of the Observer , estimates that a backdated personal pension plan of 9.05 per cent of band earnings is there for the asking at no cost to the employee (Observer , 26 June 1986).
The cost is instead being borne by taxpayers and poorer workers who will remain in SERPS.
The major significance of the Government's changes is highlighted by the fact that, whereas SERPS held out the prospect of guaranteeing every pensioner an income above the supplementary pension level, no Government minister had felt able to give a similar guarantee for the Thatcher pension reform.
The first part of this chapter detailed the significant rise in both the real and the relative income of pensioners.
But this analysis gave average figures, and combined data covering pensioners dependent on state benefits alone, as well as those who were also drawing occupational pensions.
The fate of these two groups is now very different.
Up to 1980, the increase in real income for pensioners was mainly accounted for by increases in the basic pension and other social security payments.
As a result, all pensioners gained a 20 per cent increase in their basic old-age pensions, but, for obvious reasons, poorer pensioners experienced the greatest percentage increase in their real pensions.
Since 1980, the position has been reversed, with the increase in real income of pensioners being accounted for by a substantial real increase in occupational pensions.
During the last nine years, it has been richer pensioners who have been the main beneficiaries of the real increase in the value of pensions.
Although the Government has maintained the real value of the retirement pensions, its breaking of the link between state pensions  and earnings (see Part II) is beginning to have a devastating effect on the relative income of the poorest pensioners.
Under the last Labour Government, state pensions rose by 20 per cent in real terms.
Under this Government, the rise has been a little over 2 per cent.
The value of the basic pension stood at 21 per cent as measured against average earnings in 1979.
By the end of this century, the estimate is that it will have dropped to around 15 per cent.
This fall in value, plus the scaling down of SERPS, will have a dramatic effect on pensioners' incomes by the end of the century.
A sixteen year old beginning work in a low-paid job in 1988 would have been entitled to a pension of £128 per week on retirement in 2037 when average earnings will be £411 a week.
Under the new rules this same person can expect a pension of half the original amount: £64 per week, or one-eighth of average earnings.
If the Government's approach continues unamended, and if there is no major industrial slump affecting the returns from investments, the living standards of pensioners dependent on occupational sources of income and savings are likely to move even further away from those mainly dependent on state benefits, who will get poorer relative both to other pensioners and to the rest of the community.
On present policies, according to Jeremy Lawrence, we ‘risk creating a pensioner underclass that the new private sources of income cannot reach’(New Society , 5 June 1987; the data for the last three paragraphs is drawn from the same source).
Summary
People have always been more vulnerable in old age.
Not only does their health become more problematic, but their income drops — at least in the case of those without substantial private means.
Despite being the aim of many state pension schemes, the breaking of the link between old age and low income was a real possibility with SERPS.
The effectiveness of this measure has now been neutralized, in order to boost private welfare.
Occupational pensions are undoubtedly delivering the goods for those people who are members.
But the success of these schemes is heavily dependent on the recent improvement in the rate of return of private investment, and, moreover, the coverage provided by private schemes is incomplete.
Since 1979, those dependent on state pensions alone have seen their income fall way  behind those who had two or more pensions.
The inequality in life chances has therefore intentionally been reinforced in old age.
CONCLUSION
Despite the existence of a welfare state, crucial differences in life chances have remained as wide as ever in post-war Britain.
That was the situation before the election of Mrs Thatcher's first government in 1979, which openly campaigned on the need to make society more unequal.
Under the objective of letting ‘the children grow tall’, that is precisely what the Government has achieved with respect to the distribution of income and wealth, and in the provision of state and private welfare.
This is not to say that the Government has not also been pursuing other policies, such as the wider spread of home ownership, that have been beneficial to many working-class people, but the approach has been implemented in a way that has isolated the underclass still further.
While the underclass in this country is held firmly in place by unemployment, a number of other trends, such as tax and benefit disincentives, and structural changes in the job market, are operating to support the downward kick unemployment has on the living standards of this group.
The range of policies needed to counter the root causes that have given rise to the underclass and keep it firmly in place at the bottom of the social hierarchy are examined in Part IV.
17
A NATIONAL BALANCE SHEET
A young Muscovite worker was asked what difference perestroika was making to his life.
He replied with a single word —‘hope’.
Perestroika on the left in British politics needs to have an even higher objective than this single, noble aim.
To be able to turn dreams into reality requires power.
Power requires a wider appeal than that to mere sectional interest.
To gain a wide appeal needs: first, a well thought-out programme; second, an excitement of both self-interest and altruism; and third, a party running its own affairs in such a way that the electorate will trust it in managing the nation's business.
By necessity, this part of the book can only deal with some of these requirements, and it begins by discussing the grounds on which a wide appeal can be made to counter the existence of an underclass.
The main part, however, is concerned with detailing a political programme that makes a pitch both for self-interest as well as a concern for others.
The Record
Since 1979, the Government has unleashed what amounts to a permanent revolution with one central theme dominating the Prime Minister's programme (for a fuller record of Mrs Thatcher's stewardship, see Peter Jenkins,Mrs Thatcher's Revolution , Jonathan Cape, London, 1987).
During much of the post-war period, commentators had drawn attention not only to Britain's relative economic decline, but also to the dangers of the country entering a period of absolute decline.
The Government's programme has been aimed at preventing this scenario.
Beginning with the entries on the plus side, how does the national balance sheet look in meeting this objective?
One undoubted plus has been the significant improvement in the performance of Britain's economy.
The Introduction gave details of Britain's growth rate during this century.
Compared with most of Europe and Japan, but surprisingly not with the United States, Britain has historically had a low rate of economic growth.
During the inter-war years, the average rate of growth was 1.2 per cent.
During the period of rebuilding the economy after World War Two, the growth rate averaged only 1.4 per cent.
If the first two years of the Thatcher Government are excluded — when the Government managed to achieve a negative rate of growth — the British economy has grown at an average rate of 3 per cent.
During 1988, the rate of growth was around 7 per cent, a rate that cannot be sustained and will cause severe ‘re-entry’ problems as the Government tries to get the economy back to a realistic long-term rate of performance.
Matching the Government's economic achievement has been its attempts to change the way Britons collectively think about work.
R. H. Tawney observed that the workman's philosophy was the same as his masters: ‘get as much and give as little as possible’.
This same attitude has underlain much of the industrial conflict during this century, and was to Tawney, and others, a ‘disgrace even it was explicable in terms of the evils sown and ripened in a 150 years of capitalist morality,(see Norman Dennis and A. H. Halsey,English Ethical Socialism , Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1988, p. 163).
The rottenness of this short-sighted attitude, which is shown by both sides of industry, has begun to change, and is being replaced by a growing realization that a great trading nation is not owed a living by the rest of the world; rather, it has to earn it.
Linked with this attitudinal change has been a third major plus — the Government's reform of trade unions.
On this, as on other issues, the outcome of the Government actions has been good, even if its motives for seeking the reforms are suspect.
Certainly, the Prime Minister presents this programme as part of her detestation of socialism in particular, and the labour movement in general .
But whatever the motives, the Government's twin aims of handing back the control of unions to the individual members, and ensuring that trade unions act within bounds set by a democratic state, are ones that should have been promoted by the left.
Yet in tackling the nastier aspects to be seen in British trade unionism by the late 1970s, the Government itself has adopted an equally obnoxious bullying style that is characteristic of much of its activities.
Indeed, this attitude itself marks the transition of  the plus side of the national balance sheet since 1979, onto the debit side of the account.
Here, three items in particular need to be recorded.
First, the advent of mass unemployment.
The number of people without work rose more rapidly, and to a higher level in the two years following 1979 than at any other time during the post-war period.
In its defence, the Government pleads mitigating circumstances.
Time after time, ministers have tried to shift the blame for rising unemployment to the down-turn in the world economy.
Clearly, this has played a role, but The Report of the House of Lords Select Committee on Overseas Trade (HMSO, 1985, pp. 238–41) concluded that the responsibility for at least half of the increase in unemployment since 1979 is laid directly at the Government's door.
The significant rise in the value of the pound from 1979 played a major part in crippling Britain's export performance, while making imports that much cheaper.
This miscalculation of letting the value of sterling appreciate led not so much to a slim-down of manufacturing industry but to the closure of whole plants.
It is very difficult to ‘rebuild’ Britain's competitiveness if the basis for that rebuilding are derelict industrial estates waiting to be grassed over with the help of Government landscaping grants.
Whatever the reasons for inaction, rising unemployment has not been uniformly spread over the entire population, but instead has struck hardest at these who are already the most vulnerable.
A similar, selective approach has characterized the way the Government has attempted to create an incentive-based culture.
On the income side, this aim has been pursued by cutting the rates of tax.
While this has without doubt provided an incentive for those on higher earnings, the record is more suspect when it comes to those on average earnings.
The standard rate of tax has been reduced from 33p to 25p in the pound.
But in the same period the Government has increased the rate of national insurance contributions from 6.5 to 9 per cent, and, because these rates start at a lower threshold than taxation, the net effect has been to mitigate the changes in income tax.
Moreover, both directly through its fiscal policy, and indirectly by affecting the distribution of market income, the Government has ensured that the very poorest have been excluded from any significant share in the exceptional rise in the nation's wealth.
The selectivity of the Government's approach is again illuminated by once again comparing the treatment handed out to those at the bottom of the social hierarchy, where the Government has launched a  determined attack on what it calls the ‘dependency culture’.
The Government's thinking on this issue is confused.
The largest part of the current welfare budget is paid out on national insurance benefits — such as old-age pensions and unemployment pay.
People are only entitled to these benefits if they have paid the requisite number of contributions.
Lessening the attractiveness of these benefits, for which people have directly paid contributions, in the hope of boosting the provision of private welfare, for which people will also have to make contributions, hardly amounts to a clear strategy to reduce welfare dependency.
It merely shifts dependency, if that is an appropriate term, from the public to the private sector.
Even less clearly struck has been the Government's attempt to reduce dependency on means-tested welfare.
By a whole series of moves, which were discussed in detail in Part II, the Government has made this form of welfare far less attractive — both in the level of payment, and the terms under which it can be obtained.
But at the same time, because of the Government's policy of disenfranchising people from entitlement to national insurance benefits, and reducing the income of those already on low incomes, it has significantly increased the numbers claiming means-tested assistance, or, as it prefers to say, targeted help on those in greatest need.
However, because benefit is withdrawn as income rises, means-tested benefits often confront claimants with a marginal tax rate in excess of 80 per cent on any additional income.
This approach therefore builds a ceiling over the heads of those on low incomes, making it impossible for them to break free.
The distribution of wealth is important because one aim of the radical left should be to ensure that people draw an income from work, welfare and wealth.
It is, after all, an approach that has served the rich rather well and will continue to do so, given the sweeping changes that have been made to wealth taxation.
The Chancellor recently summed up his own achievements on this front by observing ‘I have lightened the tax on inheritance very considerably, both by cutting the rates, and by granting exemptions for lifetime transfers’(interview with Bruce Anderson,Sunday Telegraph , 9 October 1988).
While making it easier for people to build up considerable capital assets, and to pass these on intact, the Government has taken a number of measures that have allowed many people to acquire capital assets for the first time.
The sale of council housing, and the privatization  flotations are cases in point.
Yet here, as on the income  front, the same pattern emerges.
Large numbers of people have gained the advantages of acquiring different forms of capital, be they houses or shares.
But this policy has been pursued along with changes that have allowed the very rich to increase still further their own wealth holdings, while simultaneously excluding the very poorest from this process.
The political significance of this change should not be underestimated.
A considerable number of the newly enfranchised capital class now ally their interests with the top echelons of society, rather than help sustain the old political coalition of interests, encompassing as it did much of the working class, and significant parts of the lower-middle and middle class.
It has been the combined effect of these changes — both on income and capital — that has led to such a growing polarization in living standards between different social groups that a new pattern of class inequalities is becoming apparent.
For the reasons already given (see Part I) the death rates of infants provide a sensitive indicator of wider socio-economic changes.
Taking the period 1979 — 85, and dividing it into two parts, we find that in the years since 1983 the differences in surviving birth of infants born to parents in social class 1, compared to those whose parents are in social classes IV and V, has widened.
Losing Out maintains that the widening of class differences along a whole front has largely been brought about by the Government's ‘success, in redistributing income and wealth towards the haves to the exclusion of the have-nots, and that this widening of class differences is playing a crucial role in the emergence of an underclass in Britain.
The Fate of the Underclass
Other forces have been at work too.
The Government's fiscal and welfare changes, and the consequent widening of class differences, have been reinforced by the advent of mass unemployment.
It is the combined effect of all these forces, together with the political isolation of the most vulnerable in society, which is leading to a disenfranchisement of one part of the population from full citizenship.
It is the loss of a comprehensive approach to citizenship that makes it appropriate to talk in terms of an emerging underclass.
Three groups are easy prey to the underclass's recruiting sergeant.
These are those who have been unemployed longest, and generally speaking are very young claimants with few skills, or older workers who, by the length of this unemployment, have been de-skilled.
A second group is made up of single mothers who are dependent on means-tested welfare into the indefinite future.
The third vulnerable group of the population are the very elderly with only a state pension.
These three groups share common characteristics which mark them out from the rest of the population, even from many of those who are on low income.
What has been meant by full social and economic membership of the community was developed earlier this century, first with the national insurance reforms of the 1906 Liberal Government, and then with the development of these policies, together with the commitment to full employment of the immediate post-war era.
Mass unemployment has led to an exclusion from sharing in the country's prosperity, and thereby in the hope of seeing one's economic position improve, for a significant group of the population.
It has also resulted in downward mobility for a significant proportion of the working class.
This loss of full participation as a consumer has been reinforced by a whole series of changes limiting eligibility to the national insurance unemployment benefit.
Income as of right has been replaced by income conditional on qualifying for means-tested support.
This reversal of universal citizenship with respect to both economic and welfare entitlement is to be accompanied by an assault on a universal political citizenship.
The Government intends to change the basis of local authority taxation.
A central Government contribution will remain, along with a reformed business rate, but in place of a levy on the value of a person's home, individuals within a house will be required to pay a community charge, more accurately described as a poll tax.
The overall effect of this tax will be to redistribute income still further from those on lower incomes to those on higher incomes.
The move will favour those people in high-spending authorities who live in expensive, and therefore high-rated property, or who are single-person households, or part of a small household.
Those who live in a high-spending authority, inhabit an expensive house and are part of a small household will find themselves at a triple advantage.
Originally, the Government's intention was to keep the compiling of the electoral register separate from the poll tax register.
However, recent developments suggest that this ‘Chinese wall’ will be breached, and this suspicion has long been voiced by many poorer people.
One way of preparing to evade the poll tax is therefore to disappear from the electoral roll.
The cost of this move is high in terms of political citizenship, for without an entry on the electoral register, a person is  unable to vote.
By this means, the Government is accompanying its move away from full citizenship on economic and welfare fronts to a curtailment in the political domain.
We now turn to consider why a counter-strategy should be mounted against this loss of a universal citizenship.
Why Bother?
In the article referred to in the Introduction, Ralf Dahrendorf maintains that the underclass is not a revolutionary threat to political stability, and that accommodating political change will not be induced by this argument.
Desperately deprived groups do not organize to bring about the downfall of a political system.
Indeed, other evidence cited in the Introduction suggests that many of the underclass, young and old alike, have strong conservative instincts when it comes to politics.
Any revolutionary aspirations of the younger members are centred on gaining work and admittance to the mainstream of ordinary life.
This does not mean that the younger members of the underclass pose no threat to public order.
There have been a number of large-scale inner-city riots in recent years.
Most liberals, if asked in 1979 what would be the effect of a rise in unemployment to well over 3 million would have predicted that democratic government would be made impossible.
Even allowing for the surprising restraint that the media has shown in not reporting some instances that local residents would term ‘a riot’, Britain remains a remarkably peaceful society, if the riot index is the only indicator used.
A rather different picture emerges if the subject is broadened to include crime.
As Dahrendorf perceptively writes, there ‘may not be official ‘no-go’ areas for the police in our cities, but there certainly are such areas for the rest of us’.
Another line of argument put forward by traditional liberals is that an appeal to the better off can be made on the grounds that the existence of the underclass tends to make our society a less civilized one in which to live.
Again, I do not believe that enough of the electorate can be persuaded to act on these grounds alone.
One of the crucial changes brought about by Mrs Thatcher is the attitude of those who have made it and believe that others can do likewise, or, if they fail to do so, are judged as having not really tried.
This ‘closed drawbridge’ mentality from those who have safely gained access to the good life, or  at least a better life, is itself one of the factors that is having a ‘ghettoizing’effect on the underclass.
With the Thatcher Government, and now to a large extent the Labour Party, appealing to the better off, this trend, if anything, is likely to be reinforced.
A much more dramatic break with the current political tradition is required if progress is to be made in building support for the policies that could spring Britain's underclass from its current position.
It is very unlikely that any opposition party will win an election until it convinces the electorate that it has an economic policy which is internally coherent and a defence policy which measures up to its name.
Few, if any voters are going to opt for a high-risk economic strategy that could result in a real cut in living standards.
But if we assume that such an appeal can be successfully made on the economic front, this strategy needs to be knitted in with a range of other policies that appeal to altruism as well as self-interest.
Much of this altruistic appeal can be made in terms of common decency, for this has been the basis on which radical politicians in the past have made their pitch.
Yet it is important not to underestimate the difficulties for politicians wishing to make such an appeal.
Generations of Britain's elite have been taught to believe that there are no absolute moral principles.
The political effect of this line has been profound.
It privatized morality and undermined the status of those verities that should govern both private and public conduct.
Above all it held up to ridicule the idea that political decisions should be taken within a moral framework.
The left also has to draw itself out of the mire into which it has been plunged following the 1960s renaissance of Marxist ideas in the Labour movement.
The political effect of this development was dramatic.
Within a short space of time, Labour's traditional approach based on careful empirical observation of issues was overwhelmed.
The contrast between the ethical socialist and a Marxist approach could not be more dramatic.
Ethical socialism is essentially a method of ‘doing’ politics within an agreed moral framework.
The Marxist approach is one of fitting political activity within the confines of a given ideology.
Ethical socialism, which is at heart a political expression of common decencies, collapsed amazingly quickly in the face of the simple ideological certainties espoused by a new generation of Marxist thinkers and politicians.
Three election defeats later, a growing proportion of the left is more sanguine about such an approach.
Hence the chance to reassert the old ethical tradition and its appeal.
This appeal to common decencies has traditionally been expressed in  developing policies that are a direct response to current needs.
This is the main purpose of this last part of Losing Out , and the proposals are broached in such a way as to appeal to a wider section of the electorate than the underclass alone.
18
RE-ESTABLISHING FULL EMPLOYMENT
Any programme that holds out the hope of eradicating the underclass must be built on the foundation of re-establishing full employment.
Full employment will not by itself be sufficient to achieve this objective; it will need to be accompanied by a whole series of other strategies, some of which are detailed in this final section.
The move back to full employment, however, must start from the basis that in some areas of the country, and in some parts of the economy, full employment has already been achieved.
A full employment programme must therefore be selective — or, to use one of the Government's favourite buzz words, ‘targeted’.
It is also necessary to set out a clear idea of what role the public and private sectors can play.
It is argued here that the public sector has a crucial part to play in initiating the first moves back to full employment.
Only when these have been successfully achieved will the private sector be able to thrive and expand in areas that are currently characterized by high unemployment.
There are four major initiatives a Government can undertake.
Relocation of Civil Service Jobs
The first move is to lay the basis of an effective regional policy.
In the past, regional policy has largely depended on attracting private-sector firms into areas of high unemployment through a range of subsidies.
Initially, this policy has shown signs of success, with some ‘footloose’ firms moving part of their operations into areas of high unemployment.
The crunch has come, however, when the period of subsidy ends, or when the economy has moved into recession.
The evidence shows  that, when adjusting output during a downturn in the economy, many firms that have taken advantage of regional assistance contract operations at those plants placed in areas that previously had high unemployment choose to close these plants.
Additionally, there have been those employers who have moved from site to site, merely to enjoy the subsidies that come from siting ‘new’ jobs in areas of high unemployment, and have left as soon as the period of the subsidy has come to an end.
An alternative approach is needed.
A comprehensive dispersal of Government jobs into those regions with high unemployment could lay the basis for an effective regional policy, and, in so doing, offer the basis for a move back to full employment in all areas.
Even after eight years of a government committed to reducing the size of the Civil Service, the number directly employed by the Government in the public sector stands at 585,383 (Civil Service Statistics , HMSO 1987, table 3).
These jobs are not evenly distributed over the country.
In the North-West, for example, those employed by the Civil Service constitute 1.7 per cent of the civilian workforce (ibid.).
This compares with 2.2 per cent for the nation as a whole, and 3.3 per cent in the South-West, which has the highest concentration of Civil Service jobs.
To bring the North-West up to the UK average would require an extra 15,500 Civil Service jobs there.
To match the proportion of the South-West would require an extra 49,500 jobs Mouse of Commons Library Statistical Section Note, 18 October 1988).
The first move of a Government committed to re-establishing full employment comprehensively would be to initiate a rolling programme of moving Civil Service jobs from areas of high employment, mainly in the South, to those of high unemployment, predominantly in the North.
Given modern information technology, it is not necessary for the administrative part of the Civil Service, as opposed to its policy-making sections, to be located in London, within easy distance of its political master.
It matters little to the efficient running of the Civil Service where the administrative work of a department is carried out.
An evening out of jobs between regions would be the first step in what, in the longer term, should aim to be an almost complete transfer of government jobs from areas of full employment into areas with the highest levels of unemployment.
This is an approach that the Department of Social Security has already begun to implement.
The aim of this policy of dispersing Civil Service jobs is not to increase directly the job opportunities of the unemployed in the  economic blackspots.
The expectation is that many of these Civil Servants would move with their jobs.
The primary aim is to underpin the local economy so that it becomes more attractive to an expansion of the private sector.
Each of the transferred jobs will result in an additional salary being spent in the local economy.
It is this additional purchasing power that will trigger the secondary investment by the private sector.
But without the initial pump-priming operation by the Government, there is little or no chance of attracting this secondary wave of employment.
Of course, some of those whose jobs are reallocated in the dispersal policy will decide to look for other employment in the locality in which they currently work.
These jobs will hopefully be filled by unemployed people in the area into which the jobs are transferred.
While this outcome will be a bonus, it is not the main objective of the exercise.
Targeting, Government Purchasing
The second initiative that should be taken by central government is to shape its purchasing policy so that government contracts are increasingly placed in areas of high unemployment.
It is very difficult to put a figure on the size of the public procurement budget, owing to the huge range of goods and services that could be considered as falling within it.
However, the European Commission has estimated that for most countries this budget accounts for between 10 and 20 per cent of GDP (Evidence to the House of Lords Select Committee on the European Communities, 1987/8 HL 72, p. 17).
In Britain, aside from the Ministry of Defence, which is the largest purchaser in central government, the most significant purchasers are as follows: the Department of Transport, spending about £1 billion a year; Her Majesty's Stationary Office, which spends about £250 million a year; the Property Services Agency, servicing public buildings and other property, spends about £1.8 billion a year; the Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency, responsible for all central government information technology advice, organizes everything from multi-million pound computer systems to peripheral services, such as micro-computers, service and maintainance; the National Health Service spends nearly £3.5 billion annually on a wide range of supplies and services through the NHS authorities; and, finally, local authorities buy a very wide range of goods and services.
It is clear that the Government's spending power presents significant opportunities for procurement ‘targeted’ on areas of high unemployment.
There are, of course, limits to such a policy.
Significant parts of the procurement budget are already spent in areas of high unemployment, for example warship orders.
Moreover, areas of high unemployment do not necessarily have the factories to make the desired goods.
Yet there is ample scope in the budget for government departments to place orders on the basis of an overall strategy aimed at raising industrial efficiency over a set time-scale.
It is within this overall objective that a targeted procurement policy should be seen, as part of a comprehensive regional policy to stimulate local industrial investment.
There are other difficulties that will be cited against such a strategy.
For example, a commitment to factories in ‘favoured, areas would undermine the principle of competitive tendering and, relatedly, such ‘favouritism’ would run counter to EEC policy.
However, these difficulties have not proved insurmountable in other EEC countries, and targeted public procurement would play a useful role in establishing a move back to full employment.
Raising Skill Levels
The third selective measure governments can use to re-establish full employment is to develop a training programme that raises the skills of the unemployed.
British workers, even those in employment, possess on average lower skills than workers from major competitor countries.
There is therefore a need to raise skill levels both amongst those in work and those seeking work.
Under the current system, there is little incentive for firms to increase the skills of their labour force.
Indeed, those employers that undertake training programmes stand the risk of having their workers with their newly acquired skills being poached by employers who undertake little or no training.
Raising the level of skills amongst British workers is so crucial, not only to any immediate  programme of moving back to full employment, but also to maintaining and improving Britain's long-term performance, that the question of training cannot be left to the free play of market forces.
Here, however, we confront a paradox.
It has recently been pointed out that the level of investment in training is substantially above that usually quoted, but that this money is not spent in the most effective way.
Employers currently report that most of this sum is eaten up in  labour costs (see ‘Massive funding survey uncovers £25 bn outlay’,The Times Educational Supplement , 5 August 1988).
The first move in any programme is to gain the commitment of employers — without this no scheme will work.
Local and regional training boards should be established and these boards should be employer led.
Trade unionists and educationalists should also be members.
In addition, each of the training councils should contain political appointees from each of the major parties.
Industrial training is too crucial a question for politicians to remain ignorant about the issues involved.
Political membership of each of the industrial training boards will therefore act as a training ground for politicians, who will then be able to use this expertise in helping to shape and develop this aspect of the political debate at both the local and national level.
These training boards should have the authority to impose a ‘training levy’.
The suggestion is that the levy should vary according to the level and effectiveness of the training undertaken by each firm, as judged by the board and the national training agency.
Those who undertake little or no training would pay the highest levy.
Those whose training programmes reached the standards set by the board would be exempted part of the levy.
And those firms that, in addition to the training programme for their own workers, initiate programmes within their companies to train the unemployed would receive a further rebate.
A reform suggested below, to introduce a flexible school leaving age so that some fourteen-year-olds can begin to undertake part-time training with part-time work, needs to be seen as part of this overall training programme.
Those firms that take on their payroll the early leavers will again either gain a subsidy via a reduction of their training levy, or, if they are already claiming the maximum rebate, the payment of a grant from the training board.
Operating on the Supply Side
Many of the proposals for re-establishing full employment in the aftermath of the 1979–81 recession were aimed at increasing the level of demand in the economy.
Now the major emphasis needs to shift to what is called the supply side, and this change in emphasis is the last selective measure the Government should take.
The campaign Full Employment UK argues for a four-pronged attack on the supply side  that will guarantee the abolition of long-term unemployment.
The first step in achieving this objective is to guarantee a place on Employment Training (ET) for everyone who has been out of work for a long period of time.
The ET programme was introduced in September 1988.
It currently offers on an annual basis up to 600,000 unemployed people an average of six months training and work experience.
The proposal is to guarantee a place on ET, or any other training, education, pre-employment course, for those who have been out of work over a set period of time.
Peter Ashby in Citizenship, Income and Work (part II, St George's House, Windsor, 1989) accepts that there will be considerable difficulties in phasing in a guaranteed training place for every long-term unemployed person.
There were, after all, difficulties in meeting the Government's objective of guaranteeing places on the Youth Training Scheme for every young person not at work or at school.
Ashby therefore proposes phasing in the training guarantee, beginning with the very long-term unemployed — and then progressively extending the guarantee to all those in the dole queues for any length of time.
The second proposal is the introduction of a system of adult ‘compacts’.
One of the more interesting of recent developments has been the initiation by large firms of local compact schemes whereby they, as employers, guarantee to provide employment for young people leaving local YTS schemes, providing the graduates have gained a predetermined qualification.
This idea of a compact should be extended to ET graduates, the aim being to encourage as many employers as possible to recruit from among ET leavers with the appropriate qualifications.
Ashby writes that the purpose of the adult compacts is simple.
It is ‘to maximise the number of ET leavers entering the labour market and minimise the number without employment’(p. 9).
The third proposal is for the introduction of a temporary work safety-net.
Graduates from ET, or other training and educational courses, should immediately be given another personal needs assessment should they still find themselves without employment.
Many people finding themselves in this position would also benefit from spending a few weeks engaged in extensive job search activities as members of a Job Club.
The final fall-back position for this group of very hard to place unemployed people should be the offer of a place on a temporary work scheme.
These places should be developed by the new Training and Enterprise Councils.
The scheme would offer  temporary work for up to four days a week, with the other day being set aside for continuing job search.
Since it would be a temporary work programme, and not a training scheme, these ‘intermediate workers’ would be paid the weekly rate for the job, minus the pay for the day spent searching for an alternative form of employment.
The proposal is that the Training and Enterprise Councils should encourage private sector employers, as well as public employers and voluntary bodies, to offer temporary work for unemployed ET workers.
The proposals made for guaranteed work by the House of Commons Select Committee on Employment are also relevant to any scheme of providing a bridging mechanism between training on the one hand and permanent employment in the labour market on the other (Special Employment Measures and the Long-term Unemployed , House of Commons Paper 99, 1986).
The fourth of Ashby's proposals consists of the introduction of special incentives to employers, both in the private and public sector, to take on to their payrolls those who have failed to find work, even though they have done everything asked of them — are actively seeking work, registered for a job, been a member of a Job Club and been on an ET course.
There are three major reasons why employers in the private sector do not increase the numbers on their payrolls.
The first relates to the level of demand for the products produced.
The second relates to the skill of the workers offering themselves for employment.
Linked to this is the third factor, the cost of employing these additional workers, and how this sum matches up to the value of the output achieved by each additional worker.
The aim of the training programme outlined earlier is to raise substantially the skills of both those in work and those seeking it.
It has to be accepted that, in the short run, it is difficult to raise the skills, and therefore the value of the output of marginal workers (marginal in the sense of their position in competing for work).
What can be altered in the short term is the cost of employing new workers, and this can be achieved either by forcing down wages, or by reducing the employer's costs.
Ashby's idea is that the government should introduce a system of employment vouchers, valued at around £3–4,000, for unemployed people unable to find employment after at least two years on ET and a temporary work scheme.
The vouchers could be cashed by employers offering them a job contract for a minimum of two years.
The scheme could be initiated first in areas of highest long-term unemployment.
19
REBUILDING INITIATIVES
The Thatcher fiscal revolution — redistributing income to those with most — must be reversed, but in such a way as to extend an incentive-based society to all taxpayers, and particularly those at the bottom of the income pile.
While arguments about equity are important in overthrowing the Thatcher tax regime, they are not the only ones.
We saw earlier that the move to greater inequality in income had been so marked that it has triggered off a widening of other class differences (detailed in Part I).
If class differences are to be narrowed on these fronts, then it is important to establish a greater degree of income equality.
This is not a plea for a ‘flat earth’ policy, with no income differences at all.
Clearly there are grounds for income differences, but these should reflect age, experience, skill and responsibility.
Tax Reforms
In what ways, then, can the British income tax system be made more equitable, while at the same time increasing incentives for those at or below average earnings?
Here it is important to remember the example cited above (p. 128) of a family man earning £79 net a week, who, because of tax and means-tested benefits, would have to increase his pay by £90 a week in order to achieve an increase in net income of only £17 a week.
Tax reform has a crucial part to play in springing the underclass from welfare dependency, as well as building up support for such a programme amongst a much wider group of the electorate.
At the outset, however, it is important to clarify the distinction between marginal and average rates of tax.
In public debate, who pays  what is invariably presented in marginal tax terms — that is, what a taxpayer will pay on an additional pound in income.
However, for most taxpayers there is a marked difference between marginal and average rates of tax, the latter being the amount averaged out for each £1 of income.
The reason for this difference is simple.
It stems from the structure of income tax, which is built around the idea of tax allowances that can be offset against taxable income.
The greater the value of these allowances, the greater the income exempted from tax, and, consequently, the less tax paid to the Exchequer.
This was not always the case.
Before the budget of 1920, the British system of direct taxation was based on an exemption principle.
Tax allowances were granted, but taxpayers were unable to offset these allowances against their taxable income once their income rose above a specified level.
In 1920, Austen Chamberlain transformed the system by allowing tax exemptions to be claimed no matter how big the taxpayer's income.
Later, a second change permitted these tax benefits to be offset against income that would otherwise have attracted higher rates of tax.
A system that had been designed to exclude the poor's income from the payment of tax, was reshaped in such a way that, although the poor continued to enjoy exemption on their low income, the same privilege was extended to similar bands of income for all other taxpayers.
Because everybody claimed the allowances, the cost of increasing the value of the tax allowances was substantially increased.
Add to this cost the growth in government expenditure, and we are a long way in explaining why the real value of the tax threshold, or the level of income at which tax begins to be paid, has fallen during the post-war period.
This fall has subjected part of the income of the poor to taxation, while, conversely, continuing to exempt part of the income of well-heeled tax payers.
Apart from personal tax allowances, there is a whole range of other allowances, or benefits, which are gained only on condition that taxpayers undertake a certain pattern of expenditure, such as buying houses, or acquiring a private pension.
Despite Mrs Thatcher's rhetoric, bribing people by way of tax allowances is the paternalistic state writ large; taxpayers pick up considerable tax benefits on the condition that they spend their money in ways approved by the Government.
It has been the growth in tax allowances that has allowed the rich to hide behind a smokescreen of high marginal tax rates, while, in reality  paying an average rate far below that of many ordinary households (see the answer given to Gordon Brown MP above, in ‘Tax Benefits’, p. 99).
A radical government should commit itself to phasing out these tax allowances.
Such a policy must, however, be accompanied by a clear commitment to use the resulting revenue to reduce the rate of tax, as well as to increase child benefit.
The agenda for reform on this issue is made up of a whole range of possibilities.
The most modest proposal would be to place a cash limit on all the non-structural tax allowances (that is, on all other than the personal allowances) and to couple this policy to a commitment to use the increase in tax revenue which results to reducing the rate of tax and increasing child benefit.
The important role of child benefit in these reforms is discussed below (see also Frank Field, Molly Meacher and Chris Pond,To Him Who Hath , Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1977).
This reform would work in the following way.
The current expenditure on these tax benefits would be taken as the cash ceiling.
The choice of time for instigating the policy would be important here; the cost of mortgage tax relief in 1988 has increased in annual terms from £5 billion to over £6.5 billion.
A reduction in interest rates will result in a fall in the size of this subsidy, and the phasing in of a cash ceiling approach ought to be timed to such a favourable point in time.
Those organizations whose clients benefit from the subsidy, whether it be the private pensions industry, or the building societies or banks, would be told a year in advance what the cash ceiling was to be, and the organizations would have the task of sharing out the tax subsidy amongst customers, and potential new customers.
This would not be an impossible task, given the state of information technology.
An alternative, suggested by Bruce Anderson in the Sunday Telegraph (4 September 1988), is to place a time limit on mortgage tax relief.
This could, of course, be extended to the whole range of non-personal tax allowances.
Anderson's proposal is for the tax subsidy to be limited to a five-year duration.
Existing gainers of the subsidy would presumably be given a further five years' grace, and new recruits would similarly benefit.
The escalating cost of these tax benefits would be checked within a few years of this policy being implemented.
A more radical proposal is to phase out the allowances over a five-year period, again with the commitment to use the increased revenue coming to the Exchequer to cover cuts in the standard rate of tax and increases in child benefit.
With increasing annual incomes, changes in jobs, changes in mortgage interest rates and the like, few people have a static view of what their income and commitments are.
It is important, however, to ensure that any move from the present regime to a simplified system should be done at a pace that minimizes the dislocation of people's personal finances.
This latter approach, of phasing out all non-structural tax allowances over the life of a parliament, could become even more radical if the personal allowances were included in the programme.
Such a proposal would need to be carefully thought out, and presented to the electorate well before an election campaign.
The points that would need stressing are the time-scale over which the reform would be implemented, and the commitment to use the revenue to reduce the standard rate of tax.
The phasing out of both personal and non-structural tax allowances would allow a government to reduce the standard rate of tax to between 12p and 15p in the pound.
There would also need to be higher rates of tax built on top of this sum.
This root and branch reform of personal taxation has many attractions for those on the left.
Because higher-rate taxpayers benefit more from tax allowances than people on lower earnings, the reform would shift the burden of taxation back on to those with highest incomes.
Reducing the standard rate of tax to between 12p and 15p in the pound would have an important impact on both the poverty and the unemployment traps.
Moreover, such a policy would be seen to be libertarian, in that it genuinely trusted people to spend their own money in ways they prefer, rather than trying to bribe them into centrally determined consumption patterns.
The political advantage of such a reform follows from the timetable for phasing it in.
If this proposal was implemented at the beginning of a new parliament, the timetable would allow for increasing tax cuts to be made throughout the parliament, with the largest tax cuts coming just prior to a general election.
The reason for this is simple.
A cash ceiling approach, or a set timetable to phase allowances out over five years, would result in very little extra revenue in the first year.
But from that point onwards, the result of bringing an increasing share of personal income into tax is a commensurate increase in revenue.
Some people on low incomes, however, would be disadvantaged by this reform.
Those single people claiming only the single person's allowance, some low-income families with children and part of the pensioner population might find themselves worse off.
These tax  reforms must therefore be seen as part of the wider reform programme advocated here (see also Frank Field and Paul Omerod, ‘The low-tax springboard to freedom’,Guardian , 2 January 1989).
Low income families would be compensated by doubling the value of child benefit over the life of a parliament.
Older pensioners, with no occupational pension entitlement, will need to be compensated for the loss of their personal tax allowance (which has the effect of exempting their national insurance pension from tax).
Some single people too will need to gain special compensatory measures, although the phasing in of the proposal will do much to minimize any losses.
Doubling the value of child benefit will begin to reshape the welfare state.
As we have seen, the major drawback of means-tested assistance — apart from its non-take-up by some groups of the population and the feeling of inferiority that it breeds — is that cash is withdrawn as income rises.
The welfare state therefore acts as a ceiling over the heads of those on low incomes, making it difficult for them to move up through their own efforts.
In contrast, because child benefit is paid irrespective of income levels, it acts as an income floor on which people can build by their own efforts, and from which there is no disincentive effect.
Indeed, the reverse is true.
Those without work have the value of their child benefit subtracted from their total welfare payments.
The bigger the child benefit, therefore, the bigger the difference between welfare income and income from work for those claimants with children.
How should the increase in child benefit be paid for?
While the Government aims to have a nil inflation rate, the prospect of achieving this in the British economy appears slim in the almost indefinite future.
One of the results of even a modest rate of inflation is that as people's money income increases, so too does their tax bill.
It is suggested that the revenue from fiscal drag, which currently goes in financing the inflation-proofing of personal tax allowances, and which under these proposals would no longer exist, should be used to finance the doubling of child benefit over the life of a parliament.
A 1 per cent growth in real incomes results in an additional £0.5 billion surplus accruing to the Exchequer.
Linked to the income tax reforms are two changes to the national insurance contribution system (other reforms affecting entitlement are discussed below).
The first reform centres on payments made by employees.
The present system operates so that those employees earning less than £43 a week (i.e. the lower earnings limit) make no  contribution at all.
Above this level, the contribution is graded, with contributions ceasing on incomes above £325 a week.
This point is known as the upper earnings limit.
Part III looked at a whole series of forces that locked the underclass into place.
One force has been the phenomenal growth in part-time employment.
The major reason why Britain now has 40 per cent of all part-time jobs in the EEC is the structure of national insurance contributions which exempt both employers and employees from paying any contributions on earnings of less than £43 a week.
However, once the threshold is crossed,all income becomes subject to the national insurance tax.
It is necessary to abolish this distorting influence on the labour market.
The proposal is for employers' contributions to begin on the first pound of earnings.
The aim is for the rates to be adjusted so that, overall, the employer's national insurance contribution does not rise.
Given that this reform will hit hardest those firms with most part-time workers, it is suggested that this change is phased in over a five-year period.
This reform, though of crucial importance in countering the current distortion in the job market towards part-time employment, does nothing to help eradicate the high marginal rates of tax faced by people leaving unemployment and gaining work, or of low-paid workers striving to gain real increases in their net take home pay.
Even with a 12–15p tax in the pound, a national insurance tax of 9p would almost double the tax rate of most workers, including those on low pay.
A second reform is therefore essential — to turn the national insurance tax from a proportional into a progressive tax.
A first move is to abolish the national insurance ceiling on contribution.
At the current time, workers pay 9 per cent on earnings up to £325 a week.
Abolishing this ceiling would generate an additional £1.65 billion per year.
The revenue gained from this reform should be used so that contributions rise by single percentage points over bands of income up to the upper earnings limit.
Employees' contributions should begin with a 1 per cent contribution from the first £1.00 of earnings.
The first band of earnings attracting this contribution should run up to what is now called the lower earnings limit.
The aim of imposing this levy is not so much to raise revenue as to bestow contributory rights on lower paid, part-time workers.
Part-time Workers' Rights
Linked to the reforms of the national insurance system are a set of proposals to strengthen the rights of workers who work less than a lull week.
As was seen in Part III, full-time employment — and to a much lesser extent part-time employment — is the gateway to a whole range of occupational welfare.
While for high-income earners this welfare will cover subsidies ranging from the cost of housing, acquiring shares in the company and towards the cost of housing, the most important benefit, both in terms of the numbers of workers covered, and its value, is the occupational pension.
Few firms give part-time workers equal rights to such benefits, and many exclude them entirely.
The reforms in national insurance contributions will abolish the in-built bias currently in existence to create part-time employment.
Without the incentive to employ workers for whom no national insurance contributions are payable, employers may more rationally decide on whether new job opportunities warrant full- or part-time status.
Similarly, because there will be no financial penalty to the employers, more employees will be allowed to determine the length of their own working week.
The reform of the national insurance system advocated here will also lead to all workers building up entitlement to national insurance benefits.
Currently, 2.7 million part-time workers acquire no national insurance record (Hansard , 4 November 1988, col. 813).
But a further extension of welfare citizenship is required, and a reform of the pension law is required so that workers are not prevented from entering the scheme on grounds of the numbers of hours worked.
While this reform may seem small in itself, it will play an important part in the overall strategy being advocated here of people being able to draw an income from work, wealth, as well as welfare.
20
SPREADING WEALTH
Moves to overhaul the income tax system must be accompanied by similar changes in wealth taxation.
It has been seen how the Thatcher Governments have been busy in turning the taxation of wealth into a voluntary tax.
An immediate objective should be the introduction of a wealth tax, which, combined with other taxes, would initiate a substantial redistribution of wealth.
Capital Shares Tax
One of the advantages of being in government is that measures can be initiated that begin to shape public opinion.
One such move of an incoming radical government should be to initiate a new Domesday Book, so that the true extent of the vast disparities of wealth is brought home to the voters.
The idea would be to compile over a short period a national register of wealth holdings.
People would be required to enter their own wealth holdings, and wealth from which they benefit or may benefit, which is held in family trusts.
Wealth held abroad would also need to be included.
The penalty for not entering an accurate record in the new Domesday Book would be that after the new vesting day for the exercise, all that wealth in Britain not entered in the record would become available for redistribution by the Government.
Similarly, those who fail to make accurate returns of their wealth held abroad would be unable to remit back into this country the income from the wealth, so making residence here difficult.
The proposal is not to introduce a wealth tax under the form that it has been proposed elsewhere.
Rather, what is being proposed is a capital shares tax.
Traditionally, a wealth tax has been considered as  another means whereby the Treasury can raise funds.
A capital shares tax uses the concept of a wealth tax as a starting point — that is, as a means of raising revenue by a levy on wealth — but goes beyond this by proposing how this revenue could be used.
Under this proposal, the resulting revenue would be earmarked (no doubt against strong Treasury opposition) for a fund, from which capital sums could be paid to selected groups in the population.
For illustrative purposes, I suggest that two specific groups should be made eligible for these capital grants — those aged twenty, on the threshold of independence, and those at forty-five, the ideal time for career reassessment and a possible fresh start.
The aim of a capital shares tax is to enable people starting out on their careers and those wishing to make a mid-career switch to have some ‘seed money’ to test their entrepreneurial skills.
Two questions need to be addressed.
How much money would be available, and how large would the capital grant be paid out from the fund to these eligible groups?
In 1967, the TUC published a proposal for a 3 per cent tax on wealth holdings of more than £20,000 a year.
This proposal has since been updated, using data from 1986 (see table 20.1).
The threshold, which in this illustration is assessed at above £100,000 a year, exempts 97 per cent of the population from the new tax; of course, the threshold would be even higher if assessed according to 1988 data.
Moreover this, exercise is intended as an illustration and not as the presentation of a detailed proposal for a   capital sharing tax.
There is a clear case for grading the tax along progressive lines on wealth holdings in excess of £300,000.
These latest figures carry an air of unreality.
For example, less than 3 per cent of the population are listed as holding assets of more than £100,000, which must be a long-passed milestone for most middle-class people living in the south, and an increasing number in the north too.
Using the 1986 figures, a 3 per cent levy on holdings over £100,000 would generate £3.7 billion a year.
Setting the threshold at £200,000, which would include all but 1 per cent of taxpayers, would still yield more than £3 billion.
What level of capital sum could be paid out of this fund to the two target groups?
Currently about 900,000 people celebrate their twentieth birthday (although this total will fall by a quarter within the next decade), while an average of 600,000 people reach the age of forty-five, a total of 1.5 million people.
If the sum raised by a capital sharing tax was around £3.7 billion per annum, this would permit individual capital grants in excess of £2,400.
Moreover, the more effective the capital shares tax became, and the more the electorate approves of increases in this tax, the larger any consequent distribution of the derived revenue.
Universal Privatization
Plans to redistribute part of the capital gains resulting from the privatization programme of the Thatcher Governments should also form an integral part of a strategy for sharing wealth.
The privatization of industries, ranging from Britoil to British Gas, British Telecom and British Steel, has been a great success, partly because they have touched a public nerve, but also because the share issues have usually been made at below market value.
Investors have made considerable capital gains.
Labour's 1987 election policy was to convert the privatized shares into government bonds with a set rate of interest.
The advantage of this approach is that it costs nothing, at least in the immediate future.
The bonds are merely printed, and the shares confiscated.
The obvious disadvantage inherent in such a move would be the adverse reaction among those sectors of the general public who had chosen to invest in such privatized companies.
Another disadvantage would be  that the interest payable on such bonds would have to be made from public funds.
Additionally, if the bonds were sold on the market, they could have an appreciable effect on interest rates and the Government's ability to raise funds in the open market.
An alternative and fairer approach would be for an incoming radical government to insist that each of the privatized industries should make a free issue of stock, by way of compensation for the sale of public assets at deflated prices.
This stock could be thinly spread over the entire population, or be given over in its entirety to a number of friendly societies (a new role for the friendly societies is proposed below).
These societies would have the duty of distributing the dividends from the shares on either a universal or a restricted basis.
This approach could also be linked to reforms that require private sector companies to make over regular, but small parts of the total value of their capital to such a scheme.
There are four major advantages to adopting this approach.
It would begin to spread industrial wealth among individuals.
It would lessen both the capital value and the size of the dividends gained by those who have made disproportionate gains from privatization.
It would begin to make industries accountable to consumers in a way that they patently are not at present; the newly enfranchised shareholders would have the right to participate in elections to the board.
It would also begin to ensure individuals a regular, if initially small income that is independent of both work and welfare, which they can spend or save as they please.
The exercise of personal initiative also needs to be encouraged on other fronts, and this is the issue that is now considered.
21
ENCOURAGING INITIATIVES
Three major initiatives are considered here.
The first is to allow individuals to act alone in planning their own lives; people should be allowed to capitalize part of the value of their national insurance benefits.
The second proposal is to allow people collectively to improve their lot.
The illustration here is of offering help to spread credit unions throughout the country.
The third looks at a different way of providing collective security, and centres on friendly societies bidding for the social security work the Government intends handing over to agencies, or hospitals opting for trust status within the NHS.
Capitalizing National Insurance Benefits
Different sets of figures are produced on the value of wealth held by different groups of the population.
The data show how wealth becomes more evenly spread if occupational, and then state national insurance pension rights are included in the calculations.
There is, of course, a major difference between people who hold most of their wealth in land, or stocks and shares and government bonds, or even gold, compared with those whose ‘wealth’ is predominantly bound up in their right to an occupational or state pension.
Wealth, other than pension entitlements, can be quickly turned into cash or used as security against which to borrow.
There is also a difference in the treatment afforded to occupational and state pensioners.
Largely because of the tax gains, but also the increased freedom it gives to the pensioner, many pension schemes have provision for allowing part of the value of the pension to be capitalized on retirement.
No such scheme exists for state pensioners.
The rules governing national insurance premiums and child benefit  should be changed so that people in clearly defined circumstances have the right to capitalize part of the value of these two state benefits.
It is not proposed that anyone, taken by a whim, should be able to cash in part of the value of either of these two benefits.
A local tribunal would decide on the advisability of such a move in each particular circumstance, and the members' common sense would ensure that applications were considered both prudently and sensitively.
The rules on how such a capitalization would affect the level of benefit would be tightly drawn in the sense that if, for example, a person capitalized £1,000 of their state pension, their pension, when paid, would be reduced by the amount of £1,000 worth of contributions.
Moreover, if the person found themselves on income support when old, the calculations for income support would assume they were receiving their full old-age pension.
There would therefore be no chance of a person claiming part of the value of their benefits, knowing that, at a later stage, he or she could have the difference made up from means-tested assistance.
The rules, however, would allow people to repay the capital sum at a later date if they wished to, and were able to do so.
Some people may wish to try their luck in using part of the capital value of their benefits to finance a business venture.
Others would use this capitalization to acquire their own house.
But this move could be important in increasing a person's employability.
Some employers ‘black list’ recruits living in certain areas.
To be able to move to a small terraced house in a more desirable area could result in winning a job when the opportunity arose.
Two recent examples from my own constituency — and which prompted me to think of this idea — illustrate the advantage of giving people this freedom.
The first comes from a constituent who works in a local factory and earns £67 a week net for a full week's work.
Her son has recently left home, and, at this point she became ineligible for housing benefit.
Her unrebated council rent and rates totals £44 a week.
But because the council is behind in adjusting people's entitlement to benefit, she continued to draw housing benefit during 1988 on the assumption that her son was still part of her household.
She now has a bill of £500 from the council for over-payment of housing benefit, a sum that she has difficulty in repaying on a net income after rent of £23 a week.
This constituent has pointed out that, given house prices in Birkenhead, if she can begin buying her own house she could cut her housing costs by over half — to around £20 a week.
She would also be acquiring a capital asset.
But because of the council's incompetence, which has meant  that her rent card is now marked as owing rent, and lacking a deposit, she would be dependent on a somewhat shady mortgage company for the mortgage to buy such a house (rent cards are the easiest and most common means of checking on the credit-worthiness of a person on a low income).
Being able to capitalize part of her pension would allow her to present herself at one of the main building societies with a deposit, to halve her housing costs, and begin acquiring a capital asset that would last with her into old age.
The second example is that of a young mother who, while not in a tower-block, lives on the top floor of a maisonette.
Under the current housing rules, she has no chance of being rehoused in the near future in a low-rise block in one of the decent areas of Birkenhead, or of gaining a house with a garden.
She has three children, one under the age of one, and has to come up four flights of stairs to her home many times a day.
She has to carry up the children, her shopping and any other goods coming into the household.
This family's life would be transformed if they could buy a small terraced house with a garden.
The mother has no savings.
Again, if she could trade in a small part of the total value of the child benefit accruing to her, she would have a sizeable sum to present as a down-payment on a house.
Credit Unions
Allowing people to capitalize their national insurance benefits is an example of building ladders from poverty that allow individuals to escape.
Credit unions provide similar opportunities, but here the action is organized on a collective basis.
In essence, a credit union, which is a non-profit-making financial co-operative, is formed by a group of people who have a common identity.
This common bond can be based on living in the same area, or working in the same factory, or attending the same church, or being members of the same club.
Or, it may come from possessing the same ethnic origin.
Membership entails the pledging of a weekly sum to be saved, and the agreement that loans will be made from this common pool of savings — at a rate of interest currently fixed by law at no more than 1 per cent.
This compares with some loan sharks who can charge in excess of 10,000 per cent!
The interest gained from the money is used to cover the operating costs of the union, and any surplus can be put towards a dividend on savings, although the savings return is  limited by a ceiling of 8 per cent.
In essence, then, credit unions are owned and controlled by their members through elected officials.
As members are in fact borrowing from friends, neighbours or colleagues, the extent of default is minimal.
The credit union movement in Great Britain lags far behind that in many other countries.
They first appeared in this country in the early 1960s, owing to the impetus in Irish and West Indian communities.
The legal framework within which they operate was established by the Credit Union Act of 1979.
The activities of the unions are supervised by the Registrar of Friendly Societies.
By 1988, there were about ninety unions in existence, with 21,000 members.
This contrasts sharply with other countries.
In the United States, for example, there are almost 17,000 unions, with nearly one in five of the population, or 54 million people, as members.
In Ireland, credit unions have been in existence for a decade longer than in Britain, but there are now over 450 unions, with a membership exceeding three-quarters of a million.
The Irish credit union movement has been strongly supported by the Catholic Church.
The advantages of credit unions are as considerable as they are obvious.
Above all, they give people a sense of having a greater control over their own destiny.
This is apparent to anyone who sat in on the proceedings of a local credit union.
The union also has other, practical advantages.
In Ireland, the coverage of unions is now so extensive that the loan sharks have been almost driven out of business.
Indeed, with the beginnings of credit unions in this country, one group that has shown considerable interest in this development has been this group of lenders whose business has been with poor people.
Giving loans at low rates of interest is only one advantage — although a significant one.
The union itself, in consultation with the member, discusses the person's total finances, the reason for the loan and the maximum amount to be borrowed is related to the size of the repayment and to the total income.
The union thus helps people develop a greater sense of money management.
A further advantage of these unions is that money saved locally is spent locally, rather than being switched to other areas, as often occurs with normal banking arrangements.
Credit unions, while initiating from the wish of people to have greater control over their own affairs, do not come into existence spontaneously.
A great deal of planning and preparation is needed.
The credit unions in Birkenhead took two years from the decision to start a union to opening the doors for business.
There is therefore a  need for a number of central bodies that have the resources to enable them to respond to local initiatives, and the staff to see these initiatives through to fruition.
A government determined to give poorer people a larger say over their own lives would set aside a small capital sum to support the central finance of credit unions.
The aim would be to have covered every area of the country where interest was shown in a union within a ten-year period.
There are a few other initiatives that, for a capital sum of a few million pounds, hold the prospect of bringing forward such a radical transformation of the immediate circumstances of poorer people, and the extent to which they control their own lives.
Friendly Societies
The Government is set on a scheme that will result in the biggest social services shake-up since the national insurance scheme was established in 1911.
These proposals present both a challenge and an opportunity to radicals.
The challenge arises from the fact that the Government is considering turning the day-to-day running of the social security system over to agencies.
The idea is that the Government would maintain a central funding role, and would lay down the rates of benefit, while at the same time encouraging organizations, possibly private ones, to handle the payments to customers.
The left has yet to wake up to the new politics as played by the Prime Minister.
Demonstrations, resolutions, debates in the Commons are all important in raising morale of those who oppose Mrs Thatcher, and in presenting a continual election campaign to the electorate.
They do not, however, have much effect on the Government's programme.
It is none the less possible for opponents to pick up the ball, so to speak, when Mrs Thatcher has put it down.
The proposed reforms in the delivery of social security benefits to customers is a case in point.
They offer the trade unions and other organizations on the left a chance of shaping the post-Thatcher agenda.
But if the labour movement is to take advantage of this Thatcher initiative, it first has to rediscover its roots.
A trade union movement anxious to extend rather than limit its influence would seek to regain those functions that the state has stripped from it.
Much of the welfare state in this country was built up through voluntary effort, in the vanguard of which were the friendly societies.
It was through these benefit or friendly societies that working  people began collectively to provide insurance against the loss of income through unemployment, and to ensure that each should have a respectable funeral.
This is not an argument for dismantling or privatizing the welfare state, or for reducing benefit levels.
What the Government's proposals offer is not only the chance to seize the initiative from Mrs Thatcher on this front, but to begin to think carefully about what is meant regarding the devolution of power.
Responding to Mrs Thatcher's initiative is one way in which radicals build up over time an alternative election programme.
Bidding for the proposed agency work allows the left to open up a new debate, and above all begins a dialogue with the voters on what is meant in everyday terms by a devolution of power.
Those seeking a central role for the state will doubtless query the advantages of setting up friendly societies competing for members, when a universal service is provided by the state.
But it is partly because the social security system is centrally run, overworked and understaffed that the customers all too often receive such a poor service.
Under any new system, the Government has made plain that it will lay down the minimum rates of benefit.
Benefit societies, governed by these minimum conditions, would provide competition clearly lacking under the present system.
Those dissatisfied with one friendly society would be able to transfer their entitlements to another.
Another way of attracting more customers — apart from providing a better day-to-day service — would be to offer a higher, or different range of benefits on top of the national insurance benefits.
These would have to be actuarily based, and increased contributions would be required.
Such a strategy would allow benefit societies to begin cutting into the insurance market, which is at present totally dominated by the private pension organizations.
There will, of course, be difficulties with this proposal.
The societies would need to initiate recruiting campaigns, and trade union skills and organization would be crucial to their success.
But the difficulties seem small in contrast to the success that awaits the left.
Above all, responding now to initiatives launched by the Thatcher Government ensures that the alternative programme is not one cobbled together just before a three-week election campaign.
22
INCOME FLOORS
These changes aimed at encouraging personal involvement and initiative need to be reinforced by a major overhaul and recasting of the welfare state.
Here we are concerned with a form of corporate provision that can also be used to provide at one and the same time a safety net and a reward for initiative.
Two reforms are singled out here that will help begin the process of reshaping the welfare state to fulfil both of these objectives.
Incentive-based Welfare
A major reason why so many people live on low incomes is that national insurance benefits, such as old-age pensions and unemployment pay, are paid at below the income support and housing benefit levels.
Beveridge was aware that, with few private resources to fall back on, most people would become poor unless basic national insurance benefits were paid at above the level that society deemed to be the minimum income level.
Ironically, implementing a programme to raise people above this poverty level may, initially, be far from popular, although sweeteners, like a double Christmas bonus, will do much to pacify any adverse reaction.
The reason for this stems from the relationship between national insurance and income support rates, and the rules about eligibility for the latter.
A person may be eligible for income support if their income is below their income support entitlement.
Income support is means tested.
Any increase in national insurance benefits are offset against the additional benefit that claimants obtain from income support.
An increase in the national insurance rates, without a commensurate rise  in income support, means that those on income support gain no net increase in benefit.
To prevent this happening, increases in pensions and other major benefits are matched by increases in levels of what was, until 1988, supplementary benefit, and has since then been called income support.
Such an approach ensures that those who are poor gain the full national insurance benefit increases.
But the net effect has been to leave exactly the same number dependent upon means-tested assistance.
How can this vicious circle be broken?
A policy of increasing income support rates in line with the annual review of national insurance benefits is the proper one to adopt when national insurance benefits are increased to take account only of changes in inflation since the last review.
But should this approach be followed if a future government should decide to make an across-the-board increase in national insurance rates that is significantly above the increase in prices?
This was the 1987 election commitment by the Labour Party.
This proposal is discussed here as a way of illustrating the main principles involved in lessening dependence on means tests, while at the same time extending the idea of social citizenship which stems from the national insurance system.
The Labour Party's commitment was to raise pensions by £5 for a single person and £8 for a married couple.
The reason for this pledge was to make good the cut in benefits that resulted from the breaking of the link between these benefits and earnings or prices — whichever most favoured the claimant.
The academic point that the proposed increase did not, in fact, make good the shortfall that beneficiaries suffered is left to one side.
How many pensioners would be floated off means-tested income support if a £5 and £8 increase in the national insurance pension was not matched by a similar change in the income support rates?
The House of Commons Library has made some calculations based on the December 1984 Supplementary Benefit Annual Statistical Inquiry.
At that time, there were 1.4 million pensioners receiving supplementary benefits of less than £5 a week.
Had the national insurance pensions been increased by an additional £5 a week over and above the inflation rate, and supplementary benefit uprated by the rate of inflation only, then virtually all of the 1.4 million claimants would no longer be entitled to supplementary benefit.
Similarly, other pensioner households, containing married couples, would be floated off supplementary benefit by an increase in the married couple's rate of £8 a week.
The  cost of increasing retirement pensions by this amount was estimated at £1.65 billion.
Such a move would have greatly simplified the supplementary benefit system, as fewer people eligible for benefit would have been on the books of local social security offices.
However, many of the 1.3 million recipients who would have ceased to be eligible for supplementary benefit were receiving what is called certificated housing benefit.
The Government points out that, for example, although this group would have lost entitlement to supplementary assistance, 1.2 million of them would have gained entitlement to standard housing benefit.
In other words, they would still be dependent on a means-tested housing benefit in order to ensure that their income was paid at the minimum level laid down by Parliament.
The Minister of State for Social Security, in outlining his calculations, demonstrated that increases of £5 and £8 in the pensions would have lead to only 100,000 ceasing entirely to draw means-tested assistance (letter from John Major, MP, to the author, 7 October 1986).
But these data do not give an accurate account of the overall effect of their change, for an additional 380,000 standard housing benefit recipients would have had an income above their entitlement level.
In other words, there would be an overall decline of nearly half a million people (that is, 380,000+ 100,000) drawing means-tested support.
A further ‘simplification’ of the system would occur if a substantial and real increase was made in child benefit.
Let us assume that the value of child benefit, currently at £7.25, be doubled (as is proposed as part of the tax changes in chapter 19).
Calculations, again by the House of Commons Library, suggest that such an increase would lead to a reduction of families drawing means-tested supplementary benefit, and family credit.
None of these calculations, however, can take account of changes in the climate in which people operate, and the resulting change in attitudes and behaviour.
With the increasing dominance of a means-tested assistance, people have not only become passively dependent as the Government claims.
The position is far worse.
A new lifestyle has developed, whereby the energy of many people on means-tested assistance is channelled into what is called ‘working the system’.
As there are few opportunities for making it by oneself, a great deal of the effort of those in low-income groups goes into working out how they can maximize their income within the existing rules.
A move such as raising the real value of national insurance benefits, and of child benefit in particular, will, I believe, begin to change the psychological attitude of claimants, by allowing the extraordinary effort and intelligence that is currently absorbed into ‘working the system’ to be channelled into transforming the status of many currently caught in means-tested assistance.
The changes in child benefit advocated here illustrate the nature of the change that will occur.
Child benefit is deducted from other social security entitlements, but is kept in full by parents in work.
It therefore acts as a springboard to freedom.
For families with two or three children, the doubling of child benefit would mean an increase in their tax-free income from £14.50 to £29 and from £21.75 to £43.50, respectively.
I would suggest that this level of support given by child benefit would price many jobs into a claimant's reckoning.
It would, in particular, transform the position of many single mothers on income support.
Work could become a real possibility for the first time.
Such an outcome would be diametrically opposite to Mrs Thatcher's policy of decreasing wages and then penalizing those unemployed people who do not take these very low-paid jobs.
The child benefit proposals are also appropriate to the significant changes occurring in the labour market with an increasing number of jobs offered on a less than full-time basis.
Unemployment has played a crucial role both in bringing the underclass into existence and to locking it in place.
Measures to reduce unemployment are of the utmost importance and have been outlined above.
At the same time, the benefits to the unemployed also need to be considered.
In 1957, of the 234,000 unemployed claimants drawing benefit, the majority (153,000) drew unemployment benefit only, while a further 46,000 (or 30 per cent) found themselves totally dependent on means-tested assistance.
In 1988, with over 2.5 million unemployed claimants, 504,142 drew unemployment only, while 1.3 million were totally dependent upon income support and a further 131,000 drew both unemployment benefit and income support.
Because flat-rate unemployment benefit can only be drawn for a maximum of a year, a large number of today's unemployed find themselves having to draw means-tested assistance.
This rule needs to be changed, so as to allow the unemployed to draw benefit as long as unemployment lasts, providing that claimants have not refused jobs they were offered without good cause, and are prepared to go on training schemes.
The charge against such a move is that it will pay unemployment benefit to claimants, some of whose household income  already prevents them from being poor.
There is some force to this argument, if the only concern is about paying benefits to people in need.
Even so, the number of households for which this is true is remarkably small.
All of the official figures show that unemployed claimants invariably have unemployed wives, and the proportion of wives unemployed increases with the length of their husband's unemployment.
One reason put forward for this is that a person is more likely to lose their job in an area of high unemployment, and this lack of job opportunities must apply equally to wives.
An alternative view, and one that is supported by circumstantial evidence from my own constituency, is that many wives voluntarily cease to work once their husbands become long-term unemployed.
The reason for this is that, while their husbands were drawing national insurance unemployment benefit, additional income to the household is not taken into account when determining eligibility for that benefit.
Once unemployment benefit ceases, a claimant may become eligible for income support, but such eligibility is affected by his partner's earnings.
Apart from a disregard of £5, a partner's earnings are deducted pound for pound from a claimant's income support entitlement.
The present rules do not make it worthwhile for most wives to continue working once their husbands join the ranks of the long-term unemployed.
A continuation of unemployment benefit for as long as unemployment lasts will ensure that the working wives of men who are unemployed are not penalized.
Moreover, working wives provide the family with a contact to the world of work where news about job opportunities is first picked up.
Keeping wives in work will therefore maximize the chances of their husbands hearing about possible job openings.
Single-parent Families
The increase in the number of single-parent families has been detailed in Part I. The rise has been so significant that, had it not been overshadowed by the advent of mass unemployment, much of today's public debate about welfare reform would be centred on how best to help this group of claimants.
While some single-parent families have an adequate income, others are poor, and some are destined to remain on welfare for very long periods.
Three reforms are proposed.
The first is to change what is called the earnings disregard.
Under the  supplementary benefit system, single parents could earn additional income and only part of this was offset against their benefit.
A taper was applied over a sliding scale of income, but on average the formula worked out so that most single parents would be able to earn an additional £12 without losing benefit entitlement.
More importantly, they were able to offset totally any child-minding costs they incurred while going out to work.
One of the Government's aims in moving from supplementary benefit to income support was to simplify the system.
This has been achieved, but at the cost of stifling personal initiative.
Instead of a sliding scale to determine what income a single parent in work can keep without losing benefit, a standard £15 cut-off point has been introduced.
While this sum is just above the average sum of additional income earned by single parents under the previous system, the new rules, again in the name of simplification, have abolished the claimants right to offset child-minding costs against their earnings.
The consequence is that most single parents, who have to pay someone to look after their children while at work, are now worse off if they continue part-time work, and the number of single parents in work is likely to drop dramatically because of this change.
Given that it is good for many people to get out of the home and meet other people at work, and that it is crucially important not to leave re-entry into the labour market until the person's children have grown up, these disregard rules need to be reversed as soon as possible.
A second reform concerns the payment, or non-payment, of maintainance.
At the current time over 1,000,000 men pay no contribution whatsoever towards the cost of raising their children.
Again, this position needs to be changed.
Being responsible for the birth of a child is one of the most important events in which a human being can be involved.
passing the bill over to the welfare authorities, and thereby to other taxpayers, is not acceptable, either in terms of the escalating size of the bill, or, more importantly, from the point of view of individuals learning about how to behave responsibly, and the long-term financial responsibilities that flow from adult behaviour.
Of the 232,255 single mothers receiving supplementary benefit in 1987, only 17,084 had maintainance orders against the father of their children (Hansard , 7 November 1988, col. 94).
In 1958, the system of attachment of earnings was instituted m respect of maintenance orders.
The scheme was extended in 1967 to fines with the intention of keeping defaulters out of prison.
At the  current time, all sorts of bodies and organizations can apply to have an attachment of earnings made on someone who owes money.
The proposal here is that the right to gain an attachment of earnings should now be limited to maintainance payments only.
Two allied reforms are also advocated.
The first is that after an initial period single parents should be required to name the father of their children when signing on for welfare.
It will then be the responsibility of the Department of Social Security to take out a maintainance order against the father, although the form of the order should be such that the order continues to operate when the mother leaves welfare.
Indeed, a crucial part of the new contract between the state and single parents will be for the state to continue paying the mother (and in a few cases the father) the maintenance payments for as long as that person is responsible for a child.
It will be the state's duty to recoup these payments from the father.
The second reform is that, in order to emphasize the importance of the responsibilities fathers have towards the maintainance of their children, maintainance payments, on a much reduced scale, should continue for people when they are out of work and on welfare themselves.
The last reform on this front centres on the school curriculum.
It is becoming more, not less important to provide adequate teaching in schools on personal relationships and on how people should treat one another that goes far beyond straightforward lessons on sex education — important though this is.
It is also crucial that vulnerable young girls understand clearly that having a child at sixteen does not usually result in getting a passport to new-found freedom.
While claiming £40 a week on welfare may seem a lot to a fifteen-year-old schoolgirl, it is precious little when that is the sum each week on which a family budget has to be maintained.
Moreover, the thought of having one's own flat takes on a different vision when it is situated on a sink council estate.
Young single parents who have themselves learned by bitter experience what a limitation young parenthood can often be should be used imaginatively in schools to get this message across.
It is important to remember that such a campaign would be conducted against the background of the economy moving back to full employment, and therefore of an increasing range of job opportunities for school-leavers.
The reforms should similarly be related to those advocated below on lowering the school leaving age to fourteen for those students who have been failed by our present educational system to allow them to undertake part-time work and part-time training.
To increase eligibility for unemployment benefit for the duration of unemployment will cost £600 million, net of savings in income support (Hansard , 28 October 1988, col. 458).
This move alone will not ensure that the working partner of an unemployed person is not penalized for working.
A further objective is to make sure that people do not move out of unemployment to an even lower income from work.
The moves to increase child benefit, which have already been discussed, will ensure that most households with children are not faced with this option.
The net cost of this reform is £1.6 bn.
While the cost of making the changes to the welfare payments to single parents will result in a net saving in public expenditure, this is not the main aim.
The overall aim is to ensure that the welfare state encourages rather than penalizes personal initiative.
It is also necessary, however, to ensure that the labour market pays adequate rewards, but this policy must be linked to real increases in productivity.
We now turn to consider this topic.
Earnings
The Thatcher Governments have been successful in pushing down the relative pay of low-paid workers.
This has been brought about by the increase in unemployment and the abolition of the statutory minimum wage, together with a programme of Government ministers  exalting employers to reduce wage settlements, particularly for the low-paid.
In addition, the whole climate of opinion created by the Government has induced some employers to short-change their staff as and when the possibility has arisen.
The move back to full employment, an integral part of the reform being advocated here, will itself have an indirect effect on wage levels, particularly for those at the bottom end of the income pile, although it cannot be stressed enough that the drive towards full employment must be matched by a commitment to improve the productivity of all workers — including those on low pay.
But other actions similarly need to be initiated.
There is a need to introduce a statutory minimum wage.
There are a number of arguments against such a strategy, and these need to be taken seriously, and, where appropriate, countered in the manner by which the minimum wage is introduced.
It is pointed out, for example, that what is of most interest is not pay levels but living standards, and the latter can be more easily influenced through tax and benefit policies.
There is some merit in this argument, although the  record shows that there is a distinct difference between rhetoric and performance on this issue.
Many people who call for benefit increases in a discussion on whether or not to operate a minimum wage, mysteriously lose their voice in debates to enhance welfare payments (Sam Brittan and Joe Rogaly, both from the Financial Times stable, are  honourable exceptions to this rule).
Moreover, this welfare-only approach ignores the opinions of low-paid workers themselves.
In a market-orientated society, where every good or service has its price, the low-pay ‘price tag’ attached to some workers sums up in their eyes the low value placed on them by society.
Higher pay is not, therefore, only about an increase in living standards, although this is crucially important, but in gaining respect and an idea of one's worth from the rest of the community.
Tax and welfare policies are important, and proposals on these two fronts have already been outlined, but these should supplement an initiative on pay, rather than be a substitute for it.
Currently, the most frequent demand is for a minimum wage level of two-thirds of average earnings to be either implemented immediately, or over a short period.
It is worth considering from where this demand came.
Back in the mid-1970s, Philip Rowntree gave me the funds to establish the Low Pay Unit (LPU) to campaign on behalf of workers in Wage Council industries.
One of the principle aims of the LPU was to ensure that Wages Councils met at least once a year (many had not done so, despite the rate of inflation at the time).
A further objection was to ensure that the independent members received an outside briefing, setting out the case for a substantial increase in pay for the workers covered by that particular Council.
It was seen above that while these workers constitute only 14 per cent of the working population, 70 per cent of Wage Council workers can be defined as ‘low-paid’.
The LPU entered this process as it believed a trade union would.
A bargaining position was established that would draw attention to the needs of the lowest paid workers, and, hopefully, lead to a reasonable wage settlement.
The target of two-thirds of average earnings was literally pulled out of the air, in order to show how low the pay rates were in Wage Council industries.
Its aim was to act as a bluff in the wage negotiations in order to shame the Councils, first into meeting each year, and then setting a respectable wage increase.
This, then, was the background to the two-thirds average earnings target.
This level of pay was never conceived of as being a realizable  objective for a statutory minimum wage that would be brought in over a short period of time.
Given present wage levels, investment and productivity levels, the current demand by some of the left for the implementation of such a target over three years would result in a substantial increase in unemployment (see Frank Field,The Minimum Wage: Its Prospects and Dangers , Heinemann, London, 1984).
What is proposed here is a more modest target of 55 per cent of average earnings of all workers, both male and female rates combined in that industry.
The target wage for each industry would be implemented over a five-year period, but should be accompanied by a tailor-made programme on training, investment and productivity targets.
When these targets had been achieved, with increased skill and investment levels showing up in higher productivity, the proposal would be to implement a higher national minimum wage for all workers, aiming for 60 per cent of average earnings over the following five years.
Nothing in this plan would prevent trade unions negotiating higher rates of pay than these target levels.
One major national requirement — also commented on in this concluding section — is to raise the skill levels of British workers.
Such an approach is crucial to any successful policy of implementing a minimum wage in low-pay sectors, if the aim is both to raise pay and protect employment.
Although again it is important to consider this question on an industry-by-industry basis.
In some low-paid industries, and here agriculture is a notorious example, the low pay of workers is accompanied by very high productivity levels.
In many other sectors of low pay, however, the level of pay is reflected in low productivity.
Indeed, a National Economic Development Office report showed that low pay itself was a probable cause of inefficiency; given the cheapness of labour, it did not pay employers to organize their own side more effectively.
Alongside a programme of raising skill levels is the need to dovetail an investment programme.
Indeed, in many industries there would be little point in raising the skill level unless workers are given more advanced capital equipment on which to work.
The raising of skills to match rising investment will lead to increased productivity.
This itself may lead to fewer people being employed, unless the programme can be accompanied by industries gaining an increased market share of both home and export markets.
From this brief description, it can be seen that a policy to deal with low pay has to be seen as a policy in miniature of planning a continuing renaissance of British industry.
Low pay is not only prevalent in some sectors of manufacturing industry.
It is also a characteristic of much of the service sector, and also of the public sector.
Policies to continue the improvement of productivity in both sectors are crucial.
But there will come a point where productivity gains alone will not cover the necessary wage increases.
At this point, we the consumers have to be presented with a moral choice.
We can continue to gain services at a price that leads to the exploitation of some fellow citizens, whether they work in the private sector, such as in hotels, or in the public sector, as in the health services.
Alternatively, we can make the decision that decent wages should be paid to all workers who carry out their duties properly and effectively, and that this increased wage level may need to be reflected in the price of the good or service.
To act on the public sector will mean that part of the bill (that is, that part not paid for by improved productivity) will be presented to us as taxpayers.
Of course, consumers as individuals can rarely make such choices operative, even if they wished to.
The only way consumers are given an effective option is for politicians to propose policies to achieve such an objective, and to seek support for their endorsement.
A policy of raising the wages of the lowest paid, first on an industry basis, and then over the whole country, for this approach to be part of an overall investment and training programme, and for the whole strategy to appear as part of an election manifesto, would provide consumers with the chance of turning a moral decision into an economic reality.
Increasing Skills
Schools fail a significant minority of children.
Large numbers leave school without being able to read or write properly, as many employers will testify, and as I am regularly reminded when younger people come to my constituency surgery and are unable to write out their names and addresses.
Other young people vote with their feet and leave early by failing to turn up during their last year, and sometimes their last two years at school.
Those children who do stay in school, but who feel they are failing, invariably have a disruptive influence.
This disgruntled minority has a disturbing impact on the performance of other pupils.
Two major educational reforms are proposed.
We saw earlier how children from poorer backgrounds were disadvantaged by their home environment before they reached school, and that a lower proportion  of poorer children gained a place at a nursery or a playgroup than did children from richer homes.
To counter both the unfavourable home environment, and the difficulty poorer parents have in equalling the sharp elbows of the middle classes, who are well accustomed to taking themselves to the front of the queue, the school starting age for nursery education should be reduced to three.
The programme would need to be implemented over time, and the money should first be targeted to those areas with high instances of deprivation.
The policy would then need to be made uniform throughout the whole country.
A second reform is to make the school leaving age flexible over the fourteen to sixteen year age band.
Disgruntled young people who currently gain nothing positive from their last years at school should be allowed to opt for part-time work at the age of fourteen if they so wish.
The new arrangement would be conditional on fulfilling the following conditions.
First, the young person would have had to have found a job, and that job would itself have to offer day release, which at the age of fourteen would amount to two days a week.
The total time in work could be raised to four days for someone aged between fifteen and sixteen.
The day release time could be spent at school or college and the course would be linked to the gaining of technical qualifications.
Second, on their sixteenth birthday young people would be required to report for interviews with their youth employment officers.
At this stage, they would have to discuss how they wished to employ their right to three years in further education.
The aim of both the part-time education and further extended full-time study, on grants, would be to acquire qualifications on a module basis, so as to build up a whole range of technical qualifications.
It would therefore be possible for a young school-leaver to begin acquiring qualifications that could lead in the end to gaining a technical degree qualification.
The advantages of such a move are considerable.
Many of those who feel they are achieving least, and are most disruptive in schools, would opt for early leaving.
Schools would become safer and quieter places, and parents would know that from fourteen onwards the remaining pupils would be specializing for their GCSE and A-level examinations.
Opting out into private education, or moving into the catchment area with the best state schools, would become a less important past-time.
The policy itself would largely make redundant the politics of selection versus comprehensive education; most of those staying in full-time education in school would be motivated by academic success.
The aim is that those young people who opt for early leaving would themselves be substantial gainers.
I have found it impossible to convince young people in the latter stages of their compulsory education of the need to gain skills with which to enter full-time work.
The lure of a weekly wage-packet has a mesmerizing effect.
Under the scheme proposed here, young people would gain the wage-packet, would not lose contact with education (they would be in college or school, initially for two days a week) and would have gained an employer interested in developing their skills.
Once these young people became achievers, both in keeping down a job for part of the week, and by acquiring skills relevant to the work, their self-esteem would be enhanced.
Once these young people begin to see that they, too, can be achievers, a mini-revolution will have been accomplished.
One positive result of a newly motivated group would be that some might see the advantages to themselves of returning to full-time education at the age of sixteen.
They would be coming back to education, however, to build upon the qualifications they had already begun to acquire, and would feel at least equal, if not superior in some respects, to their peers who had remained in full-time education.
Again, the aim would be for employers to back this decision with the offer of future employment once the education or training course had been completed.
One objection that is bound to be raised by those who are conditioned to defending the status quo is to point to the current labour market and the difficulties being experienced by young people attempting to find work.
Everything in chapter 11 points to the validity of this argument.
It is important, however, to distinguish between the current situation and what the future holds.
Already, the job market is changing.
Some companies are so short of staff that they are offering their women workers flexible hours, together with substantial sums to cover their child-minding costs.
Similarly, some of the bigger employers are finding it impossible to attract young workers on to their YTS schemes.
In an attempt to maintain their share of the young labour market, employers are finding it necessary to offer their own training courses, on the rates of pay currently going to young people in the labour market, rather than the YTS trainee pay level.
Future projections show a marked fall in the numbers of young people entering the labour market.
It is estimated that the number of people aged between sixteen and nineteen will fall by over 850,000 between 1987 and 1995 — a reduction of nearly 25 per cent.
(Labour  Market Quarterly Report , Training Commission, July 1988, p. 11.)
Indeed, the fall is so dramatic that for the NHS to maintain current nursing levels will require it cornering half of all available female school-leavers with good O-level results (five higher grade O levels, or one A level).
Similarly, fewer than twenty large employers currently account for the employment of over half the estimated 27,000 leavers with A-level equivalent qualifications (for details see Labour Market Quarterly Report , published by the Training Commission, July 1988, pp. 11–12).
There could hardly be a more opportune time for attempting to salvage something for those young people who are currently gaining little if anything from the educational system.
While this reform is specifically designed to prevent many of today's disgruntled education consumers joining the ranks of tomorrow's underclass, it will of course have implications for a much wider group of young people, whose talents and needs have been all too little met by the emphasis on the reorganization of secondary education to the exclusion of all other considerations.
The proposal of a flexible school leaving age is aimed to buy time while considering the major changes that should take place in secondary education.
An official enquiry is needed to examine why the skills acquired by some children in primary schools are lost during their time in a secondary school.
But this policy of buying time should not be at the expense of those young people who are currently losing out at school.
Hence this proposal to combine the world of work and education in a package which might prove attractive to people who are otherwise likely to be recruited into the underclass.
CONCLUSION
A number of significant changes have occurred in British society since 1979, and the one centred on in this book has been the emergence of an underclass.
Throughout modern times, there has existed in Britain a large number of people who were poor — although, for various reasons, the numbers have sometimes been exaggerated.
Losing Out has argued that, since 1979, a minority of the population has been progressively cut off from other people on low income, let alone those on average or high incomes.
A number of factors have contributed to this state of affairs.
One significant cause has been a redistribution of income towards richer people on a scale without parallel this century.
This redistribution of income, backed up by a similar strategy on wealth, has resulted in a widening of class differences for the first time  since 1945.
Unemployment has also played a part as a recruiting sergeant for the underclass, both in the way it has selected its membership, and in the way it has held them in place.
Unemployment is also a significant cause of downward mobility in Britain.
The redistribution of income and wealth has been matched by a realignment of people's political allegiances with an increasing number of those with modest resources allying themselves with the most prosperous sections of the community.
The underclass has therefore become separated, both in terms of income, life chances and political aspirations.
Separation has also occurred on somewhat more nebulous but equally important grounds.
A feeling of belonging to a community, or as it has been described here, of citizenship, is built up from a whole range of social, economic and psychological components.
Psychologically, the underclass is being increasingly isolated by the growth of a drawbridge mentality amongst those who feel they are ‘making it’ in Thatcher's Britain.
Economically, the underclass has become separated by a rebuttal from the labour market, combined with a Government policy to prevent the products of economic growth being shared amongst all sections of the community.
Accompanying the exclusion from the labour market has been a policy of disenfranchising the underclass from full welfare citizenship.
This disenfranchising policy will be taken a stage further in the political domain, with the linking for the first time for fifty years of the right to vote with the payment of contributions to local government exchequers.
This section has been concerned with outlining policies aimed at freeing the underclass from the political, economic and social apartheid into which they are being pushed.
But to implement these policies requires winning political power, and therefore the debate about the future of the underclass is itself part of the debate about the future of left politics in Britain.
There is little point devising programmes that will appeal only to Britain's newly dispossessed.
Rather, the appeal has been one that is also relevant to wide sections of the electorate.
It is an appeal that combines self-interest with altruism.
It is a programme that holds out more than hope for the underclass.
But to deliver this programme successfully will require an invigoration of left politics, where hope for the dispossessed spreads to a sure-founded belief amongst the electorate that there is, after all, a worthwhile life after Thatcherism.