

6
PARLIAMENTARY ENCLOSURE AND THE LANDSCAPE
Introduction
Professor Hoskins, perhaps because of the years he lived and taught in the Midland counties, dwells at considerable length on the impact of parliamentary enclosure on the English landscape.
Though he rightly acknowledges that large parts of the country were unaffected by this enclosure movement, his concentration on it gives us a somewhat unbalanced picture.
This has had an unfortunate result.
Because of the success of The Making of the English Landscape people who had no interest in the countryside have read the book and been inspired by it But others have used the book and particularly this chapter as an authoritative statement that most hedges are modern and thus do not constitute a serious loss if they are removed to accommodate modern agricultural techniques.
This totally misguided view which, of course, Professor Hoskins certainly did not put forward, has to be corrected and, at the same time, the somewhat unbalanced concentration on late enclosure rectified.
First, the enclosure movement, as Professor Hoskins describes.
was indeed limited to a broad zone between Yorkshire and Dorset, and was primarily concerned with the removal of the traditional open or common fields and their replacement by the enclosed fields which cover almost the entire area today.
Second, though before the enclosures of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the pattern of agriculture in this zone was basically a medieval one, it is also true to say that that in most of the rest of England was also medieval or even earlier in appearance.
The enclosed fields which covered and still cover much of say Kent, Norfolk, Shropshire, Devon and Cornwall were equally medieval in origin and function or, as we have already seen, had their beginnings in perhaps prehistoric or Roman times.
In such areas the landscape was as much medieval as in the open-field lands but it was very different and had a different pattern of settlement within it.
Third, and perhaps most important, both within the open-field lands and far beyond them, parliamentary enclosure and other forms of enclosure as well were involved with the final removal of much of the existing forests, heathland, moors, marshes and fens.
It was in this period that they too were cleared, drained and divided into fields and new patterns of occupation were established within them.
It is the totality of these new enclosures, beginning perhaps in the seventeenth century and increasing rapidly through the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that, together with the industrial and urban development discussed in the following chapters.
mark the last 250 years out as the latest revolution in the English landscape.
Yet, even so, these new enclosures need to be put in perspective.
over great parts of England enclosed fields had always existed.
perhaps from prehistoric times.
Elsewhere enclosed fields have been created by Saxons, and produced by medieval forest clearance.
moorland reclamation and marshland drainage.
The open fields themselves had always been subject to piecemeal enclosure, even as early as the fourteenth century.
Individual peasants and lords could and did remove strips or groups of strips from the rotation sequence of their neighbours and fence them around.
This was often done on a temporary basis at first, but usually the fences became permanent hedges or walls.
Such early enclosed fields still remain, their characteristic feature being their elongated form and curved or reversed-S long sides, showing their origin as open-field strips.
In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries enclosure of open fields was widespread in the Midland counties with the change to pastoral farming and the consequent desertion of settlements.
In the seventeenth century there were considerable improvements in livestock management, land drainage techniques, crop rotation and, most important of all, convertible husbandry.
Under the latter system arable land was put under grass for a long period after which it was returned to arable.
Even where open fields remained, the methods of operation were radically changed to accommodate these new techniques, but the advantages of convertible husbandry were clearly greatest for those farmers with enclosed fields.
As a result there was much new enclosure.
In parts of Lincolnshire, for example, the early seventeenth century saw a massive attack on the former open fields.
Nevertheless, from the middle of the eighteenth century, the process of enclosure of the Midland open fields developed apace and in a relatively short time produced the landscape that Professor Hoskins describes so w–ell.
Equally important was the enclosure of the wastes by various methods.
Professor Hoskins certainly mentions these, but perhaps fails to give them their true significance.
What remained of woodland by the end of the medieval period was devoured at an ever  increasing rate.
The greatest demand on timber was for industry.
The new or greatly expanded extractive industries needed pit props; iron smelting, at least until Abraham Darby discovered the use of coke in 1709, required charcoal; and other industries such as glass-making, tanning and salt-making all required timber for various reasons.
The expansion of both the Royal Navy and the mercantile marine also entailed a heavy demand for timber.
The result was a continuous attack on woodland that produced great concern and numerous investigations.
Though much new woodland was planted, the overall result was a major reduction in the area under trees which continued into the nineteenth century.
The landscape that this forest clearance created is often very similar to the better known areas of open-field enclosure with geometrically-shaped fields and new straight roads and lanes.
Most of what remains of Needwood Forest in Staffordshire has such an appearance, as has Charnwood Forest in Leicestershire the latter dating from 1829.
In Oxfordshire much of the last blocks of Wychwood Forest were cleared and replaced by regular stone-walled fields in 1857–8.
The bulk of this type of enclosure was carried out by formal acts of parliament, but there was much private enclosure, mo.st of which is unrecorded and can only be dated by contemporary maps.
At Glanvilles Wootton in Dorset, there are nearly two hundred acres of neat rectangular fields in an area which was mapped as woodland in 1839 but as enclosed by 1847.
Even more extensive was the enclosure of the former common heaths and upland moors.
In Yorkshire for example, the formal acts of parliament of the late eighteenth century were far more concerned with the enclosure of the upland pastures than with open-field land, most of which had been enclosed by agreement long before.
As Dr Raistrick has pointed out, of 386 Enclosure Acts for the West Riding, less than twenty are for the enclosure of open fields only.
Most are involved with large areas of moorland.
Thus in the Dales, the Act for the Enclosure of Burnsall and Threshfield townships involved 1,690 acres of common pasture but only seventy acres of open-field land.
At nearby Applewick only nine acres of open-field land remained to be enclosed by parliamentary act but 6,330 acres of upland moors were dealt with.
In Shropshire too a similar picture has been revealed by Mr Rowley.
Between 1845 and 1891 some twenty thousand acres of upland commons of the old Clun Forest were enclosed by act of parliament.
Former heathland too was broken up into fields on a huge scale, as Professor Hoskins rightly stresses.
It is also true to say that most of the traditional chalk downlands were divided into fields in the century after 1750.
In central Dorset, of the nearly fifty parishes with Acts of Enclosure, nine were for open-field arable alone, thirty include huge areas of downland and ten are solely concerned with downland.
It is worth noting that, though Professor Hoskins points to John Clare as almost the only rural poet to express his dislike at the destruction of his native heaths, William Barnes wrote in a very similar vein of Dorset.
There he was concerned both with the removal of the grass-covered downlands and the break-up of the Dorset heaths:
Oh! no, Poll, no!
Since they've a-took
The Common in, our Lew wold nook
Don't seem a-bit as used to look
When we had runnen room;
Girt banks do shut up ev'ry drong
An' stratch wi' thorny backs along
Where we did use to run among
The vuzzen an' the broom.
The marshlands too continued to be drained and enclosed.
Chat Moss in south Lancashire was finally drained and divided into fields in 1833.
In the Somerset Levels large areas of land were reclaimed and given straight-sided, drain-edged fields.
Far more impressive was the reclamation of the eastern fenlands.
Relatively little of the peat fens had been reclaimed in medieval times.
Reclamation was begun on a large scale in the mid-seventeenth century by the so-called Adventurers who adventured their capital in an attempt to drain the fens.
Over ninety-five thousand acres of land were improved by various methods, not always very successfully and the actual blocks of land involved are still recognisable by both their landscape and sometimes their name, Adventurers' Land.
This early reclamation was followed by more extensive piecemeal reclamation and enclosure.
From the late eighteenth century onwards, normal parliamentary Acts of Enclosure authorised the break-up of many thousands of acres of fenland.
All the  phases of reclamation are still visible today, together with traces of the complex methods of water removal which ranged from wind-driven scoop wheels, through steam engines and diesel pumps to the electric pumps of today.
The present landscape of all the eastern fenlands, from Lincoln to Cambridge, is almost entirely the creation of the mid-seventeenth century and later.
PLATE 69.
Wicken Fen, Cambridgeshire.
Almost the last surviving piece of ‘natural’ fenland.
In fact it has been carefully managed for centuries and was indeed enclosed in the late seventeenth century.
Left on its own it would quickly revert to a wilderness.
The ‘windmill’ is a wind-driven machine for lifting water into high-level drains.
It was built in 1907, though not on its present site.
These new enclosures also produced their new isolated farmsteads, set in the fields.
All over England the enclosure of each area produced a local form of architecture and building materials for the farmhouses which date from this period.
Professor Hoskins picked out the redbrick farmhouses of Leicestershire as perhaps his favourite.
In Cambridgeshire, both on the former open-field areas and in the reclaimed fens almost identical farmhouses are made of a grey-white brick.
In Yorkshire the houses of the period tend to be of stone rubble while in the former Wiltshire downlands they are more often than not made of cob, a mixture of chalk, straw and manure, or of flint rubble.
Although the enclosure movement in all these forms was the last great revolution in the English landscape, radically changing much of the countryside as it took place, it also gave us a landscape which is aesthetically much more pleasing to most people.
Open-field farming, with few or no hedges must have produced a very bare landscape, totally lacking in visual interest which the great modern prairie farms of East Anglia have actually re-created in the last few decades.
Much of the upland moors are given a scale and a softer appearance by the long fingers of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century stone walls which push up their valley sides.
The enclosure movement gave us much of what is said to be the traditional English landscape.
Inclosure, thou'rt a curse upon the land,
And tasteless was the wretch who thy existence plann'd.
PARLIAMENTARY ENCLOSURE AND THE LANDSCAPE
At the beginning of the eighteenth century the rural landscape of England was still far from assuming its present likeness.
Over large tracts of the country, especially in the west and the north, and to a considerable extent in the south-east also, the pattern of field and and hedgerow, hamlet and farm, road and lane, had established itself pretty much as we know it.
But over millions of acres between the Yorkshire and the Dorset coasts, the country scene was still largely medieval.
Farming was carried on in open fields that had not changed basically since the thirteenth century, and beyond the arable fields and their meadows lay great tracts of common pasture, much of it covered with gorse and furze, rising in places to moorland and mountains.
Much of the detail contained in this chapter remains as true now as when it was written.
The description of the landscape of parliamentary enclosure is perhaps one of the best that Professor Hoskins ever wrote.
The Extent of the Enclosure
It is impossible to say precisely how much of England still lay in open field in 1700 or thereabouts, but one can make a rough estimate.
We know that enclosures by parliamentary act and award dealt with about 4,500,000 acres of open field, leaving aside for one moment the enclosure of the commons and other ‘wastes’.
Gregory King had estimated in 1688 that the arable land of England and Wales amounted to nine million acres in all.
We shall not be far wrong then if we say that in 1700 about one half of the arable land was already enclosed in the kind of fields that we see today, and that about one half still lay in open field, a landscape which survives today only in patches of a few hundred acres at Braunton (north Devon), at Laxton (Nottinghamshire) and at Hazey and Epworth in the Isle of Axholme.
Gregory King also estimated that no fewer than ten million acres of England and Wales were still ‘heaths, moors, mountains, and barren land’, rather more than one quarter of the total area of the country as he reckoned it.
In 1795 the newly formed Board of Agriculture put the ‘wastes’ at a little under eight million acres.
It seems likely that both figures are too high.
There are today some five million acres of common, waste and wild land in England and Wales.
About two million acres of waste have been enclosed by act since 1700, so that we may reasonably assume that at the beginning of the eighteenth century there were about seven million acres of ‘waste’ all told rather than the ten million estimated by Gregory King.
The enclosure of open fields into the smaller fields that form our familiar world today, and the reclamation of the wild lands, had been going on intermittently and at a varying pace in every century.
But after the Restoration the government ceased to interfere with the enclosure of open field by private landlords, and the pace of change quickened sharply.
Up to about 1730 most of this enclosure was carried through by private agreements between the owners of the land in question.
Very few enclosures were dealt with by act of   parliament.
But under George 11, and above all from the 1750s onwards, enclosure by private act of parliament, working through special commissioners in each of the affected parishes, was the great instrument of change.
From then onwards the transformation of the English landscape, or of a considerable part of it, went on at a revolutionary pace.
PLATE 70.
The landscape of parliamentary enclosure at Brauston, Leicestershire.
The pattern of hedged fields, trees and copses produces a varied and deeply satisfying countryside.
It was not so before enclosure when most of this land was open-field strips.
This revolution affected nearly three thousand English parishes, as near as we can tell.
In many, the enclosure award of Georgian days was only the final clearing-up of remnants of open field that survived after piecemeal enclosure had been going on for generations or even centuries.
Here the revolution in the landscape was a mild one.
But in the great majority of the parishes it was a complete transformation, from the immemorial landscape of the open fields, with their complex pattern of narrow strips, their winding green balks or cart-roads, their headlands and grassy footpaths, into the modern chequer-board pattern of small, squarish fields, enclosed by hedgerows of hawthorn, with new roads running more or less straight and wide across the parish in all directions.
It was a triumph of planning in so short a time for so complicated a matter, most of it carried through in most places within a year or two years of the passing of the act.
One cannot help reflecting what would happen nowadays in a problem of similar magnitude.
Professor Hoskins was right to reflect on what might have happened if parliamentary enclosure had taken place today.
Given the consultations and enquiries that are now needed for relatively minor landscape changes, it is doubtful if it would have ever been achieved.
Just as interesting perhaps is to visualise the landscape that would have been created if enclosure had been delayed until after the introduction of barbed wire in the 1870s.
We should now have a very bleak and bare countryside.
It is true that the paper plans, as set out in the award made by the commissioners, did not produce all the physical changes at once, as we shall see in due course; but the transformation of the landscape was, all the same , remarkably swift.
A villager who had played in the open fields as a boy, or watched the sheep in the common pastures, would have lived to see the modern landscape of his parish completed and matured, the roads all made, the hedgerow trees full grown, and new farmhouses built out in the fields where none had ever been before.
Everything was different: hardly a landmark of the old parish would have remained.
Perhaps here and there the old man would have found some evidences of the former world: the windmill of his younger days still standing in the corner of a new field, though now derelict and forlorn, or the traces of the former strips in the ridge-and-furrow of the new pastures, but not much else.
This transformation of an ancient landscape into a modern one did not, however, affect the whole of England.
In some regions the transformation had taken place much earlier, as in Kent, or Essex, or Devon, where it had taken a different form altogether, and most of the fields had been reclaimed direct from forest and moorland without passing through the open-field stage at all, or had been enclosed from open field at an early date.
PLATE 71.
The landscape of parliamentary enclosure at Oare on Exmoor Somerset.
Once part of the common grazing of the parish this land was only finally enclosed in 1863.
We can indeed be fairly precise about the extent to which this parliamentary enclosure movement altered the English landscape.
It affected the Midland counties most of all, and it is here more than anywhere that we find the planned landscape of Georgian times.
Yet even here the actual extent to which the rural landscape was altered is considerably less than we might suppose.
Of all counties the one most affected by the transformation of the open arable fields was Northamptonshire.
Here just about half the total area was dealt with by parliamentary act and award.
A block of counties adjoining it — Rutland to the north, Huntingdonshire and Bedfordshire to the east, and Oxfordshire to the south, showed nearly as great a transformation.
We ought to include also the northern half of Buckinghamshire in this belt of planned country, for though parliamentary enclosure affected only one acre in three in the county as a whole it was largely concentrated in the plain to the north of the Chilterns.
On the eastern side of the county, indeed, where it lay along the Bedfordshire border, one acre in every two was dealt with by the Georgian planners.
Roughly speaking, the parts of England most affected by this type of planning form a great belt which sweeps round from Flamborough Head on the Yorkshire coast, down through the Midlands as far as the Dorset coast, and thence north-eastwards along the chalk uplands to the Norfolk coast.
Within this stretch of country, some two hundred miles at its greatest from north to south, and 120 miles or so at its widest from west to east, an average of three acres in every ten was dealt with by parliamentary enclosure.
The large counties of Warwickshire, Gloucestershire and Wiltshire, which form a solid block to the west of this ‘concentrated’ area, show about one acre in four dealt with by the enclosure commissioners, rising on parts of the Wiltshire chalk to one in two.
Berkshire is very similar in this respect to Wiltshire: on an average about one acre in four enclosed by private act, but rising on the chalk downs to more than one in two.
There is, too, a marked contrast in landscape history between the west of the county and the east.
PLATE 72.
The Welland Valley, south Leicestershire.
On the far side of the meadows of the River Welland are the regular fields of parliamentary enclosure.
These date from the late eighteenth century.
PLATE 73.
The landscape of parliamentary enclosure on King s Sedgemoor Somerset Levels.
The large drain was cut following an Act of Enclosure in 1791.
It created a twelve-mile long new course for the River Cary which then allowed the reclamation of the land alongside it.
PLATE 74.
The landscape of parliamentary enclosure at Exning, Suffolk.
The overall pattern of the fields is the result of planning by the late eighteenth-century enclosure surveyors.
The broad tree belts along the former hedges are late nineteenth-century additions to protect valuable race horses.
Newmarket, the home of British racing, is only three miles away.
Outside this great tract of central England, the influence of parliamentary enclosure on the landscape dwindled rapidly in every direction.
In the six northern counties of England, it had very little effect on the landscape, except in the East Riding of Yorkshire.
Over large stretches of northern England not one acre in a hundred had been shaped by the Georgian planners.
It is the same all down the Welsh border, from Cheshire down to the Severn, and thence across the Severn to the three south-western counties of Somerset, Devon and Cornwall.
The landscapes of the Welsh border counties and of south-western England  have an entirely different history from those of the Midland Plain.
In the south of England, Dorset, Hampshire and Surrey were affected to some extent — again much more in some parts than others — but the south-eastern corner of England owes little or nothing to the enclosure commissioners.
Large tracts of country in this part of England, especially in Sussex, Kent and Essex, had anciently been thickly wooded and never brought within the open-field system.
When the forest was cleared, mostly from the twelfth century onwards, the small fields were enclosed directly from the wild state.
Both Essex and Kent are noted by John Hales in his Discourse of the Common Weal (1549) as mostly enclosed even in the middle of the sixteenth century.
As a result of recent work by Dr T Williamson, it now seems likely that much of the existing field pattern in central Norfolk is Roman or earlier.
Large areas of basically rectangular fields around which the narrow lanes wind are cut obliquely by Roman roads.
Much of the south-western part of Norfolk is covered by sandy soils the Breckland.
Most of this was heathland until the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries when it was largely enclosed.
East Anglia has a peculiar history also, so far as its landscape is concerned.
In both Norfolk and Suffolk the eastern and western halves of the county are noticeably different.
One sees this not only on the ground, travelling through these parts, but it is also brought out clearly on the Ordnance map.
Even if one had never visited this part of England, the map would suggest that there are fundamental differences in the way in which the landscapes of the two halves of the counties have evolved.
This is particularly striking in Norfolk.
In the east and centre of the county we find a close network of narrow, winding lanes, wandering from hamlet to hamlet and farm to farm, churches standing alone, isolated houses dotted all over the map, many of them called Hall or Old Hall — significant names.
It is a closely-packed map with hardly a straight line or an empty space in it.
The west of the county is entirely different, even to the casual glance of a motorist: far fewer lanes and by-ways, more villages, the whole landscape or map more ‘open’ altogether.
To put it broadly — ignoring all the smaller points of detail — one landscape has grown up piecemeal over centuries, the other is almost entirely planned on a large scale.
entirely planned on a large scale.
William Marshall, the best of the agricultural writers of his time, describes the landscape of east Norfolk as it was in 1787 in his Rural Economy of Norfolk .
The roads, notwithstanding King Charles was pleased to say the county of Norfolk was only fit to be cut into roads for the rest of his kingdom are unpardonably bad; narrow shaded and never mended; they are numerous however especially the bridle-roads; so that a traveller on horseback has generally the choice of two or three ways of nearly equal length to the same place…
The inclosures are in general small and the hedges high and full of trees.
This has a singular effect in travelling through the country: the eye seems ever on the verge of a forest which is as it were by enchantment continually changing into inclosures and hedgerows.
This is a typical landscape of ancient enclosure, as Marshall rightly observes, of fields taken in direct from woodland and waste in medieval times, such as we find in Devon, Sussex and the other peripheral counties of England.
The Date of Parliamentary Enclosure
Before we see how the enclosure commissioners replanned the landscape of central England, and how we can identify their work today, it is necessary to say something briefly about the dating of the parliamentary enclosure movement as a whole.
Practically the whole of this vast transformation was effected between 1750 and 1850, and, so far as the open fields alone were concerned, in the sixty years of George III's reign.
There were only eight private acts for enclosure in the whole of England before 1714, eighteen under George I (1714–27), and 229 under George II (1727–60), most of these in the latter part of  his reign.
The total area dealt with before 1760 could hardly have exceeded 400,000 acres, a negligible amount when one thinks of England as a whole — only just over one per cent.
In the next forty years no fewer than 1,479 enclosure acts were passed, dealing with nearly 2½ million acres.
Altogether, between 1761 and 1844, there were more than 2,500 acts, dealing with rather more than four million acres of open fields.
After the General Inclosure Act of 1845, there were another 164 awards which cleared up nearly 200,000 more of the remaining open field.
Besides the open arable fields, there were the extensive ‘wastes’ of various kinds.
These were mostly dealt with from 1800 onwards as the high prices of the war years brought more and more marginal land into cultivation.
More than five hundred acts had already enclosed three quarters of a million acres of ‘waste’ between 1760 and 1801.
During the nineteenth century, another thirteen hundred acts and awards brought, or attempted to bring, another one and a quarter million acres of heath and moor and commons under cultivation.
Some at least of this reclamation of the ‘waste’ by enclosure was a failure, for it was applied indiscriminately to good land and bad.
Much of the extensive heath country of Lincolnshire was successfully enclosed and converted into good arable land, but between Sleaford and Lincoln, Arthur Young saw, in the 1790s, ‘hundreds of acres in the veriest state of waste I ever saw land, whether appropriated or unappropriated, in this kingdom.
Half a dozen wild rabbits were all the stock I observed upon them with scarcely a blade or leaf of herbage to keep even these alive; doubtless through the folly or madness of the first occupiers (after appropriation) in converting them to arable farms instead of sheep walks and rabbit warrens’.
The New Landscape
The parliamentary enclosure movement had its most pronounced effects in the Midlands and in eastern England, in a solid block of sixteen counties.
The Record Offices of these counties possess a considerable number of awards made by the commissioners, often accompanied by a map showing the new lay-out of the parish, with the fields and roads marked out pretty much as we know them today.
Here and there minor changes in field boundaries may have been made during the past 150 or 200 years, but on the whole the enclosure map lays down the present-day pattern exactly.
In the same Record Offices there may exist — but in much smaller numbers — even more interesting maps which show the lay-out of the village and its open fields, with every strip separately shown, and all the other features of the fields, as they were on the eve of the enclosure.
It is a completely medieval picture.
Superimposed on this map of things as they were, one sometimes finds the lines drawn in by the commissioners showing where they propose to create the new fields and hedges, and the new roads, public and private.
One sees on such maps the new landscape actually in course of being planned, and can see how completely it was drawn afresh, regardless of almost everything that had gone before.
Such maps are rare.
The Leicestershire Record Office possesses only two, for the parishes of Stathern (1792) and South Croxton and Barsby (1798).
The Lincoln Record Office does not possess a single map of this kind, in an otherwise rich and varied collection of records.
Sadly it is no longer true that the present day pattern of fields is much the same as that shown on enclosure maps.
Thousands of miles of Midland and East Anglian hedges have been ripped out in the last thirty years or so to accommodate the new agricultural demands and techniques.
In many cases enclosure maps later Ordnance Survey maps and air photographs taken before 1950 are now the only record of a relatively short-lived type of the English landscape.
The Fields
By far the most conspicuous element in the new landscape were the small, hedged fields small, that is, by comparison with the vast open fields — that had preceded them, which usually ran to several hundred acres unbroken by a single hedge.
As far as possible the enclosure commissioners formed square or squarish fields.
Where we find long narrow fields they are nearly always adjacent to the village, lying behind or beside the ‘ancient homesteads’, as they are called in the awards.
These represent in most instances the crofts or separate paddocks of half an acre to an acre in size which have been hedged around since medieval times.
The new enclosures varied in size according to the size of the farms.
On small farms, of which there were great numbers in the Midlands and East Anglia — the holdings of the free peasantry, as we have seen — the new fields were usually five to ten acres in size.
On large farms they ran up to fifty or sixty acres.
But in grazing country these larger fields were soon reduced to a number of smaller fields of round about ten acres apiece.
Robert Bakewell (1725–95), experimenting with sheep and cattle-breeding on his farm in north Leicestershire, was convinced that ‘fifty acres of pasture ground divided into five enclosures will go as far in grazing cattle as sixty acres all in one piece’ and his opinion was shared by other big graziers.
Each ten-acre field in turn was grazed bare —'till; you could whip a mouse across it' — and the cattle moved round from one field to another so that they were always eating fresh, springing grass.
Not only were the new enclosures reduced to smaller fields for grazing purposes, but so were some, at least, of the older enclosures made generations or centuries earlier.
Thus we find a much more uniform field-pattern, uniform as regards both size and shape, than we might have expected in the grazing counties of central England.
Wherever the enclosure of the open arable fields resulted in conversion to pasture we find this regular field-pattern of straight hedges and squarish fields of roughly the same size.
We must not overstress this uniformity, for even in the Midlands there are considerable variations, but compared with the variety of landscape elsewhere in England, the Midland pattern is markedly monotonous.
The conversion of the former arable fields to small enclosed fields of pasture had therefore two visible effects on the landscape.
It tended to produce this monotonous field pattern, and it also produced ‘a continuous sheet of greensward’, as William Marshall observed of Leicestershire in 1790, instead of the multi-coloured patchwork of the old arable strips.
These changes were particularly noticeable in the contiguous counties of Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Warwickshire, Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, and to a lesser extent in the counties that marched with them.
They were most marked on the heavy clays that overlie most of the Midlands, which produced good pastures.
Where the clays gave way to the lighter soils of the Stone Belt, considerable areas of mixed farming remained.
Parts of Northamptonshire did not, for this reason, go as uniformly green as Leicestershire after enclosure.
Perhaps ‘monotonous’ is unfair.
The rolling Midland landscape, even despite the amount of modern hedgerow removal, still has much to offer in visual terms.
The most important aspect of it are the trees that still line the hedgerows even after the depredations of Dutch elm disease.
The profusion of trees in the field-sides of Midland England, especially when viewed from afar and from a vantage point, gives it a well-wooded appearance far in excess of what is actually there.
PLATE 75.
These high moorland stone-walled fields near Malham, West Yorkshire, were laid out in the eighteenth century.
They are not all of the same date.
Initially very large fields appeared and these were later often subdivided into smaller paddocks.
Elsewhere in England, enclosure — especially of the heaths and common pastures — had the opposite effect.
This was particularly true of the vast heathlands of western Norfolk and of Lincolnshire.
According to Arthur Young ‘half the county of Norfolk within the memory of man yielded nothing but sheep feed’, but by the end of the century was covered with fine barley, rye and wheat.
Even in east Norfolk there were localised patches of sandy heaths and commons, as at Felbrigg, a little inland from Cromer.
Here, in 1781, there were eight hundred acres of heath and common out of 1,467 acres in the parish as a whole.
The squire owned the entire parish, except one small farm, which he proceeded to buy on liberal terms from the yeoman who owned it.
Having obtained this, he set to work    to enclose the parish and to rearrange its landscape.
The least fertile part of the heath was left as a common for the poor to collect firing from.
The remainder, together with the open arable field, he divided into small squarish fields of eight to twelve acres each (sometimes more or less according to the convenience of the farmers) and parcelled out as farms among his tenants.
He then laid out public roads for the convenience of the parish, and private roads and driftways for the individual occupiers, and so completed the transformation of the entire parish except his own park.
Marshall, who gives these facts in his Rural Economy of Norfolk , supposes that three hundred acres of heathland were divided into thirty fields of ten acres each.
Each field, he reckons, would require about seven hundred yards of quickset hedges, so giving a total of some twelve miles of hedgerow even on this comparatively small area of land.
This was the visual transformation that enclosure brought about.
In place of a sandy, open heath, supporting a rough pasture, there would be a dozen miles of flowering hawthorn in time, enclosing small fields that were being assiduously marled to produce corn crops.
The greatest transformation of heathland into corn fields was to be found on the estates of the famous Coke of Holkham, in the north of Norfolk.
In the course of a long lifetime (1752–1842) he changed the entire face of this part of the country, through his own efforts and those of his imitators.
When he began farming on his own account in 1778 he found an open and almost barren country, much of it worth only five shillings an acre.
Chiefly by digging the underlying marl and spreading it over the sandy top-soil he converted it into rich cornlands and raised the value of his Holkham estate from £5,000 to £20,000 a year within fifteen years.
‘Half a century ago’, wrote Arthur Young in 1804, ‘Norfolk might be termed a rabbit and rye country.
In its northern part wheat was almost unknown, in the whole tract lying between Holkham and Lynn not an ear was to be seen, and it was scarcely believed that an ear could be made to grow.
Now the most abundant crops of wheat and barley cover the entire district.’
But even at the end of the eighteenth century there were still in Norfolk about eighty thousand acres of unimproved common, and some sixty thousand acres of warrens and sheep walks, most of which had been enclosed and converted to arable fields or woodlands by the middle of the nineteenth.
Hardly a county in England did not possess extensive heathlands.
Much of them are unreclaimed to this day, as in Dorset, Hampshire and Surrey.
But more than two million acres of ‘waste’ were successfully enclosed, divided into fields, and brought under cultivation by act of parliament, mostly during the course of the nineteenth century.
All this is a matter of statistics and arid generalities: but what the transformation of these local heaths meant to those who had grown up near them and upon them, what the change meant in detail , is revealed to us in the poetry of John Clare, who was born in 1793 on the edge of the heath country of northern Northamptonshire.
PLATE 76.
Though the massive reclamation of the eastern Fenlands began in the seventeenth century it was not entirely successful.
The land, particularly where it was peat-covered, sank as the water was removed and thus drainage involved lifting water out of the fields into high-level drains and rivers.
This was first achieved by crude wind-driven scoop wheels, similar to windmills.
From the 1820s huge steam engines were built which did the work much more effectively.
This engine house at Stretham, near Ely, Cambridgeshire, was built in 1830 and is typical of nineteenth-century pumping complexes.
The low right-hand block held the boilers, the tall central structure the beam engine and the narrow left-hand building a gigantic wheel with slats that scooped the water into the river.
The tiny shed to the left again houses a diesel engine, the more efficient successor to steam.
Clare was set to watch sheep and geese on Helpston heath as a child of seven, and spent years of his childhood, and of his later life, wandering over the heath and through the    patches of woodland that survived in the parish.
It was a small world of heath and wood, a few hundred acres at the most, but it was a separate world as Clare describes it, for example, in The Village Minstrel :
Swamps of wild rush-beds and sloughs' squashy traces, Grounds of rough fallows with thistle and weed, Flats and low vallies of kingcups and daisies, Sweetest of subjects are ye for my reed: Ye commons left free in the rude rags of nature, Ye brown heaths beclothed in furze as ye be, My wild eye in rapture adores every feature, Ye are dear as this heart in my bosom to me.
O native endearments!
I would not forsake ye, I would not forsake you for sweetest of scenes: For sweetest of gardens that nature could make me I would not forsake ye, dear valleys and greens: Tho' Nature ne'er dropped ye a cloud-resting mountain, Nor waterfalls tumble their music so free, Had Nature denied ye a bush, tree, or fountain, Ye still had been loved as an Eden by me.
In Clare's brief Journal , too, are entries that reveal the detail of the heath landscape.
On Wednesday 29 September 1824 he
Took a walk in the fields saw an old wood stile taken away from a favourite spot which it had occupied all my life the posts were overgrown with Ivy & it seemed so akin to nature & the spot where it stood as tho it had taken it on lease for an undisturbed existance it hurt me to see it was gone for my affections claims a friendship with such things but nothing is lasting in this world last year Langley Bush was destroyd an old white thorn that had stood for more than a century full of fame the gipsies shepherds & herdmen all had their tales of its history & it will be long ere its memory is forgotten.
Crabbe, in The Village , describes the heathland also, in a few savage lines.
Doubtless they describe the hard life of the villager and the poverty of his surroundings as Crabbe saw them: but he was not a peasant, as Clare was, and he saw them from the outside as harsh, ugly and wretched.
Clare's view of the heathland is the truer one, for it is the peasant's view from the inside, born in it and part of it.
Though he never idealised it or pretended it was anything but ‘the rude rags of nature’, he saw things in it to which Crabbe was completely blind or hostile, and he felt their loss when change and ‘improvement’ came:
Ye injur'd fields, ye once were gay, When Nature's hand displayed Long waving rows of willows grey And clumps of hawthorn shade; But now, alas! your hawthorn bowers All desolate we see!
The spoiler's axe their shade devours, And cuts down every tree.
Not trees alone have owned their force, Whole woods beneath them bowed, They turned the winding rivulet's course, And all thy pastures plough'd.
Clare is the only poet to describe the ragged, solitary heaths of England, though there is also Hardy's famous prose description of Egdon heath in Dorset.
But what is even more  remarkable is the entire absence of any poetry associated with the open fields, any lament in literature for their passing.
There is indeed plenty in print about them, but it is economic, argumentative stuff, mostly condemnatory and lacking in any understanding of what this old world meant to the peasant, and of what he lost by its passing.
Perhaps it is not remarkable, after all, that no poet should have described this world to us before it expired, described it in language that would bring home to us what kind of world it actually was and how its inhabitants looked upon it, for it was above all a peasant world and the peasant was inarticulate.
Clare was the great exception, an articulate peasant, and he might have described that world for us in all its natural beauty and its deep associations for the human race — twelve or thirteen centuries of unbroken continuity — but he came almost too late for this kind of England.
By the time he began writing, about the time of Waterloo, the open fields had nearly disappeared.
In his own parish the changes had been begun immediately after the passing of the act in 1809, while Clare was still a mooning youth.
It is true that there were still considerable patches of open field left in some parts of the country: at Castor, which adjoined Helpston on the south, the fields remained open until 1898: but the Helpston fields had all been enclosed by 1820.
One must have been born and have worked all one's life in such a landscape to understand its secret life, to be able to feel its poetry, and to express it.
The English peasantry threw up only one John Clare, and he was born too late to experience this ancient world to the full.
He saw only its remnants in the unenclosed heaths.
The result is that we know nothing about it except its external face, how its economy worked, and that has mostly been described by unsympathetic observers.
Of what it felt like to live in such a world we are, and must for ever remain, entirely ignorant.
One should not be too overwhelmed by the possible beauties of the unenclosed heath and marsh land.
It was also the setting for a way of life harsh in all its details, and often uncomfortable and brutally short.
PLATE 77.
A Thomas Beswick engraving in the 1795 edition of Oliver Goldsmith's ‘Deserted Village'
Hedgerows and Trees
The new fields were hedged around with quickset, whitethorn, or hawthorn, to give its alternative names, with a shallow ditch on one side or both sides of the fence.
In the upland stone country, dry-walling took the place of hedges.
At first the hedges were no more than double rows of seedlings protected by a rail on one side or both, but after twenty years the thorns had grown high enough to be cut and laid, a practice which William Marshall describes as the latest improvement in his Rural Economy of the Midland Counties in 1790.
Throughout the east Midlands ash trees were planted along the hedges, less often the elm, usually spaced out at wide intervals.
Possibly this comparative scarcity of trees in the east Midland hedgerows — in Northamptonshire and Leicestershire especially — arises from consideration for fox-hunting.
In Leicestershire organised fox-hunting developed during the 1770s, in time to enjoy the exhilaration of galloping over miles of unfenced country.
Enclosure made things more difficult, or perhaps we should say necessitated new and exciting skills, but at least there were no close ranks of trees to make the fences impossible.
Indeed, the first effect of enclosure was to reduce the number of trees in thinly wooded country, for the new fences — hundreds of miles of them — required vast quantities of oak, elm, and ash saplings for posts and rails.
Clare, once more, was in no doubt about the diminution of woodland after enclosure:
Ye fields, ye scenes so dear to Lubin's eye,
Ye meadow-blooms, ye pasture-flowers, farewell!
Ye banish'd trees, ye make me deeply sigh —
Inclosure came, and all your glories fell:
E'en the old oak that crown'd yon rifled dell,
Whose age had made it sacred to the view,
Not long was left his children's fate to tell;
Where ignorance and wealth their course pursue,
Each tree must tumble down —‘old Lea-Close Oak, adieu!
Fox-hunting had another effect upon the Midland landscape, and that was the creation of artificial fox-covers.
The enclosure of heaths and commons reduced the extent of natural gorse patches where a fox could hide.
Good arable farmers grubbed them up.
To get more foxes and to get them distributed more evenly over the country, gorse covers and spinneys were started by hunting landlords in well-chosen spots.
These were not less than two acres in size, and rarely more than twenty acres.
Some of these covers were actually odd pieces of common land, old cow-pastures that had been allowed to get out of hand, taken over by the fox-hunters for fencing and preservation, in return for a money payment to the holders of the common rights.
Such were Ashby Pastures or Cossington Gorse in east Leicestershire, in the ‘Quorn country’.
These ‘gorses’ filled up the odd corners of parishes, and may be quickly spotted on the Ordnance map.
Other covers were planted with trees, and fenced around by large fox-hunting landlords like Aylesford or Sir Francis Burdett, the radical politician, who hunted in Leicestershire in the 1820s.
Most of these covers were made in the late eighteenth century or the early nineteenth, and often give away their date in their names.
The famous Botany Bay cover of east Leicestershire dates from the 1790s, when the convict settlement was in the news.
The one-inch maps of the east Midland counties are splashed all over with these shreds of green, usually distinguishable from true, ancient woodland by their small size and their regular shape.
In the landscape itself, they    are a very noticeable feature for they are often the only clump of trees anywhere in sight over thousands of acres.
PLATE 78.
A typical enclosure road at Duxford, Cambridgeshire, laid out in 1830 when the open fields of the parish were swept away.
Its overall width is greater than the needs of the twentieth century but it was designed for moving herds of animals, not for the motor car.
The fox-hunting country was perhaps a special case.
Over most of enclosed England, the small fields were hedged around with hawthorn fences, more or less thickly interspersed with ash and elm — the great trees of the Midlands — which when they were full grown gave the appearance of an almost continuous wood, especially when seen from an eminence.
This is perhaps the most characteristic feature of any large view in the Midland Plain.
Ash and elm were planted in the hedgerows, and the flashing grey-green willow along the banks of the streams.
These are the three trees that dominate any Midland view in the deep country.
The greater part of the hedges is, however, made of white hawthorn.
Some of these hawthorns, with their gnarled, twisted and burnished trunks, probably date from the first enclosure of the fields five or six generations ago.
The hawthorn is the oldest of the hedgerow trees, for it gets its name from the Old English word haga , ‘a hedge’ or ‘an enclosure’, and it was used from Saxon times onwards to make impenetrable fences — the hedge-thorn.
In the Midlands it is the tree one sees most often: and for a brief spell in early sum-mer it is the most beautiful of all the Midland trees, with its continuous miles of white may blossom glimmering as far as the eye can see.
W.H. Hudson says somewhere that 18 May is the crown of the English summer: in the Midland fields on that day these miles of snowy hedges reach perfection, so dense and far-reaching that the entire atmosphere is saturated with the bitter-sweet smell whichever way the summer wind is blowing.
From the hedgerow trees near and far come the calls of countless cuckoos, and the lesser sounds of an infinite number of small birds.
This description of the hawthorn hedges of the Midlands is again, alas, no longer true in most places.
The modern practice of flailing the remaining hedges with crude machinery has not only destroyed the possibility of such views, but has also led to a considerable reduction of bird and animal life The landscape is much poorer both visually and in content than it was thirty years ago.
The thousands of miles of new hedgerows in the Midland countryside, when they came to full growth after a generation, added enormously to the bird population, especially with the extermination of the larger hawks and kites as pests, a process that is abundantly recorded in the church-wardens' accounts or the field-reeves' books of Midland villages.
Millions of small birds now sing in the hedges and spinneys.
But it was not all gain.
The heathland birds have disappeared over large areas, and become rarer altogether.
The whole balance of the bird population altered where these changes were going on in the landscape.
There were more hedges but fewer heaths; in some parts less arable than ever before, in other parts more than ever before; and the coming of the canals about the same time also introduced new varieties of birds to districts where they had previously never been known.
There is only one other thing to be said about the hedgerows of parliamentary enclosure, and that is when precisely they were made.
Most enclosure awards, if not all, expressly stipulated that those who received allotments of land under the award were to fence these allotments within twelve months.
This gives us, if we know the date of the award (which is easy to discover), the exact date of all the external fences or hedges, but it does not tell us the date of the internal fences on the bigger allotments.
Where a biggish landowner received an allotment of two, three or four hundred acres, he would put a ringfence around the whole within the specified twelve months, but he might not divide up his allotment into smaller fields until some years later.
It is a small point, perhaps, but not without some historical interest in the evolution of the English landscape.
Henry Alken's hunting print The Death , dated 1824, appears to show such a landscape around Ab Kettleby, in the ‘wold’ country to the north-west of Melton Mowbray.
The parish had been enclosed as far back as 1761 — two generations earlier — but Alken's view still gives a general impression of wide spaces and open views.
There are indeed several hedges to be seen, but the hedged areas are mostly still very large and the landscape as a whole not unlike that of the Cotswolds in its feeling of great space and skies.
But where a parish was mostly in the hands of a small peasantry, and this was true of a great many parishes in Midland and eastern England, the effect would have been entirely different.
In such parishes as these the present field and hedge pattern was laid down in the year following the enclosure award, for the allotments would have been many and small.
Not all parishes enclosed by parliamentary act immediately sprang fully-hedged into view.
Indeed, the immediate effect of enclosure in most places must have been a feeling of nakedness and rawness in the landscape, until the hedgerow trees were well-grown:
O samely naked leas, so bleak, so strange!…
The storm beats chilly on its naked breast,
No shelter grows to shield, no home invites to rest,
says Clare about his native Helpston in the years after its enclosure, and that must have been true of most parishes that underwent the great transformation.
Roads
A great number of new by-roads came into existence as a result of the enclosure movement.
They are immediately recognisable on the one-inch map by the manner in which they run from village to village practically straight across country, with perhaps an occasional sudden right-angled bend and then on again.
More significantly still, these straight roads sometimes do not run to the nearest village but continue for some miles through open country, reaching the villages by means of side-roads.
There is none of that apparently aimless wandering in short stretches, punctuated by frequent bends, going halfway round the compass to reach the next hamlet or village, which characterises the byroads in country that has never been in open field or left it several centuries ago.
On the six-inch and the twenty-five-inch maps, too, the parliamentary enclosure roads stand out conspicuously with their wide grass verges.
The road runs like a grey ribbon between verges full of tall grasses, cow-parsley and dog-roses, as may be seen above all in the Lincolnshire Wolds.
But they are to be found in any of the ‘enclosure counties’ and may be identified immediately as the work of the enclosure commissioners.
In the parish of Norton-by-Twycross, on the borders of Warwickshire and Leicestershire, the award of 1748 specifies that the road to London, which is here the main road between Burton-on-Trent and Atherstone, should be not less than thirty-three yards wide.
The lesser main road from Twycross to the local market-town of Ashby de la Zouch was to have a minimum width of twenty-two yards; and the other roads of the parish were to be ‘of a proper width’.
The immense width of the two main roads, one with a minimum width of practically a hundred feet and the other of sixty-six feet, reflects the state of even the main roads before the days of the turnpikes and above all of the scientific roadmaking initiated by Metcalf and Macadam in the late eighteenth century.
Roads that carried any considerable amount of through-traffic had to be wide enough, and could be wide enough in unenclosed country, to allow of detours around the impassable stretches that developed in unsurfaced roads by mid-winter.
The main London to Exeter ‘road’ was said to have been a quarter of a mile wide by the end of the winter where it crossed — or rather plunged through — the sticky morass of the chalk on Salisbury Plain.
It seems to have been a fairly general rule in the later enclosure awards that the minimum width for inter-village roads should be forty feet between the ditches, though local roads carrying more than the average traffic for the district were often laid down forty-five or fifty feet wide.
In Somerset, public roads were usually forty feet wide, of which — in 1795 — twelve feet were stoned to a depth of a foot in the middle and nine inches at the sides.
This would leave verges of fourteen    feet width on each side, if the paved road were dead in the middle.
Often it was not, and the grass verge was very much wider on one side than the other.
On most local roads today this width has hardly varied.
All over the Midlands and Lincolnshire one finds roads with an overall width of forty feet, having a surface about fourteen or fifteen feet wide and grass verges of twelve or thirteen feet on each side.
It seems likely that a forty-foot width was regarded as the minimum for an unsurfaced road, allowing for detours as the winter went on, but when scientific roadmaking began these great widths were no longer necessary.
Only a relatively narrow width was surfaced with stone, and the remainder was left under grass as we see it today.
It is kept within bounds by county councils, but on the less frequented roads the cow-parsley, the dog-rose and the blackberry bramble flourish by the wayside.
Some of these byroads have developed a heavier traffic since they were first laid out, and in these instances it has been an easy matter to take in more of the verges and to widen the road surface.
The established main roads that had been used for traffic between the medieval towns, and had made their own width with the usage of centuries, were generally left untouched by any parish awards.
So the Fosse Way, which at one time had been the main road from medieval Coventry to Leicester, was ordered in the Sharnford award of 1765 to be ‘of the same width as it hath heretofore usually been’.
Even so, quick set hedges were planted on either side of these roads to fence them in, where formerly they had wandered at large .
It is sometimes said that the public roads laid out by the enclosure commissioners followed the lines of the medieval footpaths and bridle paths between the villages, paths that had been trodden out first in Anglo-Saxon times.
But this is by no means always true.
The strip map of Barsby and South Croxton, already referred to, shows the public roads of these two parishes to be laid out on almost entirely new lines.
Here and there they pick up and make use of the old common balks in the former open fields, which must have been the usual way of proceeding from one village to another in open-field country, but for the most part they are drawn straight across the old furlongs and strips regardless of all considerations but that of directness.
Since the furlongs, strips and balks were all to be swept away in the ensuing award and a new field system devised, it was only natural that the commissioners should do this.
The Stathern map of 1792 shows the same planning of new roads in more or less straight lines and judging by what the Ordnance map shows in other parts of the Midlands and eastern England the same thing happened fairly generally.
A local variant of these wide lanes and roads is on the fenlands of eastern England.
There too the Enclosure Commissioners laid down wide droves. in order to produce access to the new fields.
Despite this, on the marshy peat fens, even limited traffic reduced them to an impassable morass for long periods of the year.
Most had to be ploughed flat every spring to enable them to be used at all.
Such conditions produced a very isolated way of life for fenland farmers.
Indeed, it was not until 1940 that under the demands of world conflict and with cost almost no object, the War Agricultural Committees laid down thousands of miles of concrete roads along the droveways throughout the fens.
These roads not only allowed the fenlands to be exploited to the full for the first time, they also changed the way of life there, to an extent never seen before or since.
PLATE 79.
Gidding Grove Farm, Great Gidding, Huntingdonshire (Cambridgeshire), is a very typical east Midland enclosure farmstead.
It was built in the early nineteenth century, soon after the enclosure of the medieval fields of the parish and still remains surrounded by the regular hawthorn-hedged fields planned by the enclosure surveyor.
It actually consists of a large farmhouse and farm buildings, together with two groups of farm cottages.
Its total population in the mid-nineteenth century was probably in excess of many medieval hamlets or even small villages.
Another reason for such sharp changes of alignment in otherwise straight enclosure roads is parish boundaries.
It was rare for two adjacent parishes to be enclosed simultaneously and thus the Commissioners in one parish would draw their new road to join existing tracks through next parish.
When the latter were realigned or made anew they often met the earlier roads at a sharp angle on the parish boundaries.
Often, however, it is clear that the commissioners took over an existing track between two villages and straightened it a little, without going to the extreme length of drawing entirely new roads.
Where a road which bears all the marks of having been laid out by the enclosure commissioners makes, at longish intervals, a sudden right-angled bend, sometimes two bends in quick succession, one can be pretty certain that though it was planned by the commissioners it follows an even older line from one village to the next, a line which had deviated in the same way around the heads of medieval furlongs.
These right-angled bends in the road, whatever the date of the enclosure award may be, reflect some stage in the medieval colonisation of the parish when a new furlong, brought in from the waste perhaps in the twelfth or the thirteenth century, cut across the direct path to the next village and forced it to make a sudden turn for a few yards before resuming its onward course.
Even a Roman road might be interfered with in this way and diverted from its ancient line; and in the course of time its exact line became lost and the subject of an archaeological problem today.
One sees all these little points of landscape in walking round the parish of Helpston, but they can be found in many parishes in these parts of England.
Farmhouses
With the enclosure of the open fields and the redistribution of the land mostly in compact blocks instead of strips scattered all over the parish, one would have expected the old open-field village to disintegrate as the village farmers built new farmsteads on their allotments.
Often, it is true, the commissioners drew the new boundaries so as to come to a point in the village where the ancient homestead lay, so that the farmer need not be disturbed from his old home.
They did this, for example, at Middle Barton in north Oxfordshire.
But it was not always possible to do this: the mere facts of topography were against it: and a great number of farms had to be created well away from the village.
In such cases it was to the obvious advantage of the farmer to build himself a new farmstead in the middle of his lands.
This, indeed, is what happened in due course, but the old village was far from disintegrated by such new building unless it was already very small and decaying.
Often many years elapsed before the village farmers built their new houses, however inconvenient it may have been to live in the centre of the parish and to farm on the boundaries.
Enclosure had been an exceedingly expensive business, not only the heavy legal costs which worked out on an average at about £1 an acre (but were sometimes much heavier), but also the costs of making hundreds of yards of fences, which were heavier still.
Many of the smaller farmers continued to live therefore in the ancestral homestead on the village street, but carried out no repairs to it and gradually allowed it to decay.
When the old house was practically uninhabitable, they or their sons built a new farmstead in the midst of their own fields and migrated from the village.
That is why one sees so many Victorian farmhouses in red brick in the midst of the fields in these parts of England.
On the other hand, the larger graziers, for the most part prosperous men, built themselves new farmsteads almost at once.
In the adjoining parishes of Sileby and Seagrave, in mid-Leicestershire, one finds on the map such farm names as Quebec, Belle Isle, Hanover and Bunkers Hill, and New York not so far away, pleasant Georgian red-brick houses with white doorways gleaming across the home meadow.
It is easy enough to guess when these parishes were enclosed.
At Wiseton, in the Nottinghamshire plain between the Idle and the Trent, one landlord — Jonathan Ackham — built seven new homesteads on central sites on his estate after enclosure.
Yet the total number of farmsteads built out in the fields between the villages is very small.
One would guess not more than half a dozen in the average parish, often fewer than that.
There was rarely any sign of the village breaking up physically as a result of enclosure, whatever happened to it spiritually and culturally.
The dates of outlying farmsteads elucidate the uneven process of the development of enclosure landscapes.
At Swaffham Bulbeck in Cambridgeshire the act of parliament which led to the removal of the open fields and the break-up of the chalk downlands beyond was passed in 1800.
Yet of the associated farmsteads, one was built about 1802, another in 1812 and another in 1830 and a fourth in 1833.
On the other hand in part of Wychwood Forest in Oxfordshire, the first trees were cut down in October 1856 following an act of parliament.
Sixteen months later, in January 1858. the first tenants were already in their new farmhouses.
PLATE 80.
Quebec Farm, Sileby, Leicestershire, was built out in the new fields, away from the village, in 1760.
It was named after Wolfe's famous victory in Canada in the same year.
There were good reasons why the nucleated village should survive more or less intact.
In the first place, the ownership of land and the occupation of farms was concentrated into far fewer hands in the eighteenth century than they had been in the medieval village.
There is no need to labour this point, for every parish in England shows evidence of this tendency to concentrate ownership and occupation in the course of several centuries.
Rider Haggard, in Rural England , gives a striking example of this: when the manor of Feckenham, in east Worcestershire, was surveyed in 1591, sixty-three different owners held    some 2,900 acres.
By 1900 there were only six owners, who held all this and another three thousand acres besides.
* Whatever the actual figures in any particular parish, the number of Georgian farmers was generally only a fraction of the number there had been in the medieval or Tudor village.
In other words, there remained at the time of the parliamentary enclosure only half a dozen farmers who wished to build in the new fields.
Then again, the population of the country as a whole was rising fairly quickly at the time of the enclosure movement, especially in the industrial villages of the Midlands, and there was a demand for houses.
Old and roomy yeoman farmhouses, those that had not been suffered to decay too far, were cut up into two or three cottages for a new class of ‘industrial poor’.
So far from disintegrating, the open-field village often grew larger after enclosure: larger, but often more squalid, for there was generally more poverty than there had been before.
Nevertheless, a new element had been introduced into the landscape in this part of England — the isolated farmstead.
Nearly all the farmhouses we see between the compact villages of the country between the Yorkshire and the Dorset coasts date from the century 1750–1850.
The few that are older may be either the result of Tudor or Stuart enclosure, or examples of monastic granges which have already been discussed.
But probably four out of five of these farmsteads in the fields are the consequence of parliamentary enclosure.
On the vast tracts of Lincoln Heath, stretching north and south of the city for some seventy miles, Arthur Young found ‘a large range which formerly was covered with heath, gorse, etc., yielding in fact little or no produce, converted by enclosure to profitable arable farms…and a very extensive country all studded with new farmhouses, offices, and every appearance of thriving industry…’
On the map this Heath presents an absolutely typical picture of a planned landscape: dead straight by-roads, almost empty spaces between the villages, solitary farmsteads sparingly dotted about and reached by occupation roads running off the public roads, a vast landscape utterly bare of woodland except for neat little fox covers, square or rectangular patches of green for the most part.
There is, too, another marked feature of this piece of country which is characteristic of all country enclosed from open fields or common of any kind.
It is the complete absence of any lanes .
It is this, more than anything else, which makes the map of this sort of country look so empty when compared with the map of anciently enclosed country in say mid Sussex, Essex or Devon.
Lanes — true lanes that is, deep and winding — are characteristic of country fabricated piecemeal with small medieval implements.
In recently enclosed country we have instead an open regular mesh of by-roads, and a few field-paths and bridle-roads to fill in the larger spaces between the villages.
In Leicestershire, the man who wishes to forget income-tax, hydrogen bombs and the relentless onward march of science walks the field-paths, to which special maps and guides are provided; in Devon he takes to the deep lanes between the farms.
It is a fundamental difference in landscape history.
Such was the landscape created by the enclosure commissioners.
But we must never forget that every few miles, even in the middle of this orderly landscape, an older scene may make its appearance.
In passing from one parish to another, in simply crossing a nameless brook or road, we may step back into fields that were created, not by the commissioners of Georgian times, but by the Tudor squire or perhaps even by his monastic predecessors in the fifteenth century.
This is an important point and one now increasingly difficult to see.
Despite massive emigration, both abroad and to the new industrial towns, most villages doubled in population between 1800 and 1850.
The increased numbers of people were housed by splitting up existing houses so that even modest cottages had sometimes up to twenty people living in them.
Conditions were perhaps better than in the new urban areas but a good deal worse than in earlier times.
Today the cottages are being largely restored to what purports to be their former glory, occupied by middle-class commuters with the standard family) size of 4. 4 people.
Thus if we are walking in the pastoral, remote country on the borders of Leicestershire and Rutland, following the Eye brook as it makes its way south through undulating fields to the Welland, we pass in a walk of nine or ten miles through a landscape modelled in five different centuries, and this in a part of England that is generally accounted somewhat dull, the monotonous product of parliamentary enclosure.
We leave the main Uppingham to Leicester road at Allexton, a parish which is recorded as fully enclosed by 1555.
Two miles      or so to the south lies the village of Stockerston, now shrunk almost to a hamlet, with its attractive Perpendicular church standing alone on the hillside — a sure sign of some interesting change in village history.
Here we know that the enclosure of the open fields began in the 1570s, and had been completed by some date in the seventeenth century.
The field-pattern we see is three to four hundred years old.
Another half-hour's walk brings us to the site of a village which has disappeared altogether — the deserted village of Holyoak, now remembered by the solitary farmstead of Holyoaks Lodge.
Here in the winter of 1496, Sir Robert Brudenell evicted thirty people from their small, open-field arable farms to make way for his cattle-pastures.
The record tells us that ‘they have departed thence, and are either idle or have perished’.
Holyoak was only a hamlet.
Only five or six farms were involved in this tragedy; but for a few minutes at least we traverse fields brought into being by the high-handed action of a fifteenth-century squire, and pass by the mounds where the hamlet of Holyoak once stood.
Up in the hills to our right lies Nevill Holt, now only a church, a park and a great house.
Here, too, the village has gone — probably deserted by Elizabethan times.
Certainly all the fields were enclosed by the year 1572.
PLATE 81.
The landscape of parliamentary enclosure in Wensleydale, North Yorkshire.
Set amongst rectangular stone-walled fields, the farmstead is a typical example of the late enclosures of the upland wastes.
FIG. 12.
THE PATTERN OF PARLIAMENTARY ENCLOSURE IN NORTH HERTFORDSHIRE AND SOUTH CAMBRIDGESHIRE This ‘open’ pattern of compact villages and few roads and lanes should be compared with Fig. 7, which shows the ‘close’pattern of early medieval colonisation on the heavy London Clays of south-east Hertfordshire.
Here; in north Hertfordshire and south Cambridgeshire, we are on the chalk land, cleared of its woodland cover in pre-Saxon times.
It was settled by the Old English in compact villages such as Ashwell and Litlington, which were surrounded by large open fields.
Many of these open fields survived into the nineteenth century, those of Bygrave and Ashwell into the twentieth century.
Farmsteads are still rare outside the villages: the few that exist were mostly built after the parliamentary enclosure of the parishes.
The landscape of straight roads, often unfenced, and of small geometrical plantations, is characteristic of this late period.
Reproduced by permission from the 1-inch map of the Ordnance Survey.
Then we emerge from these gentle hills into the broad levels of the Welland valley, and here, in the parishes of Great Easton and Bringhurst, we enter a landscape produced entirely (as far as we know) by the parliamentary enclosure of 1804–6.
Another couple of miles up the valley and we are at Medbourne, the last bastion of the open fields in Leicestershire, enclosed in the year 1842.
From Allexton to Medbourne is only five miles straight across the hills, yet we have passed through a period of some three hundred and fifty years in the history of the landscape.
Perhaps even longer: for Thomas Palmer had a grant of free warren at Holt as far back as 1448 and this may be the beginning of the park of Nevill Holt.
If so, this piece of Leicestershire landscape is the product of various forces over a space of four hundred years.
So, behind every generalisation, there lies the infinite variety and beauty of the detail; and it is the detail that matters, that gives pleasure to the eye and to the mind, as we traverse, on foot and unhurried, the landscape of any part of England.
The landscape in this area of south-east Cambridgeshire and north-east Hertfordshire is certainly very different from that in Fig 7 only a few miles to the south-east; until the nineteenth century it was a land of open fields.
Whether all the villages were settled by the Old English is much more doubtful.
Ashwell is certainly a planned village in its present form, perhaps of twelfth-century date as may be Steeple Morden and Wallington.
Baldock is a ‘new town’ created by the Knights Templar on a formerly empty site soon after 1148.
Its name is a corruption of Baghdad.
It was apparently intended to be the north Hertfordshire commercial equivalent of Baghdad!
The numbers of ‘tumuli’— burial mounds of the Bronze Age — as well as the site of Arbury Banks — are but a pale reflection of the dense prehistoric and later settlement in this area.
Other more recent discoveries show that the area was already fully occupied and settled by at least 1000 Bc.
7
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION AND THE LANDSCAPE
Introduction
There is, surprisingly perhaps, very little that can be added to Professor Hoskins' account of industrial landscapes.
This is in part a result of his excellent description and analysis which, despite his obvious dislike of the landscapes of industry, have stood the test of time.
But it is also a consequence of the academic stagnation over the last few years of much that is called industrial archaeology in England.
The study of industry by economic historians has progressed apace, but the understanding of industry in its landscape has not advanced very far.
Much of the study of industrial remains is still at the level of recording ‘nuts and bolts’.
There is also a major preoccupation with ‘firsts’ and a consequent lack of appreciation of the difference between invention and commercial exploitation.
In two major respects the landscape of industry has changed since Professor Hoskins wrote.
First, the pace of change and economic developments during the last twenty years or so have altered the landscapes he described very considerably.
Not only have major industries virtually collapsed but their sites have often been totally cleared.
In addition much of the associated housing has also been removed and replaced by dwellings which although sometimes materially better appointed are not always aesthetically or socially better.
As a result, almost nothing remains of, say, the pottery industry of Stoke on Trent and its neighbouring towns and most of the Lancashire and west Yorkshire textile mills have been abandoned, demolished or are under threat.
Steel-making in the west Midlands has ceased and not only have many of the traditional coal-mining areas declined but the winding gear, pit-head buildings and tramways have gone and even tips have been levelled and landscaped.
In essence, then, there is far less to see of the history of industrial landscapes than there was even a few years ago.
In the meantime new industrial landscapes have developed.
Few are any more attractive than those they have replaced, despite the work of designers and landscape architects.
Featureless sheds surrounded by the requisite area of unkempt grass and undersized dying trees as well as an extensive car park is the norm for most types of modern industry.
Nor are the worst of modern industrial landscapes in the traditional areas.
One of the most depressing parts of England is the north side of the Thames Estuary around Thurrock, best viewed from the M25, travelling fast.
Even nineteenth-century industrialists at their worst did not quite approach this.
With the demise of the traditional industrial landscapes nostalgia for them has grown.
As a result various sites of former industrial activities have been taken over, cleaned up and displayed to the public in order to show what a real industrial area was never like.
The great trans-shipment complex for the riches mined from the valleys at Morwellham, near Tavistock in Devon, is now a far cry from its original form, while Coalbrookdale, despite gallant work on it, is quite unlike it was in its heyday.
The ‘sanitisation’ of industrial sites, and indeed much else in tourist England, produces a very unreal picture of the harsh realities of life in these places.
Perhaps this is inevitable, but what we see today must not be taken as a true vision of the past.
It is also a curious fact that the older the remains of industry are the better they are regarded.
The earliest industrial sites are now often looked after as carefully as those of abbeys and castles.
Places where specific industrial processes were developed are tourist attractions, as at Coalbrookdale.
The remains of eighteenth-century lead mines on the Pennines are preserved.
Coal-pits of the sixteenth century, on the Clee Hills in Shropshire, are meticulously recorded by archaeologists while medieval quarries such as those at Barnack, Cambridgeshire, are protected.
Perhaps the most remarkable of all, the Norfolk Broads, which are actually nothing more than the flooded workings of a huge medieval peat extraction industry, have recently been raised to the status of an Environmentally Sensitive Area and given their own Planning Authority.
PLATE 82.
Industrial redevelopment, Gateshead, Tyneside.
The old industries of the north-east of England have now died.
New ones are slowly appearing, producing a very different landscape.
Professor Hoskins disliked industrial towns, a fact which is obvious from his comments on them.
While this a reasonable attitude, it   sometimes distorted his judgement.
There is no doubt that conditions in these towns, particularly in the first half of the nineteenth century, were dreadful but Professor Hoskins seems more anxious to apportion blame for this than to explain why it happened, which is perhaps more important.
PLATE 83.
Iron ore quarrying.
Scunthorpe.
South Humberside.
Ironstone was a major extractive industry which, from the late nineteenth century onwards, engulfed many thousands of acres of land in Northamptonshire and north Lincolnshire.
Some of it has been reclaimed for housing, new industry or agriculture but much remains to disfigure the landscape.
Moreover he omits, virtually without mention, the extraordinary improvements made in English industrial life, and elsewhere, in the second half of the nineteenth century and which made many of these towns what they are today.
Water supply, which produced great reservoirs, gas supply and electricity, paved roads, urban transport, waste disposal and considerable numbers of public buildings and parks, all had a dramatic effect on the landscape and so their omission is serious.
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION AND THE LANDSCAPE.
The Early Industrial Landscape
England was still a peaceful agricultural country at the beginning of the seventeenth century.
Though she was passing through what has been called her first industrial revolution, there was as yet little to show for it in the landscape.
Quarries and coal-pits were numerous in certain localities, salt-works and glassworks were flourishing, the cloth industry was growing; but so far as the visible signs upon the face of the country were concerned it was all a mere scratching on the surface.
Neither Leland nor Camden has much to say about industry in England; and there was nothing that could be specifically called an industrial landscape.
Perhaps the multitude of coal-pits near the Tyne were beginning to wear that look, and Camden observed in the 1580s that Sussex ‘is full of iron mines, all over it; for the casting of which there are furnaces up and down the country, and abundance of wood is yearly spent; many streams are drawn into one channel, and a great deal of meadow ground is turned into ponds and pools for the driving mills by the flashes, which, beating with hammers upon the iron, fill the neighbourhood round about it, night and day with continual noise.’
The iron industry, centred in the Wealden woods, was steadily changing the face of the landscape in this region from the middle of the sixteenth century onwards, and a good deal remains to be seen by the historically minded traveller.
By the end of the seventeenth century the industrial landscape was much more evident.
Yarranton in 1677 thought there were more people within a radius of ten miles of Dudley, and ‘more money returned in a year’, than in the whole of four Midland farming counties.
This was pretty certainly an exaggeration, but it shows unmistakably that the Black Country (though this name had yet to be invented) was in process of creation.
The early industrial landscapes differed essentially from those that developed with steam-power.
They showed a thick scattering of settlement, of cottages and small farmhouses dotted about all over the place, and a corresponding splitting up of fields into small crofts and paddocks.
It was a ‘busy’ landscape, full of detail and movement, like one of Breughel's paintings, not a massive conglomeration of factories and slums.
The Black Country in its early days was still country, ‘a countryside in course of becoming industrialised; more and more a strung-out web of iron-working villages, market towns next door to collieries, heaths and wastes gradually and very slowly being covered by the cottages of nailers and other persons carrying on industrial occupations in rural surroundings’.
The typical figure was that of the craftsman-farmer, combining, say, a smithy with a smallholding, living in his own small balanced economy; hence the minuteness of the detail in the picture.
One still finds traces of this kind of landscape on the fringes of the Black Country, as for example in the hamlet of Lower Gornal, in the hills to the north-west of Dudley.
Defoe gives us a splendid picture of an industrial landscape in the time of Queen Anne or shortly after.
It is the landscape of the cloth industry in the neighbourhood of Halifax before the revolutionary changes brought about by the invention of power-driven machinery:
The nearer we came to  Halifax , we found the houses thicker, and the villages greater in every bottom; and not only so, but the sides of the hills, which were very steep every way, were spread with houses, and that very thick; for the land being divided into small enclosures, that is to say, from two acres to six or seven acres each seldom more; every three or four pieces of land had a house belonging to it.
…This division of land into small pieces, and the scattering of the dwellings, was occasioned by, and done for the convenience of the business which the people were generally employ'd in…
PLATE 84.
Engine houses, Minions, Bodmin Moor, Cornwall.
Here the landscape is still littered with the remains of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century mining industry.
This particular landscape had its origin in two sources — the outcropping of coal, and the presence of running water everywhere, even on the tops of the hills.
Wherever Defoe passed a house he found a little rill of running water.
If the house was above the road, it came from it, and cross'd the way to run to another; if the house was below us, it cross'd us from some other distant house above it, and at every considerable house was a manufactory or work-house, and as they could not do their business without water, the little streams were so parted and guided by gutters and pipes, and by turning and dividing the streams, that none of those houses were without a river, if I may call it so, running into and through their work-houses.
The coal-pits near the tops of the hills were worked in preference to those lower down, for various reasons.
The coal was easier to come at, water presented less of a drainage problem, and the pack-horses could go up light and come down laden.
Every clothier kept a horse or two, to carry his coal from the pit, to fetch home his wood and his provisions from the market, to take his yarn to the weavers, his cloth to the fulling-mill and finally to the cloth market to be sold.
He also kept two or three cows for the sustenance of the family, and so required two, three or four pieces of enclosed land around his house.
Having thus fire and water at every dwelling, there is no need to enquire why they dwell thus dispers'd upon the highest hills…
Among the manufacturers houses are likewise scattered an infinite number of cottages or small dwellings, in which dwell the workmen which are employed, the women and children of whom are always busy carding, spinning, &C. so that no hands being unemploy'd, all can gain their bread, even from the youngest to the antient; hardly any thing above four years old, but its hands are sufficient to itself…
After we had mounted the third hill, we found the country one continued village, tho' mountainous every way, as before; hardly a house standing out of a speaking distance from another, and…we could see that almost at every house there was a tenter, and almost on every tenter a piece of cloth, or kersie, or shalloon, for they are three articles of that country's labour; from which the sun glancing, and, as I may say, shining (the white reflecting its rays) to us, I thought it was the most agreeable sight that I ever saw, for the hills, as I say, rising and falling so thick, and the valleys opening sometimes one way, sometimes another, so that sometimes we could see two or three miles this way, sometimes as far another; sometimes like the streets near St Giles's, called the Seven Dials; we could see through the glades almost every way round us, yet look which way we would, high to the tops, and low to the bottoms, it was all the same; innumerable houses and tenters, and a white piece upon every tenter.
The steep-sided valley of Stroud-Water in Gloucestershire must have presented much the same kind of picture, but Defoe does not attempt any description of it beyond saying that ‘the clothiers Iye all along the banks of this river for near 20 miles’; and Celia Fiennes passed along the high road over the uplands from Gloucester to Bath and failed to notice it at all.
Water-Power and the Early Mills
Early inventions in most industries — except in those requiring large amounts of fixed capital, like the iron industry — benefited the small man, or at least kept him in business.
Kay's flying shuttle (1733) and Hargreaves's spinning jenny (1767) multiplied the output of domestic workers in the textile industry without compelling them to enter mills or factories.
Not until the application of water-power to machinery, and a consequent great increase in the size of machines, do we begin to see the large factory as an element in the landscape.
Before that time the largest unit of production was what Defoe calls in Yorkshire the ‘work-house’.
But the great revolution was on its way.
The first true factory built in England was the silk mill built for John and Thomas Lombe   at Derby in 1718–22.
It was five or six storeys high, employed three hundred men, and was driven by the water-power of the river Derwent.
It was, as Mantoux says, in every respect a modern factory, with automatic tools, continuous and unlimited production, and specialised functions for the operatives.
Within fifty years there were several silk factories employing four hundred to eight hundred persons, but the silk industry was of secondary importance and did not initiate the factory system.
It was when power reached the cotton, woollen, and iron industries that the face of the country really began to change on a large scale, and that was not until the 1770s.
PLATE 85.
Late eighteenth-century weavers' cottages at Littleborough, Lancashire.
A relic of the domestic system of industry when spinning and weaving were done at home.
The long window of the upper storey was designed to throw the maximum light on the loom.
Matthew Boulton opened his great Soho factory, in the still unravished country outside Birmingham, in 1765, and shortly afterwards began the manufacture of steam engines.
Wedgwood's new large factory at Etruria in the Potteries was opened in 1769.
Richard Arkwright, the greatest of the new industrial capitalists, erected his first spinning mill, worked by horses, at Nottingham in 1768, but his second factory, built on a much larger scale at  Cromford on the Derwent in 1771, was driven by water-power.
In the 1760s, too, the Darbys enlarged their ironworks at Coalbrookdale in Shropshire to the largest works of any kind in the kingdom.
With these four large-scale factories, the creation of the modern industrial landscape may be said to have begun.
The new mills, factories and works tended to be in more or less remote places, partly because of the need to be near a falling stream for the supply of power, and later to escape too close inspection and regulation of their uninhibited activities.
One finds these early mills therefore, often windowless and deserted today, in the upper reaches of the moorland valleys on either side of the Pennines.
Coalbrookdale, then a romantically beautiful valley, was chosen by the Darbys for their ironworks because here a rapid stream entered the broad navigable waterway of the Severn.
Water was needed in the iron industry both for power and for the transport of heavy materials.
It was not long before the ravishing of this scene attracted the lament of the poets.
Anna Seward, ‘The Swan of Lichfield’, mourned over ‘Colebrooke Dale’ in a poem written about 1785:
Scene of superfluous grace, and wasted bloom,
O, violated Colebrook! in an hour,
To beauty unpropitious and to song,
The Genius of thy shades, by Plutus brib'd,
Amid thy grassy lanes, thy wildwood glens,
Thy knolls and bubbling wells, thy rocks, and streams,
Slumbers!— while tribes fuliginous invade
The soft, romantic, consecrated scenes…
Some ten years earlier, Arthur Young had already noted the discord between the natural beauty of the landscape and what man had done to it, but he saw, too — and painters also were on the verge of seeing it — that an unrestrained industrial landscape has a considerable element of sublimity about it.
‘That variety of horrors art has spread at the bottom [of Coalbrookdale]; the noise of the forges, mills, etc., with all their vast machinery, the flames bursting from the furnaces with the burning of the coal and the smoak of the lime kilns, are altogether sublime.’
PLATE 86.
Tean Hall Mills, Upper Tean, Staffordshire.
The timber-framed house of 1613, and its early eighteenth-century addition on the left, were occupied from 1747 by a loom manager.
The looms were used in local cottages, and warehouses occupied much of this site.
In the late eighteenth century the three-storey pedimented mill was built as the weaving became fully industrialised.
In 1823 steam-power replaced water and in 1888 the mill was further extended along the street.
The scale of the new industries brought about a number of visual changes, some of them unexpected.
The large sums of fixed capital sunk in the factory buildings and the machinery, and the fact that water-power, unlike human labour, needed no rest, demanded that the new buildings be used by night as well as by day.
Shifts of labour were therefore organised, and these tall fortress-like structures were lit from top to bottom at night, and presented something new and dramatic to those who had the leisure to stay outside and contemplate it with detachment.
So we get Joseph Wright of Derby as early as 1780 painting Arkwright's cotton mill by night — tiers of tiny yellow lights in the immemorial country      darkness of the Derwent valley, the isolated forerunner of those tremendous galaxies of light that one now sees from the Pennine Moors after sundown.
In the eighth book of The Excursion , Wordsworth sees the other side of this romantic scene:
When soothing darkness spreads
O'er hill and vale, and the punctual stars,
While all things else are gathering to their homes,
Advance, and in the firmament of heaven
Glitter — but undisturbing, undisturbed;
as if their silent company were charged
With peaceful admonitions for the heart
Of all-beholding Man, earth's thoughtful lord;
Then, in full many a region, once like this
The assured domain of calm simplicity
And pensive quiet, an unnatural light
Prepared for never-resting labour's eyes
Breaks from a many-windowed fabric huge;
And at the appointed hour a bell is heard,
Of harsher import than the curfew-knoll
That spake the Norman Conqueror's stern behest —
A local summons to unceasing toil!
Disgorged are now the Ministers of day;
And, as they issue from the illumined pile,
A fresh band meets them, at the crowded door
And in the courts — and where the rumbling stream,
That turns the multitude of dizzy wheels,
Glares, like a troubled spirit, in its bed,
Among the rock below.
Men, maidens, youths,
Mother and little children, boys and girls,
Enter, and each the wonted task resumes
Within his temple, where is offered up
To Gain, the master idol of the realm,
Perpetual sacrifice.
Arkwright's son built ‘a very elegant seat’, after his father's death in 1792, commanding a view of his works, precisely as Josiah Wedgwood had built Etruria Hall within two hundred yards of his new pottery near Burslem.
The early industrialists were proud of their achievements and liked to have them in full view.
(Now they take good care to live well out of sight of them).
Matthew Boulton lived close to his works at Soho; but his son bought the estate and country house of Great Tew in Oxfordshire and went to and fro by the coach which is still preserved in the stables there.
It was not long before the new factories generated their full powers of ugliness, dirt and blight, and employers moved away.
Etruria Hall still stands, in a landscape of demonic ugliness, backed not by tiers of green woods but by colliery tips higher than itself, and in front, not an ornamental sheet of water but a filthy ‘flash’, dark with coal-dust, arising from subsidence due to coal-mining below.
PLATE 87.
Styal Mill, Cheshire, was begun in 1784 by Samuel Greg of Belfast as a silk mill It was later much enlarged and here the 1810 additions lie against the stream which provided its power.
The setting of Etruria Hall at Burslem, Stoke on Trent, has now been completely altered.
The area has been redeveloped as part of the Stoke Garden Exhibition Centre and the ‘squalor’ has entirely disappeared.
In the textile districts the new industrial landscape lay in the valley bottoms, which had been comparatively ignored in Defoe's day, when the thickest settlement was on the hillside.
Now, down in the bottoms, arose the new many-storeyed mills, some of them handsome buildings not too unlike the plain country houses of the time.
Around them grew up short streets of cottages for the workpeople, run up so quickly that they look as though they were planted flat on the surface, without any foundations; but still there was no congestion.
The water-power age produced hamlets, at the most small villages, gathered around a new mill.
Around Ashton-under-Lyne, for example, where it was reckoned there were nearly a hundred cotton mills within a ten-mile radius — all on the river Tame or its tributaries — we  find hamlets in the 1790s with the significant names of Boston, Charlestown and Botany Bay.
Milford, in the Derwent valley just south of Belper, is a complete and almost untouched late eighteenth-century industrial village.
Before 1781 it had consisted of only eight houses, but in that year the Strutts — who had gone into partnership for a time with the then-needy Arkwright — built the large cotton mill that still stands there.
They built a great number of cottages for their workpeople; a Unitarian chapel for their spiritual welfare, a school for their children, and a mansion for themselves.
It was what the Americans would call a ‘company town’, and is worth seeing as an example of what enlightened employers were doing at the time.
A mile or so north of Milford is the little town of Belper.
Until 1776 this was a poor place inhabited chiefly by nailers.
Then came Mr Jedidiah Strutt, who built a cotton mill on the Derwent and shortly afterwards three more.
Here, too, the Strutts provided a chapel, and day schools and Sunday-schools, and another mansion.
At the north end of the town stands one of their great eighteenth-century mills, now under the name of the English Sewing Cotton Company, which incorporated several new and striking features.
By 1811 Belper was the second largest town in Derbyshire.
The Derwent valley, which exemplifies along its bottom so much industrial history of the water-power age, attracted large mills from the beginning by reason of its fast-flowing river; but not everyone admired the result as Wright of Derby did.
Uvedale Price in his Essays on the Picturesque (1810) observed:
When I consider the striking natural beauties of such a river as that at Matlock, and the effect of the seven-storey buildings that have been raised there, and on other beautiful streams, for cotton manufactories, I am inclined to think that nothing can equal them for the purpose of disbeautifying an enchanting piece of scenery; and that economy had produced, what the greatest ingenuity, if a prize were given for ugliness, could not surpass.
Mills arose in the remote valleys below the moors, and hamlets and villages quickly clustered around them.
But established towns too were advancing over the surrounding fields.
Trees and hedges were torn up, red-brick or gritstone streets, short and straight, multiplied every year, even before the age of steam: Sheffield, Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester, all were on the move.
According to Langford, ‘The traveller who visits [Birmingham]once in six months supposes himself well acquainted with her, but he may chance to find a street of houses in the autumn, where he saw his horse at grass in the spring.’
The population of the town doubled in the last forty years of the eighteenth century (thirty-five thousand people in 1760; seventy-three thousand in 1801), but it was as yet far from being the dark and horrible landscape that it eventually became.
Even in the early years of the nineteenth century the middle-class streets had ‘prospects’ of the country and the older working-class houses at least still had gardens.
The dirt and overcrowding came with the steam age in the nineteenth century.
Sheffield, on the other hand, was ‘very populous and large’ in Queen Anne's time when Defoe traversed it, and its houses were already ‘dark and black’from the smoke of the forges.
Two generations later the population had trebled and the pall of industrial smoke had become permanent.
As Anna Seward saw it:
Grim Wolverhampton lights her smouldering fires,
And Sheffield, smoke-involv'd; dim where she stands
Circled by lofty mountains, which condense
Her dark and spiral wreaths to drizzling rains
Frequent and sullied…
In Lancashire and the Potteries the worst had still to come.
Chorley was, when Aikin  wrote (1795), ‘a small, neat market town’ with its river flowing through a pleasant valley, turning ‘several mills, engines and machines’.
It possessed the first water-driven factory to be erected in Lancashire (1777).
Preston was ‘a handsome well-built town, with broad regular streets, and many good houses.
The earl of Derby has a large modern mansion in it.
The place is rendered gay by assemblies and other places of amusement, suited to the genteel style of the inhabitants.’
Aikin notes that the cotton industry had just come to the town.
In the south of the county what was to be the most appalling town of all — St Helens — was just beginning to defile its surroundings.
The British Plate Glass Manufactory had been erected at Ravenhead, near the village, in 1773, and other glassworks followed.
And about the year 1780 ‘a most extensive copper-work’ was erected to smelt and refine the ore from Paris mountain in Anglesey.
The atmosphere was being poisoned, every green thing blighted, and every stream fouled with chemical fumes and waste.
Here, and in the Potteries and the Black Country especially, the landscape of Hell was foreshadowed.
Steam-Power and Slums
Water-power in itself created no smoke or dirt.
Only where industries used coal directly, like the forges of Sheffield, were towns yet blackened and the air poisoned; and only where they produced ‘waste’ in great quantities, such as in coal-mining, glassworks and chemicals, was the landscape beginning to acquire that sterile covering of ‘tips’, that were destined to go on piling up until they produced a mountain landscape in miniature; until the vast range of coal-tips around the old town of Wigan, for example, could be sardonically nicknamed the Wigan Alps and be illustrated in later years under that name on picture postcards.
But until steam-power became generally used, these landscapes did not achieve their final horrific form.
Although Newcomen had produced the first practical steam-engine in the early years of the eighteenth century, it was capable only of a simple back-and-forth or up-and-down motion and therefore disappeared under-ground to be used for pumping water out of mines.
Nor, when Boulton and Watt began producing steam-engines, from 1775 onwards, was there much perceptible change in industry for many years.
Between 1775 and 1800, when their patent expired, 321 steam-engines were built.
Of these, nearly one-third went into cotton mills, and the remainder were distributed between ironworks, collieries, copper-mines, canals (for pumping) and breweries.
Even with all the Newcomen engines that still continued to be made, and the piracies of Watt's engine, the use of steam-power was neither general nor extensive in 1800.
The steam age, with its dramatic impact upon the landscape, begins effectively in the early nineteenth century.
The ‘Wigan Alpes’ have now been transformed by landscape reclamation and tree planting.
The reference to Newcomen engines disappearing underground is puzzling and perhaps Professor Hoskins misunderstood their function.
They were used for pumping but they were bulky machines and were never installed underground.
Some of them had very long working lives and a few survive.
The figure of 231 Boulton and Watt steam engines as having been built between 1775 and 1800 is now less certain.
The number was probably greater than this.
We are not concerned here with the general effects upon industry and the English economy of the use of steam-power, but with its visible effects upon the landscape, and these are now obvious enough.
Steam-power meant a new and intense concentration of large-scale industry and of the labour force to man it.
It meant that manufacturers no longer needed to seek their power where there was fast-running water, especially in the higher reaches of lonely dales, but found it near the canals which brought coal to them cheaply, or directly upon the coalfields themselves.
So emerged what Wordsworth called ‘social Industry’.
No longer need they go out into the wilderness and create a village or a hamlet to house their labour.
Manufacturers ran up their mills, factories and works on the edge of existing towns, and their workers were housed in streets of terrace-houses built rapidly on the vacant ground all around the factory.
PLATE 88.
The Potteries landscape at Burslem, Staffordshire, as it was in 1934.
This sad picture of an industrial landscape should be examined under a powerful reading-glass.
There is a church, rebuilt in 1717, when the pottery manufacture was flourishing with forty-three small manufactories, carried on by families until they were  superseded in the industrial revolution.
Next to the churchyard, children play around the Board School.
All around their homes lie intermingled with the filthy potbanks, their characteristic bottle shapes rising above the roof-tops.
A blackened Anglican church, to cater for the enlarged Victorian population, stands in the middle of the view.
Derelict ground occupies much of the scene.
It is a formless landscape, usually thickly blanketed with smoke.
The photograph was taken on a favourable day or it could not have been taken at all.
Industry spread over the lower-lying parts of the towns, leaving the hills for the residences of the well-to-do, but this was not a conscious piece of ‘zoning’.
Large-scale industries in pre-railway days needed canal-side sites both for bringing in their coal and other raw materials and for taking away their heavy products.
Thus they chose the flatter and lower ground where the canals lay.
Moreover, it was the low-lying areas that were vacant when the industrialists appeared on the scene, for earlier generations had wisely avoided building on them wherever they could.
The sites were there waiting.
And again, it was easier and cheaper to build on a flat site than a hillside.
As a consequence most of the new streets of working-class houses were built on land that presented difficult drainage problems (not that anyone except the victims gave much thought to this), and the sanitary conditions soon became appalling.
The slums were born.
The word slum , first used in the 1820s, has its origin in the old provincial word slump , meaning ‘wet mire’.
The word slam in Low German, Danish and Swedish, means ‘mire’: and that roughly described the dreadful state of the streets and courtyards on these undrained sites.
It need hardly be said that the industrialist of the steam age did not build his own house near the works, as the country factory owners had done.
He went to dwell on the ‘residential heights’ and walked down to the mill each day.
But there is more meaning in the word slum than simply a foul street or yard: it denotes also a certain quality of housing.
In the early nineteenth century the quality of working-class houses, as structures, deteriorated rapidly.
The industrialists of the water-power age, out in the open country, had put up houses for their workpeople — as at Cromford, Mellor and Styal, where many of them may still be seen — which were, in Professor Ashton's words, ‘not wanting in amenity and comfort’ and even possessed a certain quality of design and proportion.
These decent working-class houses were put up in the 1770s and 1780s, where land was cheap and when building materials were plentiful, wages in the building trades relatively low, and money relatively cheap.
With the outbreak of twenty years' war in 1793, the price of materials and wages in the building trades both began to rise steadily.
Interest rates, too, increased and remained high for a generation.
Since at least two thirds of the rent of a house consists of interest charges, the rise in interest rates alone was sufficient to bring about the drastic reduction in the size and quality of working-class houses in order to preserve an ‘economic rent’.
Further, land inside the older towns was acquiring a scarcity value, above all in the towns that were surrounded by open fields, so that they could not grow outwards (see Chapter 9), and a steady rise in the price of land for building was added to the rise in the price of borrowed money.
Possibly, too, the building trade was invaded by a new class of speculator who made conditions even worse than they need have been by extracting high profits out of the unprecedented demand for cheap houses.
No one has studied this particular class of parasite, how he worked, or what fortunes he made.
One often wonders in what opulence his descendants live today, forgetful, or perhaps ignorant, of the origin of their wealth.
Their forebears would make a fruitful study.
Bad materials and fewer of them, and bad workmanship, reduced the costs of building.
Houses run up in the courts of Birmingham in the 1820s and 1830s cost–; 60 each to build.
Birmingham specialised in close, dark and filthy courtyards: there were over two thousand of these in the town in the 1830s, and many of their houses were built back to back in order to get the maximum number on to each expensive acre.
The local medical men did not object, but rather commended them for their cheapness.
At first some of them had a deceptive brightness, but their abominable quality soon revealed itself and decay rapidly set in.
Decent people moved out if they could, and the born-squalid moved in: the swamp of the slums spread a few years behind the speculative builder everywhere.
PLATE 89.
Cotton mills and Victorian working-class housing, Preston, Lancashire in 1920.
Another photograph of an industrial and urban landscape that no longer exists.
Preston in the eighteenth century was a ‘rendezvous of fashion and society: Aikin in 1795 said that it was a ‘handsom, well-built town…rendered gay by assemblies and other places of amusement, suited to the genteel style of the inhabitants’.
The Earl of Derby had a town house here.
When cotton spinning was introduced in 1777, there were 6000 inhabitants.
A hundred years later there were 90,000 and the town had a bad reputation for strikes.
The housing surely explains a great deal: neither good enough to promote happiness nor bad enough to produce hopelessness.
Open spaces inside the older towns vanished rapidly.
The last remnant of Birmingham Heath was enclosed in 1799, and was built over forthwith with eight new streets.
Precisely the same thing was happening around the Lancashire towns also, where the ancient commons    were enclosed and grabbed by the private speculator for building, as at Oldham.
Only Preston managed to save its commons from the vultures, and to transform some of them eventually into public parks.
PLATE 90.
China clay working St Austell, Cornwall.
The digging of kaolin, actually decomposed granite, on a vast scale for the pottery industry produces a tortured landscape unlike any other in England.
Not only the commons but the large gardens of the eighteenth-century bourgeoisie disappeared under bricks and mortar.
The house of Baskerville, the eminent Birmingham printer, was sold in 1788 and the seven acres of land that surrounded it were advertised as ‘a very desirable spot to build upon’.
In these older towns, too, the large houses of the middle class were divided into tenements to house the swarming population, and factories and warehouses went up on their gardens and orchards.
Slowly the other features of the industrial towns were added: Anglican churches, Nonconformist chapels, schools and public houses.
Public parks came in the 1840s, and public libraries a few years later; later still perhaps the grandiose Town Hall, by no means always to be despised as architecture.
Entirely new towns grew out of hamlets in the industrial north and Midlands.
The germ of Middlesbrough was a single farmhouse near the banks of the unsullied Tees in 1830: by 1880 it was a town of more than fifty thousand people.
Barrow-in-Furness, too, sprang from a single house, grew into a fishing village of about three hundred people by the 1840s, and by 1878 was a town of forty thousand.
South Shields, St Helens and Birkenhead all shot up quickly during the first half of the nineteenth century.
‘Meanwhile’, said Wordsworth in The Excursion (1814):
Meanwhile, at social Industry's command,
How quick, how vast an increase!
From the germ
Of some poor hamlet, rapidly produced
Here a huge town, continuous and compact,
Hiding the face of earth for leagues — and there,
Where not a habitation stood before,
Abodes of men irregularly massed
Like trees in forests,— spread through spacious tracts,
O'er which the smoke of unremitting fires
Hangs permanent, and plentiful as wreaths
Of vapour glittering in the morning sun.
And, whereso'er the traveller turns his steps,
He sees the barren wilderness erased,
Or disappearing…
Nor was the industrial landscape represented solely in the great towns, for between them stretched miles of torn and poisoned countryside — the mountains of waste from mining and other industries; the sheets of sullen water, known as ‘flashes’, which had their origin in subsidence of the surface as a result of mining below; the disused pit-shafts; the derelict and stagnant canals.
The train journey between Leeds and Sheffield shows one this nineteenth-century landscape to perfection.
In the Lancashire township of Ince there are today twenty-three pit-shafts covering 199 acres, one large industrial slag-heap covering six acres, nearly 250 acres of land under water or marsh due to mining subsidence, another 150 acres liable to flooding, and thirty-six disused pit-shafts.
This is the landscape of coal-mining.
As for the Black Country, one can hardly begin to describe it.
Dickens has an horrific description of it in The Old Curiosity, Shop (1841), when it had reached the rock bottom of filth and ugliness, and of human degradation.
The early industrialists were not ‘insensitive to the appeal of the country: the beauty of Cromford and Millers Dale suffered little by the enterprise of Arkwright, and stretches of the Goyt and the Bollin owe something to Oldknow and the Gregs’.
But the later industrialists, the heirs of the steam age, were completely and grotesquely insensitive.
No scruples weakened their lust for money; they made their money and left their muck.
The industrial landscape is not confined to the north of England and the west Midlands.
In Cornwall for instance one finds two distinct landscapes of industry, one dead, the other still active.
Over central Cornwall, particularly to the north-west of St Austell, are the   spoil-heaps of the china-clay industry, an almost lunar landscape that one sees gleaming on the horizon from almost any hill-top in the county (Plate 90).
And there is the equally striking landscape of the vanished tin-mining industry: the windowless engine-houses, the monolithic chimney stacks against the skyline, the ruined cottages of an old mining hamlet, and the stony spoil-heaps — a purely nineteenth-century landscape, and perhaps because of its setting, the most appealing of all the industrial landscapes of England, in no way ugly but indeed possessing a profound melancholy beauty (Plate 92).
Just across the Devonshire border is the old mining landscape of Blanchdown, west of Tavistock, where, in the middle decades of the nineteenth century, the Devon Great Consols was the richest copper mine in the world: now its miles of spoil-heaps have created a silent and desolate beauty of their own, and foxes and snakes haunt the broken buildings and the glades between.
PLATE 91.
The view of the Black Country in 1866.
The full horror of life in a Victorian industrial area is obvious here.
The combination of coal mining and iron making produced a world which fully deserved its name.
There is a point, as Arthur Young saw, when industrial ugliness becomes sublime.
And indeed the new landscape produced some fine dramatic compositions such as the railway viaduct over the smoking town of Stockport; or the sight of Bradford at night from the moorland hills to the north; or of the smoky silhouette of Nottingham on a winter evening as seen from the south-bound train on the Eastern Region line; or the city of Sheffield in full blast on a murky morning; even (one thinks sometimes) the sight of long gas-lit streets of red brick working-class houses in a Victorian town with not a tree or a bush in sight: only the lamps shining on pavements blanched by the autumn evening wind.
PLATE 92.
Abandoned tin mines at Botallack, Cornwall.
A romantic landscape, yet one which in its heyday meant appalling conditions of work for those employed there and perhaps an even worse life when the mines were killed by cheaper metal from elsewhere.
PLATE 93.
Delabole slate quarry, Cornwall.
Traditionally the largest man-made hole in England, it is the result of the running together of a number of small quarries Cornish slates were widely employed for roofing in the county by the fourteenth century and indeed by 1314 they were certainly in use on buildings in Winchester, Hampshire.
Slate was being worked at Delabole in the sixteenth century and still is.
Sometimes slate was also mined in caverns as at Carnglaze.
8
ROADS, CANALS AND RAILWAYS
Introduction
The landscape of communications has always fascinated historians and laymen alike.
Generations of scholars and local historians have sought to understand the pattern of roads and tracks in England and in recent years the same enthusiasm has been shown for railways and canals.
All these means of travel have their own intrinsically interesting features largely generated by the method of movement involved: bridges, turnpike cottages, milestones in the case of roads.
and stations, cuttings, locks.
warehouses, etc. in the cases of canals and railways.
The actual line of communication is usually of little interest, an area of tarmac, a grassy lane, a sheet of water or two parallel rails.
Thus the main interest in the methods of communication should lie in how they affect the wider landscape rather than in their specific details.
Yet so many people fail to see these wider and far more important aspects in their search for minutiae such as the differences between the Midland Railway signal boxes and those of the Great Western.
Even worse has been the invention of a whole pseudo-history of roads and tracks based on the tracing of communication across large areas of countryside and explaining the results in terms of prehistoric ways or medieval roads.
Apart from the major engineered Roman roads, limited lengths of eighteenth- or nineteenth-century turnpike roads, some nineteenth-century enclosure roads and modern by-passes and motorways, there is no way of dating a road.
The Ridgeway in Wiltshire and Berkshire may well have been used in prehistoric times, but probably no more so than the line of the A4 across the same counties.
Similarly the A11 between Thetford and Norwich is likely to be just as old as the nearby so-called Icknield Way, but we do not know, nor is there any way of finding out.
More time and energy has been expended on the history of roads and tracks than on any other feature in the English landscape and most of it to little effect.
Just because a road runs past a group of Bronze Age burial mounds does not mean that it is prehistoric.
There are Bronze Age burial mounds in their thousands all over England and some road or track passes near most of them.
Nor is the road between, say, Salisbury and Winchester necessarily medieval just because it now links the two medieval towns.
It may be older, it may possibly be later.
Indeed one can safely say that almost all of our roads and tracks were used in medieval times and perhaps most were also used in the prehistoric period as well.
But that said we have come to no great conclusion.
To understand roads we need to begin with the premise that all roads are very, old indeed and that what we need to study is their changing importance through time as man adapted them to his requirements.
Thus a minor lane between two Iron Age villages might have been improved and linked with others to become a road between a Roman estate centre and one of its dependent farms.
It could then have been further extended and incorporated into a Saxon salt way stretching across three counties.
Later it may have declined to a local field access path in the thirteenth century, been re-aligned by enclosure commissioners in the eighteenth century and turned into a dual-carriage trunk road in this century.
It is still the same road, but has merely changed its function and thus its form.
It is in the perception of these changes that we begin to understand the history of the landscape as a whole, the Iron Age village, the Roman estate, the Saxon trade, the medieval fields, the eighteenth-century agriculture and twentieth-century industrialisation.
Professor Hoskins was incorrect in suggesting that there is little new to say about roads.
Basically there is everything to say, for most roads are not understood at all, at least in their wider context.
Yet he was probably correct in attempting to explain some of the complexities of roads in England by using one sheet of the ordnance Survey 1-inch map series.
Much of what he says about the roads and tracks depicted there is perceptive and useful, but even Professor Hoskins is wrong in the attribution of many of them.
Some of the alternative explanations and differences of interpretation are covered in the marginal notes to this chapter, but it is perhaps worth mentioning others at greater length here.
PLATE 94.
Wade's Causeway.
Wheeldale Moor, North Yorkshire.
This is the Roman road from Malton to Whitby and has been cleared of vegetation and exposed to show its structure.
What is visible are merely the rough foundation stones.
The smooth road surface has long since disappeared.
It is thus a failed routeway.
The area covered by the old  Ordinance Survey Sheet 145 is now included on parts of the new 1:50 000 scale series, Sheets 151, 152, 164 and 165.
Within this region, as Professor Hoskins suggested, there are various names and alignments which raise questions in the mind of any landscape historian, questions which could be asked of any part of England.
Professor Hoskins was particularly interested in the Banbury Lane, largely because it had been identified as a prehistoric trackway by archaeologists in the 1950s, shortly before he wrote this book.
It now seems unlikely that this was any more of a prehistoric trackway than other roads depicted on the map.
The identification of the so-called Jurassic Way was always based on the very flimsy evidence that it linked some six or seven Iron Age sites.
Now, hundreds of Iron Age sites are known from the area and the ‘way’ has no direct connection with any of them except by accident.
The section west of Banbury is, in any case, by no means a continuous line, nor is the alleged early ‘arc’ via Byfield.
The real importance of the Banbury Lane, regardless of exactly how old it is, is that it was the main medieval route from Northampton to Banbury.
Northampton was founded in late-Saxon times, perhaps as a planned town.
Banbury is certainly a planted town set up by the Bishop of Lincoln between 1123 and 1138.
The important period of use of the Banbury Lane must have begun therefore in the late twelfth century.
Yet by the late seventeenth century it is not one of the main roads described by John Ogilby in his atlas,Britannia , and had thus lost its former significance by that date.
Nevertheless much of it is still an important road between the two towns.
Nor is the other alleged prehistoric routeway, the A432, any more convincing.
It is indeed on a ridgeway in places, but the existence of long barrows near it is entirely fortuitous.
It is no doubt an old road, though no older than most, whose importance developed in the medieval period as the main route between Oxford and Banbury.
By 1676 it was part of the main Oxford to Coventry road and of course remains as a major trunk road today.
That is, it had a similar status to the Banbury lane in medieval times but it is one which it has kept and developed in response to changing circumstances, whereas the Banbury Lane has failed.
A similarly failed road, at least to the west of Bicester, is the Roman Akeman Street which is only used as a modern road in short sections.
This is because it has been replaced by more suitable roads which have been adapted to the continually changing pattern of communications and settlement development.
A much odder but more interesting Roman road is that running north-east from Bicester on its way to Towcester in Northamptonshire.
As far as Finmere it is now the main road to Buckingham (A421).
One might easily assume that it has always been an important road.
Yet in the late seventeenth century the road to Buckingham ran roughly parallel to it, a mile or so to the south-east, through Stratton Audley.
This is now merely a set of narrow winding lanes, cut at its north end by a second world war air field.
Then it was part of the Oxford to Cambridge main road.
It was not until the eighteenth century that the Roman road was re-used and became important as a through route.
In the late seventeenth century too the main road from London to Aberystwyth did not pass through Oxford but followed the present minor road (B4027) to the north, via Islip and Woodstock to Enstone and then via the modern A34 to Stratford-on-Avon.
All these are examples of the changing importance of roads through time.
They show well the difficulty of identifying ‘old’ roads.
Even more interesting is the situation at King's Sutton, a village to the south-east of Banbury.
Today no main road passes less than two miles from it.
It is set at the junction of four minor lanes, none of which has any indications of antiquity.
Yet recent research has shown that the village was the centre of a great late Saxon estate that once extended north-east to Towcester, south-east to Buckingham, north to Chipping Warden and west perhaps well into Oxfordshire, and was also the site of a great Saxon minster church.
All the lanes must have once been extremely important, but nothing on the map nor indeed on the ground suggests this.
The dangers of ‘dating’ roads from their former alignments are clear.
The canals of England had a much shorter life, though many are now gaining a new importance as recreational routeways.
They were mainly constructed to link the new industrial areas to ports and markets.
but were soon overtaken by the great railway construction.
However, in the short time they flourished, they had an enormous impact, not so much on the towns they joined but on the countryside   through which they passed.
While the actual canals, together with their locks, bridges and wharfs, have their own intrinsic interest, far more significant is the fact that they allowed the easy and cheap movement of bulk cargoes over long distances.
This, as Professor Hoskins rightly points out, was further developed by the railways, but the canals began the spread of standard bricks, tiles and slates which changed the visual appearance of much of England.
Railways have even more interest in terms of the resulting local alteration of the landscape with their cuttings, tunnels, bridges and embankments.
But in the end their greatest impact was the way in which they helped to change most people's way of lite and in so doing changed much of the landscape.
Protessor Hoskins gives some vivid contemporary descriptions of what happened and rightly stresses the effect of cheap standardised building materials.
But in addition whole new settlements came into existence.
Crewe, Wolverton and Eastleigh were all new railway towns, while Doncaster, Swindon and Ashford became major engineering centres.
Other towns were changed out of all recognition because of their location at centres of major railway lines.
Peterborough is perhaps the best known but March in Cambridgeshire and Gainsborough and Spalding in Lincolnshire are among many places where the railway transformed provincial towns.
Perhaps the most greatly changed of all was York.
The railways also produced or speeded up the development of some of the early resort towns such as Skegness, Mablethorpe, Bournemouth, Swanage and Weston-super-Mare, and certainly allowed minor villages such as Cromer to become lesser resorts and ports such as Grimsby to be developed into major exporting centres.
Even sleepy rural villages were turned into minor railway settlements with the coming of the railways.
An example of this was Woodford Halse, in Northamptonshire, which was transformed by the arrival of the Great Central Railway's locomotive depot in 1896.
PLATE 95.
Excavations for the cutting for the Park Village, Camden Town, 1836, on the London Birmingham Railway.
This splendid lithograph by Bourne gives one a vivid idea of the impact of the railway on urban landscapes.
It is the scene of the ‘earthquake’ description in Dombey and Son.
Perhaps one of the most fascinating places is Melton Constable in north Norfolk.
Up until 1880 it was a typical Nortolk village with no real centre but merely a dispersed pattern of cottages and farmsteads.
Then, in 1882, the Lynn and Fakenham Railway Company extended their line from Fakenham to Norwich via Melton.
In 1883 the company's successor the Eastern and Midlands Railway, laid a further line from Melton to North Walsham and also established Melton as their engineering headquarters.
A year later another branch to Holt, ultimately Cromer, was completed and Melton stood at the centre of a minor railway junction.
In 1889 the new Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway took over the lines and Melton was further developed as the new Committee's locomotive building and repair centre.
For eighty years Melton was a railway ‘town’.
Then closure took place.
Today all the rails have gone, as have most of the station buildings, but the cuttings the locomotive works, the school and the ‘Railway Institute’, both dated 1896, and rows of neat terraced houses, clearly designed by a Great Northern architect, still survive.
Visually Melton remains a railway centre even more than twenty years after the railway went.
Its much longer history before the 1880s is hardly visible.
Elsewhere the overall impact of the railways on the English landscape is not as easy to assess as it at first appears.
As Professor Simmonds has shown, it is by no means always clear what effect railways had.
The arrival of a railway in a town did not always lead to expansion.
For example, in 1851 just after the railway came, Macclesfield was larger than Coventry, Halifax or York, having had a 160 per cent increase in population in the previous forty years.
Yet by 1911 its population had fallen by four thousand.
Professor Simmonds is correct when he says that it is very hard to isolate the part played by railways in the growth of towns and the development of the countryside from all the other economic and social factors of the nineteenth century.
The study of railways in the landscape has hardly begun.
PLATE 96.
An unusual feature on an English road, this tunnel on the A3066 at Beaminster, Dorset, dates from 1831–2.
It was built in order to improve the ancient road over the steep-sided Horn Hill into Somerset, and largely paid for by Giles Russell, a major local landowner, as a piece of genuine public beneficence.
It was designed and constructed by one of the new generation of civil engineers, M. Lang, in a form that presages early Victorian railway architecture, which at that time had not yet appeared.
ROADS, CANALS AND RAILWAYS
Roads
The roads of England have attracted a considerable literature, and it might seem difficult to say anything very new.
It would be attempting the impossible to write about all the varieties of roads there are in England in the space of a few pages: such a wide-ranging discussion would be full of familiar generalisations and would make very dull reading.
Let us take instead one comparatively small piece of country, which contains every variety of road from the prehistoric trackway to the modern by-pass, so that the detailed differences are brought out: for the interest of an inquiry such as this, and one cannot say it too often, lies in the detail of the subject.
For this purpose I choose the country depicted on Sheet 145 of the Ordnance Survey (sixth edition), which runs from the edge of Oxford northwards to a few miles beyond Banbury, and from Chipping Norton on the west to beyond Brackley in Northamptonshire on the east.
One could find as much to write about on almost any other sheet of the Ordnance Survey; and one could indeed write a whole chapter about a single sheet of the 2 ½-inch map, covering only some six miles each way.
A merely casual inspection of sheet 145 reveals a number of named roads suggestive of several different ages and uses.
There are the Welsh Road, the Salt Way, the Port Way, Akeman Street, Traitor's Ford Lane and Banbury Lane; and besides these named roads a considerable number of roads, lanes and paths that excite our curiosity by their directness for miles across almost uninhabited country, or by their association with parish boundaries or ancient earthworks (like Aves Ditch), or some other suspicious circumstance.
Banbury Lane, now in part a main motor road, is the oldest of the roads on the map, though there is little about it today to indicate its great antiquity.
It is a part of the so-called Jurassic Way, which runs along the junction of the upper lias and the lower oolite like a corridor, eventually linking the Bristol Avon with the Humber.
The course of this important trackway across sheet 145 is perfectly clear.
It makes its appearance on the bold ridge by the Rollright Stones, where it forms the boundary between Warwickshire and Oxfordshire for part of its course.
Keeping along the watershed between the Warwickshire Avon and the Cherwell, it runs past Oatley Hill Farm to Wigginton Heath.
Thence it drops down to cross the Cherwell at Banbury.
East of Banbury, where it has attracted the name of Banbury Lane for some twenty miles, it follows a winding course along the watershed between the Cherwell and the Great Ouse.
For a considerable distance it is now followed by a main road (A422 and B4525), but near Culworth it becomes a narrow lane, running through almost deserted country, past Adstone Lodge and Foxley to Cold Higham.
Here we are in the uttermost depths of the Midlands.
After Cold Higham it crosses Watling Street, runs past the important Iron Age hill-fort of Hunsbury, and reaches the crossing of the Nene at Northampton.
There is no need to trace it farther.
Mr O.G.S. Crawford believes the Jurassic Way to be of Iron Age date in view of its strong associations with hill-forts and finds of this period, though he does not dismiss the possibility of its being older.
Whether it goes back to the Iron Age or the Bronze Age, however, it has lost its original character as a wide trackway across open country.
To see what it was once like we have to turn to the chalk downlands, notably the Ridgeway that follows the crest of the Berkshire Downs or the Icknield Way near Royston in Hertfordshire.
In its present form the Banbury Lane represents a great narrowing down of what was originally not a single track but a more or less open corridor (so that one cannot be too precise about its prehistoric course), bounded on either side by dense forest, in places several miles wide.
The narrowing down of this primitive trade-route took place, perhaps    in stages, in Saxon and early medieval times as more and more land was taken in for arable cultivation.
On the chalk downlands, which have been under sheep pasture ever since the Iron Age, something like the original appearance of a similar trackway has been preserved, but in the arable Midlands it must have disappeared fairly early.
We know that in the eleventh century the Jurassic Way in Oxfordshire was the main road to Northampton, probably joining it with the important town of Gloucester, and throughout the Middle Ages it was a market-road, linking one market town with the next in a long series.
Its present course can almost certainly be dated from late Saxon times.
Northampton began life as a fortified position in the early tenth century — it is first recorded as a name in the year 917 — and soon became the shire town.
From this time we can probably date the development of Banbury Lane as a road rather than a wide corridor.
Deviations from ancient routes appeared at an early date.
It is clear from the map (and other evidence) that the original trackway near Great Rollright ran due north, across the Stour and straight up Traitor's Ford Lane (this must be a medieval name), along the broken lip of the escarpment to Edge Hill.
Thence it described a great arc through Fenny Compton and Byfield to rejoin the other road at Cold Higham (Crawford).
Crawford considers that the Saxon road to Northampton was a later shortening of this ancient trackway; even so, parts of the Banbury ‘cut-off’ are themselves prehistoric in date.
The other deviation, that from near Culworth to Watling Street, is of recent date.
The old lane was in use down to comparatively recent times as a through road from Northampton to Banbury.
On the first edition of the 1-inch map (1834) it is shown as boldly as the lanes linking the villages of Canons Ashby and Moreton Pinkney, and similarly on the map of 1887.
The Lane must have fallen out of use in this stretch within living memory.
The implication here is that these prehistoric trackways wandered across open land.
If indeed they were prehistoric, it is doubtful that they crossed the open downland after the later Bronze Age.
The Ridgeway on the Berkshire Downs is edged by the traces of thousands of acres of late prehistoric fields and would have merely been one lane among many passing through a totally cultivated landscape.
The Icknield Way in Hertfordshire actually consisted of at least half a dozen clearly defined and parallel lanes edged by contemporary fields, with other lanes crossing it at right angles.
Even later on, in the medieval period, when the downlands were indeed grass-covered grazing areas, the generally wide ‘zone’ of communication was made up of countless trackways criss-crossing each other, quite unlike what survives today.
PLATE 97.
One of at least three lines of the so-called Ridgeway, near Aldworth, Berkshire.
How old is it?
It was certainly used in medieval times but it is doubtful if it is prehistoric, even though traces of Bronze Age and Iron Age fields lie on either side of it.
In fact a little further to the north-west this track is cut by a Bronze Age ditch.
There is at least one other prehistoric ridgeway on sheet 145.
This has continued in use to the present day and carries a vast traffic between Oxford and Coventry and Birmingham.
It is now A423, which began as a prehistoric ridgeway along the watershed between the Cherwell and the Evenlode.
It ran from a crossing of the Thames at or near Oxford (perhaps ultimately from the Berkshire Ridgeway) northwards to join the Jurassic Way near Banbury.
There are remains of long barrows and of megalithic tombs at various points along its course.
Later it was taken over and paved by the Romans from a point north of Oxford to Sturdy's Castle, where it met the east-west road of Akeman Street.
Medieval   charters along its course refer to it as ‘the ridgeway’.
It apparently remained in continuous use throughout medieval times; it figures as the main road from Oxford to Banbury in Ogilby's road-book (1675); it was turnpiked in the eighteenth century and it still follows its original course after some three thousand years.
Because it has remained in use all this time, and has been continually adapted to heavier traffic, it has lost its original character except in two respects.
It still commands extensive and airy views over the valleys to the east and west, and in places its broad grass verges betray something of its original width before the road was metalled.
Of the Roman roads of the district, one need say little.
Akeman Street will serve as an example.
A good deal of it to the east of the Cherwell remains in use as a main road (A41 and A4095), the only important break in the line being caused by the growth of the Saxon town of Bicester, a mile to the north, in place of the now-vanished Romano-British town of Alchester.
Just short of the Cherwell, however, the line of the road disappears from the 1-inch map, and to the west of the river for many miles it can be followed only as a continuous hedge-line, a field-path, and a bit of lane here and there.
Its entire course can, however, be traced without much hesitation.
Among other features of the road it is interesting to see how it still forms the northern boundary of Kirtlington Park, to the east of the Cherwell, and the southern boundary of Tackley Park, on the other side of the river.
The immense continuity of English boundaries is fascinating.
Akeman Street was the boundary between what is now Tackley Park and Whitehill Farm as early as the year 1004 when King Ethelred gave the small estate of Whitehill to St Frideswide's monastery at Oxford, and it is still a boundary though the Roman road has vanished from sight.
Not many miles away, two estates meet, between Wootton and Steeple Barton, precisely where they met in a charter dated 958, and possibly for some considerable time before that.
The colonisation of new land, and its demarcation into private estates, created thousands of miles of boundaries for the first time.
Often these new boundaries followed a stream or a trackway that already existed, but very often they created their own boundary lanes or meres (from the Old English word' (ge )maere ', ‘boundary’).
This is the origin of a great number of ‘green lanes’ on the map which run for a few miles, separating parishes on either side but eventually petering out.
They are to be distinguished, therefore, from the green lanes that run for more considerable distances, which are portions of through-roads dating from prehistoric times.
Sometimes these ancient estate-boundaries took the form of deep V-shaped ditches, much more impressive than the ordinary ditch for drainage, and therefore puzzling until one realises their special origin.
These green lanes are sometimes ten to fifteen yards wide, still entirely grassed over, and used only by tractors and cattle.
An example of this kind is Dornford Lane, which runs parallel with the Banbury to Oxford road for some miles north of Woodstock.
The age and original purpose of this road, like that of many similar green lanes, are puzzling.
At its northern end it has no obvious beginning, but it assumes a recognisable course at Barton Lodge in Steeple Barton parish.
Thence it runs directly southwards for four and a half miles to Woodstock.
For centuries the lane served no doubt as a cattle-road, but why did it come into existence at all, and when?
It runs so near the ancient Banbury-Oxford road (within a quarter of a mile in places) that it cannot have served as another through road.
One might suspect then that it originated as a boundary — a green mere between two ancient estates — but there is no sign of a boundary along it today.
The parochial and manorial boundaries (both very ancient) follow either the Banbury-Oxford road or else take a winding course between the main road and the lane.
At no point on its way to Woodstock is it followed by a boundary that is known to be ancient.
The break in the line of Akeman Street was not ‘caused’ by the growth of Saxon Bicester which actually lies to the north of the road.
The road through the Roman town was abandoned and re-routed just outside it, presumably in the fifth or sixth centuries.
Bicester seems to have been a medieval planted town probably laid out around 1239 along the then main road through the area, the Aylesbury to Banbury road (A41).
The adjacent roads were then diverted into the new town.
Dornford Lane is much more likely to have been the former main road into Woodstock from Banbury which developed after 1154–74, when Woodstock was founded as a royal town by Henry II.
The decline of Woodstock relative to Oxford merely led to the increasing importance of the present main road.
Dornford Lane itself has an extension which actually by-passes Woodstock to the east and joins the main road to Oxford (A 34) further south at Begbroke.
It may therefore have had an earlier importance as an alternative main road to Oxford in late Saxon times before the arrival of Woodstock.
PLATE 98.
Packhorse bridge, Wasdale, Cumbria.
Bridges of this primitive style and construction are  undatable .
It was not a through-road for Saxon or medieval traffic; it did not come into existence as a boundary; it was not originally a drove-road, for cattle-drovers took over existing tracks and lanes and did not create their own except in special circumstances.
We are left with one possibility — that it originated as a road from one of the royal demesne farms to the royal hunting lodge of Woodstock.
The Anglo-Saxon kings are known to have used Woodstock (now Blenheim) Park as a hunting-ground.
It is first heard of about the year 1000, and a charter of 1005 speaks of the ‘haga ’ or enclosure which existed here.
At the other end of the lane lay the manor of ‘Bertone’: no amount of ingenuity can carry the lane any farther north than this.
Barton means literally ‘barley farm’ or ‘corn farm’, but later came to have the special meaning of ‘demesne farm’.
Although by 1086 the Barton estate had been split up into a number of manors, of which only one was still in the hands of the king himself, there can be little doubt that before the Conquest the Anglo-Saxon kings had had here an estate of some seven thousand acres which they kept in hand for their own supplies.
Nor can there be much doubt that when they were in residence at Woodstock these supplies were called upon, and were carried in carts along the wide green track now called Dornford Lane.
The lane came into existence for this special purpose not later than the tenth century: in no other way can we explain its peculiar and limited course.
The fact that the lane runs so wide and straight also tells us that when it came into existence the open arable fields of Barton and Wootton did not yet extend so far.
It clearly ran through uncultivated land originally.
I have dwelt upon this small piece of local topography in order to show how here and there, and possibly oftener than we think, roads came into existence to serve a special and limited purpose.
Most of these curious little by-roads and lanes developed in Saxon times.
In the same piece of country, for example, we read of ‘the wood way’ in Saxon charters: these are the lanes that grew up between certain villages and the distant woods in which they had rights or pickings.
Many of these tiny lanes survive, some incorporated into motor roads.
It is likely that a considerable number of Romano-British by-roads came into existence in the same way for limited purposes and yet remain to be discovered on the map or on the ground.
Mr Margary's book on Roman Ways in the Weald was a revelation of how much can be unearthed by a patient and detailed examination of one region.
There can be no doubt that on Sheet 145 of the Ordnance Survey, with which we are immediately concerned, there are by-roads which will prove eventually to be Romano-British in origin.
We have been bemused too long by the great military roads of the Romans and have not given enough thought and research to the local ‘economic’ roads that developed during the two or three centuries that followed the Conquest and the brief phase of military occupation.
In many parts of England, roads marked as ‘Salt Way’ may be found.
On Sheet 145 there is a short stretch of lane so described immediately south of Banbury.
Salt was one of the very few necessaries of life that could not be produced anywhere and had to be transported from the centres of production on the sea coasts, on tidal rivers, and from certain inland centres.
At Ingoldmells, to the north of Skegness, heaps of debris have been found to be the result of salt-workings in the late Bronze Age.
In 1086 there were 278 salt-pools in Lincolnshire, in Sussex 285, and many other coastal counties had a considerable salt industry at this period.
It is certainly true that many of the by-roads in an area such as this may well have been used in Roman times though it is difficult to prove.
The example of King's Sutton quoted in the Introduction is significant.
Its importance as a late Saxon estate centre was probably the result of it being an equally important Roman and even Iron Age estate.
A large Roman settlement existed just north of the village and the great Iron Age hill-fort of Rainsborough lies a little to the south-east.
Many of the roads tracks and footpaths which link the village to its neighbours and to the fort were probably used by prehistoric and Roman people.
At an early date, the inland brine springs of Droitwich and Cheshire were discovered and used for the manufacture of salt.
The earliest reference to Droitwich salt occurs in 716, when King Ethelbald granted a salt pit there to Evesham Abbey.
By 1086, Droitwich salt was being widely distributed over the Midlands; King William himself had eighty-five salt pans here.
According to Domesday Book, no fewer than sixty-eight manors and estates had    the right to receive salt from Droitwich, including Princes Risborough, some seventy miles away in Buckinghamshire.
Mr F.T.S. Houghton has worked out many of the salt ways of the West Midlands, and considers that the short stretch of Salt Way near Banbury was part of the route taken between Droitwich and Princes Risborough, by way of Stratford-upon-Avon and Aynho.
It is therefore of Saxon date, and is an example of a track used for a special purpose.
It is doubtful, however, how far the salt trade created its own lanes and tracks.
For the most part it made use of trackways already established and ancient, though it is possible that new pieces of track were trampled out where the direct line required it.
Certainly the crossing of the Avon at Stratford is extremely ancient.
These salt ways certainly seem to have been used to transport salt from Droitwich in late-Saxon times and even later, but there can be little doubt that they were in existence long before then.
Salt ways present no special features that distinguish them from other roads and lanes on the map or on the ground.
Nor have the medieval market-roads that developed all over England, particularly in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, any special characteristics.
Most of these, too, developed along existing paths, the paths that ran from village to village in Saxon times, though here and there they may have called for a new piece to complete the chain of paths.
Many medieval market towns were originally villages of little note, and have sunk back again into obscurity, but their former importance is betrayed by the spider's net of roads that still converge upon them.
Deddington, in north Oxfordshire, is an example of such a village, and there are several similar examples in every English county.
Deddington is indeed a failed town which was founded probably a little before 1190 presumably because of its situation at the junction of what by then were important routes.
It probably failed because Banbury founded a feu years earlier (1123–38) was at an even more important road junction.
As with salt ways Welsh roads indicate their use as drove roads particularly from the sixteenth century onwards.
But again they were probably making use of much older tracks evolved for very different purposes For a short time they were important.
Then with the coming of the railways they slipped back into obscurity.
Few new roads were created between Saxon times and the turnpike and ‘enclosure’ roads of the eighteenth century.
Like the salt traffic, the cattle trade that developed so strongly from the sixteenth century onwards moved along existing green lanes and trackways.
Since most of England south of the Trent was now in a state of cultivation, there was little opportunity for drovers to strike across country and create new lines of movement, though on the moorlands north of the Trent they may have done so.
The drovers' roads of the Midlands were particularly important, for it was along these that the great traffic in cattle from Wales to London and the Midland markets found its leisurely way.
The Welsh Road, which appears here and there on the map of the Midlands, refers to this cross-country traffic.
This road can be picked up just outside Kenilworth, whence it runs in a south-easterly direction through Offchurch across country to Southam, and thence through an almost uninhabited landscape towards the North-amptonshire uplands.
Near Marston Doles the route turned south, past Priors Hardwick, Upper and Lower Boddington to Aston-le-Wall, near which it crosses the Banbury-Daventry road.
It goes on to Culworth, where it meets Banbury Lane, and may have proceeded along this Lane to the great markets of Northampton, where the cattle were sold in large numbers for fattening on the rich Midland pastures.
In the other direction, one can trace the route vaguely from the Welsh border into the Midlands.
The Anchor Inn, on the border of Wales and England, high up on the far western side of Clun Forest, was the great point of assembly for drovers coming out of Wales.
Thence one recognised route led on to Ludlow, and so due east through Bewdley and Bromsgrove, through the country south of Birmingham, to the point near Kenilworth where where we previously picked it up on the map.
The drove-roads of England have yet to be identified and pieced together.
They have been written about in Scotland and Wales, and a fascinating piece of field work and historical research awaits someone in this country who head.
For many miles along the Leicestershire-Lincolnshire border there runs a green lane known as Sewstern Lane or The Drift.
This road has a continuous history from the Bronze Age onwards.
After it had been superseded in the seventeenth century, by the Great North Road, which runs to the east of it through more inhabited country, Sewestern Lane became  a recognised route by which cattle from Scotland and the North of England reached the Midland pastures and London: hence its later name of The Drift.
Parts of it have been taken over for a secondary motor road, but much of it remains remote and quiet, rarely disturbed by a human voice.
The old drove-roads made their own contribution to the landscape in the wayside inns that grew up to cater specially for drovers in lonely stretches of country, and in the ‘stances’ beside them where the cattle were shut up and rested for the night.
After the middle of the nineteenth century animals were moved by train (and now by lorry) and the drovers' lanes were deserted for good.
Now they make some of the quietest walking in England away from the high moors.
For they always avoided towns and traffic; they avoided also the larger roads which became turnpikes in the eighteenth century and were subject to tolls, and they were short-turfed for the cattle and sheep, grazing as they went.
Sewstern Lane is a fine example of part of a multiple road system.
It does run parallel to the Great North Road (A1) away to its east.
But to say it was superseded by the latter in the seventeenth century is not entirely true.
In medieval times it was merely an alternative to the already existing Great Northern Road.
The latter was probably always more important, for medieval towns such as Stamford and Grantham lay on its line.
When traffic increased from the late seventeenth century onwards, usually only one of the various alternatives was improved.
The others were largely abandoned as major routes.
They then became very useful as cattleways, unencumbered by wheeled vehicles.
Further south in Cambridgeshire there are two or three alternative routes, parallel to and east of the present A1 which had the same origin.
The same picture is visible on the London to Norwich road between Newmarket and Thetford across the Breckland.
PLATE 99.
This toll house at Kintbury on the Bath Road west of Newbury Berkshire is perhaps more exotic than most.
It is probably late eighteenth-century and known as Halfway House as it lies roughly halfway between London and Bath.
The turnpikes, though important in the history of roads, contributed little to the landscape that did not exist before.
For the most part they took over existing routes, though in the hillier parts of the country they were responsible for the making of entirely new stretches of road where the older roads tackled gradients suitable only for foot-passengers and pack-horses.
These new roads may often be recognised by the fact that they run for miles without passing through a village, or indeed habitation at all apart from their own toll-houses (their most notable addition to the scene) and an inn or two attracted to the roadside by the prospect of traffic.
In the industrial counties such as Lancashire the new towns called for entirely new turnpike roads  between them, and the old road pattern was more drastically altered.
Many turnpike roads like the canals and railways after them, produced minor settlements or led to changes in existing ones.
Cowsfield Gate, in Whiteparish Wiltshire is now a handful of cottages which grew up around a toll house after 1767 when the Salisbury to Romsey road was turnpiked and re-aligned.
The village of Arrington in Cambridgeshire moved sideways to the improved Old North Road (A14) in the eighteenth century.
The London to Holyhead road improvements produced both minor and major changes to the settlements along its route.
At Weedon Bec in Northamptonshire an entirely new settlement mainly composed of inns, grew up at the point in the parish where the Holyhead road left the Roman Watling Street and struck north-west towards Daventry.
The new settlement acquired a separate name, Road Weedon.
Further north in Staffordshire the ancient market town of Lichfield founded in 1149 on the line of one of the main London to Chester roads, declined into cosy respectability as the new Holyhead road was diverted sixteen miles to the south.
Certain important roads, too, were altered out of all recognition.
The Roman Watling Street, which had become the London to Holyhead road, was vastly improved and largely remade by Telford between 1820 and 1828.
Cuttings were made to ease the original gradients, causeways laid down in difficult places, and the roadway widened.
Much of this engineering work was wasted at the time, for it was done on the eve of the railway age and never put to good use — not until the twentieth century.
An incidental effect of the turnpike movement was the construction of fine bridges to carry heavy coach-traffic.
There is a notable series over the Thames from Lechlade down to Staines, and there are innumerable others up and down the country.
Near Exeter, the old Exeter to Crediton road had been doubled in width (from nine and a half to twenty feet) and so made necessary a new bridge over the Creedy.
This bridge (Cowley Bridge), built by James Green, the county surveyor, in 1813–14, is so fine in design that it has already been scheduled and protected as an ancient monument.
Milestones make their appearance along the roads during the reign of Charles II.
They were known to the Romans, but no one afterwards used them until the Dover Road was given mile-marks in 1663.
Stones were also set up along the Great North Road in 1708, but the first true milestone to be set up in Britain since Roman times was that at Trumpington, just outside Cambridge, in 1727, where it is still to be seen.
The earliest milestones were the result of private enterprise.
Official milestones were authorised on the London to Chester road in 1744, but they did not become compulsory until 1773.
An act of that year ordered all turnpike trusts to provide guide-posts and milestones on their roads.
Guide-posts of a sort are much older than milestones.
Rough granite crosses for example, marked the track across Dartmoor in the thirteen century; and a German traveller in 1598 found a pre-Reformation wayside cross acting as a guide-post in Kent.
A few new guide-posts appeared here and there in the late seventeenth century, and an act of 1698 ordered justices to erect standing-posts at cross-roads; but the act seems to have been ineffective.
Guide-posts did not become compulsory until the act of 1773.
One of the earliest private guide-posts stands on Broadway Hill, in the Cotswolds, set up by Nathan Izod in 1669.
A post dated 1705 stands at Hopton in Derbyshire; and at Bicton, in East Devon, is a fine brick pillar dated 1743, with directions and scriptural texts on its four sides.
Yorkshire has many early guide-posts.
The older Guide-posts stood several feet high for the be back, but in recent years those on the main roads have been considerably reduced in height for the convenience of motorists.
In recent years, too, other changes have been made in English roads.
Great by-pass roads, like the East Lancashire by-pass, now plunge straight across the country, regardless of contours, using cuttings and embankments to keep as even a gradient as possible.
They are entirely without beauty.
Is there anything uglier in the whole landscape than an arterial by-pass road, except an airfield?
Old roads have been straightened, and have lost all their character, historic and otherwise.
Sheet 145 of the Ordnance Survey, with which we began, furnishes an excellent example to finish with.
The main road from Oxford to Bicester (A43) runs dead straight for several miles and might well be taken for a fine piece of Roman road.
But the first edition of the one-inch map, dated 1833, shows a very different sort of road, a narrow Saxon road winding and zig-zagging every few yards.
Only in recent years has it been straightened.
The milestone at Trumpington is only one of a whole group, most of which survive, along what was in the early eighteenth century the main road from Cambridge to London.
Few London-bound travellers follow their line today and much of the road is a relatively minor one.
One of the most remarkable guide-posts is Dunston Pillar on the former heathlands south-east of Lincoln.
It now stands alongside the main road between Sleaford and Lincoln, set in a landscape of rectangular fields and straight lanes all dating from the late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century enclosures there.
But it was built in 1751 as an inland lighthouse to guide travellers across what was then an empty open and desolate countryside.
PLATE 100.
The Grand Union Canal Braunston Junction, Northamptonshire.
The Oxford Canal was cut here in 1774 and the Grand Junction was opened in 1796.
Today it is hard to realise that the canal was the late eighteenth-century equivalent to the M1, which lies five miles away to the east.
PLATE 101.
The arrival of canals was of great value to many industries, not least the textile area of west Yorkshire.
Here the Leeds-Liverpool canal climbs up Five Rise Locks at Bingley.
The mills in the background are arranged along the canal bank.
Canals
The canals of England are mainly the creation of the last forty years of the eighteenth century and the first quarter of the nineteenth, and they introduced a number of distinctive changes into the landscape.
Not only did they bring stretches of water into country often lacking in them, as in many parts of the Midlands, with consequent changes in bird and plant life, but they also brought — mostly for the first time — aqueducts, cuttings and embankments, tunnels, locks, lifts and inclined planes, and many attractive bridges, and they greatly influenced the growth and appearance of many towns.
One town, indeed, was entirely the creation of canals (Stourport in Worcestershire) and is worth seeing solely on that account.
As already noted the Car Dike, north of Peterborough is now known not to have been a canal but a Roman catch-water drain.
It is true that the Romans had constructed two or three artificial waterways in this country large enough to be regarded as canals: Car Dike that winds from Peterborough up to Lincoln, the Foss Dike joining the Witham and the Trent, and perhaps the Itchen Dike from Winchester to the Itchen.
But these were hardly distinguishable from drainage channels, having none of the features that we associate with canals.
The first true canal, with locks and a towpath, was that constructed by the municipal authorities of Exeter between 1564 and 1567 to allow barges to pass around the weirs on the river and to reach the city.
On this canal poundlocks were used for the first time in England, i.e., an upper and a lower gate fitted with sluices and enclosing a chamber into which boats passed to be raised or lowered to the next level.
The Exeter canal had three locks of this type.
It was a small undertaking, only sixteen feet wide, three feet deep, and about three miles long, but it was a remarkable work for its time, all the more so because it was a municipal enterprise.
Since then it has been  three times enlarged, in width, length and depth.
It became a favourite walk in the eighteenth century for the citizens of Exeter, and remained so until recent years.
Perhaps it still is, for it still winds peacefully between the elm-shaded meadows of the Exe valley past congenial inns.
The Exeter canal remained the only one of its kind for almost two hundred years, until James Brindley made his first canal for the Duke of Bridgewater in 1760.
In the meantime more than a thousand miles of rivers had been made navigable, but these made no noticeable change in the landscape.
But Brindley's canal from the coal-mines at Worsley to Manchester had several features hitherto unknown.
His principle was to keep his canal as level as possible.
To achieve this he carried it over roads and streams by means of aqueducts, of which the most notable was that at Barton (two hundred yards long and nearly forty feet above the Irwell), crossed valleys by embankments, cut through hills where they were unavoidable, and followed the contours where possible.
At times the Worsley canal followed a most circuitous route in order to maintain a level course, and this excessive winding remained a feature of the early canals.
On reaching Worsley the canal tunnelled into the sandstone cliff to reach the coal workings some three-quarters of a mile inside the hill, where it divided into channels that eventually reached a length of several miles.
The village of Worsley was transformed by this undertaking, the first of many to be so fluctuate by canals.
When Josiah Wedgwood visited it in 1773 it had ‘the appearance of a considerable Seaport town.
His Grace has built some hundreds of houses, and is every year adding considerably to their number.’
Later canals became more daring in their engineering as experience was gained.
The Grand Trunk Canal (1766–77) not only made use of aqueducts, cuttings and embankments, but was carried through the hill country between the Mersey and Trent basins by means of five tunnels, of which the Harecastle Tunnel near Kidsgrove was 2,880 yards long and more than two hundred feet beneath the surface at its deepest point.
One can still see this triumph of Brindley's engineering skill, though it is now disused, having been superseded by a second tunnel, parallel with the first, which was constructed by Telford in 1827.
Altogether the Grand Trunk Canal had five tunnels and seventy-six locks on its ninetythree mile course from the Mersey to Shardlow, near which it entered the Trent.
Shardlow was transformed from a quiet farming village into an inland port like Worsley, but with even wider connexions.
Wharves were constructed to handle the coal and timber traffic, and tall red-brick warehouses arose after 1777 for iron, for cheese, for corn and salt.
By the early nineteenth century three ‘large carrying establishments’ had made their headquarters here, of which Sutton & Co. carried on a great trade with Hull and Gainsborough, Liverpool and Manchester, the Cheshire salt works and the Potteries, and with Birmingham, Dudley and the Black Country.
For many years Shardlow was ‘an improving place’, but the Derbyshire directory for 1857 observes that business had declined greatly after the opening of the Midland and other railways.
But one can still go to Shardlow, which has sunk back into obscurity, and see the tall warehouses, the wharves, and the later Georgian Shardlow Hall where the prosperous James Sutton lived, and all the other evidences of a place that was virtually created by the canal age.
More striking, however, than Shardlow is Stourport, at the confluence of the Stour with the Severn.
Before 1772 only a little ale-house stood here, on a sandy waste.
With the completion of the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal in that year, and the refusal of the town of Bewdley to have anything to do with it, a new town shot up at the point where the canal joined the Severn.
Soon there were extensive wharves and basins, tall warehouses, boat-building yards, and ‘a considerable iron foundry belonging to Messrs Baldwin'.
Just as Shardlow was a great inland distributing centre for the east Midlands, where mining, industry and agriculture mingled their products, so Stourport became the emporium for the west Midlands, connected by river and canal with most parts of the kingdom.
Some notable canal engineering was carried out by men like Rennie and Telford.
Rennie  built the beautiful aqueduct carrying the Lancaster Canal over the Lune; but even more striking was the Pontcysyllte aqueduct, constructed by Telford between 1795 and 1805, carrying the Ellesmere Canal over the Dee.
This, perhaps the greatest monument in stone of English canal engineering, is over a thousand feet long and 121 feet above the river.
On the same canal may be seen the Chirk aqueduct and tunnel.
Telford's canals took a much more direct course than Brindley's, and so involved much more dramatic engineering, of which a splendid example is the bridge over the deep cutting near Tyrley, on the Shropshire Union Canal.
Tunnels, too, became bolder in conception.
The Sapperton tunnel (1789) at the summit of the Thames and Severn Canal bores through the Cotswolds for more than two miles.
The Pennines presented the most formidable obstacles of all to the canals, but even they were successfully overcome.
The Standedge tunnel, at the highest point (637 feet) of the Huddersfield Canal, was 5,415 yards long.
On the little canal linking Tavistock with the navigable Tamar in Devon, the Morwell Down tunnel (1804–17) was a mile and a halflong and emerged at its western end nearly 240 feet above the river meadows.
This drop was overcome by means of an inclined plane, up and down which the loaded barges were carried on trolleys.
For many years the quay at Morwellham was
a scene of busy industry with its unloading barges and shouting sailors and hammering workmen and train of waggons ascending or descending the inclined plane.
A quantity of ore is here shipped off to distant smelting-houses.
It is curious to enter the well-swept yard and observe the different wooden shafts down which distinct ores from various mines are poured.
Then it is to be collected and placed on board the vessels bound for distant quarters.
These ships in return bring coals and lime-stone and many other commodities.
By the end of the nineteenth century the quay was deserted; and now it is a grass-grown waste covered in part with the ruins of houses and other buildings.
The canal was derelict for many years, but now flows again to produce electricity for the neighbourhood; and it still makes a pleasant summer evening walk from Tavistock to the tunnel mouth.
This description of Pontcysyllte aqueduct is misleading.
It certainly contains some substantial stonework but the outstanding feature is the cast-iron water trough which carries the canal across the masonry piers.
Morwellham is no longer a grass-grown waste.
It has been completely restored and its former importance can be readily appreciated even if it has now lost its earlier charm.
By the 1820s some three thousand miles of canals had been made, the industrial districts in particular being a network of grimy waterways.
But all over the pastoral Midlands and the south of England too, the canals flowed clear and sparkling in the sunshine, something new in the landscape with their towpaths, lock-keepers’ cottages, stables for canal horses, their Navigation or Canal Inns where they met a main road, and their long and narrow gaily painted boats.
The early canals were contour canals, winding about for miles in order to circumvent a hill; but the later ones were made as straight as possible by means of cuttings and embankments.
Sometimes an older canal was straightened by later engineers.
The Oxford Canal, for example, was shortened by thirteen and a half miles between 1829 and 1834.
The old course and the new can be seen  particularly between Hawkesbury Lock, where it joins the Coventry canal, and Hillmorton near Rugby.
In 1868 the Fenny Compton tunnel, on the same canal, was removed and replaced by a cutting.
By vastly cheapening the carriage of heavy materials over long distances, the canals also brought about indirect changes in the landscape.
Thomas Pennant observed in 1782 that the Grand Junction Canal, between Trent and Mersey, had brought in new building materials: ‘the cottage, instead of being half covered with miserable thatch, is now covered with a substantial covering of tiles or slates, brought from the distant hills of Wales or Cumberland.
The fields, which before were barren, are now drained, and by the assistance of manure, conveyed on the canal toll-free, are clothed with a beautiful verdure.’
But it was left mainly to the railways to break down finally the various regional traditions of building in England, and to put an end to the use of age-old local building materials in favour of standardised brick and slate.
Railways
One very special place to appreciate this and many other aspects of the English landscape is in the meadows south-west of Braunston, Northamptonshire.
There on either side of the River Leam, lie the wonderfully pre-served sites of the deserted villages of Braunstonbury and Wolfhamcote both apparently finally abandoned in the sixteenth century, together with the latter's tiny church.
They are hemmed in on the east by the Grand Junction Canal which still flourishes on the north by the straight alignment of the shortened Oxford Canal on the west by the former Great Central Railway line constructed in 1896 and on the south by the embankment of the old Daventry to Leamington railway.
All these lines of communication cut through the ridge-and-furrow of the open fields of the villages as does the wandering line of the original Oxford Canal to the south-east and west.
PLATE 102.
Box Tunnel on the Great Western Railway near Bath.
Railway builders gave a special dignity and significance to the treatment of tunnel entrances.
This western portal to Box Tunnel is nearly twice the height required for modern traffic.
Even the short tunnels on this part of the line are treated on a grand scale.
Two generations of canal-building brought about great alterations in the landscape of England, now matured by centuries of slow growth, but these changes were highly localised.
They were confined for the most part to the close proximity of the waterways and some parts of the country hardly knew them at all.
The railways made a more massive impact.
Not only were they greater in mileage, penetrating to remote places unknown to   the canals and sometimes even to the roads, but they began — from an engineering point of view — where the canals left off.
Striking though the tunnels and cuttings and aqueducts of the canal engineers had been, they were soon surpassed in size and grandeur by those of the railways.
The canals had indeed created two classes of people without whom the railways could not have been built — the civil engineers at one end of the scale, and the navvies (the ‘inland navigators’ of the canal era) at the other.
Almost from the start therefore the railways manipulated the landscape on a grand scale.
Nothing like their earthworks had been seen since the earlier Iron Age of pre-Roman times.
We take the railways so much for granted.
Indeed, we see little of their grandeur from the line itself as we cross the Wharncliffe Viaduct on the Great Western Railway, or the beautiful bridge over the Thames at Maidenhead, and plunge into the Classical-Renaissance portal of Box Tunnel; or as we traverse the great Tring cutting on the old London and North Western.
We must walk to see all this, and it is more difficult to walk along the railways than along the canals with their sequestered towpaths.
The early lithographs of J. C. Bourne, John Britton, A. F. Tait and others show us best the magnitude of the physical changes that the railways brought about in both town and country.
Since the great period of railway closures of the 1950s and '60s it is, of course, now possible to walk along many of the former track beds and appreciate their impact on the landscape.
The line of the Great Central Railway south of Leicester through Catesby Tunnel and on to Brackley, is a superb example where an appreciation of the engineering involved in the construction of the last great main line in England can be obtained In a different landscape are the deep cuttings and high embankments south-east of Overstrand, Norfolk which suddenly open out into a vast grass amphitheatre-like area the site of Mundesley Station only opened in 1898.
Now this space and a terrace of standard Great Northern Railway Company houses are all that remain of a venture which attempted to turn Mundesley from a tiny fishing village to a major seaside resort in the early years of this century.
All that is except for the vast Hotel Continental and the grid lines of an abortive speculative development high on the cliff top overlooking the old railway cutting.
In Domby and Son , too, Dickens — an incomparable reporter of the contemporary scene — makes us feel what a convulsion the making of a railway was.
Here is Camden Town in the year 1836 when the London and Birmingham Railway was under construction in the locality which Dickens calls Staggs's Garden:
The first shock of a great earthquake had, just at that period, rent the whole neighbourhood to its centre.
Traces of its course were visible on every side.
Houses were knocked down; streets broken through and stopped; deep pit sand trenches dug in the ground; enormous heaps of earth and clay thrown up; buildings that were undermined and shaking, propped by great beams of wood.
Here, a chaos of carts, overthrown and jumbled together, lay topsy-turvy at the bottom of a steep unnatural hill; there, confused treasures of iron soaked and rusted in something that had accidentally become a pond.
Everywhere were bridges that led nowhere; throughfares that were wholly impassable; Babel towers of chimneys, wanting half their height; temporary wooden houses and enclosures, in the most unlikely situations; carcasses of ragged tenements, and fragments of unfinished walls and arches, and piles of scaffolding, and wildernesses of bricks, and giant forms of cranes, and tripods straddling above nothing.
There were a hundred thousand shapes and substances of incompleteness, wildly mingled out of their places, upside down, burrowing in the earth, aspiring in the air, mouldering in the water, and unintelligible as any dream.
Hot springs and fiery eruptions, the usual attendants upon earthquakes, lent their contributions of confusion to the scene.
Boiling water hissed and heaved within dilapidated walls; whence, also, the glare and roar of flames came issuing forth; and mounds of ashes blocked up rights of way, and wholly changed the law and custom of the neighbourhood.
In short, the yet unfinished and unopened Railroad was in progress; and, from the very core of all this dire disorder, trailed smoothly away, upon its mighty course of civilization and improvement.
But as yet, the neighbourhood was too shy to own the Railroad.
One or two bold speculators had projected streets; and one had built a little, but had stopped among the mud and ashes to consider farther of it.
A brand-new Tavern, redolent of fresh mortar and size, and fronting nothing at all, had taken for its sign The Rail way Arms; but that might be rash enterprise — and then it hoped to sell drink to the workmen.
So, the Excavator's house of Call had sprung up from a beer-shop; and the old -established Ham and Beef Shop had become the Railway Eating House, with a roast leg of pork daily, through interested motives of a similar immediate and popular description.
Lodging-house keepers were favourable in like manner; and for the like reasons were not to be trusted.
The general belief was very slow.
There were frowsy fields, and cow-houses, and dunghills, and dustheaps, and ditches, and gardens, and summerhouses, and carpet-beating grounds, at the very door of the Railway.
Little tumuli of oyster shells in the oyster season, and of lobster shells in the lobster season and of broken crockery and faded cabbage leaves in all seasons encroached upon  its high places.
Posts, and rails, and old cautions to trespassers, and backs of mean houses, and patches of wretched vegetation, stared it out of countenance Nothing was the better for it, or thought of being so.
If the miserable waste ground lying near it could have laughed, it would have laughed it to scorn, like many of the miserable neighbours.
Bourne's lithograph (Plate 95) of the excavation at Park Village near Camden Town, showing the works in progress in September 1836, must be the identical scene to that described by Dickens.
The railway pushed on to Birmingham, the army of navvies departed, the convulsion subsided, and within a very few years
there was no such place as Staggs's Gardens.
It had vanished from the earth.
Where the old rotten summerhouses once had stood, palaces now reared their heads, and granite columns of gigantic girth opened a vista to the railway world beyond.
The miserable waste ground, where the refuse-matter had been heaped of yore, was swallowed up and gone; and in its frowsy stead were tiers of warehouses, crammed with rich goods and costly merchandise.
The old by-streets now swarmed with passengers and vehicles of every kind; the new streets that had stopped disheartened in the mud and wagon-ruts, formed towns within themselves, originating wholesome comforts and conveniences belonging to themselves, and never tried nor thought of until they sprung into existence.
Bridges that had led to nothing, led to villas, gardens, churches, healthy public walks.
The carcasses of houses, and beginnings of new throughfares, had started off upon the line at steam's own speed, and shot away into the country in a monster train.
As to the neighbourhood which had hesitated to acknowledge the railroad in its straggling days, that had grown wise and penitent, as any Christian might in such a case, and now boasted of its powerful and prosperous relation.
There were railway patterns in its drapers' shops, and railway journals in the windows of its newsmen.
There were railway hotels, office-houses, lodging-houses, boarding-houses; railway plans, maps, views, wrappers, bottles, sandwich-boxes, and time-tables; railway hackney-coach and cabstands; railway omnibuses, railway streets and buildings, railway hangers-on and parasites, and flatterers out of all calculation.
There was even railway time observed in clocks, as if the sun itself had given in.
Among the vanquished was the master chimney-sweeper, whilom incredulous at Stagg's Gardens, who now lived in a stuccoed house three storeys high, and gave himself out, with golden flourishes upon a varnished board, as contractor for the cleansing of railway chimneys by machinery.
To and from the heart of this great change, all day and night, throbbing currents rushed and returned incessantly like its life's blood.
Crowds of people and mountains of goods, departing and arriving scores upon scores of times in every four-and-twenty hours, produced a fermentation in the place that was always in action.
The very houses seemed disposed to pack up and take trips.
Wonderful Members of Parliament, who, little more than twenty years before, had made themselves merry with the wild railroad theories of engineers, and given them the liveliest rubs in cross-examination, went down into the north with their watches in their hands, and sent on messages before by the electric telegraph, to say that they were coming Night and day the conquering engines rumbled at their distant work, or advancing smoothly to their journey's end, and gliding like tame dragons into the allotted corners grooved out to the inch for their reception, stood bubbling and trembling there, making the walls quake, as if they were dilating with the secret knowledge of great powers yet unsuspected in them, and strong purposes not yet achieved.
But Staggs's Gardens had been cut up root and branch.
Dr Johnson had deplored the effect that canals would have upon the privacy of the landed class.
The railways aroused an even greater opposition for this as well as for numerous other reasons, and not only among those who quietly enjoyed the amenities of a large estate.
At Helpston in Northamptonshire, Clare recorded in his diary for 4 June 1825:
Saw three fellows at the end of Royce Wood, who I found were laying out the plan for an iron rail way from Manchester to London.
It is to cross over Round Oak spring by Royce Wood corner for Woodcroft Castle.
I little thought that fresh intrusions would interrupt and spoil my solitudes.
After the enclosure they will despoil a boggy place that is famous for orchises at Royce Wood end.
Nothing came of this particular project, not at least for many years, and Clare continued to enjoy the orchises of Royce Wood undisturbed.
But the battle to preserve beloved solitudes flared up repeatedly in patches all over the country, precisely as it does today with the threat of new airfields and military training areas.
The price of solitude in the modern world is eternal vigilance.
In 1844 Wordsworth was aroused by the proposal to construct a railway from Kendal to the shores of Lake Windermere:
Is then no nook of English ground secure
From rash assault?
His two long letters to the Morning Post marshal every conservative argument against the proposal, and conclude:
We have too much hurrying about in these islands; much for idle pleasure and more from over activity in the pursuit of wealth without regard to the good or happiness of others.
Proud were ye, Mountains when in times of old, Your patriot sons to stem invasive war, Intrenched your brows; ye gloried in each scar: Now for your shame a Power the Thirst of Gold, That rules over Britain like a baneful star, Wills that your peace your beauty shall be sold, And clear way made for her triumphal car Through the beloved retreats your arms enfold!
Heard YE that Whistle?
As her long-linked Train Swept onwards, did the vision cross your view?
Yes, ye were startled;— and in balance true, Weighing the mischief with the promised gain, Mountains and Vales, and Floods, I call on you To share the passion of a just disdain.
But the conservatives, however right they were — and we have lost nearly all our privacy and silence since they wrote — lost all along the line.
The new railways ‘slashed like a knife through the delicate tissues of a settled rural civilization.
They left their scars on park and copse; they raised high walls of earth across the meadows —’ your railroad mounds, vaster than the walls of Babylon,’Ruskin called them; they brutally amputated every hill on their way.’
PLATE 103.
West Cranmore Station Somerset typical of the rural branch lines of the country.
This one was built by the East Somerset Railway Company between 1858–62.
It was one of three separate lines each belonging to a different company laid to the small cathedral city of Wells between 1859–70.
Wells then only had 7500 people.
The East Somerset line later taken over by the Great Western Railway could never have made a profit.
It was only a single track and had a gradient of 1 in 50 or worse for several miles.
Yet it together with the other numerous Somerset railways knitted town and country together in a way that had never been achieved before.
All lines were closed to passengers in the 1960s.
The magnitude of the early railway works was enhanced by the severe limitation the engineers placed upon themselves as regards gradients.
Brunel would have nothing steeper than 1 in 660 for the first eighty-five miles out of Paddington; Robert Stephenson planned the London and Birmingham Railway with no gradient steeper than 1 in 330 (except the first rise from Euston to Camden); and Locke nothing steeper than 1 in 250 on the difficult London and Southampton line.
So we get on the London and Birmingham route the vast cuttings at Tring (two and a half miles long and at times nearly sixty feet deep) and Roade (one and a half miles long and nearly seventy feet deep), and the embankments at Boxmoor and Wolverton.
On the London and Southampton line sixteen million cubic feet of earth were moved in making the cuttings and embankments, mostly between Basingstoke and Winchester: some of the most extensive cuttings in the world are on this stretch of line.
On the Great Western route we have such major engineering achievements as the Wharncliffe Viaduct over the Brent valley at Hanwell, the Sonning cutting, the embankment west of Chippenham (and the fine viaduct over the town itself), the Box tunnel, and the series of tunnels, cuttings and embankments between Bath and Bristol.
PLATE 104.
Viaduct, Ribblehead, Yorkshire, on the Settle-Carlisle line Scenically perhaps the most attractive line in England.
It was built by the Midland Railway in 1870–5 as a third route to the North.
It was not actually needed and was probably hardly worth constructing.
Yet it was a triumph of Victorian engineering and now adds more to the English landscape than most railway lines do.
At times the railway altered almost the whole aspect of a town, or at least of distant views of it.
The Great Western Railway's embankments and viaducts changed the prospect of   Bath; the viaduct over the Mersey at Stockport brought a fine geometrical composition into the urban landscape.
Indeed the railways created as much beauty as they inadvertently destroyed, but of a totally different kind.
The great gashes they inflicted on the landscape in their cuttings and embankments healed over, and wild flowers grew abundantly once more.
Going down to the south-west in spring, the cuttings through Somerset and Devon sparkle with primroses.
Even in Clare's own country, the railway has been absorbed into the landscape, and one can enjoy the consequent pleasure of trundling through Rutland in a stopping-train on a fine summer morning: the barley fields shaking in the wind, the slow sedgy streams with their willows shading meditative cattle, the elegant limestone spires across the meadows, the early Victorian stations built of the sheep-grey Ketton stone and still unaltered, the warm brown roofs of the villages half buried in the trees, and the summer light flashing everywhere.
True that the railway did not invent much of this beauty, but it gave us new vistas of it.
PLATE 105.
Crewe Station in 1848.
The early railway stations were often a pleasure to contemplate — imposing sometimes, and sometimes faintly romantic, like the first Crewe Station.
Few stations of the first generation survived the vast increase of railway traffic, but some did and they are well worth seeing Railways added a vast amount of detail to the English landscape, besides manipulating it at times on a large scale.
Or there is the grander scenery, and the more spectacular engineering, of the railway from Settle up to Carlisle, some of the finest railway landscape in Britain; and the route over Shap with its visions of the Lakeland mountains; and there are the superb night scenes from the railway viaducts that span the industrial towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire.
There are the elaborate tunnel entrances like Box and Bramhope and others, the great viaducts like Monsal Dale and Dutton, the bridges like Saltash and Severn; and the charming survivors among early railway stations that one comes across unexpectedly almost anywhere in England.
All the convulsions and brutal gashings of the rural landscape by the railway engineers have long been smoothed over and forgotten; and we take the railway earthworks and monuments as much for granted as we do the hedges and fields of the enclosure commissioners or the churches of our medieval forefathers.
The speed of change which Professor Hoskins deplored is well brought out here by his remarks about a stopping train through Rutland.
Not only does Rutland no longer exist, swallowed up by a greater Leicestershire, but the trains which cross the old county now only stop at Oakham, its last surviving station.
The rest have been demolished, vandalised or turned into country cottages.
Even so the slow trains from Peterborough to Leicester, via Stamford, Oakham and Melton Mowbray, give us, visually, one of the great railway journeys for those who can appreciate the English landscape.
The barley still shakes, the meadows still have their cattle and the superb spires still stand proud above their villages.
The railways not only made a direct physical impact on the landscape: their indirect effects were equally powerful and far-reaching.
The diary of a Middlesex parson, the Rev B.J. Armstrong, shows us what a devastating effect they were having as early as the 1830s.
His father had decided in the year 1830 to move out of London and to take a small house in the country.
It was thought advisable to take some small place in the country for the benefit of our health…
He took a very pretty and rather commodious cottage-residence at Southall Green, Middlesex, about a mile out of the high road to Uxbridge, and exactly 10 miles from Tyburn Gate.
Our intention was to reside half the year at Southall, and the remainder in London, and I remember we moved there on the 26th June, 1830…
My delight at everything I saw was beyond bounds — gardens were allotted my sister and self — there was the canal to fish in — a pony to ride — besides animals of different kinds…
Having been long pent up in town, Annie and myself viewed Southall as a second Paradise, and I remember I nearly hung myself on my pin-before the very first morning after our arrival, in attempting to scale the yard gates to see the country beyond them.
Eight years later the main line from Paddington to the west was opened through Middlesex.
West Drayton (for Uxbridge) was the first station; and in the following year stations were built at Ealing, Hanwell and Southall.
The effect on Southall is duly recorded in Armstrong's diary:
A remarkable change for the worse took place about this time in the hitherto retired neighbourhood of Southall Green.
The railway spread dissatisfaction and immorality among the poor, the place being inundated with worthless and overpaid navigators ['navvies']; the very appearance of the country was altered, some families left, and the rusticity of the village gave place to a London-out-of-town character.
Moss-grown cottages retired before new ones with bright red tiles, picturesque hedge rows were succeeded by prim iron railings, and the village inn, once a pretty cottage with a swinging sign, is transmogrified to the ‘Railway Tavern’ with an intimation gaudily set forth that ‘London porter’and other luxuries hitherto unknown to the aborigines were to be procured within.
These immediate effects were observable only near the stations, but as the railways extended rapidly to all parts of the country their effects on local building and building materials grew correspondingly wide.
In Middlesex the impact came soonest, and was most violent.
The older houses had been built of a homely and native brown stock brick, and the farm buildings largely of wood.
Between 1800 and 1850, however, a hard soapy-looking yellow brick was pouring up the Thames from Suffolk, and most of the new Middlesex churches were built of it.
‘From 1850 onwards’— with the triumph of the railways —‘every kind of material was poured on to the unprotesting soil: harsh red bricks, sometimes glazed; in the north, yellow-green brick from Three Counties, near Hitchin; slates, pantiles, green tiles; stucco, artificial stone, and concrete.’
What happened in Middlesex eventually happened all over England, and as Midland bricks and Welsh slates — and later more unspeakable materials like asbestos and corrugated iron — flooded into every corner of provincial England, the ancient local materials that fitted their own regions so well, for they came out of their very soil, disappeared one by one.
In Oxfordshire the Stonesfield slate-pits and mines shut down one by one during the second half of the nineteenth century; in Leicestershire the Swithland slate-quarries, which had been worked since Henry III's time, shut down altogether in 1887; and so it was in nearly every county in England.
All regional styles and all local materials were exterminated except where the well-to-do could afford to build deliberately in the old manner, with the aid of an architect.
What had been the living style of a whole region, modified to suit all classes of people, became a piece of pleasant antiquarianism for a rich man.
The nineteenth-century expansion of London in general and west London in particular was complex and not by any means always related to the arrival of the railways.
In many areas the coming of the horse trams and later the electric trams, of which almost all traces have gone, were a far greater influence.
Often the policies of individual railway companies determined what happened As Professor Simmonds has pointed out the Great Western was mainly concerned with long distance traffic in its early years.
Though stations were built on the main line west of Paddington after its opening in 1838 the initial suburban service was poor and the passenger receipts small.
Only at Ealing was there large-scale housing development at this time.
It was not until the Metropolitan Railway was linked to this line at Paddington, thus enabling through trains to run to the City.
that traffic developed and new housing estates appeared elsewhere.
Even then the existing double track limited services.
only when the track was quadrupled in 1879 did residential development begin in earnest in this port of London.
Though Ealing itself doubled in size between 1861 and 1871 and grew by over half in each of the two following decades, the first of these increases can hardly have been the result of the railway services although the later ones may have been.
9
THE LANDSCAPE OF TOWNS
Introduction
Writing in the 1950s, Professor Hoskins rightly criticised the lack of detailed topographical studies of towns at that time.
Since then the situation has improved greatly.
There have been numerous large-scale excavations on historic towns, many individual historical studies and a variety of general works on urban origins and development.
As a result we now know much more about the beginnings of towns in England as well as about their growth at all periods.
Professor Hoskins divided towns into those he called planned, those described as open-field towns and those which were market towns.
While there is still much validity in that classification, it is perhaps more interesting to analyse towns, at least to begin with, in terms of their origin.
The most important and certainly the commonest form of town is the planned town, using the work ‘planned’ in its widest sense.
It is now clear that there are very few towns which just grew because they were at suitable locations.
Certainly geography helped and prevailing economic conditions played an important part, but most towns seem to have come into existence as a result of conscious decisions.
Thus the term planning encompasses not only those places whose form shows clearly that an overall scheme lay behind the layout of streets, but also towns which, whatever form they acquired, were pushed into existence and developed by the active support of individuals or institutions.
Excluding Roman towns, the earliest planned towns of England can be identified in late Saxon times.
These appear to be of two types.
The first are those which developed from what have been called ‘proto-urban’ settlements.
That is they are places which, well before 800 AD, had characteristics which were already marked as different in function from the normal agricultural settlements of the period.
The most important of these characteristics were that they were the administrative centres of royal estates, or more rarely great ecclesiastical estates.
They were already the centres of civil administration, often derived from earlier minor kingdoms or tribal units, they usually possessed an early minster church and so were centres of ecclesiastical administration and they had already acquired some marketing functions more important than those of their neighbours.
Most of these places also are physically very close to known important earlier settlements such as Roman towns, large Roman villas or a semi-urban Roman settlement, or even an Iron Age hill-fort, the latter often reused temporarily in early Saxon times.
PLATE 106.
This simple building in the Lea Valley at Walthamstow in London was at the end of its life a pumping station belonging to the Metropolitan Water Board.
Together with the great reservoirs that lie around it typifies the enormous impact of Victorian and later public works on the English landscape.
Yet its full history is much more complicated.
It stands on the site of a watermill recorded in Domesday Book as belonging to the Manor of Walthamstow.
The mill was used for grinding corn until the seventeenth century.
Then it was variously used to produce gunpowder flour and paper.
The existing building dates from the 1740s when it became an oil mill for linseed In 1808 it was bought by the British Copper Company and was used for producing copper sheets In 1860 it was purchased by the East London Water Company and rebuilt as a pumping station.
The tower was added in 1864 and it passed to the Metropolitan Water Board in 1904.
The implication of all this is that such places had perhaps been important as estates or administrative centres as well as having marketing functions long before late Saxon times and thus could be developed into true towns fairly easily.
They also had a pattern of routeways radiating from them, originating from centuries before.
These later towns might then have been either assisted in their development by their royal or ecclesiastical lords or owners, or actually given a regular street pattern and/or a market place to encourage them to grow and expand.
Towns of this category include Canterbury, Rochester and Faversham in Kent, Abingdon in Berkshire, Bradford on Avon in Wiltshire, Dorchester in Dorset, Lincoln, York and Carlisle.
Some of these have rectangular layouts of streets which seem to date from late Saxon times, as at Winchester and Guildford.
PLATE 107.
The urban motorway of Newcastle-upon-Tyne is perhaps the ultimate in the drive to destroy totally the historic landscape of towns for the sake of short-term convenience and gain.
By far the largest and most important of this type of town, curiously ignored by Professor Hoskins here, and elsewhere.
was London.
As recent work indicated.
it too was redeveloped within its older Roman walls on a huge scale in late Saxon times.
The.
surviving street plan of the City, with the exception of the late nineteenth-century alterations, is in fact arranged in a regular grid which dates from the end of the Saxon period.
The second type of late Saxon town, which overlaps in some cases with the first, is the fortified burghs.
These were founded either by the late Saxon kings from Alfred onwards to protect their kingdom from the Scandinavian invaders or by the Scandinavians themselves, partly for defence, and partly tor the encouragement of trade.
The Altredian burghs of southern England include Shaftesbury and Wareham in Dorset, and Wilton and Cricklade in Wiltshire.
Worcester, Heretord and Towcester, Warwick and Stafford are among the later English burghs, while the Scandinavian burghs include Derby, Manchester and Leicester.
Some towns had more than one burgh.
Stamford, one of Hoskins' ‘open-field’ towns, is actually made up of a Danish burgh, founded in 877 on the north side of the River Welland and consisting of a roughly rectangular block bisected by the east-west High Street, and an English burgh to the south of the river founded by King Edward in 918, and consisting of a neat rectangular area bisected by the north-south St Martins High Street.
Cambridge is even more complex.
North of the River Cam, re-using the older Roman town, was the late eighth-century Mercian burgh which had another fortified town south of the river crossing added to it in the late ninth century by the Danish soldiers and traders.
The latter had the present Bridge Street as its main road with the significantly dedicated St Clements Church halfway along it.
A few years later in 917 King Edward added a vast planned town to the south, laid out on a slightly skewed grid and with a massive open market place on its east.
This work in Cambridge was also accompanied by the diversion of the river from its original channel to one alongside the new town.
Most of this grid, incidentally, was later destroyed by the growth of the University and Colleges, though fragments of it still exist.
The next type of planned town includes those which are reasonably well dated to the tenth to thirteenth centuries and which were clearly new planned urban centres added on to existing villages by their owners as attempts to encourage trade.
Many of the towns on the Banbury map which Professor Hoskins referred to in the previous chapter fall into this category.
Bicester (1239), Banbury (1123–38), Woodstock (1154–74), Chipping Norton (about 1150) and Deddington (before 1190) are examples.
Elsewhere in England there are many more.
Daventry and Oundle in Northamptonshire, Ely and Wisbech in Cambridgeshire, St Albans and Peterborough are more examples.
Some of these were strictly castle towns, that is, they were planted against the gates of a newly built castle of the late eleventh century, such as Ludlow.
Alnwick, Pontefract and Launceston.
All these, if examined carefully, show in their arrangements of streets or patterns of roads the impact imposed on them by their ‘planning lords’.
The best of all the planned towns are those such as New Winchelsea (1288) and Salisbury (1290) which were apparently laid out de novo on previously empty sites from the late eleventh century to the fourteenth   century.
again as deliberate acts of commercial exploitation.
Such towns often show their unencumbered planned origins by the grid-pattern of streets, or generally rectangular layout, and they include not only the obvious planned towns such as those noted by Professor Hoskins at Kingston-upon-Hull (1293) and Strattord-upon Avon (1196) but also Newmarket, Suffolk (1217–23), Market Harborough (1167–77), Liverpool (1207), Leeds (1207) and North Shields (1225).
All these still have clues in their plans to show their origins.
At Leeds, for example, the grid of streets between the present railway station and the significantly named The Headrow, though now much mutilated by modern development, is still that laid out by Maurice de Paynel in the early thirteenth century.
New towns continued to be founded right through the medieval period though after the early thirteenth century the changing economic conditions were no longer ideal for their development and the process tailed oft Queenborough, Kent (1368) is said to be the latest medieval planned town, though Bewdley, Worcestershire (soon after 1477), is probably the last one.
During the High Middle Ages, many of these towns were successful and soon expanded.
Many merely developed by ribbon expansion along existing streets, but others had additional planned elements added, as had happened earlier at Cambridge and Stamtord.
Banbury had a completely new suburb significantly called Newland added to the older town between 1250 and 1285, only a little over a hundred years after it had been first founded, a mark of its success, while Eynsham, also in Oxfordshire, has a neat rectangular block of properties, bisected by Newland Street which dates from 1215 when a charter was acquired for an extension.
The original town had been founded with a new market place in 1135–9 by the Benedictine abbey there.
PLATE 108.
Bolton Town Hall Lancashire, by William Hill, 1866–73.
A Victorian public building on a grand scale, even if the French top of the tower sits rather oddly on the rest of the classical design.
After the sixteenth century few new towns were established.
Whitehaven in Cumbria was begun in 1660 by the local Lowther family and given a spacious grid of streets and a new harbour.
It soon became a successful coal port and ship-building centre.
The growth of the British Empire and in particular the requirements of the Royal Navy produced Chatham in 1622 and Devonport in the late seventeenth century.
At the old medieval naval base of Portsmouth the planned suburb of Portsea was added in the early eighteenth century to house the workers in the new and expanded dockyard.
More important in producing new forms of urban life was the general prosperity of the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, coupled with new ideas of social life and architecture brought in from abroad.
Up to then there had been little social division in towns and houses were crowded in on themselves in a formless way.
Expansion of population was often solved by sub-division of plots and infilling of open spaces, particularly markets.
But from the 1630s the idea of high class residential areas was introduced from Italy.
The first expression of this was the Earl of Bedford's estate of Covent Garden in London which included the idea of an Italian piazza or open space surrounded by terraces of uniform houses.
The concept was taken up elsewhere in London and the beginnings of the great pattern of squares Bloomsbury Square in 1661, St James's Square in 1665 and Soho Square in 1690) with their associated terraced streets began to emerge.
This concept of squares, and more particularly terraced houses, was to dominate urban planning for the next two hundred years.
It first produced the glories of Bath, and later still Buxton and a whole series of resort towns such as Tunbridge Wells, Cheltenham and Leamington Spa.
The development of industry, and the coming of the railways, produced towns that were essentially planned, at least in outline, even if the detailed building work was done piecemeal.
Middleshrough is especially mentioned by Professor Hoskins, as is Stourport as a canal town.
Goole, in Humberside, was a planned canal port founded by the Aire and Calder Navigation Company in 1819 while the railway towns of Crewe.
Wolverton and Eastleigh have been discussed earlier.
other resort towns came in the nineteenth century.
The earliest is Scarborough, begun in the seventeenth century; the most famous, with its magnificent squares and ubiquitous terraces, is Brighton, begun soon after 1750.
Melcombe Regis acquired the first of its grand planned terraces in the 1780s.
Grid planning was immensely popular and extensions of old medieval towns as well as the new industrial towns went on apace in this fashion.
In Birmingham the Colmore family laid out a new suburb on a neat grid in the 1740s on their land north-west of the existing town centre.
Its traces are still just visible amongst the wreckage of the modern urban motorway system.
Ashton-under-Lyne was   given a rigid grid of wide streets by the Earls of Stamtord after 1758 when it was becoming an important cotton town.
PLATE 109.
Bedford Square, London.
Up until the middle of the seventeenth century this part of London (Holborn) was still open fields.
Houses and some streets appeared after 1660 but it was not until 1775 when Bedford Square was laid out that the growth of Bloomsbury began.
Within fifty years the area was entirely built over with a population of nearly 70,000.
Bedford Square is not only the oldest of the Bloomsbury development it is also the only one that remains complete.
Planning of this type covered large areas of most English towns by the late nineteenth century.
The process has continued ever since.
New towns have continued to appear, though by the late nineteenth century novel concepts of housing produced very different layouts and appearance, best seen at, for example, Letchworth, the first garden city in 1903, and later at Welwyn Garden City in 1920.
More recently, a whole new series of planned towns, including Crawley, Bracknell, Stevenage, Harlow and most notable of all, Milton Keynes, have appeared.
Much of the foregoing has concentrated on the origins and physical plans of towns.
But much exists in their architecture to tell us of the social conditions, wealth, success or decline of towns.
Not all periods of a town's history are visible in its buildings.
In many cases the more successful a town the less likely is the chance of seeing its early development.
The late medieval story of a small place such as Thaxted, with its mass of late medieval timber buildings, survives because it failed to develop after its early period of prosperity as a wool town.
The joys of Stourport result from the failure of the canals and their replacement by railways.
Birmingham is less attractive because it has remained the commercial centre of the Midlands.
All towns, if one wishes to understand landscapes rather than to gain inner pleasure from beauty, have much to offer, despite Professor Hoskins' strictures.
The modern centre of Coventry is as much a reflection of mid-twentieth-century ideals, demands and greed, as the centre of Saffron Walden is of those of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The gentility of Harrogate shows what upper-class people thought suitable in the early nineteenth century, as Basingstoke, with its urban carriageways and new industries, shows our demands today.
Milton Keynes can tell us a great deal about late twentieth-century hopes and aims in a democratic car-owning society, quite apart from having the best range of modern domestic architecture in England.
Detailed work in recent years has given us new insights into how nineteenth-century towns developed.
Professor Dyos' study of Camberwell was the first in a series of examinations which have enabled us to see how the ubiquitous terraced streets of our great cities were laid out and slowly built up in a highly complex way, for a whole series of social and economic reasons.
Today we often ignore large areas of terraced housing and merely regard it as ‘late nineteenth-century development’, forgetting perhaps that most of the population was then housed in them and indeed still is today.
We ought to be more concerned as to exactly how they came into being.
Even the great spread of inter-war surburban houses, such as those which line the Kingston by-pass in Surrey, have a fascinating story to tell of the growth of such areas if we are prepared to look at them properly.
Not all towns were a success and the English landscape is littered with total failures.
Lydford, in Devon, still has the abandoned streets of a late Saxon burgh which never succeeded.
Newport in the Isle of Wight with its grid of lanes and isolated Guildhall is a failed planned town of 1177–84, as are the villages of Hindon, Wiltshire (1219–20), Holme in Cambridgeshire (before 1107) and Newborough in Staffordshire (1100–39).
Dunwich in Suffolk was swept away by the sea, while at a later date Tenbury Wells, founded as a spa in 1839, never took off.
Even in this century there have been failures.
Mundesley in Norfolk was intended to be a new resort town in 1900 but never succeeded.
THE LANDSCAPE OF TOWNS
There are many different ways of looking at a town for the first time.
One of them — a little old-fashioned perhaps, for I do not see many people doing it nowadays — is to walk around it guide-book in hand, best of all with one of those old Murray's Handbooks for Travellers , the most catholic, the most informative, the most solid guide-books ever written in this country; still well worth buying though the last one came out nearly fifty years ago and one must hunt for them with increasing difficulty in the second-hand bookshops.
We may study with our guide-books all the historic, individual features of a town and get to know them.
But then — if we are taking our time and stay to look at the town as a whole, walk around it in the cool and quiet of the evening when the shops are shut, and the traffic has gone home, and we can really see its contours and its bone-structure — other questions begin to arise in the mind, which even the best of guide-books does not answer.
Why is the town just like this, this shape, this plan, this size?
Why do its streets run in this particular way and not in some other way that seems more logical to us?
Why are there sometimes two market places, why are the ancient churches just where they are?— and so on.
In short, what gives the town this particular landscape?
Here even the best of guide-books fails us.
Indeed, there are no books at all to answer our question.
The historians also fail us — in this country, at least— for they have not studied the topography of towns as they have in Germany and France.
We have nothing like Louis Halphen's great topographical study of the growth of Paris; or the work of Keussen and Koebner on the physical development of Cologne, or of Des Marez on the city of Ghent.
This lack is astonishing when one thinks of the innumerable ancient towns of England that richly deserve such a study.
There are, of course, many scholarly books on boroughs in their institutional aspects, their political history and their administration.
But one looks in vain for any discussion of their physical growth, where their original core lay, of the directions in which they grew, and when and why, and of what accounts for their street plan and their shape today.
The nearest we have to this in England is one chapter by the American scholar Carl Stephenson in his book Borough and Town .
Written over twenty years ago, it is admittedly a tentative sketch put on in the hope that some English historians and archaeologists would set to work in a more expert way and on a bigger scale.
But still very little has been done: only medieval Lincoln and modern Brighton have had some attention recently.
What is the point of studying towns in this way?
For me, at least— and I think for most people who travel around this country for pleasure, that is , to see things — it is simply that one gets a greater depth of pleasure out of knowing the anatomy of a town and why it takes that particular form and not just its superficial features, however attractive they may be individually.
It may well be that when the archaeologists and historians have studied a sufficient number of towns intensively in this country, as they have done abroad, we shall add something appreciable to our knowledge of English history, knowledge which we could get in no other way.
But this is looking a long way ahead.
In the meantime one studies them as landscapes, so to speak, simply to heighten one's pleasure in sight-seeing, to get behind the superficial appearances, to uncover the layers of the palimpsest and to see, for example, a piece of the tenth century in the way a street makes an abrupt turn or does something else unexpected.
The Planned Town
Street-plans raise a multitude of questions.
Why are certain English towns, for example, laid out on a gridiron pattern with straight streets crossing each other at right angles, sometimes at fixed distances apart, like a mid-western American city?
Towns, moreover, so utterly dissimilar in other ways — Salisbury and Middlesbrough, Barrow-in-Furness and Winchelsea?
From a topographical point of view, these planned towns are the simplest towns to understand: but even here we are confronted with a number of questions at the outset.
Why are there so few planned towns in this country?
Why were most English towns left to grow up in more or less haphazard fashion?
What determined that a particular town should be planned with this regular layout of streets and building-plots?
Why, again, are the planned towns scattered about the country in so haphazard a way, and so different in age and social type — Salisbury's plan belongs to the thirteenth century (Fig. 9, p. 93), Middlesbrough's to the nineteenth.
And why are certain parts of a great city like Birmingham planned on the gridiron pattern, and the rest of it just a jumbled, inchoate mess?
We look into the records and another question emerges.
While some, indeed most, planned towns established themselves successfully, others proved completely abortive, never came to life at all despite all the activity of the planners, including the king himself.
For the viability of towns depends in the last resort on a solid economic foundation.
Planned towns were deliberate attempts to exploit the economic possibilities of a site; and like any other investment could go wrong.
On the southern shore of Poole Bay in Dorset, directly opposite the ancient port of Poole, is the site of a completely still-born royal town — Nova Villa.
King Edward 1, that great town-planner, gave it a charter in 1286, conferring upon it all the liberties and privileges of the City of London.
A site was chosen; two townplanners appointed (one of them a parson), the town marked out on the ground: but all in vain.
Nothing happened.
In Elizabethan days, three hundred years later, the solitary farm of Newton, standing upon the heath that petered out in the muddy flats of the bay, alone marked the site of Edward I's ‘new town’.
Leaving aside the Romans, whose tradition of town-planning had been completely forgotten after their departure, the earliest piece of town-planning that we know of in England is that carried out by Abbot Baldwin at Bury St Edmunds, between 1066 and 1086.
This plan is still very easily picked out today as one walks about the streets of Bury.
The little border town of Ludlow may well be a twelfth-century example of planning on a smaller and more rudimentary scale, but the most notable examples come from the thirteenth century — Salisbury, New Winchelsea, the five bastide towns laid out by Edward I in North Wales, and part of Kingston-upon-Hull, laid out by Edward from 1293 onwards.
Hull was already an important seaport in the twelfth century.
Edward did not create it from nothing, but he founded a new town — King's Town — on the old site, which he manipulated especially on the western side.
At Stratford-upon-Avon, the Bishop of Worcester (who owned the entire manor) obtained the grant of a market in 1196 and proceeded to lay out a new town forthwith.
He set aside an area of one hundred and nine acres to the east of the original Saxon village (called Old Town to this day) and on it laid out a regular plan of streets — three running parallel with the river and three others crossing them at right angles.
This elementary plan survives unchanged as the core of the modern town.
As already discussed, Bury St Edmunds is not the earliest planned town.
There are numerous towns which had already been founded in late Saxon times either as commercial centres or as fortified burghs.
Again, as discussed in the Introduction, medieval towns continued to be founded until the fifteenth century.
The impulse to produce planned towns, such as it was, had died out by 1300.
Then we get no more until the planned development of more or less large estates in the late eighteenth-century towns — notably, of course, the spas, but also in such unlikely places as Birmingham and (early in the nineteenth century) Ashton-under-Lyne.
Finally, in the middle decades of the nineteenth century, we get once again whole new towns created on the gridiron pattern, of which the outstanding  examples are the iron and steel towns of Middlesbrough and Barrow-in-Furness.
It is curious, by the way, that the gridiron plan should have gone on so long.
It is the simplest and most obvious layout, but there are, of course, other patterns — such as the radial pattern of so many modern housing estates — and it is odd that these others should not have been tried out until within our own time.
When we study the planned towns of England, we arrive at the first, and obvious, conclusion that to make a planned town required the absolute ownership of the site by one man or corporation.
This immediately limited the number of towns that could be planned, for most English towns have developed from villages, and their sites had been partly built on for centuries before they developed into towns.
More important than that (for medieval village buildings could have been swept away as easily as the Romans had swept away the native British buildings for their planned towns)— a variety of ownerships and rights had grown up that precluded a unified plan even as early as the twelfth or thirteenth century.
True, these property rights could have been dealt with by a determined planner, but the fact remains that they were not.
At Bury, for instance, the abbey owned the whole site and could lay it out as it pleased.
At Salisbury, in the 1220s, the Bishop of Sarum was able to plan a complete new city on his own meadows by the Avon (Fig. 9).
At New Winchelsea and in North Wales, the king was dealing with his own land, as he was also on the abortive site of New Town beside Poole Bay.
In Birmingham the planned area — all that part to the west of Snow Hill station today — was formerly the New Hall estate of the Colmore family.
Their park was given over as a whole for building development, and laid out on the gridiron pattern in the middle decades of the eighteenth century.
At Barrow-in-Furness the site of the new town was owned by the dukes of Devonshire, one of whom was responsible for its planning in the middle decades of the nineteenth century.
At Middlesbrough in 1829 a syndicate of six Quakers bought a site of five hundred acres beside the Tees, and created their planned town upon the empty farmland, drawing their straight lines and making their rectangles without hindrance from any legal or physical obstacle.
But to say that the planned town required a single ownership of the site does not go to the root of the matter.
Most English towns have grown from Anglo-Saxon villages, but, particularly in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, landowners were founding new towns all over England — and indeed all over Europe.
In the one county of Devon, for example, sixty or so boroughs were created by optimistic landowners, of which one half failed to come to anything.
Population was increasing, trade and industry growing; it was an expanding economy with wonderful new opportunities for making money if one could only strike the right spot.
Very few English towns can really be said to have ‘developed’ from villages.
Almost all had some form of conscious planning or deliberate encouragement from their lords to give them urban status.
It is possible that a few minor markets did grow slowly from an earlier village but they are difficult to discover.
Chatteris in the Cambridgeshire fens might be a rare example.
Much of the original Middlesbrough no longer exists Most of the slums which developed from the complex succession of nineteenth-century grid blocks have now been swept away in modern re-development.
So landowners, from the king down to relatively small provincial lords, founded boroughs right and left, especially where they saw merchants and traders already congregating at some convenient spot — near the protection of a castle or an abbey, which were considerable markets also, at some important river-crossing, and so on.
Why, then, were only half-a-dozen of these new towns properly laid out on a predetermined plan, and the vast majority left to grow haphazard with narrow, irregular, winding streets, odd little lanes everywhere, and all the other attributes of the picturesque today?
There were two principal reasons for this: one was that medieval men had no a priori love of symmetry.
The planned town is an aberration, not the norm.
Secondly, the planning of a new town-laying out the lines of streets, lanes, markets, churches and house-plots over a considerable area — required, after all, the investment of a large amount of capital, and a greater degree of economic optimism than most landowners could contemplate.
The planned town is the product of the big capitalists — kings, bishops, abbots, in medieval times; town corporations, dukes and Quaker syndicates in modern times.
And today, only the state can    afford to lay out a complete new town.
PLATE 110.
West Pier, Brighton, Sussex.
Brighton is usually seen as a genteel late eighteenth-century resort favoured by the Prince of Wales.
So it was, though its real period of early development was in the 1820s, still as a select upper-class watering place.
Then in 1841 the railway arrived, and the ‘people's Brighton’ began.
It expanded from 47,000 people in 1841 to 102,000 in 1901 and in 1860 nearly 150,000 people came to the town by excursion train in two successive days.
Now millions of visitors come every year for day trips and holidays.
The West Pier, built in 1863–6 and lengthened in 1893, represents the later Brighton as the famous Pavilion does its beginning.
Most landlords, even bishops and abbots, made no attempt to lay out their new towns.
They gave them charters, sometimes supplied building materials, offered low rents and other inducements, but they were content to let the town grow — if it was to grow — as it liked within the prescribed area.
And when that area was satisfactorily filled, they were prepared to extend the boundaries of the borough by granting more land for building, as happened at Scarborough in 1256 (Plate 111) or at Newcastle-on-Tyne in 1298.
To plan a whole town at once was a highly risky investment.
We know, for example, that at Kingston-upon-Hull fewer than half the building plots in the royal town had been taken up by 1320, a generation after the original planning.
At New Winchelsea many of the thirty-nine squares or chequers into which the town-site had been divided in the 1280s were never built upon, but remained under grass and can be seen to this day.
These were all royal foundations.
Few other landowners could afford to wait a generation for the return of their money, if it was to come back at all.
It was far safer to start a town off with a charter, a market and a fair, and a few other practical inducements to settlers, and then to sit back and hope for the best.
Let it grow automatically as new groups of traders and merchants directed their steps there and decided eventually to settle and build there.
No landowner — not even the king — could create a new town if people did not want it.
It remained empty or half-empty despite all the inducements.
We do not know why New Town, on Poole Bay, failed so completely to come off.
It is one of those nice little problems of local history.
In a general way, I suppose it was still-born because the town of Poole lay only four miles across the bay, founded about forty years before by William Longsword, Earl of Salisbury, and the new town of Edward's, for all its royal backing and privileges of the City of London, could not compete with it.
The earl had got in first on this wonderful anchorage, and the advantage remained with his town.
PLATE 111.
Scarborough.
The first settlement can be precisely dated.
It was in 966 or 967 that the Norsman Thorgills Skarthi (Hare Lip) founded it below the great fortified headland that was thereafter called Skarthi's Burh or stronghold.
The earliest village probably lay along the waterfront of the inner harbour.
In the mid-twelfth century a castle was built on the headland and a new town laid out below it.
Within a hundred years the town had grown westwards and in 1256 Henry III granted land outside the walls for, new planned extension to the borough.
This extension is today marked by the street called Newborough.
Scarborough remained a prosperous if small town until the seventeenth century when, after the discovery of medicinal springs, it became a fashionable spa.
Sea bathing developed in the mid-eighteenth century but it still remained somewhat select until the railway arrived.
The mighty Grand Hotel of 1863 and the rows of Victorian terraces tell of a different type of resort when it became Yorkshire's equivalent to Lancashire's Blackpool.
It is likely that Newtown in Poole Harbour failed, as Professor Hoskins suggests, because of the proximity of Poole.
This was not an uncommon feature.
The Bishops of Winchester laid out a new town at their manor of Downton in Wiltshire, in 1208–9.
It failed because in 1219 the Bishop of Salisbury founded New Salisbury, eight miles to the north on a better site.
Now only a great rectangular green, known as the Borough, exists at Downton to mark this abortive town.
Down in Cornwall, it was difficult to attract the natives into the new towns at all.
Like all Celtic people they preferred to live in the country.
So, though medieval landowners founded nearly forty boroughs in the county, few of them ever got going as towns.
Most were futile experiments.
In fact they became the rotten  boroughs of later centuries.
Even those that succeeded in coming alive were populated in their early days mostly by foreigners, that is, by non-Cornishmen, or they too would have failed.
There were in fact great risks in starting a new town, or at least in investing money in it.
One needed considerable capital and a long-term view to risk a completely planned town, and preferably also the certainty that the demand was there and could not fail — as in New Sarum in the thirteenth century or Middlesbrough and Barrow in the nineteenth.
And so, for these and other reasons, the planned town has always been the exception in England, and derives most of its special interest from that fact.
As suggested above, planned towns are probably the norm rather than the exception in England.
The Open-Field Town
The planned towns are the easiest kind of urban landscape to understand, and perhaps for that reason the least interesting to the curious traveller — however attractive they may be to look at.
They satisfy our curiosity too soon.
Now let us explore what lies behind the contemporary appearance of quite another group of towns: towns which reveal nothing at first sight of their secret, physical history, and which indeed seem to have little or nothing in common as one looks at them and around their streets.
As we explore the ramifications of their anatomy we shall encounter a good deal of the stupidity, the greed and self-interest, the plain conservatism — just human resistance to change of any kind — as well as the pure evil of human nature, working itself out in bricks and stone and mortar.
Let us look at those towns that grew up in the midst of their own open fields, that entered the nineteenth century with their population rising at a phenomenal rate, but were wholly unable to expand their building area to meet this rise in numbers.
They were still held within the vice of their own fields, with all the complicated property rights which made it impossible to secure land for building development.
Most effective of all in stopping any new building were the Lammas pasture rights — that is, the right of burgesses, or some of them, to graze their cattle and sheep over the open fields after the harvest had been taken in.
The town fields might well be private property and held by only half-a-dozen farmers.
The burgess might have no land at all in the fields; but he had this right to graze his cattle after Lammas over any man's lands, freely and wherever he liked.
It sounds a trivial thing — this common pasture right for six months of the year — but it had the most devastating effect on town development, in the Midlands above all.
The consequences are almost unbelievable until one follows them out.
There are, in the east Midlands, three towns lying fairly close together that illustrate well the physical consequences of this situation — Nottingham, Leicester and Stamford.
Until about two hundred years ago, they had developed along pretty much the same lines.
They differ very markedly from each other today.
For in each instance the problem of expansion was solved or evaded in a different way, and produced as a result towns with very different characteristics.
Nottingham failed to solve the problem until too late and created as a consequence some of the worst slums in any town in England.
Leicester solved it just in time and produced a town that spilled widely across the surrounding fields and gave its working class bigger and better houses, and wider streets, than almost anywhere else in industrial England.
Stamford failed entirely to solve the problem of its open fields; but whereas Nottingham created its slums, Stamford fossilised into the beautiful seventeenth- and eighteenth-century town we see today, a museum piece from a pre-industrial England.
Some two to three hundred years ago, Nottingham was one of the most beautiful towns in England.
All travellers were agreed about this.
Thomas Baskerville, who saw it in the 1680s, called it ‘Paradise Restored, for here you find large streets, fair built houses, fine   women, and many coaches rattling about, and their shops full of merchantable goods’.
For Celia Fiennes, a few years later, it was a favourite town by which she judged all others — and generally found them wanting.
It was, she said, the neatest town she had ever seen.
And Dr Charles Deering, who settled there after a wandering career, said that ‘were a naturalist in Quest of an exquisite Spot to build a Town or a City, could he meet with one that would better answer his Wishes?’
PLATE 112.
This now historic photograph of Leeds shows how the nineteenth-century terraced houses were fitted into the pre-existing pattern of fields.
The agricultural past thus shows through into the urban present.
Three generations later, Nottingham had become a squalid mess.
‘I believe,’ said the commissioner who reported on it to the Health of Towns Commission in 1845,
that nowhere else shall we find so large a mass of inhabitants crowded into courts, alleys, and lames as in Nottingham, and those, too, of the worst possible construction.
Here they are so clustered upon each other; court within court, yard within yard, and lane within lane, in a manner to defy description….
Some parts of Nottingham [are]so very bad as hardly to be surpassed in misery by anything to be found within the entire range of our manufacturing cities.
In an England that contained the slums of Manchester and Liverpool, Leeds and east London, this was strong language indeed.
What had happened to destroy so utterly the Paradise Restored of Thomas Baskerville, the neat town of Celia Fiennes, the exquisite spot of Charles Deering, to destroy it in the short space of three generations?
To the north and south of the town, gripping it along three quarters of its circuit, lay nearly eleven hundred acres of open fields, far more than enough land for housing the new industrial population.
But until these fields were enclosed, until their multitudinous strips were reallotted in large compact blocks of land, and until the rights of common pasture over them were extinguished, it was impossible to get a single acre for building.
The burgesses with pasture rights steadfastly refused to allow the enclosure of the fields.
Borough elections were fought on this issue.
Candidates who wanted enclosure were burned in effigy, their supporters wheeled about in muck-carts in the robust eighteenth-century fashion.
Even the freeholders in the fields — who were willing to have enclosure so that they could farm more efficiently or sell land for building — were helpless in the face of the burgesses who might have no land but who hoped to get a piece in time, or who already held these rights to graze their cattle and sheep.
PLATE 113.
Broad Street, Stamford, Lincolnshire, marks the line of the north side of the planned Danish burgh, laid out in around 877.
An earlier name, Beastmarket, indicates the reason for its width.
It presumably developed as an extramural market place.
By the nineteenth century it was a highly respectable area lived in by bankers amongst others.
The high quality houses show this.
FIG. 13.
Plan of a typical court in Nottingham (taken from the Report of the Royal Commission on the State of the Large Towns, 1845) showing the intense pressure on building land as a result of the failure to enclose the surrounding open fields.
Notice the back-to-back houses, the tunnel entrances to the completely enclosed court, and the primitive sanitation.
This ‘Cowocracy’, as they were called, were not entirely blind to the evils of slums and overcrowding.
But they had a lively fear that enclosure might rob them of their valuable rights — rights which made a real difference to their standard and their mode of living — in the interests of the large freeholders and a corporation known to be corrupt.
Then, too, there were those who opposed enclosure because there was no guarantee that any open spaces would be reserved for the public benefit; and, as things stood, the slum-dweller in Nottingham could at least walk in the adjacent fields and get some fresh air.
Enclosure might result in every acre being grabbed by private owners, who would sell for speculative building.
Most of the opponents of enclosure at Nottingham were not, therefore, mere villains.
They had some good reason on their side.
But their refusal to enclose had the effect of creating another class of opponents of a blacker hue — the owners of slum property.
The town could not grow outwards.
So every garden, every orchard, every foot of open space within the old confines, was doled out piecemeal at exorbitant prices for building.
Even streets were too extravagant of space: courts and alleys enabled more houses to be packed into a given area: and where, in Deering's day, the apple or the cherry orchard had blown in springtime, courts of back-to-back houses now faced each other across an open drain (Fig. 13).
In some parts there were eight hundred persons living — if that is the word — on one acre of ground: one person to every six square yards.
FIG. 14.
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT IN  NOTTINGHAMSHIRE AFTER THE ENCLOSURE OF THE OPEN FIELDS The map shows the development of part of Clay Field after the enclosure.
The heavy black lines represent the boundaries of the separate allotments made to private owners by the enclosure commissioners.
There were about four hundred of these allotments, most of which were immediately ‘developed’ by their owners without the slightest reference to neighbouring allotments and owners The pattern of the roads and streets was largely determined by the medieval footpaths and furlongs of the open fields.
Thus Victorian Nottingham is largely built upon lines determined many centuries ago (see J.D. Chambers, A Century of Nottingham History, 1851–1951 University of Nottingham, 1952).
Reproduced by permission of Dr J.D. Chambers and of the Ordnance.Survey.
Even the schools were built in the corners of crowded burial grounds, or over public sewers into which they slowly sank.
Rents for these appalling houses — eight thousand back-to-backs, rising three storeys with single rooms piled one on top of the other — took a high proportion of a working-class income.
Nottingham's own historian, Dr Chambers, reckons that altogether the slum property of the town produced an annual return of forty thousand pounds, some of which went to building-clubs financed by small artisans.
Not all the slum-owners were big men.
So an unholy alliance of cow-keepers and slum-owners repeatedly elected the kind of corporation that would fight to the death ‘the unsightly monster’ of enclosure — as the mayor called it in 1825.
When, at last, the reformed corporation carried through the enclosure in 1845, and the town could burst outwards, the damage had been done (Fig. 14).
Three times as many people had been packed into the old confines as could prudently be housed there, even by the low standards of a hundred years ago, and the slums of Nottingham have remained a byword down to our own day.
Not until the 1920s and 1930s could a real clearance be made of this formidable mess, and a newer Nottingham begin to appear out of it.
At Leicester, twenty miles away, with much the same kind of industrial and population history, things happened quite differently.
Here the three open fields which practically surrounded the ancient town had all been enclosed before the need for more building land had become desperate.
One great field, lying to the east and north-east of the town, had been enclosed in 1764 — in good time for the population increase — and the town proceeded to grow comfortably in that direction.
There was almost unlimited space for Leicester to expand; and in 1845 the commissioners were able to report that the town ‘was spread over an unusual extent of ground in proportion to its population’.
Many large gardens were still to be seen, even in the centre of the town.
The newer streets were wider than the average of manufacturing towns.
The wind could blow through them and the sun shine upon them, unlike the courts of Nottingham.
The working-class homes seldom rose above two storeys.
Moreover, these houses had four rooms, and each room was bigger than its Nottingham counterpart; and there was rarely more than one family per house.
They generally had ample yards, often little gardens, and were better built than those of most industrial towns.
Leicester was no Paradise Restored: its flat site led to difficult drainage problems and mortality was high even by the standards of the time, but there was nothing remotely resembling the horrors of Nottingham.
Stamford presented quite another case again.
The open fields hemmed in the town along its entire northern side, while on the southern side Burghley Park and the farmlands of the Cecils offered not an acre for expansion.
Here the open fields survived until 1872.
Until that late date, the Cecils successfully opposed any move to enclose the fields, for reasons which were never fully disclosed at the time.
But the main reason is clear enough.
The borough of Stamford returned two members to Parliament, the franchise being restricted to householders.
Since the end of the seventeenth century the Cecils, at Burghley House just outside the town, had controlled the election of both members by a combination of methods that seemed to leave no loophole for a mistake.
There was, indeed, one possible loophole.
Squatters on the waste of the manor, at the fringe of the open fields, erected hovels and tried to stake a claim.
But the Marquess of Exeter (as the Cecils had become in 1801) pulled down these hovels instantly, and prosecuted the squatters.
Why?
Because every house that went up and stayed up represented a certain vote against his political nominees.
With all his elaborate political machinery — his control of all the tradesmen in the town and of all the town's six advowsons, his ownership of some two hundred houses each carrying a vote, his absolute control of the Mayor, the corporation and all the corporation offices — the Marquess of Exeter could not be absolutely certain that the remaining voters would not one day oust his candidates.
There were too many houses he did not own; and he could not afford to see any more built.
In a town that chafed under this tyranny, every new house that went up was a vote against the Cecil interest.
For the same reason, therefore, he could not allow the open fields to be enclosed.
That would have meant some twelve hundred acres freed for building, a catastrophic thought.
True, he owned a good deal of this land and could stop any building on his own acres.
But there was much he did not own.
As lord of the manor, his consent was necessary to the procuring of any act of parliament for the enclosure of the town fields: and that consent was never forthcoming.
If Stamford had been a vigorous industrial town like Nottingham or Leicester, the results of this feudal control would have been disastrous for the health and housing of the population.
But Lord Exeter also saw to it that Stamford should never attract any industry.
In 1846 there was a good chance that the new main line of railway from London to York would pass through Stamford instead of Peterborough, then a place of no consequence.
The people of Stamford were passionately anxious that the railway should come their way, for it was plain enough that the great coaching trade, by which they lived, was doomed.
For reasons we need not go into, Lord Exeter successfully  prevented the main line from entering the town: it was taken through Peterborough instead.
Stamford was killed: in the 1850s its population, which until then had been rising steadily, actually began to fall.
There was no housing problem here.
The open fields remained open for another generation — until the secret ballot came in 1872, but by then grass was growing in the streets of the town.
Other towns in the Midlands, towns such as Coventry for example, faced the same problem of how to get building land for their physical expansion.
Some towns, like Leicester, solved the problem with no difficulty.
Others, like Nottingham and Stamford, failed — though the failure was due to entirely different political circumstances.
At Nottingham it was the shortsighted conservatism of the townspeople themselves, fighting a minority who wanted change and improvement; at Stamford it was an aristocratic landlord fighting for his archaic political privileges against the townspeople.
And there at Stamford, the beautiful town that Celia Fiennes and Defoe had admired so much remained almost exactly as they had seen it: but fossilised, moribund.
Peterborough became the great railway and engineering centre that Stamford might well have become.
But now that the human misery of the transition is over and forgotten, and now that we see modern Peterborough, we may perhaps be grateful to the Cecils for the feudal obstinacy which kept their town from growing, and preserved it for our pleasure today.
There are too many Peterboroughs, and not enough Stamfords, in modern England.
The railway did come to Stamford in the end, but even then the influence of the Cecils remained and is still visible.
The Midland Railway Company constructed a line from Syston to Peterborough between 1846 and 1847.
The station at Stamford was built in a plain Tudor style and was described by the Stamford Mercury at the time as ‘in an Elizabethan Style similar to Burghley House’.
A second station, built in 1855 for the long defunct Stamford and Essendine Railway, was even more elaborately Tudor and indeed much closer to Burghley in its detailing.
Both structures survive.
PLATE 114.
Boston, Lincolnshire.
The great tower or Stump of St Botolph's church dominates both the town and the river which gave it its prosperity.
The Witham is edged by warehouses, mainly of the eighteenth century.
These reflect a relatively late period of modest success for the town.
Of its earlier medieval greatness little more than the church and the town plan survives.
The Market Town
The majority of old towns have grown up as market towns, and they all present their own special problems.
This makes them more varied to look at, and in general perhaps more picturesque, but it is not easy to make them intelligible to someone who has not seen them.
The market place was the growing point of most towns, and they have taken their shape around it.
Standing in the market place, we are — not always but very often — at the origin of things.
As we study its shape, its size, its layout in relation to the parish church, and the details of its topography, we are confronted by a whole series of questions.
If we could answer these, I feel we should know a lot more than we do about the earliest history of the place and the way it has grown.
What accounts for the differences from town to town, or the similarities between them?
In the Midlands, even in the large industrial towns, we find markets still being carried on with stalls pitched in a large open space, covering perhaps a couple of acres, exactly in the medieval fashion.
The covered stalls with their piles of goods of every description, the traders shouting their wares from every stall under the open sky, all this is purely medieval; and around these open markets stand the lordly twentieth-century shops, the nearest to the London shops that the town can show.
It is a curious survival: the Middle Ages  encapsulated in the twentieth-century industrial town.
Such great open-air markets can be seen at Northampton, Newark and Leicester, for example, and most notable of all was that at Nottingham, where the vast triangular market place covers five-and-a-half acres and was once even larger.
Only in recent years has it been taken over as the civic centre, and the Goose Fair relegated to the outer suburbs; but for something like a thousand years it was the market place.
At Leicester the market place occupied the whole of the south-eastern quarter of the walled town.
It has shrunk a little since it first started there, perhaps in the tenth century, but it is still one of the largest open-air markets in the country.
Yet at Stamford, thirty miles away, not an industrial town but indeed always a market   town for a very rich countryside, the market place has shrunk to a fraction of its original size.
Red Lion Square, covering about half an acre at the most, and mostly taken up by the Great North Road, represents just the shrunken remains of a market place that once covered about five times that area.
Not all market places were vast squares or rectangles or triangles, set aside for the purpose.
At Marlborough and Thame, both ancient Saxon towns, the present-day main street — of immense width and length — once served as the open-air market.
Stalls were set up to a considerable depth on either side of the main road, which swelled out like a sausage shaped balloon for half a mile or so and then closed in again.
All this must have taken shape before there were any houses on the scene.
Not until much later were these immense spaces lined with buildings, and even then the houses and shops were kept well back so as not to interfere with the immemorial rights of the stall-holders.
In such towns as Marlborough and Thame — and many others — the market places were never built upon, but remain wide and open to this day.
Probably they owe their exceptional size to the fact that Marlborough was a great sheep market from the earliest times, and Thame possibly a great cattle-market.
Both needed all the space they could get.
In scores of other towns, on the other hand, the market places have been partly built over, so that one gets a broad main street, a block of buildings down one side and behind that again a narrow street running parallel to the main street.
There seem to be no discoverable rules about the shape of market places, why some take the form of a large open square — often set rather apart from the main flow of traffic — and some a swelling, a sort of aneurism, in the main artery of trade.
The triangular shape is also common: starting with a broad base, narrowing steadily as one goes away from it for a quarter to half a mile, until one reaches the outlet in a main road of the normal width.
St Albans is a good example of this type, if we think away the large block of building that lies between the present market place and the street called Chequer Street that lies behind.
One would like to know what these various shapes mean.
Perhaps they reflect nothing at all except the accidents of conception: but I suspect that there is often, in fact, a buried clue here, and that if we could unearth it we should know something about the early growth of many market towns that no documents will ever tell us.
Very occasionally there is a document that gives us a clue.
Thus the chronicler of St Albans monastery tells us that about the year 950 Abbot Wulsin laid out the rudimentary town outside the north gate of the abbey.
It took the form of an open space tapering from a broad base outside the abbey walls, northwards to a point at which he built St Peter's church.
Facing this triangular space, created for the benefit of traders, the abbot divided up the land on either side into a series of narrow plots on which traders and others were encouraged to settle permanently, building their houses with timber and other materials provided by him.
The triangular plan of the market place, which determined the shape of the town here, is now seen to be a perfectly rational shape for its purpose.
Traders would naturally regard stall-sites close to the abbey wall as the best for business.
As many as possible would cluster at that end, and the stalls would thin out quickly as one went northwards away from the abbey towards the open country, with all its dangers for the peaceful trader.
The triangular shape gave the maximum protection of the greatest number of traders; but whether it represents a fairly general type of early plan — say pre-Conquest — I do not know.
Thame is certainly a planned town, founded by the Bishops of Lincoln in 1219–21, and Marlborough is likely to have the same origin.
Balloon-or cigar-shaped market places in new towns are relatively common, as it was one of the easiest ways to create an open space along an existing main road.
The centre of Royston, Hertfordshire, founded by the adjacent priory of Austin Canons in about 1189, has this characteristic.
The original cigar-shaped market place was entirely built over, presumably at an early date, for then a second, triangular, market place was added to the east.
This too has partly been encroached upon.
St Albans is thus a planned town of late Saxon date.
Such a market place was covered with booths and stalls for different types of traders.
The next stage developed when the stalls were covered over and became permanent.
The last stage was reached when the permanent stalls became houses or shops.
At this point it might well happen that blocks of shops and houses would be built down one side of the market place, taking the place of a number of stalls, and so creating the plan, described   above, where the original open space is reduced to a broad main street, with a detached block of buildings down one side, behind which is a narrow back street, as at St Albans, or Kimbolton in Huntingdonshire, to speak of only two examples.
This happened at Stamford, also, though the buildings put up in the market place there formed irregular blocks.
And the records at St Albans and Stamford show that these permanent buildings had made their appearance by the early fourteenth century.
We should be safe in saying that this building-over of ancient market places was the result of the great expansion of trade and population in the boom of the thirteenth century.
But why did they choose to build on their own valuable market places instead of expanding outwards into suburbs?
After all, suburbs have a very respectable antiquity.
They were well developed outside the walls of many English towns by the thirteenth century, even a little earlier in some places.
Kimbolton, now in Cambridgeshire, is not an example, of encroachment.
The broad rectangular market place, laid out at the gates of the former castle there, still exists as it was originally planned.
The back lane marks the line of the old through road of the area which was then diverted around four right-angle bends to enable it to enter the new market place.
PLATE 115.
Thame, Oxfordshire, belonged to the Bishops of Lincoln who were great town planners.
It was probably set up around 1150 and given this huge market place along an existing road running north to south But the main through road from Oxford to Aylesbury ran from east to west a little to the north of the new town.
So, in 1219 this road had to be turned into Thame town centre, a diversion of almost a mile.
By 1221 the town was so successful that encroachments on the market place began.
Their successors still stand in the middle distance.
The relationship of market place and church raises yet other questions.
That the two are almost invariably found together is a commonplace: but why, at Market Harborough, does the church of St Dionysius spring grandly up from the market place without any green space around it, without a vestige of a church-yard?
The answer to this question takes us back to the very origins of the town in the middle years of the twelfth century.
Before that it was simply a part of the open fields of Great Bowden, a village a mile or two away.
With the expansion of trade and industry in the twelfth century — perhaps the most prolific of all centuries for new towns until we come to the nineteenth — a few traders assembled periodically near a crossing place over the river Welland.
An informal and unofficial    market began to develop.
In such a casual way many an English town was conceived.
This is no guesswork; we know from the records that it often happened like this.
By the year 1203 the casual assembly at Harborough was sufficiently well established and viable to attract the notice of the Crown — ever on the look-out for revenue — and the infant township was called upon to pay three marks into the Exchequer for the right to hold a regular weekly market.
Some forty years later, the town had grown big enough to call for a church of its own, instead of attending the mother church of Great Bowden.
But the new town church, large and imposing though it was, was allowed only to be a dependent chapel of the mother-church, without the right of burial of the dead.
This right, which was a source of income to the medieval rectors, was carefully reserved to the mother-church.
When the men of Market Harborough died they were carried back to Great Bowden for burial, back to the country village on whose fields their town had sprung up.
Their own church of St Dionysius was allowed no churchyard.
Wherever we see an ancient town church without a churchyard, we may well suspect that the town is the daughter of some mother village near by — now completely overshadowed by its offspring — and that it came into existence at a comparatively late date, since the Norman Conquest anyway, and most probably in the twelfth or thirteenth century.
At King's Lynn one's curiosity is immediately aroused by two great market places with a splendid church beside each: the Saturday market shadowed by St Margaret's church, the Tuesday market by St Nicholas.
Here again, we are taken back to the very beginning of the town, to the years just after the Norman Conquest — for King's Lynn is not really old by English standards.
It was a town created on the marshland by the first Bishop of Norwich (Herbert Losinga, 1091–1119), to whom the site belonged and who saw its wonderful possibilities.
It was he who created the Saturday market and built the church of St Margaret beside it, just before the end of the eleventh century.
And it was his successor, William de Turbe (1146–74) who, two generations later, had to extend the limits of the successful town over the marshland to the north, where he established another market place and built the church of St Nicholas beside it.
Hence the two: the Saturday market in the original town, the Tuesday market in its twelfth-century extension.
Each symbolises a distinct phase in the physical history of Lynn.
This is much too bald an account of what lies behind the landscape of this fascinating town: and across the grey waters of the Wash lies another town of the same type and date and manner of origin — Boston.
Lynn was created by a Norman bishop, Boston by a great Breton lord almost simultaneously.
But they did not get in each other 's way: more than twenty miles of water lay between them and they drew their vigour and their sustenance from different parts of England.
What I have tried to do in this chapter is to suggest a way of looking at towns as though they were a special kind of landscape — as indeed they are — to get behind the guide-books and the individual buildings to the secret history of these places: to draw attention to what I think are some of the significant bits of urban landscape that point the way into this secret history.
But there is — for all our reflection — so much we do not know about even the simplest town scene.
Professor Hoskins' description of the growth of Market Harborough is splendid and was based on his own detailed research (Trans.
Leics.
Arch.
Soc.
XXV (1949), 56–68).
However it is now clear that Market Harborough is indeed a true ‘New Town’.
Here again the old north to south and east to west through-roads were diverted to pass through the new market place, so producing the dangerous corners which still exist in the town today.
Again therefore, King's Lynn is a double new town.
Boston (1086–1113) too is a planted town, its plan related to the curving banks of the River Witham along which came the trade which made it the second most prosperous town after London by 1206.
PLATE 116.
Kimbolton, Huntingdonshire (Cambridgeshire).
Not an example of the infilling of a market place, but a perfect instance of a small planned town.
The original through road is still in existence at the top and the bottom of the picture.
It now leads, via sharp bends, into the town, whose broad market place was laid out at the gate of Kimbolton Castle probably around 1200.
The medieval castle has long since gone, its site occupied by the great house, built by Sir John Vanbrugh for the fourth Earl of Manchester between 1707–14.
The back lane, roughly on the line of the original through road, is exactly that.
There are so many towns to be seen, and each must be — or ought to be — approached for   the first time on foot: certainly all the smaller towns.
For only on foot does one detect the subtle rise and fall of ground to which the earliest settlers were so sensitive, or alignments in the town scene that may throw light on some fundamental change of plan: or the names of streets and lanes that set the mind working at once.
No one could see Old Town Street, at Plymouth, without beginning at once to speculate about the significance of a name like this: and in fact the name takes us back to the very beginnings, to the poverty-stricken little Saxon village of farmers and fishermen, well down behind the Hoe, out of which this great naval city has grown.
And then there are all the seaside towns and the dockyard towns, about which I have said nothing.
The landscape of towns, indeed, requires a whole book to itself.
PLATE 117.
Wool Merchant's House, Lavenham, Suffolk.
A glorious fifteenth-century structure with a central open hall and elaborate cross-wing.
It was in the height of fashion when it was built.
Yet it has only survived because Lavenham, as a town, failed.
In a more successful town the house would have undoubtedly been destroyed long ago.
One needs the published histories of the towns and behind them the town records themselves.
And slowly one pieces together from the records, from the archaeological finds in the local museum, and from the evidence of one's own eyes, what has happened.
It would be an interminable occupation were it not for the fact that what one learns about the landscape of one town often throws a flash of light upon a topographical puzzle in another.
A pattern begins to form.
It is still too early to generalise much about this subject — if indeed one will ever be able to.
But in the meantime how pleasant it is to find oneself arriving in the evening for the first time in some lively little English market town, where one can forget for a while the noisy onward march of science, and settle down to meditate upon the civilised past.
10
THE LANDSCAPE TODAY
Introduction
There is little that can be added to this chapter.
containing as it does Professor Hoskins' evocative explanation of the piece of the English landscape visible from the window of his study in Oxfordshire.
One might add that despite his strictures on modern landscapes.
there is much to see from any window in England if only the viewer is prepared to try and understand it.
Not all the views may be as pleasurable as that of North Oxfordshire but the history of at least part of the English landscape can be seen from all of them whether it be the story of the development of a north London suburb, seen by a student from a garret window in Stoke Newington, the growth of a medieval town viewed by a young man from the upper windows of an eighteenth-century house in the centre of Lichfield, Staffordshire, or the development of a Cambridgeshire village in front of an ageing civil servant from a study in a 1960s neo-Georgian estate house.
Professor Hoskins saw little in the modern development of the English landscape that filled him with pleasure and one has great sympathy for his feelings.
Yet two points come to mind.
One is that if aesthetic pleasure is separated from objective study then the most dreadful landscapes can come alive after close research and bring with them their own form of satisfaction.
The other is that the English landscape has never been static but has always been changing, for better or worse Today we are passing through a period which can perhaps be regarded as a disaster.
Yet it is not the faceless planners, mindless civil servants, wild military men or politicians who are always to blame.
Ultimately they merely carry out what we as a democratic society demand.
It is we who want broad motorways, cheap coal, instant electricity, subsidised food, and protection from alleged enemies without care for the past or indeed thought for the future.
Perhaps we have achieved in our landscape what we deserve.
THE LANDSCAPE TODAY
PLATE 118.
Early Warning Radar Station, Fylingdales Moor, North Yorkshire.
The landscape we deserve?
Even the preparation for Armageddon produces its own strangely attractive vision.
The industrial revolution and the creation of parks around the country houses have taken us down to the later years of the nineteenth century.
Since that time, and especially since the year 1914, every single change in the English landscape has either uglified it or destroyed its meaning, or both.
Of all the changes in the last two generations, only the great reservoirs of water for the industrial cities of the North and Midlands have added anything to the scene that one can contemplate without pain.
It is a distasteful subject but it must be faced for a few moments.
The country houses decay and fall: hardly a week passes when one does not see the auctioneer's notice of the impending sale and dissolution of some big estate.
The house is seized by the demolition contractors, its park invaded and churned up by the tractors and trailers of the timber merchant.
Down comes the house; down come the tall trees, naked and gashed lies the once beautiful park.
Or if it stands near a town, the political planners swarm into the house, turn it into a rabbit-warren of black-hatted officers of This and That, and the park becomes a site for some ‘overspill’— a word as beastly as the thing it describes.
We may indeed find the great house still standing tidily in a timbered park: but it is occupied by what the villagers describe detachedly as ‘the atom men’, something remote from the rest of us, though not remote in the sense they themselves like to think.
And if the planners are really fortunate, they fill the house with their paper and their black hats, and opencast mining of coal or iron ore simultaneously finishes off the park.
They can sit at their big desks and contemplate with an exquisite joy how everything is now being put to a good use.
Demos and Science are the joint Emperors.
Beyond the park, in some parts of England such as East Anglia, the bulldozer rams at the old hedges, blots them out to make fields big and vacant enough for the machines of the new ranch-farming and the business-men farmers of five to ten thousand acres.
Fortunately, the tractor and the bulldozer cannot easily destroy the great hedge-banks and stone walls of the anciently enclosed parts of England; nor is it worth doing, for the good farmer knows the value of these banks and walls as shelter, and of the hedges for timber.
Much of the old field pattern therefore remains, with its tangle of deep lanes and thick hedges.
What else has happened in the immemorial landscape of the English countryside?
Airfields have flayed it bare wherever there are level, well-drained stretches of land, above all in eastern England.
Poor devastated Lincolnshire and Suffolk!
And those long gentle lines of the dip-slope of the Cotswolds, those misty uplands of the sheep-grey oolite, how they have lent themselves to the villainous requirements of the new age!
Over them drones, day after day, the obscene shape of the atom-bomber, laying a trail like a filthy slug upon Constable's and Gainsborough's sky.
England of the Nissen hut, the ‘pre-fab’, and the electric fence, of the high barbed wire around some unmentionable devilment; England of the arterial by-pass, treeless and stinking of diesel oil, murderous with lorries; England of the bombing-range wherever there was once silence, as on Otmoor or the marshlands of Lincolnshire; England of battle-training areas on the Breckland heaths, and tanks crashing through empty ruined Wiltshire villages; England of high explosive falling upon the prehistoric monuments of Dartmoor.
Barbaric England of the scientists, the military men, and the politicians: let us turn away and contemplate the past before all is lost to the vandals.
The view from this room where I write these last pages is small, but it will serve as an epitome of the gentle unravished English landscape.
Circumscribed as it is, with tall trees closing it in barely half a mile away, it contains in its detail something of every age from the Saxon to the nineteenth century.
A house has stood on this site since the year 1216, when the Bishop of Lincoln ordained a vicarage here, but it has been rebuilt over and over again, and last of all in 1856.
Down the garden, sloping to the river, the aged and useless apple      trees are the successors of those that grew here in the time of Charles I, when the glebe terrier of 1634 speaks of ‘one orchard, one backside, and two little gardens’.
Beyond the apple trees and within a few feet of the river is a large raised platform, visible in winter before its annual submergence in weeds, part of a vanished building, and there are clear lines of stone walls adjoining it.
Almost certainly this is the site of one of the three water-mills recorded on the estate in Domesday Book.
Below it flows the Dorn, known to the Saxons as the Milk, from the cloudiness of its water after rain: and one still sees it as the Saxons saw it a thousand years ago, as I saw it a few minutes ago in the thin rain drifting down from the Cotswolds.
PLATE 119.
Middle Barton, Oxfordshire today.
Compare this photograph with the plan of the village in 1795 (Fig. 5).
The old pattern of streets and houses is still just visible but it is being rapidly engulfed by the ubiquitous housing estates and ‘infill’ as the drive for ‘a home in the country’goes on apace.
Across the stream, tumbling fast on its way to Glyme and Evenlode, one sees a wide sedgy hollow planted with willow saplings, from which flocks of goldfinches rise with a flash of wings on sunny mornings.
This hollow, enclosed by a massive earthen bank, was the fishpond begun by the lord of the manor before his death in 1175, and completed by his son: ‘Odo de Berton grants to Roger de St John the land between the garden of Roger and the road to the bridge together with the moor where Thomas de St John began to make his fishpond, rendering yearly a pair of spurs or twopence.’
This was about the year 1200 (the charter is undated), but there is the fishpond today.
And there is the lane dropping down to the stone bridge that was rebuilt in 1948, but unquestionably on the site of the stone bridge which is mentioned as a landmark in an even earlier charter.
And ‘the moor’ is the description of the scene before it had been claimed for cultivation.
We catch a sight of an earlier world in the bare words of this charter.
Beyond the fishpond, the ground rises to form the other side of the valley, fields with their broken hedges of twisted hawthorns.
What age are these hedges?
They were not here in 1685, when another glebe terrier shows that the parish still had its open fields.
But they were probably made before 1750, by which date the enclosure had apparently been accomplished.
One or two hedge-banks are, however, medieval in origin, for the St Johns had a separate enclosed pasture called Grascroft from the early 1200s onwards, and this ancient field comes into the view also.
A little to the right, on the other side of the lane, the eye dwells upon a small park, with a boating-lake catching the light, and some modest landscaping; and through the bare winter trees one sees the chimneys of a seemly Victorian ‘big house’.
The house and park were made as late as the 1870s.
It must be one of the last parks to be made in England, for landowners began to feel the pinch of falling rents soon after that.
The house, in fact, is older, for the work of the 1870s, though apparently a complete rebuilding, is merely a stone casing around a house originally built by a successful merchant of the Staple, whose inscription is still over the door: ‘Thinke and Thanke Anno 1570 ’.
Three hundred years later his house was remodelled by another successful bourgeois — this time a wealthy Oxford brewer.
But this was an old, long-cultivated estate when John Dormer the merchant stapler acquired it, with a history stretching back to pre-Conquest days, when it was one of the demesne-farms of the Anglo-Saxon kings.
When they hunted in Woodstock Park, five miles away, in the tenth and eleventh centuries, they called upon the produce of this large estate (about seven thousand acres then) to feed their household; and one can walk, after a morning's writing, along the broad green lane that was first made to connect the estate with the hunting-park.
It was a royal estate in Saxon times, but how far back into that age?
What was it when the Saxons captured Eynsham, not many miles away, in the year 571?
We do not yet know, but here in this room one is reaching back, in a view embracing a few hundred acres at the most, through ten centuries of English life, and discerning shadowy depths beyond that again.
By opening the window and leaning out, the parish church comes into view across the lane, a lonely building now, empty and cold and bare except for one hour each week.
It was rebuilt about the year 1300, when the village was large and flourishing: this was the high farming period of the Middle Ages.
But the font is of the twelfth century, so there was   a church here then; and deep in the churchyard to the east of the chancel is a buried wall which is perhaps the east wall of a Saxon church.
For though it stands so isolated today from human kind, St Mary's church was a mother-church for a wide area round about, as befitted the spiritual centre of a royal estate; and we do not know how far back a building stood on this site.
A Roman coin came from under the tower at the restoration of 1855, but one cannot make too much of that.
And then, finally, out of sight but only fifty or sixty yards from this room in the field next the garden, there lies buried the main street of the old village that was wiped out by the Black Death.
One walks between the banks that show where the houses stood, marking how blocks of squared masonry thrust in one place out of the turf (a more important building than most of them), and how the tree-roots twist among the rubble footings of the peasant dwellings; and one picks up pieces of twelfth- and thirteenth-century pottery — mere sherds, bits of rim, of sides, of bases, but all  datable : nothing later than the Black Death, when the great silence descended.
PLATE 120.
Didcot Power Station, Oxfordshire.
The modern landscape.
Not every small view in England is so full of detail as this, upon the oolite of north Oxfordshire, for this was a rich and favoured countryside that was beloved of owners of Roman villas, even in places of Bronze Age men.
The cultural humus of sixty generations or more lies upon it.
But most of England is a thousand years old, and in the walk of a few miles one would touch nearly every century in that long stretch of time.
Know most of the rooms of thy native country before thou goest over the threshold thereof Especially seeing England presents thee with so many observables.