

5
Introduction
The work to be considered in this chapter provides for a temporary completion of the argument concerning the nature of objectification to which the first part of this book has been devoted.
It also introduces a brief discussion of material culture, which is the subject of the next section, and provides a bridge with the major subject of the third section, the nature of mass consumption.
Simmel's work has been selected on the grounds that I consider it to be the most convincing analysis of modernity consistent with the concept of objectification as outlined here.
This is not at first apparent, mainly because of the particular uses to which his work has been put.
At one time, he was taken as a founding figure for American sociology of a quite different complexion; while, more recently, interest in his work had developed from an assessment of his considerable influence on Lukács and, through him, to a certain tradition of Western Marxism.
Within this tradition, the argument has been that Simmel's The Philosophy of Money provides an important critique of alienation, which, unfortunately, the author perceived as a condition of modernity itself instead of a specific attribute of capitalism; but, once his philosophy is directed back to its proper object, there is much to be learnt from his examples.
In a sense then, the fate of Simmel's work is at present parallel to that of Hegel's, in as much as later authorities have appropriated his ideas and aligned them with a theory of rupture seen as specific to capitalism.
In this chapter, I shall argue that Simmel's assertion that his analysis is one of modernity rather than solely of capitalism should be taken seriously, and that the contradictions in modernity which he analysed are not resolvable through Marxist conceptions of a future society, but are dilemmas which have to be investigated as integral aspects of modern life.
Indeed, to see them as representing a kind of problem to which some solution might be found is to misunderstand  their nature.
Simmel's further contribution, which has been largely ignored, is his explicit account of the quantitative increase of material culture and its effects upon society, concentrating on the area of consumption.
In some respects, he is the last major social theorist directly to have confronted this issue in its own terms, despite the fact that this same quantitative rise in material culture has continued, and appears set to continue, at a most extraordinary rate.
It is not, however, the work of Simmel in general which is the subject of this chapter.
Much of this work, such as his theory of social forms, which has been seen as one of the foundations of the discipline of sociology, will be ignored.
The particular text to be examined is The Philosophy of Money , first published in 1900 (here 1978).
It is this work which most clearly follows the Hegelian model, and which is most explicitly concerned with the nature of material culture and modern society.
In addition, use will be made of a series of articles concerning the nature of modern culture.
For Simmel, modernity is defined by societies which are highly monetarized, and therefore strongly permeated by high levels of abstraction and quantitative forms, which may also be related to the rise of industrialization.
For the purposes of the present work, there will be an emphasis on structural differentiation and the availability of industrial products to the mass population, providing a material rather than an evolutionary legitimation for the exclusion, with respect to issues thought to be specific to modernity, of countries without monetary wealth or the necessary degree of equitable distribution.
Such a definition also excludes approaches to modernity and modernism which focus upon an outlook or attitude usually restricted to elite sections of the population such as artists and planners (for example Berman 1983).
The Philosophy of Money
As Simmel and every subsequent commentator on this work has stressed,The Philosophy of Money is not intended primarily as a treatise on money as an economic form, but as an examination of the increasingly abstract nature of human relations, for which money provides a symbol and an instrument.
The construction of the book follows a pattern which appears to be closely modelled upon Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit , though not explicitly so.
Simmel starts with the original separation which engenders the subject as consciousness, and traces the stages of increasing distance between subject and object.
Each stage is characterized by a simultaneous increase in abstraction  and particularization, which are held in tension with one another, and each is taken to present greater difficulties for the subject attempting to resolve these into its own development.
Simmel implies specific stages of historical or philosophical forms to equate with his material rather less than Hegel, but his text is much richer than that of his predecessor in the wealth of sociological models based upon such a sequence.
The work begins in classic Hegelian style: ‘Mental life begins with an undifferentiated state in which the Ego and its objects are not yet distinguished; consciousness is filled with impressions and perceptions while the bearer of these contents has still not detached himself from them’(1978: 63).
It is only through the development of subject-object relations that the subject as such comes to be constituted.
Subjectivity is not prior to, but is contingent upon, objectivity.
The object emphasized by Simmel in grounding these ideas is, significantly, very different from that of Marx.
Whereas the subject of Marx's early work should develop through the productive construction of the world, Simmel's examples most often related to the potential provided by the exchange and consumption of goods not of one's own production.
The simplest relationship is the sheer pleasure of immediate consumption of an object which offers no resistance.
As Simmel notes, in such circumstances we merely ‘lose ourselves’ in the object, and no consciousness is generated by the relationship.
It is only through the creation of a distance between subject and object that consciousness may arise, as the awareness of being a subject, which ‘is already of objectification’(1978: 63).
This distance between the subject and object is considered by Simmel to represent desire.
The influence of Kant's aesthetic theory on the forgoing of immediate pleasure is clear and explicit; Simmel states that ‘We desire objects only if they are not immediately given to us for our use and enjoyment; that is, to the extent that they resist our desire’(1978: 66).
This first step towards abstraction is complemented by the initial stages of differentiation.
Simmel echoes later structuralism in his conception of a nature undifferentiated except through the imposition of human order, which here takes the form of desire as selective preference.
The book starts with a statement about the natural equality of all entities (1978: 61), which Simmel, writing in the Romantic mould, perceives as the first primitive imposition of subjective value upon nature.
From a generalized application, the subject moves towards greater differentiation of surrounding objects, and an increasing specificity of desire.
As with Hegel, following the initial creation of subject-object relations in consciousness, there arises an increasing awareness of the  existence of other subjects, and therefore also the possibility of other values and social relations in the world.
Any comparison between these is dependent upon the further externalization of these values as objective forms.
Exchange therefore appears as the means by which subjective values are overcome, and it thus the essential condition of all human relationships (1978: 82).
Here, we move to a further degree of abstraction, since things are no longer of interest for some essence they may possess but for their exchangeable aspects.
For Simmel, objectification is the precondition for culture and thus society; but it is mediated by exchange, which, as the expression of the relationship between things and desires, is the source of value.
Simmel places exchange at the point at which Hegel constructs society, and this articulates well with a major tradition in anthropological theory, where it is exchange, often viewed in terms of the polarity of gift and commodity, which is seen as constitutive of society itself (e.g. Appadurai 1986; Lévi-Strauss 1969; Sahlins 1974: 165–183).
At this stage, the sequence has developed towards what Simmel calls the relativistic world view, which he understands as contributing to certain attitudes to the world which comprehend processes rather than just entities (1978: 101–8).
Throughout the work, Simmel is concerned with the relationship between the degree of abstraction here found in human relations, and that found in the emergence of modern scientific enterprise and modes of thought.
This represents a clear overlap with the concerns of Weber, although this later aspect of the approach is much more poorly developed by Simmel.
The stage is now set for the introduction of money as the relational element between goods: ‘Money is the reification of the general form of existence according to which things derive their significance from their relationship to each other’(1978: 128).
Money is not just the result of an increasing capacity for abstraction, but becomes instrumental in supporting this relational view of things.
Again, paradoxically, objects are seen as increasingly exchangeable with one another, but also increasingly specific in terms of the particular values assigned to them in the form of prices.
In the second chapter of his work, Simmel traces the manner in which coinage as the medium used for money gradually loses any intrinsic value, and becomes exclusively a symbol for all other relationships.
This stage is seen as characteristic of other elements of abstraction, such as the growth of intellectual abilities.
Having established the presence of money as pure symbol and medium of abstract and relational thought, Simmel goes on to address several major features of such a state and to show how money may stand as the quintessence of each.
He looks first at purpose, which he  takes as the basic means by which the subject abstracts itself from, and imposes itself upon, nature.
Money acts as pure directed purpose, since there is no other reason for its existence except as a medium through which ends may be accomplished.
It is therefore the purest example of a tool: ‘The tremendous importance of money for the understanding of the basic motives of life lies in the fact that money embodies and sublimates the practical relation of man to the objects of his will’(1978: 21 1).
Simmel recognizes, however, that this particular variety of means has a tendency to become an end, as with the accumulation of money for its own sake.
He investigates some of the resulting attitudes to money, such as that of the miser, for whom, instead of acting as a tool, money becomes a barrier between means and ends; this is also the case with excessive extravagance, where the overcoming of price as a constraint becomes the source and end of action.
As money in itself becomes more important, so too does the strategy of asceticism which rejects wealth as its prime mode of expression.
Simmel concludes this section of his Philosophy with an argument that money represents the end point of that cultural process which may be described as the reduction of quality to quantity, a line of argument which was to prove  particularly influential in later traditions of Western Marxism.
Simmel asserts that many of the attitudes which surround, and were created through the impact of, money as abstraction are most evident when it has not completely achieved its role in transforming its own social context, and where there are still structures which resist this transformation and hark back to a non-monetarized era.
Here in history (but also in many anthropological examples, see Taussig 1977,; Worsley 1957), the nature of money and its role in the transformation of social relations is made explicit.
These arguments provide the foundation for Simmel's account of the contradictory nature of modern life.
Having pursued a pseudo-Hegelian sequence with an emphasis on the ever increasing abstraction, which leads to an ever more radical separation of subject and object, we are faced with the question of the nature of subject-object relations in this new era.
This may be divided into two sections: first, the problem of the nature of the subject, and secondly, the problem of the nature of the object in relation to that subject.
These may be roughly equated with chapters 4 and 6 of Simmel's text respectively.
One of the most common clichés of everyday life is the equation of money and evil.
Money itself is commonly blamed for unpleasantness in human character, attitudes and behaviour.
It is this which makes the next section of Simmel's work so difficult to accept, in that it appears to work so deeply  against the grain of modern consciousness.
Simmel's essential argument is that money is the prerequisite for, and major instrument in, the accomplishment of freedom and potential equality.
The strength or his argument is such that it cannot be dismissed as merely a distortion of the formula by which ‘capitalism, is understood as the guarantor of ‘bourgeois freedom’.
The argument is easier to appreciate when set against a non-monetarized society.
As represented by anthropologists, such societies often appear to embody the Romantic conception of close social relations within highly communal environments; but what is less often underlined are certain more difficult aspects of the actual experience of living within such conditions.
In a close knit society, the sense of personal obligation is overwhelming.
Such obligations, usually based upon kinship relations, are highly specific as regards both the actions demanded and the identity of the individual subject to them.
That is to say that every individual lives according to a highly structured set of personal obligations which he or she must continually fulfil.
This condition is characteristic of societies dominated not only by kinship but also by feudalism or slavery; it is also characteristic of the peasant village.
All actions seem to be controlled by a sense of propriety or tradition.
The constancy of personal obligations may appear, to the outsider, unremitting and intensely claustraphobic.
This may also be the case for the participant, either because the cosmologies themselves, which are often contradictory, admit of an alternative, mythical, more individualistic model of freedom, or because that alternative is evident in the nearby cities, where its attractions outweigh the possible negative features.
Money as abstraction is understood by Simmel to be the root of impersonal relations between people.
In a monetarized regime, the individual may be under obligation to a far larger range of people than was hitherto possible, through  mortgages , tax systems and so on; but these obligations are almost entirely anonymous.
The personal figure of coercion, such as the bailiff, may be held at bay through the provision of money, which allows for exchange outside of the nexus of personal social relations.
The amount of money received for a service rendered is not dependent upon who you are, but upon the abstract relations within which the service is performed, for example as wage labour.
Money therefore tends to extend a concept of equality, in so far as the perception of inequality becomes based upon differences in the possession of money, rather than on an essentialist notion of intrinsic differences in persons.
The same condition which favours the emergence of equality as an ideal may provide the means for the further refinement and exactitude of inequality.
Non-financial reward for services is likely to be of a highly specific, immediate and  implicated form; financial recompense, however, may be translated at any time into a large range of goods and alternative services, according to the desire of the recipient.
Under these conditions, lack of money becomes equated with lack of freedom.
It must be recalled that money stands here as the symbol of abstraction in human relations.
That same abstraction allows for quantitatively based technological rationality, and for science.
Mone-tarization is thereby tied to the rise of industrialization and bureaucracy.
It is this whole series of changes which effect the transformation we recognize as modernity.
Although these changes are usually the subject of fulminations against wage labour and the evils of rural or urban proletarianization, the conditions of wage labour may prove attractive to villagers and town dwellers, not necessarily because they are duped by promises or pressurized by taxes, but because of the very real specific constraints of non-monetarized social orders.
What commentators often forget in their Romantic imagery of ‘traditional’ society is the very heavy burden of strong personal and specific obligations.
Indeed, one may imagine that in their private lives these same authors may well feel that the visit of the in-laws or attendance at some social function or a distant relative, two of the few reminders of the once overwhelming burden of personal social relations, are curbs upon their own ‘freedom’.
In the non-monetarized society, the individual is likely to be tied to activities which are far more tightly constrained by the necessities of daily life.
The exception are aristocrats, who are served by a sufficient number of other people to be freed of this daily burden.
However, with money, and all the abstractions associated with it, it is not only those who can directly command the labour of others who are free to indulge, if they so wish, in areas outside of productive work, such as education, but also those who wish to use the money from their labour to secure such opportunities.
Money, paradoxically, provides the major means of detachment from direct economic involvement, and is the basis of the professions and pure research.
In relation to the politics of his time, Simmel's more detailed arguments often appear confusing.
He clearly favours a state which involves itself essentially through monetary transaction rather than direct intervention in other more qualitative spheres of life.
He appears progressive in advocating an income tax as the basis or an arrangement by which people might give according to their means and take according to their need, and sees this in terms of the possibilities of socialism, but at the same time he lends himself to a strong laissez-faire interpretation highly restrictive of the involvement of the state (1978: 315–18).
Money is held to provide the basis for that level  of abstraction at which people are regarded as fundamentally equal to one another, bereft for purposes of social construction of their personal characteristics.
Money is thus the foundation for ideas such as socialism and equality between the sexes, which, as abstractions, would be literally inconceivable outside of a highly monetarized society.
Simmel is, however, highly sceptical or claim that liberalism has achieved equality in education and other such institutions (1978: 439).
Much of this is surprisingly consistent with the writings of Marx.
Translated as the historical purpose of the bourgeois, Marx saw money as the necessary stripping away of every vestment of the ancien régime, every personal relation of family and society, which would provide the essential foundation for the possibility of communism.
In this respect, Marx was a committed a modernist as Simmel (Marx and Engels 1967).
The process which has been described in the development of abstract social relations is also accomplished in the relationship between persons and things.
As has been argued throughout this work, the concept of culture is one which assumes the indivisibility of person and forms (that is, with respect to material objects), and of being and having.
According to Simmel, possession is not a static state but an activity (1978: 304).
Following the same Kantian argument referred to earlier, possession is held to indicate a profound relationship, since its durability goes beyond the pleasure of immediate gratification.
Private property, as an institution, effects not a closer relationship between people and objects, as is often thought, but a greater separation than was hitherto possible.
It is a means by which a relationship may be maintained with objects which are at the same time always potentially alienable.
Property is central to the relationship of people and things, and, whether this is experienced individually or as a member of a group, it is one of the foundations of modern culture.
In the absence of money, property will tend to be highly specific, and the group it may be related to relatively small.
Money as abstraction furnishes opportunities for possession, but mediates in this relationship to give rise to some separation between the specificity of being and the specificity of having, since money alone does not determine its further use by its presence, and is entirely ahistorical.
Money is thus an extreme expression of the possibilities inherent in property.
Once again, it accomplishes the flexibility of abstraction while potentially being translated into the most specific of things and individual demands:.
‘Money's remarkable achievement is to make possible the most adequate realization and effectiveness of every individual compli-cation through the equalization of the greatest diversity’(1978: 319).
Money as property is therefore most attuned to serving our particular and independent will.
In Simmel's view, then, freedom consists, in part, in the articulation of the self in the medium of things.
Marx's own celebration of capitalism is an ironic one, demonstrating its historical necessity, but always presenting it as an instrument of a doomed social formation permeated by the image of proletarian suffering.
We find a more genuine reconciliation of the two authors when we turn to Simmel's analysis of exploitation and alienation.
The reduction of individual people to a quantitative mass of wage labourers, who are appraised only in terms of their contribution to capital, is clearly dependent upon the abstraction represented by money.
The rise of science, and of technological rationality with which it is closely  associated , provides the basis for this reduction of human relations from qualitative to quantitative forms, of which money is the dominant model.
Simmel's eloquent rendition of this process led in the work of Lukács and more generally in Western Marxism, to the condemnation of mechanisms such as reification and alienation.
As such, Simmel understands the place of abstraction as a process of rupture.
The difference, however, between The Philosophy of Money and most of the later works is that in the early book the rupture created through the rise of money is seen to be inseparable as a historical moment from its positive aspects; that is, it is seen as representing freedom and potential equality.
What is stressed rather is that the same phenomenon provides the foundation for both historical tendencies.
The Quantitative Rise in Goods
Simmel differs markedly from Marx — and almost all other commentators on modern society — in that he stresses the relationship between people, the products of industrialization and the monetary economy in terms not only of production, but also of consumption.
It is this which he takes as the key to an understanding of contemporary society, and of culture itself.
It  will be clear by now that Simmel recognized the necessity of culture for the development of society, and saw the massive increase in material culture as constructive of new developments in the very possibilities of societies.
Whether the objects are books, furniture, or cars, individuals are seen by Simmel as increasingly coming into relationship with them, not as producers who fail to recognize their products, but as consumers who have to determine their own development in this world of goods.
Simmel's definition of culture is premised upon objectification; he states that  ‘one of the basic capacities of the spirit is to separate itself from itself — to create forms, ideas, values that oppose it, and only in this form to gain consciousness of itself.
This capacity has reached its widest extent in the process of culture’(1968: 45).
Simmel effectively extends Marx's concept of rupture to account for the inability of modern individuals to recognize themselves in the world of goods.
The problem is that the massive increase in objective culture has not been appropriated by the subject in such a way that material goods become the instrument of the subject's self-development through the sublation of its own projections; instead, the subject confronts the world of material goods as an alien sphere.
In short, the spread of objective culture has outstripped the capacity of the subject to absorb it.
This is a result of that historical process by which, through new media such as printing, material goods have been created with cumulative effect; as a result of this powerful force for cultural production, the present generation has inherited a vast accretative mass of products in terms of which it is expected to know itself.
Simmel uses Marx's writings about fetishism as the basis for a general theory of the negative aspects of modern culture (1968: 42).
He notes the self-perpetuating nature of modern mass production: ‘Thus vast supplies of products come into existence which call forth an artificial demand that is senseless from the perspective of the subject's culture’(1968: 43), and argues that just as academic pursuits such as philology and archaeology, which start with certain aims, may develop as methods creating infinite classificatory refinements for their own sake, so people may become the mere instrument of that which they originally developed: ‘The infinitely growing supply of objectified spirit places demands upon the subject, creates desires in him, hits him with feelings of individual inadequacy and helplessness, throws him into total relationships from whose impact he cannot with-draw, although he cannot master their particular contents’(1968: 44).
The division of labour facilitated by money leads to extreme differentiation of its products.
The subject is now surrounded by a multitude of objects from which only a few can be selected and invested with a sense of self, but Simmel argues that: ‘our freedom is crippled if we deal with objects that our ego cannot assimilate’(1978: 462).
There are parallels with Durkheim on anomie, who was also much concerned with consumption (Williams 1982: 322–342), and with other writers of the period.
The subject continues to invest itself in cultural forms, identifying, for example, with sports, cinema, clothing, a political line, or certain relationships; but such is the scale of modern society that the same individual may become absurdly overextended into essentially superficial relationships, none of which  augments his or her being, and yet simultaneously, may have nothing at all in common with another overextended individual who has selected entirely different areas of the surrounding culture.
Hence the two highly ‘cultured’ individuals who meet at a party and find they have nothing in common to talk about.
Material objects provide immense specificity, but potentially also extreme fragmentation.
Having extended the narrow problem posed by Marx, of the separation of the worker and product, to that of the separation of the subject from culture, Simmel does, however, begin with the premise that the subject might develop in relation to forms which are not his or her individual or class product, a proposition which will be explored further in chapter 10.
Thus the two end products of the development of modern culture, its degree of abstraction and its degree of specificity, are the component parts of the sense of alienation in the modern world.
Like Hegel, Simmel exemplifies the result with a characterization of certain attitudes to the world.
For example, he suggests that cynicism, which starts with philosophical distance and becomes a refusal of all values, is caused by the observation of values being universally reduced to their money  equivalence (1978: 225–6.)
If money as abstraction engenders this cynical attitude, so the plethora of products and pleasures creates the blasé attitude in which all objects are perceived as dull and unexciting, and only a new stimulation which rises above the others can produce some, usually temporary, interest (1978: 256–7).
This argument was later extended with respect to the experience of living in the modern metropolis, which Simmel suggests provides for a massive intensification of stimulation and experience, but which threatens to overwhelm us as objective culture (1950: 409–24).
This is the key domain of the calculating, rationalist attitude, obsessed with time, which sees other individuals as merely partners in a transaction, rather than individuals in their own right.
Even those who do not exemplify the cynical or the blasé attitude tend towards a certain reservation in their social relations which barely conceals an aversion to direct personal contact (1978: 331).
It is this critique of alienation which has been seized upon by some as Simmel's major contribution to modern critical analysis (e.g. Bottomore and Frisby 1978: 1–49; Frisby 1984: Schmidt 1975).
It would, however, be just as unfortunate for our understanding of Simmel to be confined to this aspect of his work as it was for his philosophy to be reduced to the simple model of freedom enshrined in a earlier tradition of American sociology.
The significance of Simmel's work is that he breaks away from one of the most predominant tendencies in the grounding of Hegel in social analysis: that is, the suggestion that we can separate off the positive side of sublation from the negative side of externalization as rupture.
What Simmel accomplishes is a realization of the inseparability of the positive and negative consequences of these social transformations.
For Simmel, contradiction is not merely an instrument for, but an intrinsic condition of, the dynamic force of history.
In short, his argument is that it is the very abstraction which confers the material advantages of modern science, and the social advantages of both modern freedom and equality, which is also responsible for the dilemmas of exploitation and alienation. the central conflict is not, therefore, one between liberalism and equality, which come from the same root, but one emerging from a recognition that both of these entail consequences which may turn against the interests of the subject.
It is an integral part of modern culture that it is simply not possible to envisage a model of freedom, including that abstraction needed for the achievement of equality, which would not have as one of its component parts the tendency towards alienation.
The prospect of providing variety cannot be dissociated from a sense of swamping the subject in its alternatives.
It follows that a society which had removed capitalism, but which nevertheless sought to retain the benefits of science and the flexibility of money, would still be faced with the problems of these intrinsic contradictions of modern life.
Capitalism is thus to be opposed for its exploitative practices, rather than its non-utopian form.
Equally, a socialism which restricted itself solely to solving the problem of exploitation in the social relations of production, and failed to respond to these contradictions in culture, might find itself far less attractive-to an electorate, for example-than it envisaged.
This is not an affirmation of the status quo; there is nothing in Simmel to reduce antipathy to class conflict or economic exploitation.
There is, however, a refusal of the Romantic notion of an ultimate resolution of culture.
Hegel's use of this Romantic tradition to develop his idealism with respect to the rationality of the actual and his striving for the transcendence of duality do, however, find their parallel in Simmel's highly positive attitude to art, affirming its ability to express and overcome fragmentation.
Simmel emphasizes the paradoxical nature of culture, recognizing the  essentially positive process of modernity which has allowed for hitherto unimaginable possibilities; but he is wary of the forces which lead towards reification and autonomy, both of which are inimical to human interests.
This inherent contradiction is what Simmel calls the ‘tragedy’ of culture.
As he describes it,
This is an important point in considering non-modern culture.
Culture for Simmel is not constituted by the material world in itself, but exists only as a process of the subject's becoming.
To that extent, modernization represents only a potential for development, not necessarily an actual development; indeed , form itself, in its stability, may challenge the continuum of lived experience (Arato 1974: 158; compare Giddens on routinization 1984: 61).
It was suggested in the last chapter that analysis which tends to deal with the nature of modernity itself is always in danger of leading to assumptions concerning the superiority of certain ‘advanced’ peoples over others, which are in effect a version of primitivism.
This does not follow, however, from Simmel's approach; for him, the Walbiri's intimate relation to the objective forms taken by their social products, and their classifications of the landscape, might well have appeared more ‘cultured’ than the attitudes of his German contemporaries, who, in spite of having at their disposal the enormous possibilities of mass culture, did not possess the means for assimilating these into the development of person or group.
A social group may be deprived by missionaries or a new education system or access to their own historically inherited forms, and a mere glimpse of the possibilities of industrial culture, without the means for appropriating that culture, is hardly an adequate substitute for such a loss.
These observations follow from a recognition that  objectification is a process, not an entity.
There are many limitations to Simmel's analysis, the most frustrating being his style and his level of generality.
In many respects, Weber provides an alternative source for a study of the rise of abstraction, the attitudes which relate to it, and the institutions it produced.
One of the major weaknesses in Simmel's analysis is a possible interiorization of the radical subject-object dichotomy he is describing, in particular a leaning, on occasion, towards an essentialist given self.
Simmel tends towards a Romantic style of analysis which takes for granted a primitive undifferentiated nature, and various latent versions of totality, for example in art and aesthetics as models of utopian, if transient, resolutions.
He also tends to construct spurious histories of the world bases on his sequence.
On the other  hand, Simmel provides an excellent example of the grounding of Hegelian ideas as a model of culture, and specifically modern culture, and clearly  demonstrates how these ideas may be used in the exploration of the everyday goods of the mass market (e.g. 1957).
Conclusion
Simmel's work provides a focus for a review or the metamorphosis or the concept of objectification.
It may be defined as a constitutive process for the development of some subject in and through the medium of culture, which is the form taken by all social productions.
Since this includes all those forms which are conventially termed subjective, it is clear that the distinction between individual and society is only one or the selection or an analytical level, since the two are inseparable.
Culture, then, is not to be understood, by the concept of  objectification formulated by Berger and Luckmann, as the necessary externalization of subjective processes onto intersubjective domains where they become institutionalized.
Culture is derived as a historical force prior to the  existence of any individual subject, but is only realizable through agency.
It is therefore the means by which the individual is socialized as a member of a given society, and is, in turn the form of all individual and social creativity.
Objectification describes the inevitable process by which all expression, conscious or unconscious, social or individual, takes specific form.
It is only through the giving of form that something can be conceived of.
The term objectification, however, always implies that form is part of a larger process of becoming.
When using the term to describe a developmental process, one starts with a relatively undifferentiated and unselfconscious subject such as a baby, or with a society which preserves a relatively high degree of cultural inalienability.
Through several stages, the subject moves to an increasing degree of separation which allows on the one hand for the development of greater variability and specificity, and on the other hand for the development of abstraction.
These two are always concurrent aspects of the same process, and are always united in a subject's mode of becoming.
These processes are viewed as essentially positive, but as possessing intrinsic dangers, in as much as either specificity or abstraction may develop in such a manner as to be no longer assimilable by the subject through sublation, in which case they become both alien and oppressive.
In particular, the subject has to be able to recognize these externalities as intrinsic aspects of itself.
Ideology, defined as the  control over certain potential media of objectification in society by interest groups such that those who externalize themselves on to those media are unable to recognize that section of themselves, is a common historical phenomenon.
Even without a conflict in interests, the attempt to encompass a vast specificity of goods, or the abstractions of academia, have their dangers to the group involved.
These problems arise from the intrinsic contradiction in objectification by which the very form necessary for the subject's development is always an exercise in self-alienation and is therefore a potential source of estrangement.
This is one of a number of aspects of the model which originally stem from Hegel, but the model itself is not Hegelian.
It accepts the priority of the process of objectification over either subject or object and recognizes that it is only the process itself which accounts for their appearance as discrete.
On the other hand, it does not involve the complex Hegelian construction of the world as ultimately rational; it allows for no philosophical or transcendental resolution, no expressive totality or teleology, no absolute knowledge or ideal communism.
The contradictory nature of the process allows for no ultimate resolution.
Different elements of the term objectification may be emphasized, depending upon whether it is applied to the process of ontogenesis, culture or modernity.
Analogies between these are themselves important, though their dangers have been pointed out.
Habermas, for example, recently attempted to equate ontogenetic and phylogene-tic growth using the work of piaget (Habermas 1979: 130–77).
In as much as these are, however, different groundings, the term objectification preserves a fluidity, its meaning always dependent upon its particular use.
Such relativity is an inevitable consequence of the shift away from philosophy towards anthropology.
Objectification as an approach is only useful in so far as it is an aid to understanding a given process in the world.
This summary is only a temporary closure in the meaning of objectification.
In the third section of the book a far more detailed grounding of the process will be attempted as a means for understanding mass consumption.
6
THE HUMILITY OF OBJECTS
Introduction
Up to this point, the principal focus of analysis has been the concept of objectification, which refers to a process of externalization and sublation essential to the development of a given subject.
It will, however, have been evident in the previous chapters that one particular potential medium or vehicle for objectification has been emphasized: the concrete material object.
In this chapter, I aim to narrow the area of discussion down from the larger field of objectification as a process to the question of the nature of the object per se .
More specifically, the subject of the next two chapters is the artefact, that form which is the result of human labour, as opposed to equally concrete natural phenomena.
The reasoning behind the present emphasis is that, as observed in the introduction to this work, there is an extraordinary lack or academic discussion pertaining to artefacts as objects, despite their pervasive presence as the context for modern life.
In philosophy, for example, there are numerous discussions of objects which refer to some observed attribute or perceptual property pertaining to things as such, but books with titles such as Words and Things (e.g. Brown 1958; Gellner 1959) will be found to have very little to say about the social implications of things as objects, while having plenty to contribute to an understanding of the nature of words.
Political philosophy is more concerned with objects as properties than the properties of objects, while phenomenology, as that branch or philosophy which claims more direct concern with everyday objects, considers these mainly as media for addressing the role of agency and the nature of subjectivity (though see McCarthy 1984 for the contribution of Mead).
The scale of this discrepancy between theory and practice may ironically itself become important evidence for uncovering the nature of objects in the modern world.
The approach in this chapter will be largely ahistorical and asocial, focusing on the properties of things in themselves, while in chapter 7 the artefact will be returned to its historical context in order to examine how its various potential social attributes are actually realized in diverse circumstances.
The first approach to the object per se will follow the structure of previous chapters by investigating the process of ontogenesis (individual development) through the examination of two particular texts.
These will be used to illustrate the way the necessary relationship between object and subject in ontogenesis follows the general pattern of objectification already outlined.
Although these studies, derived from psychology and psychoanalysis, show little concern with the specific nature of the culture within which socialization occurs, the detailing of the process itself strongly reinforces the argument that the human subject cannot be considered outside of the material world within which and through which it is constructed.
The study of the infant's development also throws light on two further matters which will be addressed more fully later on in the chapter: the relationship between the symbolism of the object and that of language, and the use of the artefact in play.
This will be followed by a consideration of the relatively few attempts systematically to distinguish the social properties of the object from those of language as expressive medium.
The differences found between them may throw light on certain rarely remarked properties of the object which suggest that it has a major role in the development of cognitive abilities and the ways in which the world is perceived, understood and lived in.
Some of these factors may also account for the lack of academic analysis of the object, compared with the extent of linguistic research.
These issues in turn relate back to the process of socialization, which, towards the end of the chapter, will be considered from a more general anthropological perspective, providing a bridge with the concerns of chapter 7.
The Object in Ontogeneis
Ontogenesis as a process always results in a socialized subject existing within the objective structures of a particular cultural order.
Beginning as it does, however, with birth and the very earliest development of the infant, it may be a useful starting point for an examination of those more general properties of the material artefact which are relevant to the place of objects within the general process of objectification.
Two particular texts, both published in 1946, will form the basis of the analysis: Jean Piaget's book Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood (1962), and Melanie Klein's article ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’(1975: 1–24).
These works examine infant development from the quite different perspectives of cognitive psychology and psychoanalytic studies respectively, but it is worth noting that, within the context of these separate disciplines, Piaget and Klein are both distinguished by their emphasis upon the early stages of infant development.
The selection of these particular texts is on the grounds that they succeed in overcoming a dualistic representation of the relationship between the human subject and culture by avoiding reductionism (either to the external world, as in behaviourism, or to the given subject, as in essentialism).
Piaget and Klein also show that it is only through the intrinsically dynamic relationship between the infant and its environment that the subject is able to become itself.
While sharing these basic  features with the concept of objectification, both authors also provide a grounding in particular mechanisms which provide exemplification of how such processes may operate.
Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood may be related to a whole series of studies of cognitive development by piaget.
In these, he adopts a Kantian constructivist position which proposes certain basic categories through which alone the world may be apprehended, but recasts them as dynamic forms achieved only through a long process of interaction with the environment, in which the infant develops cognitive abilities as a means of dealing with the world.
This allows Piaget to argue for a direct congruence between the structures of the mind and those of the environment.
This constructivist approach is opposed to psychological behaviourism.
The external world exists for the child only at that level of complexity which is compatible with the stage of development it has reached.
As the child's mental processes become more complex, it becomes increasingly able to absorb and construct for itself the complexities of the external world.
In this dynamic process, action is at least as important as perception.
Through action, the child encounters the world directly, literally feeling its possibilities and constraints.
The developmental process was found by Piaget to work through a series of stages, beginning with what he called sensory-motor actions, which are very simple, and culminating in adult life with formal operations, such as that sense of a mathematical and logical order in relation to space, time and other domains which may be equated with the mature Kantian series of categories.
Piaget's is an epigenetic sequence in the sense that each stage is dependent upon the previous  developments and to an extent absorbs, rather than replaces, the early stages.
The sequence does not develop of necessity, however, but only through a continuance of the process of dynamic interaction which is the basis of its genesis (Piaget 1971a; 1972).
Central to Piagetian psychology is a dynamic relationship between the processes of accommodation and assimilation.
Through accommodation, the mental structures at whatever stage they have reached are themselves changed in order to encompass the particular characteristic of the environment they have encountered.
In assimilation, by contrast, the environment is incorporated only at the level of comprehension the child has attained at any given stage (Furth 1969: 14).
The same environmental phenomena will therefore be perceived differently by a young child and an adult, according to their respective assimilatory capabilities.
As a simple example, at the level of concept formation, one might envisage a child encountering an object which looks rather like a table, though slightly different from any tables previously noted.
The child would then assimilate this object into its already formed concept of table, with no further consequence.
If, however, a whole series of such objects was encountered, the child might be forced to accommodate its basic concept of what a table was in order to take in these experiences.
For piaget, cognitive development consists of a series of stages in which these two processes advance asymmetrically, but with the mature phase of what he called ‘operational thought’ only becoming possible when a balance or equilibrium has been achieved between them.
A consideration of the cultural context of such concept formations is largely absent from his work.
In Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood , piaget begins the developmental sequence from the earliest cognitive mechanism, which is a simple stimulus-response form of imitation (Piaget 1962: 81).
He suggests that at this stage no object-notion has been formed, and imitation is merely a device for prolonging an interesting event (1962: 85).
This process of imitation is an example of pure accommodation, where the child is at the mercy of the environmental events it encounters.
Imitation, however, gradually increases in complexity, and becomes more systematic and deferred.
Sets of repeated actions may then develop as independent schema, which emerge as play once these sequences achieve sufficient autonomy to be carried out in the absence of any direct stimulant.
For example, a child may be observed rubbing its hands together and saying soap, even though there is no water.
There are two elements to this initial use of symbolism: a representational imitation which derives from the early mode of direct  imitations, and the new ludic mode which distorts the environment, changing the significance of a given external object, and permitting it to be used as the subject desires (1962: 102).
While accommodation was dominant in imitation, it is assimilation which dominates in play, as in the classic example of a stick used as a hobby horse (Gombrich 1963).
Play leads to increasingly complex imagined worlds over which the child assumes control.
The development of play leads naturally towards involvement in games, which begin in imitative practice such as tying a shoelace, and develop towards symbolic constructions such as of villages or weddings.
At this stage, what began as an expression of pure assimilation, in which anything could provide the basis for the child's construction of images, turns increasingly into games with a much stronger  accommodative element, as a genuine resemblance is required between the signifier and the signified, and the actual characteristics of the village or wedding observed must be taken into account.
Accommodation then gradually moves towards a higher level, at which the egocentricism of play is confronted with the external rules of the social game.
The child's gradual acceptance of rule-based games is an important element in the development of its sense of morality (Piaget 1932).
From this point onwards, Piaget's account progresses towards more complex forms of symbolism through which the adult's conceptual apparatus and capacity for cognitive representation are fully developed.
In these later stages, the earlier stress on accommodation and the later stress on assimilation come into equilibrium, attaining the reciprocity and balance of fully operational thought.
Assimilation in play has allowed the child greatly to improve its powers of abstraction in space and time; that is, to imagine objects far away in both of these dimensions (see also Vygotsky 1978: 92–104).
In a more limited sense, Piaget, like Hegel, is attempting to transform Kantian ontology into a dialectical movement.
It is only through a process of dynamic interaction that consciousness is achieved as a sense of self and other.
This ‘other’ is, however, always understood as a projection equivalent to the stage of development of the subject, which progresses through an epigenetic sequence of increasing sophistication and abstraction.
For both Piaget and Hegel, the initial stages are highly egocentric, equivalent to the development of mind, but in the later stages the subject is increasingly confronted by the social world in which rules are imposed from the outside.
Piaget's work also exhibits a parallel with Marx's concept of praxis, in his insistence that all development is derived form practical interaction with the material world, in which we live, and with which we are held  in tension.
There are also parallels with (and differences from) anthropological structuralism (Piaget 1971b; Turner 1973).
The final outcome of the stages of development outlined by Piaget is also utopian, in so far as he links formal operational thought with the structure of the ‘real’ world.
Like absolute knowledge, operational thought is conceived of as representing the final balance between the processes of externalization (assimilation as projection) and embodiment (accommodation as introjection), which have been held in asymmetrical relations in all previous stages.
There are also parallel assumptions concerning the rationality of the actual, which underlies an essential teleology, providing the context within which this developmental process occurs.
As an alternative perspective on infant development, Melanie Klein's article ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’(1975: 1–24), provides a rather more sophisticated analysis of actual mechanisms which may be involved in ontogenesis, revealing a more complex cycle of interaction between subject and object, which does not presuppose an entirely positive sequence of development.
Klein's work developed through several stages, and the article considered here is representative of her later work (Greenberg and Mitchell 1983:.
119–50).
Klein's model may be introduced in her own words:
I have often expressed my view that object-relations exist from the beginning of life, the first object being the mother's breast which to the child becomes split into a good (gratifying) and bad (frustrating) breast; this splitting results in the severance of love and hate.
I have further suggested that the relation to the first object implies its introjection and projection, and thus from the beginning object-relations are moulded by an interaction between introjection and projection, between internal and external objects and situations.
These processes participate in the building up of the ego and super-ego and prepare the ground for the onset of the Oedipus complex in the second half of the first year (1975: 2).
The crucial terms for an understanding of the development of the infant's sense of the self and its relationship with the outside world are projection, introjection and projective identification (see also Klein 1975: 141–75).
These are not to be understood as a simple cycle of something being externalized as object, recognized as such, and then embodied, but rather as a complex series of strategies which may include splitting and inversion.
They are, however, based around a concept of object relations which asserts that the external forms which are the subject of these mechanisms are always to be understood also  as projections.
The infant's orientation is not towards a ‘real’ external world, but its own internal projection, through which that world is constructed.
This means that the infant's cognitive and emotional response to the object (which is usually a person) is one of interiorization.
Both the ideal good and the ideal bad objects are understood, not as a something external to the subject, but as inseparable from an emerging sense of the world in which such a division is as yet unperceived.
The sequence begins (as with Hegel) with the establishment of the first object relation, which is therefore the first stage towards eventual self-consciousnesses.
The object concerned, or, as it may be termed in relation to the mother, the part-object, is the breast.
The infant is held to be beset by anxiety which is believed to be related both to the notion of the death instinct, and to its confrontation with the complexity and contradictory nature of its environment.
This anxiety is primarily associated with the infant's ambivalent perception of the breast, which is the major source of satisfaction and of benign feelings, but, because it is not always available when desired, it is also the major source of frustration.
At this stage, the infant cannot cope with the contradiction implied by the fact that two opposing feelings are aroused by the same object.
This first object is therefore not a whole, coherent form, but is split between two forces which the infant tends to see as uncomplicated ideals: one wholly good object and one wholly bad object.
The wholly good object may become a focal point around which the emergent ego can form, while in reaction to the wholly bad object, the infant develops a set of strong persecutory feelings.
This stage, in which the infant is concerned only with part-objects such as the breast, is called the ‘Paranoid-Schizoid Position’.
For Klein, it is the defensive mechanisms the child develops in response to its sense of anxiety which form the basic building blocks of ego development.
In such circumstances, the infant may feel hatred, love or fear; but it will understand these as feelings assigned to an external form, which may be introjected.
This kind of splitting is a mechanism which is actively pursued by the primitive ego.
Thus the goodness which is associated with the good breast may be preserved and protected by being introjected, to appear as an attribute of self; but if the infant's anxiety is aroused by its own feelings of frustration and hatred, the same good object may be projected outwards in order to protect it from the overwhelming badness which the infant feels to be within itself.
The complexity of these relations, and the manner in which they might be used as a model of dynamic mechanisms to extend the  concept of objectification from a simple dialectical cycle, is evident in Klein's discussion of infantile hallucinatory gratification.
One aspect of the infant's early mentality is its belief in its own omnipotence, which may lead towards an attempt simply to deny the existence of the bad object, thus safeguarding the presence of the good object, and projecting both as idealized forms.
Since, however, this is an object relation — that is, since that bad object is itself a part of the ego — this denial is to some extent also a denial of a part of the ego.
The basic mechanisms which utilize splitting are therefore always to be understood as a division in the subject as well as the object.
Klein suggests that ‘The process of splitting off parts of the self and projecting them into objects are thus of vital importance for normal as well as for abnormal object relations.
The effect of introjection on object relations is equally important.
The introjection of the good object, first of all the mother's breast, is a precondition for normal development’(Klein 1975: 9).
The strategies of splitting are essential for the infant's attempt to deal with the genuine contradictions it encounters in struggling to form some image of itself and the part-objects it confronts.
The pathological connotations of the term paranoid-schizoid are more appropriate to the reappearance of certain of these strategies later in life, when they become overextended from their normal place, and therefore develop as aspects of rupture, as when an adult attempts to gain power and control over another person as a substitute for the development of self-discipline.
Later, when the infant becomes capable of relating to whole objects, such as the mother instead of just the breast, it develops more integrative mechanisms in terms of what is called the depressive position.
In the depressive  position , the infant can no longer rely on seeing the good and bad objects as entirely separate, but has to recognize their simultaneous presence in the form of the mother as whole object.
This results in a more integrative ego dealing with a more integrative object.
Integrative does not, however, mean cohe-sive; rather, the new position leads to still more sophisticated forms of internal and external contradiction and relationships, exhibited in part through more developed emotions, such as guilt and mourning, as the infant deals with the contradictory nature of the mother.
For Klein, the equivalent of the central place of symbolism in Piagetian analysis is the concept or phantasy, which is the form taken by all the mechanisms so far described.
The initial model for this work may be Freud's concept of the super-ego, which is the interiorized form taken by parental authority.
What is implied by the notion of the super-ego is that the child may react less to the actual external forms of its parents, and more to its own projection of them, interiorized as  its moral order.
Klein's theories of projection and introjection greatly extend this model.
The forms taken in projection are often personifi-cations — that is, sensations such as envy, love and hatred understood through an anthropomorphic objectification.
This constructivist notion of phantasy is understood by Klein as the primary basis for all symbolic processes, whereas for later object-relations theorists it becomes a kind of false consciousness, or misapprehension of the real world.
These processes provide the foundations for the ego, and thus become highly integral and largely intractable.
As the sense of self, they provide the basic attitudes and perspectives which are taken for granted in relations with the external world, by virtue of the extent to which they are models into which that world must be assimilated.
The parallel with Bourdieu's notion of habitus (see below) may be noted.
Again, there are elements of Klein's work which may be aligned with ideas explored in the previous chapters.
Klein provides perhaps the least teleological analysis of the development of a subject, and her examples of adult psychosis may be linked to Hegel's, and especially Marx's, models of rupture, since they appear to result from the subject's belief in the alien nature of some fragmented aspects of the self it has become unable to sublate.
Klein s work rests upon a moral and normative order which can either, as in the work of other object-relations theorists, become associated with a particular status quo in terms of family structure and roles, or else, if rechannelled, be used for a radical critique of these same institutions (e.g. Frosh 1987).
The most interesting element in this analysis is, however, the complex nature of the mechanisms themselves, whose twists and cycles are able to capture a sense of dynamic interaction in a manner which may escape that vulgarized version of the dialectic which is commonly used to represent processes of this kind.
Paly
The implications of these general approaches to ontogenesis for the nature of the artefact become clearer when they are directed at a specific problem, the nature of play.
For Piaget, the activity of play represents a major advance in the ability of the child to control its own  environment and engage in a variety of strategies.
To illustrate this point, Piaget uses the following examples: the creation or imagined characters to provide a sympathetic audience for a child's actions or speech; catharsis, as when a doll is allowed to ride a machine which a child fears; and compensatory combinations, as when a child goes through the motions of pretend washing up when forbidden access to  the real thing by its parent.
The manipulation of this internal world may provide a safe basis for trying out combinations and ideas prior to, and sometimes instead of , attempting them in the real world.
It is also an essential aspect of the development of the internal world of thought.
Compared with the majority of recent social theorists, Piaget is unusual in de-emphasizing the role of language in the development of symbolism.
Indeed, for many other writers the two are seen as virtually synonymous.
Piaget, however, asserts in the introduction to his work that ‘We shall rather show that the acquisition of language is itself subordinated to the workings of a symbolic function which can be seen in the development of imitation and play as well as in that of verbal mechanisms’(1962: 1–2; see Vygotsky 1978 for a contrary view).
One of the first uses of language is merely as a subordinate subject for play.
Piaget attempts to map the increasing capacity for abstraction implied by the symbolic function, showing that in this development, language, which depends on an entirely conventional relationship between sign and signified, is bound to come at a relatively late stage.
Play with objects, which retain a physical similarity between sign and signified, or where some concrete form may be used to represent the distant other, then becomes an essential prerequisite for the development of the symbolic faculty found in language.
It is only after the child has interacted with the external world and its construction at a sufficiently sophisticated level that language as abstract reference becomes feasible.
By then, however, the semiotic function of language is already established.
Later Piagetian writers, such as Furth, have shown through their work with the deaf how inessential language is to the development of intelligence (Furth 1969: 119–20).
Klein's emphasis on play develops from more pragmatic concerns.
The use of toys is central to Klein's major methodological addition to the psychoanalytical tradition of  psychotherapeutic analysis: that is, her ‘play technique’(Klein 1975: 122–40; Segal 1979: 35–44).
This technique arose from the inability of a child to perform the ‘rituals’ of the adult psychoanalytical tradition in couch-based sessions of verbal exposition.
Instead, Klein supplied the child with a variety of material forms such as human figures of various sizes, plasticine and other malleable substances, and attempted to interpret its actions in relation to them.
Some of the  interpretations she provides, especially the emphasis on overt sexual imagery, may strike the reader who does not belong to the psychoanalytical tradition as quite unconvincing, but even if the specifics of her analysis are rejected, what emerges clearly is the centrality of play to the infant's projective processes; that is, the use of play as enactment.
Klein is not the only psychoanalyst to have commented upon the  place of material objects in play.
Freud's example of the fort-da game in which the child pretends to lose and find something as an enactment within a domain it can control, of its sense of separation from, and the return of the mother, provides a classic case of the problems of how to interpret vicarious activity.
(Freud 1984: 283–7).
Or particular significance is the account by Winnicott (1971) of the role of the ‘smelly blanket’ in the development of the self.
The smelly blanket is that particular, usually soiled, object from which the child hates to part.
Winnicott observed that such ‘transitional objects’ were important, precisely because they may appear to the infant as not fully part of the external world, and therefore not entirely separate from the child's own body.
While studies such as those of Klein, Winnicott, Piaget and Vygotsky have resulted in elegant explanations of the place of play with material objects in child development, there is a common inference that this becomes relatively redundant in later life.
However, to interpret play as merely a stage towards, for example, the more satisfactory situation of pure verbal expression while lying on a couch, would be unfortunate.
If language is seen as increasingly taking the place of explicit negotiation, communication and conscious thought, there is the possibility that, simultaneously, material objects become increasingly important in the formation of the unconscious, a possibility raised by Freud (though only briefly) in relation to repressive mechanisms (e.g. 1984: 206–8).
This provides a link with the more general tradition developed from Freud, which emphasizes the unconscious as an alternative site for the study of the contradictory nature of the individual (and social) body, especially in its relations with the external world seen as a ‘reality principle’.
This ambiguous position of the object, between self and the outside, and its relationship to the unconscious, will be further explored below.
Objects and Language
In contrast to the study of objects, the study of language is surely one of the most flourishing of all academic pursuits, a major success story in the social sciences.
One result of this has been the pervasive influence of linguistic methodology upon such studies of objects as have developed in recent decades; and while the rise of semiotics in the 1960s was advantages in that it provided for the extension of linguistic research into other domains, any of which could be treated as a semiotic system (e.g. Eco 1976: 9–14), this extension took place at the expense of subordinating the object qualities of things to their  word-like properties.
Major influences were the linguistic studies of Saussure (e.g. Humphrey 1971) and Chomsky (e.g. Faris 1972; Krause 1978).
In this literature, questions have been raised around a whole host of categories, relating to how far objects signify, symbolize, connote, denote, realize, constitute, reflect, embody and perhaps also objectify.
There have been fierce debates over the differences between objects as sign and as symbol, and over degrees of iconicity, most of which can be reduced to levels of abstraction involved in the process by which objects become vehicles of meaning (see Lyons 1977 for survey).
Dominating such studies has been a tendency to perceive objects as being reflective in a relatively passive sense.
As noted in chapter 4, social anthropology has tended to privilege society and social structure as prior phenomena which posses a certain profound reality, and in this tradition patterns located in objects might be held to reflect back to some social division or model from which they derive their source and significance.
The concept of objectification provides the basis for examining such an assumption, and any critique of the notion of society as the privileged signified over culture may be extended to consider the nature of the sign in general.
On these grounds (but not on others), the implications of objectification have much in common with a whole series of critical writings which argue that representation or symbolism, as a relation between signifier and signified, tends to promote the unproblematic assertion of the signified (for example, the modern conception of the self) rather than investigating the mechanisms by which these are constructed in the symbolic process itself (e.g. Coward and Ellis 1977: 122–52).
A further example is the critique by Baudrillard of utility as privileged signified, which was noted in chapter 3.
Any simple notion of signification as reflection trends towards a subject-object dualism which fails to acknowledge the process underlying their mutual construction.
Two problems emerge from this literature: first, the absence of any consideration of the specificity of the object; and secondly, the relatively simplistic form of reference which tends to be used in object analysis.
In order to direct the discussion towards the particularity of the artefact form, rather than the problem of the mainly  linguistic sign, artefacts need to be explicitly distinguished from language.
There have been very few attempts systematically to contrast their different properties.
The only cases I have encountered come from discussions of aesthetics, although that by Langer (1942) is dominated by the image of the painting, while those by Colquhoun (1981) and Scruton (1979: 158–78) are based on the example of architecture.
Langer  represents the distinction as one between ‘discursive’ and ‘presentational’forms.
Language and thought are discursive processes from which a series or independent component parts derive their overall meaning through sequential articulation.
The rules of grammar are intended to  analyse the structure underlying this discursive order.
A presentational form such as a picture, on the other hand, has no natural divisions; one could not take, for example, the division between light and shade as independently meaningful.
In assimilating a presentational form we have to take it in all at once, rather than sequentially, and there is nothing equivalent to grammatical structure underlying it (1942: 90–3).
Langer discusses in detail some of the implications of these differences, focusing upon their capacity for expression.
She sees presentational symbolism as the major vehicle of objectifying feelings, and argues that these are thereby under-represented in our philosophies (1967: 101–2).
A limitation of her analysis, deriving from its emphasis on aesthetics, and found also in some of the recent discussions of media and advertising, is a tendency to exaggerate the unique properties of the individual object, as against the type-token nature of words which almost always refer back to some generic category.
Art and unique objects are, however, only a minute proportion of the material world, and our ability to discriminate through perception is as pronounced for the everyday observation of fashion and cosmetics as in any appreciation of fine art.
In most material culture, the individual object is as much a type-token of the larger group of identical handbags, armchairs, spears or canoes as is the case with words, and, even when held as individual property, may thereby mark the relation of object and owner to the set of items it represents.
Scruton's (1979) critique concentrates on the claims of semiotics.
He argues that the structures found in architectural rules should not be credited either with direct semiotic import, or, necessarily, with propositional content.
Architecture also differs from language in its strict observation of its own rules and conventions, and in its sense of detail.
The analogy with syntax or grammar is therefore rejected.
Rustin (1985) notes that Scruton places undue emphasis on the referential approach to language in semiotics, ignoring the equally powerful structuralist component (see Sperber 1975 for a parallel comment on anthropology).
Colquhoun (1981: 130) is also concerned to expose the limitations of semiotic studies of objects based on Saussure, but in this case mainly with respect to their synchronicity, attempting to characterize several differences of objects from language in the way in which architectural styles change.
For example, in  language change occurs only in one part of the system at a time, while in aesthetics whole styles may alter, as in the transition from Gothic to Classical architecture.
Colquhoun also notes the impossibility of abstracting some ‘arbitrary’ meaning outside of the spatial and functional context within which the materials of buildings operate, underlining particular differences such as the  reliance of architecture upon self-referential and ‘traditional’modes for its meaning; in other words, its historicism.
Less remarked on are the inadequacies and crudity of language when faced with objects in everyday interaction.
This point is easily illustrated through a simple reflective exercise.
Imagine for a moment attempting to describe in detail the difference in shape between a milk bottle and a sherry bottle, or the taste of cod as against haddock, or the design of some wallpaper.
Clearly, compared with our ability to make fine discriminations of perceptual qualities and immediately to recognize and discriminate amidst a profusion of ordinary objects, linguistic description may appear slow and clumsy.
This simple observation is crucial to the argument of this chapter, as it allows us to question ingrained assumptions concerning the superiority and greater significance of language over other forms of expression.
Another difficulty arises when trying to assess how far different media may be taken as propositional.
That this cannot be assumed of language, which appears to serve just such a purpose, has been illustrated very clearly by the linguist Lehrer in an analysis of the language used in the description of wines.
Through her experiments it became evident that, despite the extensive elaboration of wine descriptors and the beliefs of the participants, neither lay persons nor experts were actually communicating knowledge about wines to their fellows in conversation, such that the wine referred to could be recognized from linguistic description alone (Lehrer 1983).
By contrast, many studies of objects such as buildings, which discuss the links between architectural form and a set of ideals such as scholasticism or imperialism, indicate the degree to which such objects are significant as propositional forms, even as to the nature of the world (e.g. Panofsky 1957; King ed. 1980).
It appears, then, that although the object has different qualities from language it may be equally impressive in the areas of expression and communication in which language is most esteemed.
In the next section, however, the emphasis will be on qualities of the object which language cannot share.
The Artefact Per Se An analysis of the artefact must begin with its most obvious characteristic, which is that it exists as a physically concrete form  independent of any individual's mental image of it.
This factor may provide the key to understanding its power and significance in cultural construction.
The importance of this physicality of the artefact derives from its ability thereby to act as a bridge, not only between the mental and physical worlds, but also, more unexpectedly, between consciousness and the unconscious.
The question of the place of objects in the formation of mental imagery may be referred back to the discussion of play.
It is clear that during a certain stage in the child's development, artefacts become its principal means of articulating feelings and desires.
The linguistic mechanism is a more sophisticated means of articulation which requires the complete break between sign and signified essential to the development of the arbitrary basis of pure linguistic symbolism.
Objects, however, by virtue of their concrete nature, can never possess that entirely arbitrary and abstract capability.
While perception of objects may not be prior to those mental apparati which absorb them (a version of the Kantian categories), it does act as a firm physical constraint upon them.
It appears that play begins during the period when the separation between consciousness and unconsciousness is becoming more deeply dichotomized, and that, following the development of language, objects never again have such a prominent place in our articulation or self-expression.
This feature of child development has echoes also in social development, where there is an analogy with the role of objects in social reproduction before the acquisition of writing skills; at this stage objects as authentic objectifications of the ancestors were, along with oral tradition, the major means of ensuring the continuity of social reproduction (Weiner 1985).
These accounts may therefore imply that, as language strengthens its hold on consciousness and, through writing, on the explicit world of knowledge, objects may retain their place in the ordering of the unconscious world.
Consciousness appears to be almost wholly dominated by language as the medium of thought and expression, so that the entire surface of cognitive processes and voluntary responses appears to be  channelled through language.
It is to this domain that we conventionally ascribe our image of self and of importance, identifying strongly with our controlled ability to articulate what appears to us to be the content of our own will.
Contrary to approaches influenced by Lacan, there seems little reason to suppose that the unconscious is structured largely in relation to language or some other grammatical form, since in the intellectual representation of the external world it is possible to account for symbolic processes through a variety of other cognitive mechanisms (e.g. Sperber 1975; 1979).
Most of the major advances in the social sciences over the last two centuries, including the work of Freud and Marx, should lead us to be suspicious of any equation of importance with surface, suggesting that there are other forces both historical and unconscious which underlie this arena of language and linguistically articulated intent.
We have some knowledge of these processes in cases such as proxemics, where our spatial orientation to objects may be observed as both cultural and normative (Hall 1966).
In general, however, it is only the massive gulf between perceptual ability and linguistic competence of conscious articulation which provides evidence in day to day experience of the power of an unconscious oriented towards objects rather than language; but this alone implies that the object world holds great significance.
This is not to deny the vital role played by language in naturalizing cultural differences such as gender roles, but rather to assert that artefacts may be still more powerful mechanisms in this process.
This relationship between object and unconscious is by no means obvious.
Indeed, the very concrete physicality of objects might lead us to expect quite the opposite conclusion, which is that it is language which organizes the deep unconscious, while objects as visible images are a relatively superficial phenomenon.
If, however, the social properties of objects are not as ‘evident’ as they are visible, this very factor may actually be, in part, responsible for our inability to appreciate the significance of the object.
This, in turn, might account for our difficulty in dealing with objects through academic studies dominated by language.
Rather as with other areas fundamental to the operation of the unconscious, artefacts may resist conscious articulation and in a sense be embarrassed by language.
This argument may be exemplified by considering one of the mechanisms through which we deal with the everyday world.
It was suggested earlier that our image of the artefact is constantly dominated, not only by linguistic analogies, but also by the concept of art and the uniqueness of the object of art.
One of the very few art historians to have moved away from the unique art object to consider more mundane phenomena is Gombrich, whose book,The Sense of Order (1979) attempts to make generalizations about the nature of design, as opposed to art.
In distinguishing between these two, Gombrich uses the picture frame as an example of design.
This is a felicitous choice, since it serves the dual purpose of examining design at the same time as providing a basis for a definition of art, from which it is distinguished.
Following Kant, many aesthetic theories emphasize the particular manner or attitude of regarding the object of art; for example, the way a work of art commands our concentration and  consideration, producing an abstracted and contemplative gaze.
By contrast, the definition of a good frame is almost exactly the opposite; it should be  immediately absorbed without any period of consideration and, rather than being the focus of attention in itself, should direct our attention to the object within it.
In short, the frame enhances, but it is not itself, the subject of attention.
What is crucial to this argument, if extended a little beyond Gombrich's own assessment, is that the frame's anonymous and modest presence belies its significance for the appreciation of the work of art.
It might be suggested that it is only through the presence of the frame that we recognize the work of art for what it is, perceiving it and responding to it in the appropriate way.
In short, it is the frame rather than the picture which establishes the mode of appreciation we know as art.
Placed in another context, such as the billboard, the work of art might well fail to attract either attention or interest.
Where the conventional wooden frame is inappropriate, as in many forms of modern art, the gallery itself provides the larger frame which is an index of the nature of its contents; or, at a still more abstract though obviously more explicit level this function is performed by the category art itself.
In this  instance , by establishing a relationship of immediacy with our unconscious, one object is able to control the nature of our consciousness, making it appropriate to the context within which that object is working.
This principle proves to have general validity.
There have emerged at different times a number of theories of social  psychology or sociology which provide versions of what Schultz (1970: 245–62) termed multiple realities.
Goffman's version, presented in his book Frame Analysis (1975), most directly extends the example used by Gombrich (see also Giddens 1984: 73–92 for a parallel case using discursive form).
Goffman's emphasis is upon a wide range of cues which tell us what kind of activity or behaviour we are engaged in.
Quite often these are object cues, such as the theatre or church, which signify more general  categories such as drama or religion, thereby providing an appropriate setting for particular attitudes and kinds of behaviour.
As in these two examples, the frame may occasionally be conspicuous and possibly highly ornate, but, more commonly in everyday living, objects as frames play on inconspicuous and normative cultural role.
Even when an object such as a picture frame or set of clothes is highly ornate and may be the topic of conversation, it is usually intended to pall before the glory or that which it encloses: the work of art or the person.
The humility of the common object is especially clear in an area of mass material culture such as furnishing.
While it is possible to draw attention to these object frames as forms of display, more commonly  they are the appropriate background for living.
What is important is that they should not draw our attention towards them by appearing in some way wrong, inappropriate or misconceived.
More appropriate terms are warm, friendly, modern or stylish, and if our attention should focus upon the pattern or texture of the wallpaper or upholstery, this should always be in order to comment on the taste of the selector.
In modern linguistics, we are often told of our remarkable ability to construct meaningful sentences which we have never previously heard; yet this is surely matched by our ability to absorb the social implications of an array of furnishing consisting of a combination which is not only almost certainly in some degree unique, but some of whose basic elements may also be new to us.
It is clear that this impression made upon us is no less significant in determining our conception of the individuals concerned than the articulate self-expression represented by the conversation we may be engaged in within this setting.
This example illustrates one of the many ways in which unconscious, non-linguistic processes may act to control conscious and linguistic articulation.
This is not to deny some level of autonomy to the latter, but to reject assertions of its virtual total autonomy.
Even in linguistics, the recent rise of pragmatics as opposed to syntax and semantics as the basis for understanding the nature of meaning (e.g. Sperber and Wilson 1985) should suggest that, while the contextual world of objects may be the last and most overlooked component of the mechanisms of social interaction, it may very well prove, when finally excavated from its embedded relationship to the unconscious, to be the most significant factor of all.
Few anthropologists have focused  specifically upon the place of the object in social reproduction.
Most tend to privilege language and the interview as media of expression.
In the crudest forms, the informant is reduced to that which he or she says, and the idea of the anthropologist going beyond or against that particular limited form of expression is considered suspicious, though this attitude is unusual.
Exceptions to this bias towards language include a crude behaviourism still strongly asserted in some archaeological theories which reduce the artefact as cultural construction to merely part of the process by which an environment works its determinant force upon the human subject.
Other exceptions are the highly objectivist forms of analysis such as structuralism, which tend towards the opposite extreme of a virtually autonomous logic of cultural forms.
One anthropologist who has been noted for attempting to retain a balance between objectivist and subjectivist analysis is Pierre Bourdieu.
In his work as in the present study, there has been an attempt to  mediate between the physical world of practices as a determinant material structure and constructivist analysis of the material world as inseparable from the cognitive means of its appropriation.
A brief account of Bourdieu's notion of ‘habitus’ provides an example of how we might assimilate the apparent paradox of an external physical world which is nevertheless in a more immediate relationship with the unconscious than the world of articulate symbolism.
It also allows us to consider directly the implications of the object as physical form which mediates between the subjective and objective worlds, and to do so within an anthropological mode sensitive to the specificity of culture.
This may facilitate a return from the ahistorical concerns of psychology and linguistics, where analysis of the object threatens to remain fetishistic, to the world of social action where such analysis is reintegrated into cultural studies.
In his key work on this subject (1977), Bourdieu begins with a critical account of that anthropological structuralism which provides him with one of his main methodological tools.
Structuralism may be employed to excavate the principles of classification and order which unite what on the surface appear as highly disparate domains, so that for a particular society food preparation, kinship and myth may be revealed as transformations of each other.
The problem with this ‘high’ structuralism is that it tends to offer only an extremely objectivist account of social action, in which the human actor is merely a vehicle for the autonomous working of certain ordering principles.
When used to account for anthropological observation, it may become a series of mechanical and inflexible models.
Bourdieu wished to retain what we have learnt from structural analysis, and yet to mitigate its objectivist implications by emphasizing that such structures produce not rules but dispositions, and underlie not determinacy but strategy.
Structuralism may help us to understand the construction of the subject as cultural being, but must then allow for the action of that self-referential subject upon history.
Bourdieu, by virtue of his many anthropological examples, provides one of the most satisfactory resolutions of this age-old conflict between being made in history and creating history.
This positive concept of strategy is also very different from the more common nihilistic rendering of the same problem (e.g. by Sartre 1976).
The account of habitus given below is, however, greatly traduced by summary.
The ‘habitus’ is that structured set of classificatory schema which is inculcated in the child as its sense of cultural propriety and normative order.
As excavated by structuralism, the underlying order found, for example, in house layout, exchange relations or morality, may be  reducible to certain basic patterns or transformations.
By absorbing these, the subject is then in turn able to impose them upon some new domain not previously encountered, and thereby immediately to assimilate this into its particular cultural order.
These closely woven principles are specific to certain groups — for example, gender or class — and lead also to a sense of identity between those who share habitus.
This sense of order is a given, fundamental, rather than negotiated, disposition.
Habitus is learnt through interactive practices, as the acts of living within a world which is composed of this same order are continually reinforced in different domains.
In fact, this is a process of familiarity rather than learning.
Since these domains are physical, they act to provide the agent with objective probabilities producing subjective (rather than individual, Bourdieu 1977: 86–7) aspirations which are usually restricted to aims the agent has some prospect or accomplishing (Bourdieu 1977: 77).
It is these same practical taxonomies which serve to exemplify the principles of cultural order.
In certain societies, formal education may attempt to make explicit and controlled some of these processes of learning, and it is no coincidence that Bourdieu is otherwise known as a writer on the French educational system (e.g. Bourdieu and Passeron 1977; 1979).
In both cases, he explores the hierarchies within and between these classification systems, and their importance for an understanding of ideology and power.
It will be clear that for this approach an artefact which already embodies a categorization process is clearly distinguished from a natural object which does not.
Bourdieu's concept of habitus starts as constructivist rather than behaviourist, with the external environment being differentially absorbed and interpreted from the perspective of the subject as a member of a social group.
It thereby links socialization processes, by which a new generation is culturally incorporated, with the longer term movements of history and the process by which culture itself is reproduced, thereby developing as a dynamic praxis, or an objectification which avoids determinism.
The habitus is viewed as a structured set of dispositions which provides a basis for the enactment of strategy according to interest, perspective and power.
As with language, the generative order does not dictate the result of its use.
Our ability to ‘read’ objects for their social appropriateness and to impose upon any series or new forms that order which would make them culturally acceptable does not in any respect lessen the place of strategy, or the possibility of intent; both, however, are accomplished within objective conditions of which we have an underlying experience, even if we choose to deny them in formulating strategy.
In common with Langer, Bourdieu stresses the relationship of this object world to feelings rather than language; it is those expressions of disgust, distaste and discomfort which best express our sense of something being ‘wrong’.
It is a world in which the grimace is often more eloquent than the phrase.
Although concerned to embed his ideas in practices Bourdieu is not himself especially concerned with defining the role of the artefact, but it is clear how his work contributes to such a task.
His examples taken from fieldwork amongst the Kabylia of Algeria, using house form, motor-habit and  calenders , provide abundant further evidence for this relationship between the order of artefacts and the unconscious absorption and creation of cultural form.
He constantly affirms the effectiveness of order embodied in details such as dress, body movement and manners, and argues that it is a function of the mundane artefact almost always to be regarded as an example of mere ‘trivia’ unworthy of systematic academic study.
At this point it is possible to return to the most evident implication of the physical nature of the artefact as symbol without appearing to invite a crude behaviourist concept of materialism.
Clearly, an object may always signify its own material possibilities and constraints and  thereby the more general world of material practices.
What is of importance is certainly not the idea of physicality as some ‘ultimate constraint’ or final determining factor, but rather the manner in which everyday objects continually assert their presence as simultaneously material force and symbol.
Our images of the house are continually modified by the actual houses we encounter, and our perceptions of their size, shape, order and limitations; and the effect of this is most pronounced when we engage in attempts to alter, extend, or discover pleasure in some physical aspect of this materiality which may resist these constraints.
The use of artefact as symbol does not in any way detract from its significance as tool, material worked, or environment experienced.
Material culture studies derive their importance from this continual simultaneity between the artefact as the form of natural materials whose nature we continually experience through practices, and also as the form through which we continually experience the very particular nature or our cultural order.
This is most especially the case in industrial society; in London, for example, there is no ‘natural’ environment to be opposed to the socially constructed form.
In view of this it is reasonable to conclude that all experience of physical force is mediated by its prior constitution as a cultural category.
Using the example of the work of Bourdieu, it has been argued that, although the object may be closely associated with the most fundamental and hidden aspects of socialization, this does not mean  that it must be analysed only by determinant, rule-based objectivist procedures, since as an instrument of social strategy it retains a high degree of flexibility.
This flexibility is suggestive of certain properties of the artefact as physical form.
Recent social theory has emphasized the variety of interpretations to which texts may be subject, with linguistic texts, as usual, providing the dominant models.
Yet, clearly, any account of the death of the author as arbiter of the final ‘meaning’ of a given text (Barthes 1977; Foucault 1977a), is potentially matched by the important, though much less addressed, question of the transcendence of the industrial designer, who, as Forty (1986) has shown, should never have been ascribed the autonomy often assumed.
The problem of interpretation is closely linked to the place of the artefact in intersubjective order.
In the examples discussed in the previous chapters, such as the work of Munn, it was clear that the individual is already closely oriented towards a social order by external forms such as the landscape, in which conceptions of the person and of society are literally grounded.
This idea can now be refined through Bourdieu's concept of habitus, in which the social group's perspective upon some form is always predicated upon the historical construction of its  dispositions , interaction being a conjunc-ture which cannot be reduced merely to its immediate context (Bourdieu 1977: 81).
The artefact plays an important role here, because once again its physical and external presence belies its actual flexibility as symbol.
Symbolism, which is always a relationship of evocation, is held in most studies to be a highly variable process which is dependent upon the social positioning of the interpreter and the context of interpretation.
This is fairly obvious with a relatively abstract form such as a moral code.
We are used to the idea that a statement of belief or propriety is continually open to challenge, and that debates concerning its correct interpretation are never fully resolvable.
The artefact, on the other hand, tends to imply a certain innocence of facticity; it seems to offer the clarity of realism, an assertion of certainty against the buffeting of debate, an end or resting point which resolves the disorder of uncertain perspectives.
All this is, of course, quite illusory; the object is just as likely as the word, if not more so, to evoke variable responses and invite a variety of interpretations.
In fact, language, through abstraction, is a much more efficient form or communication and possesses much more control over its interpretation, and it is rather that this difference in evocation is less likely to be evident in artefactual symbolism than in linguistic symbolism.
This is of major importance.
In so far as differences in social position, such as class and gender, lead to different perspectives, that  which is evoked by the objects in society will also be different.
This problem, which, where conflicts of interest are involved, becomes one of ideology, need not lead to overt conflict, however, because the groups concerned may be quite unaware of the discrepancy.
A male may not be aware or the possibility or a female's alternative reading of what an object constitutes or signifies; similarly, it may never occur to a member of a one social class that some revered object may be subject to a parodied and subversive interpretation by members of another.
If two groups acquiesce in the representation of their perspective through the same array of objects, which for one group is acceptable because it is bright and cheerful, while for the other is acceptable because it enshrines a sense of good design, each may project its own perspective onto the other; in this case, the object permits the coexistence of two perspectives, rather than the dominance of either.
The fact that objects may become the source of actual struggles over conflicting interests will be discussed in chapter 9 as part of the general problem of ideology.
To conclude, in order to examine an area which is rarely focused upon in itself, it has been necessary in this chapter artificially to abstract the object, considering it in rather universalistic terms, and in relation to a perhaps overdrawn dichotomy with language.
In practice, of course, the object is usually a historical phenomenon, which confronts us as evidence for a larger, anterior cultural tradition within which we exist, and is inseparable from the linguistic mechanisms which are central to our knowledge of it.
Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to assume that the specific nature of the object, and in particular its physical presence, will result in a tendency for it to act in certain distinctive ways, compared with other media of cultural expression.
It has been argued that the artefact may perhaps best be understood as playing a series of bridging roles.
It does not lend itself to the earlier analysis of symbolism which identified distinct abstract signifiers and concrete signifieds, since it simultaneously operates at both levels.
Instead, it has been suggested that the object tends towards presentational form, which cannot be broken up as though into grammatical sub-units, and as such it appears to have a particularly close relation to emotions, feelings and basic orientations to the world.
The artefact may be used to promote fine distinctions through its relation to extremely sophisticated mechanisms or perceptual discrimination which tend to remain outside of consciousness.
finally, its physical presence exemplifies the concept of praxis, in that this materiality is always an element in cultural transformation.
In relation to Bourdieu's concept of habitus, the artefact was noted as playing a pivotal role in social reproduction, where it forms part of a reconciliation of objectivist accounts exposing the mechanisms which create the subject in history with an interpretation of the social subject's role as active agent in the formulation of historical strategy.
The artefact's affinity to the unconscious also allows it to play an important role in marking different forms of social reality, and allowing these and the perspectives arising from different social positions to exist concurrently without coming into overt conflict.
In objectification, the artefact appears to be instrumental in linking these major processes of abstraction and specificity.
Finally, these two characteristics of the artefact — its extreme visibility and its extreme invisibility — may also, through their relationship, in large measure account for our difficulty in appreciating the importance of material culture for social relations.
7
ARTEFACTS AND THEIR CONTEXT
Introduction
Although in chapter 6 an attempt was made to investigate the nature of the artefact per se , even a cursory examination of artefacts as actually employed within different societies reveals the extreme diversity of uses and connotations among physically similar forms.
Whatever properties are delineated as especially appropriate to material artefacts in general, these cannot be regarded as necessary attributes of an individual artefact when considered in any particular social context.
Societies have an extraordinary capacity either to consider objects as having attributes which may not appear as evident to outsiders, or else altogether to ignore attributes which would have appeared to those same outsiders as being inextricably part of that object.
In this respect, the study of the properties of objects in the social sciences is quite dissimilar to equivalent studies in physics or chemistry, where statements about these properties take the form of law-like propositions.
An attempt to identify those social properties which pertain to objects as artefacts, for example, as opposed to the properties of words as discovered by linguists, or dreams as discovered by psychologists, can only be achieved through a balance between two procedures.
On the one hand, it requires the transcendence of cultural relativism in order to discuss objects in terms of their general potential, but on the other hand it demands the recognition that these potential attributes need not necessarily be realized or acknowledged in any particular cultural context.
It was argued in chapter 6 that the physicality of artefacts makes them much harder than language to extricate from the particular social context in which they operate, and that for this reason they pose a particular problem for academic study.
My intention in this chapter is not to construct a systematic model of the properties of material culture in society, but rather to investigate through a series of illustrations the interaction between material culture and certain  contextual dimensions, emphasizing the implications of the materiality of the object as symbol.
There is at present no academic discipline which sees it as its specific project to examine the nature of artefacts as cultural forms.
The physical properties of objects revealed in the natural sciences may well have an important bearing upon discussions of the technological constraints on manufacture and utility, but these studies do not differentiate, as a prime dichotomy, between the artefact and the natural substance, and indeed are largely concerned to reduce the former to the properties of the latter.
More surprisingly, this distinction is equally absent in the discipline of psychology.
Studies of cognition which seek to elucidate the nature or that cultural order which we might impose upon or recognize in the world may well be concerned with the classification of objects, but they generally fail to acknowledge, let alone address, the difference between artefacts such as cutlery which already incorporate categorization in their manufac-turer, and objects such as trees which do not (e.g. Rosch 1978: 30–5).
Consumer psychology attempts to relate sets of objects to groups of people as ‘target’ populations, but, whilst it deals entirely with artefacts, it does not address the question of their particular nature as concrete material culture.
A similar failure to analyse the artefact per se has already been noted in philosophy.
The only branch of academic analysis which, by virtue of its title, might have been thought to represent a candidate for this specific area of study is that sub-section of anthropology known as material culture studies.
Yet although this sub-discipline has from its origins been concerned with the nature of the artefactual world as an element of culture offering insights into that part of social behaviour which is oriented towards the creation and use of objects, the rather particular history of this series of studies has hitherto severely limited its application.
At that period of the nineteenth century when the discipline of anthropology was coming into being, material culture studies represented the very core of this emergent social science (e.g. Haddon 1895; Tylor 1881).
Both to armchair academics, and, though museum displays, to the population as a whole, objects were representative of the peoples of distant cultures.
They were closely integrated into the emerging central paradigm of social evolution, according to which the level of sophistication of these objects was held to symbolize the place of such peoples as a kind of fossil record of social development from the primitive to the civilized (Steadman 1979; Chapman 1985).
This significatory potential of the object was seen as being affirmed by archaeology, which produced a sequence from the early stone age to  the iron age and beyond, providing a temporal foundation for these assertions of social evolution (Lowrie 1937: 22).
If evolutionary studies provided a vertical dimension within which objects could signify the development of societies, this was complemented by the growth of diffusionary studies in which the horizontal distribution of objects over the globe was thought to be further evidence for the movements of both peoples and ideas, for example, from origins in ancient  Egypt or Germany.
These two dimensions provided the basis for the first coherent theories about the connections between the peoples of the world.
In the twentieth century, however, there was a revolt against the dominant paradigms of anthropology, and evolutionary and diffusionary theories were rejected in favour of direct participant observation, in which objects no longer mediated in the relationship between the anthropologist and the informant.
The discipline became dominated by two new theoretical models: first a functionalist theory of synchronic adaptation, and later structuralism.
Both of these rejected the notion of the primitive as used in the earlier studies, as well as the evolutionary concepts which had legitimized that notion.
The very success of material culture studies in having been so firmly integrated into the older paradigm meant that such studies become invalidated by their own historical associations, and were no longer able to play a significant role in the new anthropology.
The amount of research in material culture studies declined (e.g. Fenton 1974), and tended to become reduced to two of the peripheral areas of anthropological enquiry.
These were either the study of technology integrated within a general study of human adaption to the environment, which presupposed a particularly immediate relationship between society and the environment, or alternatively an anthropology of art which, by contrast, emphasized the greatest possible distance between people and their environment, in order to focus upon exotic and esoteric practices.
The middle ground, within which lie most of the current concerns of social anthropology, was increasingly ignored, as far as consideration of the social use of objects is concerned.
The discipline within anthropology which maintained the closest relation to material culture studies was archaeology, which has always been highly dependent upon such studies, since its task of resurrecting ancient societies is based in large measure on the interpretation of the material remains excavated from those societies.
During the course of the nineteenth century, archaeology moved in a quite different direction, becoming, like the earlier diffusionary theories, increasingly obsessed with objects as such, and treating them as having an  independent behaviour in a manner which separated them from any social context and which amounted to a genuine fetishism or the artefact.
A series of archaeological studies in the 1960s (e.g. Clarke 1968) proclaimed a science of the object based on systems theory and patterns of artefact change, or highly detailed examination of the properties of flints, bones and pottery.
Only in the sub-discipline within archaeology called ethno-archaeology, where archaeologists worked in contemporary ethnographic situations in order to study the relationship between peoples and their material world, was it usually impossible to ignore the social basis of material culture (e.g. Gould ed. 1978; Gould and Schiffer eds 1981; Hodder 1982a; Kramer ed. 1979).
Recently, however, there has been a reversion to analysis of pre-historic artefacts in terms of their contextual social relations, as semiotic and ideological representations, with respect both to users in the past and for us today (e.g. Hodder ed. 1982; Miller and Tilley eds 1984).
To conclude, the fact that there has been to date remarkably little progress towards an independent discipline of material culture is due, at least in part, to the particular history of that field within anthropology.
Other reasons for this relative absence were discussed in chapter 6.
In order to pursue the implications of the generalized account given there of the artefact as symbol, the following sections examine a set of particular domains.
These are chosen somewhat arbitrarily, and, needless to say, others might have been included.
In each case the intention will be to emphasize the artefact's constitutive character, rather than treating it as a mere reflection of social relations, that is a ‘human mirror’.
In most cases a single example of the relationships between the object and a given contextual domain has been selected for illustrative purposes, although it will be obvious that there is a vast number of alternative relevant instances.
The Artefacts as Manufactured Objects
The factor which distinguishes the artefact from the natural object is that it is the product of human labour.
Although structuralism, in its extension of the Kantian position, has constantly asserted the cultural nature of those natural phenomena which impinge upon us only through being assimilated by our own categorizing processes, these may still be differentiated from artefacts, within which such a system of categorization is an inherent attribute.
In formulating the category ‘artefact’, some notion of intention is also usually attributed to their creation; for example, a gas cloud may emerge as an unpredicted  by-product of a technological process, though this product of human labour is only marginally an artefact.
Since manufacture always has to be practised upon materials, its first implication is that it may show signs of the constraints these materials bring to the technological process (Gombrich 1979: 63–94).
Some materials, such as stone or wood, are largely subtractive, in that there is a natural substance from which parts are taken away, through chipping, sawing and other means, to create the finished artefact; while others, such as cast metal or clay, are additive, in that a quantity is utilized in a plastic state which can take the shape of a template or mould.
Any such artefact may seek either to proclaim or to hide the material used and the constraints the material has imposed upon the technological process: a mask may be thought to incorporate the spiritual properties of the wood from which it is taken; a group of people may refuse to purchase an item known to be of seal skin; a plastic may seek to copy a more traditional material; the gold from which an object is made may have far greater significance than the actual form into which it has been hammered.
In a society with a relatively unpronounced division of labour, it may be difficult to distinguish manufacture as a separate arena of social relations which are specifically signified by its products.
As in the case of the construction of canoes for the Kula (Munn 1977), technology may be thoroughly embedded in cosmology, and even social theorists who would eschew a technological determinism, but wish to characterize societies through more mediated concepts such as‘modes of production’, have often had to subordinate the organization of production to a host of other elements of social organization such as kinship and ritual (e.g. Godelier 1972; Hindless and Hirst 1975,; Kahn and Llobera eds 1981).
An insight into the relationship which may be found between technology and cultural form in such societies is offered by the argument formulated by Franz Boas (1955) concerning the origins of primitive art (see also Gombrich 1979).
Boas identified two major sources for this art: the drive towards representation and the tendency to create pattern.
The latter, he suggested, stems from the basic motor-habits involved in simple technological processes which revolve around regular and repetitive movements, such as those of the hand in sewing, basketry, or weaving.
These sequences may give rise to a kind of play, in which they are exaggerated, inverted or otherwise re-ordered in such a manner that a regular pattern or rhythm emerges in the finished product.
The interplay between these sequences and the tendency either to see representational figures in pattern, or alternatively to repeat representational figures in such a way that they  reduce to pattern, was held by Boas to be the foundation of art and design, providing the basic dimensions which united the diverse media of craft production, music, dance and poetry.
Using material from the Kwakiutl peoples of the north-west coast of America, Boas showed how the major stylistic features of their material culture, such as an extensive use of bilateral symmetry and the disintegration of animal representations into pattern, could be understood as emerging from the interplay of technology and constraint.
For example, the problem of representing three-dimensional figures in two dimensions lent itself to the splitting of animal forms so that they faced out in both directions, joined by a centre line around the mouth and spine.
In turn, these tended to become complex and ambiguous images such that, as anthropomor-phized animals, they could represent the transformation of human and animal forms (Vastokas 1978), or through the focus upon the mouth could illustrate the principle of voracity according to which human killing and eating of animals ensured the cyclic reproduction of all life in the world (Walens 1981).
Here, then, manufacture as technology involving materials with certain properties becomes an integral part of the emergence of culture incorporating the visual embodiment of the nature and legitimacy of a certain social order, which in turn forms part of an encompassing ontology (Goldman 1975: chapter nine).
With a more developed division of labour, and particularly with industrial production, the separation of the sphere of manufacture, as found, for example, in Marx's privileging of this particular domain, has tended to become more pronounced.
An object may then become a conspicuous example of non-industrial production, such as the homespun Khadi cloth of India popularized by Gandhi as a symbol of Indian independence, and still a potent emblem for Indian political parties (Bayly 1986).
The nineteenth-century arts and crafts movement developed by William Morris and others was also  successful in advertising the hand-crafted status of their products.
This kind of ‘natural’ product gains its meaning entirely from its opposition to industrialization, and is thus always indirectly produced by industrialization.
The contradictory nature of this relationship is illustrated by the experiences of a community of potters in Japan, who, through the equivalent of the arts and crafts movement, were held as exemplifying a natural, anonymous and traditional form of production.
When publicized as such through a visit by the British potter Bernard Leach and Japanese enthusiasts, however, the potters were forced to adopt new forms of marketing and production in order to meet the demand for these symbols of their purity, whilst at the same time preserving, for the benefit of the tourists, the appearance of producing works of art untainted by industrialization (Moeran 1984).
As is evident from the writing of Hegel, Marx and many later writers, technology itself, as the deliberate imposition of rational will upon the world, may become the foundation for the dominant ideologies of the industria-lized world (e.g. Castoriadis 1984: 299–59).
These cases suggest that when manufacture as the signified of the object, becomes reified as having a separate and particular connotation it is not the actual process of manufacture which is of importance, but the ability of the object to stand for a particular form of production and its attendant social relations.
The object has always had the ability to proclaim one technological origin while actually deriving from another.
The skeumorph , in which, for example, a stone blade copies the style of a metal object, is a classic find in archaeological excavations of early bronze age sites.
With the development of machinery, the mass produced object intended to disguise its origins and look like the product of hand labour has become well established.
In many cases, this symbolism is part of a more general ability to proclaim or deny a distance from nature.
Although the artefact may stand for a particular form of production, it cannot be assumed that it will do so, or that the divisions which appear as significant from one perspective upon modern society will necessarily emerge as the major dimensions of differentiation in the object world.
It might be thought, for example, that the major distinction between socialist and capitalist development, terms which are rounded in contrasting philosophies or the proper relations or production, would be a prime subject for the symbolic capacity of the modern artefact.
In practice, when making a purchase, it is very rare for us to note whether an object is made by a cooperative or a private factory, or in East or West Germany, and extraordinarily this division appears hardly, if at all, within the major symbolic dimensions of the contemporary world of commodities.
We do not think in terms of capitalist shoes and socialist shoes.
From this example, we can draw a conclusion of crucial importance for the analysis of material culture: divisions which may appear important in language and ideology may be absent from object differentiation, while distinctions within the domain of artefacts may constitute important divisions which would elsewhere be ignored or denied.
Artefacts and Function
In no domain is it as difficult as it is in the matter of function and utility to distinguish the actual place of artefacts in human practices  from the particular legitimations and assumptions we have about them.
In many societies, the classification and labelling of objects appears to indicate a close relationship between artefact and particular function, and the labels ‘kitchen chair’ or ‘fryingpan’in Britain may be matched, for example, by an equivalent close relationship between pots and their labels in Nepal (Birmingham 1975).
Function  appears to play a key role in infant recognition and naming of objects (Miller and Johnson-Laird 1976: 229–35), and, in adulthood, continues to play an important, though highly flexible, role in the description of objects in daily life (Miller 1978).
What is problematic about this is the common assumption that it is caused by, and in turn indicates, some relationship of efficiency between the object and its use, such that this is the prime reason for its particular form, being either the natural outcome of adaptation, or the product of deliberate design processes for industrial goods.
Although functional purpose must impose a certain constraint on the shape and form of an object, that constraint is generally a very loose one for everyday forms (though obviously not for machine parts).
A moment's reflection upon the several hundred different shapes of glass bottle in an off licence, all of which serve essentially the same purpose of containing liquids, or upon the variety of clothing in the high street, or china in the store, indicates this high degree of variability.
Even though the individual shopper will often find some functional justification for his or her particular choice, as being especially practical, other reasons, some of which will be analysed in later chapters, may be adduced, relating to social rather than functional considerations which may more convincingly account for the majority of purchases.
While for some this may be evident enough in the society of mass consumption, it has equally commonly been assumed that this degree of variability is an aberrant result of the wastage of modern capitalism, and that the ‘pristine’ subjects of social anthropology live in a far closer relationship with the given needs of their environment (e.g. Forde 1934).
The vast arrays of artefacts to be found in ethnographic museums which serve as simple vessels or clothing are, however, eloquent evidence for the distance between form and function in non-industrial as well as industrial societies.
In parts of Melanesia such as the Solomon Islands, for example, relatively homogeneous tropical forest may be the setting for an extreme variety of cultural forms, such as spears or armbands, as one moves across an island archipelago.
Detailed observation of the hand-made containers used in a South Asian village reveals a wide variety of forms designed to serve identical purposes, and a very loose relationship between form and fitness for function (Miller 1985: 51–74).
Just as with manufacture, the artefact may be used to express not actual efficiency but an ideal of function.
In modern practices, this ideal has been conceived of as a principle of utility, to be embodied in the creation of the artefactual world.
With modernism, the strongest assertion of the value of utility is found in the assumption that aesthetics may be subordinated to function.
The proper modernist artefact is always held to be aesthetically pleasing precisely to the degree to which it exemplifies the adage that form follows function (Benton and Benton 1975).
However, the actual reproduction or modernist form over the last century and a half has revealed exactly the opposite tendency, since objects formed entirely on the basis of utility have proved singularly unattractive (which accounts for their general absence from commercial marketing).
This has not in any way curtailed enthusiasm for the principle that good design is based upon utility among its acolytes in London's Design Centre or the Boilerhouse project of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, where beauty through ergonomics may still be an avowed aim.
Once again, this division does not accord with political affiliation; Baudrillard attacks Marx and Marxist assertions of natural utility with as much vehemence as contemporary critics attack modernist architecture as an elitist imposition of ideology upon the general public.
This embodiment of utility and technological rationality in the object as modernist form may be a powerful example of the much more general tendency towards the legitimizing role being played by technological rationality in the modern world (e.g. Habermas 1970; Sahlins 1976a).
In movements such as‘hi-tech’, objects most clearly come to exhibit a principle of utility quite detached from any consideration of actual purpose, as the style is applied (as was streamlining in its day) indiscriminately to steam irons or armchairs.
With hi-tech style, as with much of modernism, it is evident that the theoretical articulation of these principles is far less developed than their material expression.
Indeed, hi-tech could be better understood as a set of principles distilled from a collection of material forms than as objects intended to embody prior principles.
The object form which has always been seen as most clearly exemplifying the utility principle is the tool.
Tools, after all, extend the very possibility of humanity as productive agent, and thus make for obvious analogies with biological function.
When understood as our ‘extra-somatic means of adaption’ they have become almost defi-nitional of culture (White 1959).
This notion of the instrumental object as an extension of being should not, however, be reduced to a relationship of efficiency, since an agriculturalist may wax more lyrical about a musical instrument than a plough, and the microcomputer's  popularity may be greater among those who in common parlance ‘waste time’ in obsessive programming or games, than among those who use it as a practical means to some other end.
It is the object's relationship to the social group which is crucial, rather than its ability to perform a transformation of nature under the sign of utility.
The artefact's capacity to separate itself from the immediacy of a relationship embodied in the concept of utility is most evident in the manner in which it is used for precisely the opposite function, that is, to separate the individual from productive activity.
Although one means of detachment from the world is a spiritual asceticism based upon a lack of material possessions, more common has been the desire to accumulate luxuries and objects which themselves signify the lack of any need to engage directly in productive labour.
The object's ornate and fragile form is an emblem of the leisure class which is constituted precisely by this distance (Veblen 1970).
Civilization is most commonly defined not as greater efficiency in crop-growing and manufacture, but precisely as the preservation of distance from these activities.
Artefacts, the Self and Society
One of the limitations of anthropological investigations of the social meaning of artefacts is the tendency to Romanticize non-industrial societies as prior to objectification in the Marxist sense of rupture.
The classic statement on this question with respect to the person was by Mauss (1979), who argued that the contemporary concept of the self is a relatively recent creation, strongly tied to the rise of various legalistic notions of the person in relation to property in ancient Rome and emerging in its modern form after certain developments in eighteenth-century German philosophy.
Recent objectivist approaches in the social sciences and philosophy have attempted to equate all reference to the self with a particular and historical bourgeois self inextricably related to capitalism.
Anthropologists, in turn, have attempted to argue that, for example, the transition from brideservice, in which labour is performed by the prospective groom, to bridewealth, where objects are given in exchange for the bride, marks a significant difference in the development of a phenomenon whereby objects may stand for human labour, with the implication that this is the first stage towards the conditions of property and alienation as we know them today (Strathern 1985).
This theme, which relates the development of individualism and alienability specifically to homo  economicus,has been a longstanding concern in philosophical and political anthropology (e.g. Dumont 1977).
Although we may find a particularly explicit conceptualization of the autonomous self in certain contemporary societies, this may be only an aspect of the more general separation and autonomy of concepts evident in modernist theory.
While some capitalist societies may practise an extreme individualism, it is surely only a Romantic tendency to dichotomize which denies the possibility of this characteristic to all other societies.
The specific objectification of a moral and juridical individual through the use of objects may be found in a wide range of societies, including those where kinship rather than the economy appears to be the dominant organizational principle.
The phenomenon of certain mundane objects becoming so firmly associated with an individual that they are understood as literal extensions of that individual's being was discussed in some detail by Levy-Bruhl (1966: 100–27).
In many societies, the clothing, ornaments and tools belonging to an individual may be considered so integral to him or her that to touch or do harm to these inanimate objects is considered indistinguishable from taking the same action against the person.
Such property is identical to the person and may stand for that person in his or her absence.
It may well be burnt together with the corpse as an equal form of the physical detritus of death.
The ‘self’ objectified in the object will be differentially constructed according to the cosmological context.
Tambiah (1984) has recently described an example of the transformation from one form of embodiment to another in Thailand, where buddhist amulets objectifying the charisma of forest saints are exploited by certain individuals as a means of gaining material advantage in their business dealings in the city.
As was noted in chapter 4 with respect to recent work on the hau , by embodying ancestral links objects may be the basis of an individual's present social identity such that loss of the object would itself constitute a danger to the legitimacy and viability or the personage and the group he or she leads (Wiener 1985).
At the other extreme, societies, may allow claims upon that which we consider inalienable.
For example, in areas of the South Pacific it is not uncommon for parents to have to relinquish a new baby to admiring kin who have claimed it (Sahlins 1976b; Silk 1980).
It is more useful to argue the variable nature of the relationship between the individual and society than to assume a linear evolution towards the autonomous self.
Even between societies which may be subsumed under the label of late capitalism, such as the USA and Japan, there may be considerable differences in this regard (Abercrombie et al.1986).
Anthropological  discussion of this relationship between self, object and society is dominated by the more general analysis or exchange.
Until recently, emphasis was most commonly placed on the object as gift in the tradition of Mauss, but some consideration is now also being given to what is too often taken merely as the gift's antithesis, that is the commodity.
Appadurai (1986) provides a survey of some of the relevant literature, pointing out that in some respects commodities are not necessarily as divorced from wider cultural considerations as is often supposed.
Almost all societies have elements of an exchange of objects in which persons are directly implicated, market exchange in which they are not implicated, and separate spheres of exchange which constrain the equivalences between things (e.g. Douglas 1967; Miller 1986).
Mauss's underlying concern was with individualism as an aspect of the fragmentation and disembedded nature of capitalist society.
The problem is not, however, unique to capitalism.
The fundamental opposition which may erupt between economy and society was noted by Simmel, who observed that the merchant is identified with the relative autonomy and abstraction of flexible exchange and is therefore often, as ‘stranger’, held in an ambiguous and partially anomalous relation to the host society (e.g. Simmel 1950: 402–8).
Indeed, Parry has recently argued that it is only under the conditions of a relatively free market that there is evidence for the entirely disinterested gift, in which calculation should be entirely absent, this being a product of the same emergent duality (Parry 1986).
Any consideration of the relationship between commodities and persons is overshadowed by the concept of property which, as Sartre (1969: 575–600), Simmel (1978: 306), and others have noted, cannot be separated from the basic relationship between being and having.
In turn, discussion on this topic often focuses less upon the effect of property relations today than on the links established between property as an institution and Locke's concepts of individuality and natural rights, and, in turn, Marx's critique of private property.
Unfortunately, the particular division most often invoked in contemporary political rhetoric concerning private and public property is misleading with regard to this issue, since the concept of private property suggests a close relationship between person and thing, whilst in practice private property is an institution which works to produce precisely the opposite effect.
Private property as a notion conflates the direct relationship between the individual and those objects with which he or she is associated in self-construction with those over which he or she has legal rights.
As an institution, private property is the foundation of abstract relationships between anonymous people and postulated  objects, an extreme example of which is the relationship between shareholder and investment.
In terms of the legalistic concept of private property, an individual is able to own an object with which he or she may have no personal relationship, thus preventing others from realizing their potential for achieving such a relationship.
The claim to legitimacy of particular possession is based entirely upon the institutionalization of rights.
With respect to the object as objectification it might be better to use a term such as personal property, which assumes a genuinely self-productive relationship between persons and objects.
The classic case of private property would than become not home ownership but the ownership of  somebody else's home.
The confusion of private and personal property as the subject of criticism has led most people, who for good reason wish to defend property with which they are intimately associated also to defend institutions which may result in their alienation from such property.
People wishing to own their council house may thereby be led to believe mistakenly, that the present institutionalization of private property is in their interests.
Using a concept such as objectification, in which the cultural nature of the subject-object relationship is brought to the fore, the lines of this particular debate might be redrawn with important political consequences.
Personal property is best linked with communal rather than private property, such as state or kin-held property, since it is a statement of relative inalienability, such that the social subject, individual or collective, associated with the object retains control over the conditions under which it may be alienated.
Artefacts and Space
The relationship between the materiality of the artefact and the materiality of space is especially close.
Various authors have attempted to investigate the qualities which pertain to the nature of spatial order as such (e.g. Hillier and Hanson 1984), and many others have investigated the social use of space with particular reference to architecture (e.g. Ardener ed. 1981; Gilsenan 1982: 164–214; King ed. 1980).
Berman (1983), following Benjamin and Simmel, gives a vivid impression of the impact of urban form as the media through which modernity was transmitted to become the precondition for contemporary Western society.
In certain societies, spatial planning has been used to represent a sacred order which is of an ideal form, and within which actual human society attempts to exemplify certain principles, often creating tightly  controlled urban populations ordered according to spatial dimensions such as left and right hands, verticality and circumambulation (e.g. Geertz 1980; Wheatley 1971).
In South Asia, such religious cosmologies were replaced under colonialism by equally explicit secular images of power and authority, as in the layout of Imperial Delhi (King 1976).
These elements of spatial order as representation are complemented by the impact of new material developments such as transport systems, which may affect our sense of space and distance.
Much recent geographical research has been devoted to the relationship between space and time (Thrift 1977).
One example of the function of the symbolism of space is the fact that artefacts have always made an impression on us by virtue of their exotic qualities.
Lapis lazuli was probably valued in the ancient world not only for its colour, but also because it was derived from a single source and thus always signified its origins as distance.
In archaeological literature, goods imported in small quantities have often been studied under the general term of ‘prestige goods’, and, as such, control over these resources appears to have been a major factor in the rise and fall of early social hierarchies (Friedman and Rowlands 1977).
Distance, which increases the problem of access, may be used to emphasize the differential ability of elites to acquire sumptuary objects, or, for peripheral areas such as Anatolia, might signify the awe with which the core civilization of Mesopotamia was regarded.
In contemporary societies, goods which are difficult to obtain because of their exotic origins vie with highly priced goods in competing status systems.
As in the previous areas discussed, objects may not merely be used to refer to a given social group, but may themselves be constitutive of a certain social relation.
One example is the use of objects, as opposed to the experience of actual peoples, to objectify the dual notions of orientalism and primitivism, which have dominated the way the Occident has historically constructed its self-image.
It was noted at the beginning of this chapter that early European travellers brought back objects to represent the peoples of other lands and, through the arrangement of these objects in museums, contributed to the development of early theories of social evolution and diffusion (Steadman 1979).
These objects were often used to exemplify the competing images of the Romantic and nobel primitive and the  cannibalistic barbarian as suited the arguments or interests of the time.
Smith (1960) has shown how images of the Pacific islanders were manipulated in these two directions, and Mitter (1977) has traced the varied history or European interpretations of Hindu sacred statuary, from viewing them initially as images of the devil, to finally  incorporating them as works of art.
On further investigation of many of the objects themselves, it becomes clear that they not only represent the selection of non-European artefacts by Europeans, but may also themselves be manufactured as objectifications of the relationship between different societies.
One instance of this image-construction is the ‘Oriental’ style of cloth (Irwin and Brett 1970).
Some years ago, research workers at London's Victoria and Albert Museum and elsewhere encountered a considerable quantity of textiles in a recognizable style, composed mainly of exuberant large blossoms with curvilinear stems, sometimes joined to trees which were no longer rooted to the earth.
At first, researchers attempted to place this style in the area from which it was assumed to originate — perhaps Persia, China or Central Asia — but through historical research it became clear that this was based on the false premise that the cloth was made in the original style of a certain group of people.
In fact, it seems that this chintz was the product of a relationship rather than a society.
When Indian cloth was first imported to Britain, it was in great demand because of its enormous technical superiority over British materials, European cloth dyeing being still in its infancy.
The actual Indian designs were not, however, to the taste of the British at the time, who had developed a somewhat different image of Oriental peoples.
The consumers' hints and suggestions, communicated over considerable distance and thereby often greatly distorted when realized by the manufacturers, resulted in changes in the cloth, which in turn prompted further comments.
Gradually, through several cycles of modification and response, there emerged a style embodying an image of what the European consumers thought the Indian manufactures ought to be making for themselves.
This design has come to be known as the Oriental style, since it objectifies precisely what Said (1979) and others have termed orientalism.
Similarly, much of what has been called primitive art or ethnic art consists of objects made in that style which manufacturers in various parts of the world have perceived to be demanded of them (Graburn ed. 1976; Williams 1985).
Indeed, objects used for inspiration by the artists in the nineteenth-century Paris studios were from parts of West Africa which had been making such images for European consumption for centuries (Donne 1978).
The point to be made here is one common in contemporary discussions of racism.
Nation-states define themselves, in part, in terms of what they are not; that is , by setting themselves in opposition to alternative degenerate or ideal societies.
Both people and objects are then required to exemplify the stereotypes which have been constructed.
Within the Occident, such a process has been highly influential in  the development of genres both in an older literary tradition and also in more recent media such as film.
In the recent film Return of the Jedi , for example, the imaginative licence of science fiction is combined with a reverence for genres already developed within the film industry in order to offer images of Orientalism and primitivism extended and exaggerated beyond the point of realistic representation of ‘other’ peoples or goods (for an extension of this argument see Miller forthcoming; for a comparable example see Spooner 1986).
Artefacts and Time
Like spatial position, temporality is an intrinsic property of the object, which always exists in time, and will potentially signify the amount of time elapsed since it was created.
As was pointed out in chapter 4 through Lévi-Strauss's example of the Australian Churinga, material objects are often the principal means of objectifying a sense of the past.
The historical associations of the object of art noted by Benjamin (1973) pertain almost inevitably to any object which can be said to have passed through the hands of the ancestors, and are often a pivot around which social identity is constructed.
The concept of primitivism enables a society to construct its self-image not only by objectifying its concept of other distanced peoples, but also by conflating the dimension of space with that of time.
Thus, contemporary peoples living in distant areas are viewed as though they were relics of one's own past (Fabian 1983).
The temporality of the object may also contribute to our sense of identity by evoking the past of our own society.
This is crucial for large-scale societies such as nation-states which, by virtue of their size, demand some concretized form such as a monument which can serve as a focus for the populace's identification with the state.
One example of this use of artefacts is derived from the relationship between the discipline of archaeology and the nation-state.
Archaeology has as its declared intention the reconstruction of past societies and the understanding of processes of long term social change.
In practice, however, its main result is the production of large numbers of ancient artefacts and monuments.
One advantage of the fact that it can often produce little contextual information in comparison with this massive material product is that the labels given to this material are often relatively arbitrary.
Archaeology therefore has the ability to impose, with relatively few complications, the particular contemporary boundaries of the nation-state upon its findings, and to identify these as the prehistory of Germany or Italy.
As prehistory, these are  typically based on sequences ranging from  palaeolithic stone axes through bronze age pottery to iron age swords.
Since these are relatively common finds of a mundane form, the highly parochial local museum can often contribute its own sequence which is a version of the overall national pattern, thereby helping to embody in material form, and as an aid in teaching, that sense of history which underlies the collective identity presupposed by the state.
Different objects may serve different purposes in this regard.
The large monument is territorially fixed, and, as an assertion of identity, it is commonly the basis of claims to both territory and historical achievement; for this reason archaeological monuments such as Great Zimbabwe and Masada have particular significance in newly formed countries such as Zimbabwe and Israel.
The smaller portable artefact, by contrast, lends itself to being exported to areas outside of its site of discovery, and thereby provides evidence for more abstract legiti-mations; for example, the claim by colonial governments to represent the historical legacy of a sequence of great accomplishments is subsumed and given meaning by the concept of civilization.
Thus, Britain as colonial power could represent the achievements of ancient civilizations such as Mesopotamia or  Egypt as the beginnings of a linear historical relationship leading, not to the people who now dwell in these same areas, but to Britain itself.
In the museum display of these materials (such as the treasures of Tutankhamun's tomb), stress may be laid on the objects' discovery by British archaeologists, thereby helping to legitimize the implicit pseudo-evolutionary claims of historical advance as civilization (Gidri 1974).
This may also have positive consequences.
The Solomon Islands is a new nation-state which may have been created through the imposition of an arbitrary boundary, but has to exist as a viable institution within the modern world.
One of the constraints it suffers is the dominance of a history which tends to be reduced to that of either missions or colonial discovery, with the implications that the Solomon Islanders themselves were a stagnant and unchanging people prior to the arrival of Europeans, a view reinforced by some of the dominant synchronic traditions in social anthropology.
By tracing artefactual change over several  millennia , archaeology can produce materials which are regarded as directly ancestral by the modern population, even though different from those used today.
Thus, mundane objects such as clam-shell axes and fish hooks may be used to objectify a concept of self-development and self-created change which may potentially be a powerful force in the rise of post-colonial states (Miller 1980).
Just as objects may come to symbolize time, so time is the context in which the symbolism of the object must be understood.
In the case  of a large archaeological monument such as Stonehenge, the object acts as a text which may be differentially interpreted, according to the period, as emblem of ritual power, as ruin, as national monument, or as symbol for druid and hippie (a process which is already evident in prehistory, see Shennan 1983).
Barth (1975) provides a remarkably clear instance of the alteration of the ‘meaning’ of a set of objects, in his account of a sequence of initiation rituals within a particular New Guinea society.
During the rituals for initiation into each successive age-set the ‘true’ meanings of certain sacred objects are revealed and it transpires that the interpretations given at the previous stage were false or partial.
Almost all mundane objects possess some kind of biography through which their significance may radically alter.
For example, the pottery made in an ordinary Indian village may start as a ritual object whose meaning is derived from the ceremony within which it is presented.
The same pot may later on serve a specific function, holding only those items appropriate to its name.
Later still, it may be dissociated from this role and used for general storage, in which case its previous specific symbolic role is ignored, and it is no longer of consequence whether its ritual status accords with that of its contents (Miller 1985: 172–83).
Similarly, a blouse which is purchased from a shop as an alienable commodity may then become so intimately associated with a particular individual that it may not even be borrowed by a sibling, After some time, however, the object may lose this close association, becoming, as jumble, an alienable commodity once again.
These two elements of temporal symbolism, the object standing for time and time controlling what the object stands for, come together in the realm of fashion.
What makes an object fashionable it is ability to signify the present; it is thus always doomed to become unfashionable with the movement of time.
Fashion usually operates within a system of emulation and differentiation in knowledge, such that it uses the dynamic force of object change as a means of reinforcing the stability of the social system within which it is operating (Miller 1985: 184–96; Simmel 1957).
Consideration of fashion, and indeed of markets in general(e.g. Geertz 1979) where the value of the object is related to highly transient knowledge, reinforces the impression of possible instability in artefact symbolism, and its dependence upon wider information-based and other contextual features.
The older tradition of semiotic anthropology, in which objects were said to represent fixed denotations for a given society, based only on synchronic structure and with little consideration of when and where the interpretation was taking place, seems to be invalidated by these further considerations.
Similarly, once concepts such as alienability  and authenticity are re-defined within a general theory of objectification, as properties of relationships rather than of either peoples or things, the place of time in determining the implications of context becomes of major importance.
Artefacts and Style
Up to now, objects have been related to external contextual dimensions in an unmediated form, without consideration of their internal organization.
Although the term ‘style’ is often used to cover a wide range of artefactual properties which relate such artefacts to their social environment (for example in archaeology Hodder 1982a:.
125–84, 204–7; 1982b 173–96; various papers in Hodder ed. 1982), here it will be used to refer solely to the relationship between artefacts within a given object domain, such as all windows or all cars.
Little mention has been made so far of those elements of material forms which relate to each other in an ordered fashion, and which may thereby influence the manner in which they are utilized in constituting cultural patterns or acting as systems of meaning.
In the latter case, an exact equivalent to grammar in linguistics is unlikely to be found, since, as noted earlier, objects gain their effect from their comparative lack of abstraction and the various bridging functions they can thereby perform.
This greater reliance on context means that the branch of linguistics termed ‘pragmatics’(e.g. Levinson 1983; Sperber and Wilson 1986) is likely to be of far greater significance than semantics of syntax in those material culture studies which investigate the object's communicative abilities.
The first manner in which objects may be related to each other is as type-tokens.
Most artefacts are either the product of mass production, in which case they are identical to all others items produced by the same process, or else are intended as equal copies of a normative cultural notion, in which case, for example, all spears of the same type are intended to look alike.
Where objects are deliberately unique it may be that they are intended to signify some generic concept of uniqueness, such as in art; the object is then both an individual form and an example of a larger category to which it must be related.
Objects as  categories may, however, be related more to the fuzzy logic of normative and peripheral forms than to the contrastive logical approach of componential analysis and binary opposition (Kempton 1981; Rosch 1978).
At the next level of analysis, every object may usually be organized into a given field within which it contrasts with all others, for example the various types of curtain, canoe, car or ornament.
Such a field is commonly organized according to the principle of style, which may be defined as the use of certain limited dimensions upon which the variability of a domain is expressed.
Thus, certain aspects of the artefact will be used to create distinctions of flavour, type of lid, colour or length of skirt; but in all these cases other properties will be uniform  throughout the range.
It is this which helps us to recognize that an object is from a certain period or particular place.
The thousands of varieties of European shirts may differ in terms of button types and collar lengths, but they remain recognizable as shirts as opposed to garments used in other cultures for an identical functional purpose; and this is because the manufacturers, as it were, agree to differ with respect to these specific and limited dimensions.
Such internal order is highly significant, since it reinforces the point that objects are not best understood as merely subservient to social divisions.
Social groups may be divided according to the logic of objects with which they associate, which includes the objects' autonomous tendencies towards pattern, as well as their physical constraints.
At the next level, objects in different domains may be organized according to a comparable underlying logic.
This principle has been most forcefully demonstrated in structuralist and semiotic analyses (e.g. Friedrich 1970; Humphrey 1971).
In structuralism, these formal properties are taken at a  relatively abstract level.
Lévi-Strauss has recently provided his own examples of the material artefact as pseudo-mythic form.
In a study of masks used amongst the American Indians of the north-west coast, he shows the Xwexwe masks of the Kwakiutl, with their bulging eyes, protruding jaws and tongues, are the inverse transformation of their Dzonkwa mask which have sunken eyes, hollow cheeks, and no tongue, but are the same as those masks called Swaihwe of the neighbouring Sailish.
He compares this material inversion to the opposite pattern of semantic inversion integrating these into mythic and other cultural forms such as dance and kinship, noting that ‘when from one group the plastic form is preserved, the semantic function is inverted.
On the other hand, when the semantic function is retained, it is the plastic form which is inverted’(Lévi-Strauss 1982: 93).
In such an analysis, the transformations of the cultural forms become almost independent of their social vehicles, as societies themselves are understood as merely variants upon a deeper structural order.
In a sense, this inverts the Durkheimian tradition from which it originally stemmed, by representing society as a reflection of style.
As with the other areas discussed above, style has achieved a certain autonomy in contemporary industrial society, going beyond its capacity for ordering to become itself the focus of concern.
This was brought out in an incisive account of the impact of the Bauhaus on modern society by Baudrillard (1981: 185–203), in whose view this principle of creating order through style has become dominant over social interest, as a kind of structuralism imposed on everyday life.
The Bauhaus is seen as the symbol of a drive to make all human creations serve the principles of style.
In this new world, all architecture, furnishing, clothing and behaviour are intended to relate to each other in a visibly coherent fashion.
This works to break down all frames into a universal order of good design.
The matching colour scheme is extended to all commodities, so that a given company may prefer to purchase machine tools manufactured by a firm with a reputation for design in microchips, attracted by that firm's modern hi-tech image rather than its reputation for efficiency (Fry 1982).
Ironically, that set of ideas and ideals which expressed the legitimacy of form following function was most effective in ensuring that function followed form.
Baudrillard perceives this as the product of multi-national capitalism, but on reflection this principle is not so different from the utility of relations enhanced by the object which was stressed as socially cohesive in a non-industrial society.
Among the Kwakiutl, discussed above, all objects may be related through a style expressive of an orality in which humankind achieves significance by its place in a universal cycle of devouring and reproduction (Walens 1981).
Religions have also often attempted to reduce all human action to stylistic embrace as an  expression of cosmological  pretensions .
Modernism must be granted its specificity, but it also has its precursors.
Conclusion
If the implications of the examples surveyed in this chapter can be summarized in a single idea, it is that the medium of objectification matters.
It makes a difference what form is used in the process of becoming; and of those media used in objectification, physical artefacts have certain properties and tendencies which, in an age of rapidly increasing material culture, ought to be investigated in their own right.
The physicality of the artefact lends itself to the work of praxis — that is, cultural construction through action rather than just conceptualization.
The object also acts to integrate the representative  individual within the normative order of the larger social group, where it serves as a medium of intersubjective order inculcated as a generative practice through some version of ‘habitus’.
This order is continually objectified in the pattern or style of the artefactual world.
The object may lend itself equally to the expression of difference, indicating the separate domains to which people or aspects of people belong, and to the expression of unity, connecting otherwise diverse domains.
Although conventionally the totalizing property of the artefact is stressed as a condition of the non-modern (e.g. Bateson 1973; Forge 1973), and the commodity is viewed as the fragmenting medium of modernity, both forms in fact exist in both contexts.
For example, in several cases in the present text, the object has been shown to be expressive of quite autonomous elements of the dimensions analysed, as function beyond efficiency, image of manufacture beyond actual construction, pure individuality, coherent style and so forth .
What is curious, however, is that it is often the same object which does all of these things.
The image of modernism as artefact is in this sense a totalizing image using the project of art as its means of accomplishing such totality (compare Gell 1986 for the ability of the commodity to perform this function in a non-industrial context).
Thus the high-modernist building was able simultaneously to enshrine a notion of pure rationality in systems-building, pure formalism in its opposition to ornament, pure functionality which was seen as the basis of its aesthetic value, and pure style.
It was thus held to be as authentic an image of the society within which it was produced as the gift, whose authenticity was premised upon its own totalizing ability.
In practice, however, both are cosmological pretensions which achieve their aim only by virtue of the object's other ability to keep apart the many alternative orders and demands which would threaten the purity of these abstractions.
The deeply integrated place of the artefact in constituting culture and human relations has made discussion of it one of the most difficult of all areas to include in abstract academic discourse.
The mundane artefact is not merely problematic but inevitably embarrassing as the focused topic of analysis, a practice which always appears fetishistic.
Its study is therefore in its infancy, and the cases presented above provide no more than a glimpse of its potential interest.
The flexibility of the artefact indicated in the deliberately wide range of examples provided should not, however, lead the reader to assume an arbitrary or unsystematic use, any more than the flexibility and uniqueness of languages excludes the possibility of linguistic analysis.
8
THE STUDY OF CONSUMPTION
Introduction
The remaining chapters of this book will all be concerned with the potential application to the understanding of mass consumption of the ideas about objectification and material culture so far developed.
The focus of attention will move to contemporary Britain, although examples will also be drawn from elsewhere.
In Britain, our relationship with goods is almost entirely one of consumption.
Even those directly engaged in industrial production are more likely to be immediately associated with a complex work process than with an identifiable product.
The consumption of goods is quite remarkably neglected as a subject of study outside of formal economics and models of individual purchasing behaviour.
This becomes evident if one considers the goods we encounter in terms of some fairly simple criteria.
Such goods might be divided into those we possess and those we encounter but do not possess.
These may in turn be sub-divided; goods possessed may comprise either the results of private purchase or goods allocated by the state, while goods not possessed tend to fall into two categories: first, those we encounter as material forms, in particular the built environment, the goods of our acquaintances or those in the high street shop, and secondly, goods we do not experience directly, but which appear to us through the media — for example in television, magazines and advertising.
It is indicative of the lack of serious analysis of the artefact, however, that even for such a politically sensitive issue as the division between private purchase and state allocation, the implications for the subsequent relationship people have with those goods are quite unknown (with the possible exception of housing).
Studies of the impact of production relations on a group's identity have not been complemented by equivalent studies based upon consumption.
The discussion of consumption will be divided among three chapters.
In the present chapter, a brief account of the historical  background to contemporary consumption will be followed by a resumé of some of the approaches to this issue found in various disciplines, one of which, the tradition stemming from Veblen's work on goods as the expression of social differentiation, will be discussed in more detail.
Chapter 9 will be devoted almost entirely to the general question of how active a role should be ascribed to consumers in understanding the meaning of goods in social relations today, and the nature of goods as material culture.
The final chapter will attempt a more general model of consumption in terms of the concept of objectification.
Consumption and the Industrial Revolution
The problem in discussing consumption is that our ‘common sense’ understanding of the phenomenon is often merely a reflection of the ordering of the processes we see around us.
An object is manufactured before it is purchased, and we therefore have a tendency to see consumption activities as the result of, or as a process secondary to, the development of manufacturing and other forms of production.
In the history of Britain as taught in schools and conventionally rendered, the great event of modern times was the industrial revolution.
It is this epoch which has traditionally marked for pupils a break from learning about royalty and politicians to noting the dates of inventions such as the spinning jenny and Arkwright's mule.
Industrialization provides the backdrop for the study of the subsequent transformation into modern economic classes: the rise of colonialism is explained in terms of a search for markets, and wars in terms of economic competition.
An exception to this tendency towards a belief in technological determinism is that branch of Marxist history which follows Marx himself in preferring to focus on changes in the social organization of productive relations.
Marx provides a clear example of this in his analysis of the period of manufacture during which the social organization of production became concentrated in a variety of ways, such as the bringing together within one workshop of all of the stages in the production of a particular item.
Such social changes are shown to be prior to, and necessary precursors of, any technological changes, such as industrialization (Marx 1974: 318–47).
More recent literature on proto-industrialization (e.g. Kriedte et al.1981) continues the same tradition.
Marxist writings emphasize the social organization of production as the primary factor in the transformation to modernity, an emphasis continually reproduced in the abundant use made of the term ‘capitalism’ in most accounts.
Historical documentation in this field becomes more scarce as the emphasis moves towards other aspects of social organization, despite the highly influential work of the French historian Braudel, whose books (e.g. 1981) include lengthy accounts of patterns of consumption in food, textiles and housing, which have been followed up by the Annales school of historians (see also Elias 1978; Sombart 1967 for alternative traditions).
A variety of recent studies provide a glimpse of possible alternatives to the  hegemony of technology and relations of production in popular conceptions of the nature and cause of modernity.
There has been no general attempt to rewrite the history of the period from a perspective based on changes in consumption and material culture (though see Mukerji 1983), but two examples may be suggestive, the first derived from historians and the second from studies of material culture.
Several recent works on British history have examined the development of craft production, consumption and the increase in material culture, with volumes concentrating upon the seventeenth century (Thirsk 1978), the eighteenth century (McKendrick, Brewer and Plumb 1983), and the results of the industrial revolution in the later nineteenth century (e.g. Fraser 1981).
Particularly important are a series of changes which took place prior to the development of industrial technology.
The main argument is summarized by McKendrick: ‘In a society in which the social distance between classes is too great to bridge , as say between a landed aristocracy and a landless peasantry, or in which the distance is unbridgeable , as in a caste society, then new patterns of increased expenditure on consumer goods are extremely difficult if not impossible to induce ‘(1983: 20).
It follows that the break up of the ancien régime and the impact of the Enlightenment gave rise to a radical transformation of the nature of objects in society.
In a period of strong social stratification, objects tend to reflect given social hierarchies.
At such a time, sumptuary laws may be passed which forbid the use of particular goods to those who are deemed to be below a certain station in life (e.g. Braudel 1981: 311; Mukerji 1983: 179–82; Sennett 1976), a form of regulation common to a large range of societies (e.g. Srinivas 1966: 16), which may be associated with limited spheres of exchange (e.g. Douglas 1967,; Salisbury 1962), and restrictions on mercantile practices.
The process of signification between material object and social station in this situation strives to remain relatively uncomplex and controlled.
When, however, this breaks down, goods can change from being  relatively static symbols to being more directly constitutive of social status.
Under these altered conditions, emulation is increasingly significant as a strategy by means of which people lower in a given social hierarchy attempt to realize their aspirations towards higher status by modifying their behaviour, their dress and the kind of goods they purchase, since it now becomes possible to mistake a poor nobleman for a wealthy trader.
Emulation in turn stimulates the desire to retain differentials, which often becomes based upon access to knowledge about goods and their prestige connotations.
By this process, fashion emerges as the means for continuing those forms of social discrimination previously regulated by sumptuary rulings.
In other words, demand for goods may flourish in the context of ambiguity in social hierarchy.
Behind the industrial revolution were a series of major historical transformations, including the abandonment of popular culture by the European elites after 1500 such that the concept of culture itself became more closely related to hierarchy, but was combined with a growth in literacy and other resources by means of which lower status groups might also gain access to the new high culture (see Burke 1978: 270 and Mukerji 1983 for pre-1800; Williams 1961 for post-1800).
New exotic prestige goods were used on a much wider national and international scale contrasting with regional and local styles, which became more consciously preserved.
Inventions such as clocks, new transport systems and printing were also influential in expanding communication about such innovations and their implications.
Mukerji focuses on the early modern period of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries as marking a highly significant rise in material culture, so that peasants and ordinary town dwellers who had remarkably few personal possessions in late medieval periods (Braudel 1981: 283) were becoming familiar with many more products, and from a much wider area (Burke 1978: 246–8).
Following on this, the more general impact of Enlightenment ideas which questioned the legitimacy of the ancien régime allowed goods to begin to play new constitutive roles, which in turn led to a substantial rise in demand.
Mukerji (1983) also challenges Weber's concentration upon the link between Protestantism and capitalism, and argues rather that this period sees the rise of both asceticism and hedonism as more explicit and abstract attitudes to goods themselves.
This is closer to Simmel's arguments concerning the relationship between the rise of money as abstraction and material culture as specificity.
Mukerji is not dividing off consumption from production, but showing how it is impossible to account for the development of the latter without considering the history of the former.
As noted by McKendrick et al.(1983), these  changes led to substantial shifts in the nature and pattern of demand in eighteenth-century England prior to the main developments in machine technology.
To follow this argument in more detail, it is worth turning to the product which is most intimately associated with the earliest period of the industrial revolution, that is cotton cloth.
Braudel's work has a problematic tendency to regard certain societies as changeless, especially the so-called ‘traditional’ civilizations (e.g. 1981: 285, 312).
This view stems, in part, from the difficulty in perceiving in an unfamiliar society that degree of micro-differentiation which is so important in appreciating the subtleties of consumption patterns in one's own society.
Other equally influential modern forms of historiography have tended to develop still further this European ethnocentrism, with other societies viewed either as the passive victims of the European search for markets (e.g. Wallerstein 1979), so that the rest of the world is seen as peripheral to a West-European core, or else as active players in what is still, however, a story dominated by European desires (e.g. Wolf 1982).
Such histories tend to ignore the extraordinary extent and longevity of certain earlier trade patterns to which Europe itself was merely peripheral.
It comes as something of a shock, therefore, to realize that there were other areas, such as South Asia, more developed in technology and the articulation between production and trade, and highly dynamic in mercantile organization, which might have possessed equal potential to have become the centre for an industrial revolution, if these factors were indeed the primary causative variables (Perlin 1983).
One of the problems the European traders encountered early on in their attempt to develop longer trade routes, was that peoples in South-East Asia who produced spices highly regarded in Europe did not, for their part, show any great desire for European products.
Britain could only obtain these goods by intervening in an already well-established trading pattern, taking much-desired cotton cloth from South Asia and using this to purchase spices from the East Indies.
One effect of this intended trade in spices was the probably largely unintended arrival in Britain of quantities of South Asian calicoes.
These were of a markedly superior quality to anything which could be produced in Europe at the time; indeed, by comparison, the British had not by then developed any significant dyeing technology.
South Asian calicoes in both silk and, later on, cotton became an increasingly desirable commodity in Britain, first as a luxury item but subsequen-tly as a widely used material.
Britain had perhaps never faced such a large demand for a product which, since cotton could not be grown in  the country, it was incapable of producing itself.
A previous influx of linen in the sixteenth century had been countered by government sponsorship of the linen industry and the growing of coarse flax and hemp, part of a larger tendency in Britain towards the development of local projects to counter foreign imports (Thirsk 1978: 72–4).
The industrial revolution, which began with machinery for cotton textile production, should therefore be understood, in part, as an exercise in import-substitution (Chaudhuri 1978; Mukerji 1983: 210–42).
By means of an unprecedented policy of increasing its manufacturing efficiency through technology, and putting pressure on South Asia to export raw cotton, a trade which it had never previously engaged in, at the expense of calico, which was subject to high import duties, Britain was able to turn the tide against India, and later to flood that area with cheap cotton goods.
The impact of this arrival of South Asian calico can only be understood in terms of those wider social changes already referred to.
London was a crucial site for such developments, since with a population or 900,000 it was unique in the Europe of 1800 (McKendrick 1983: 21).
During the eighteenth century, the older categories of difference in goods, that is locality, occupation and so forth, appear to have become overwhelmed by more flexible and creative differences.
McKendrick provides examples of the hundreds of hairstyles on offer in 1772, or a pattern book for garments with 1,370 designs.
Textiles are admirably suited to the dictates of fashion, which guarantees continuous demand (1983: 34–99), and the same period saw the rise of women's fashion magazines (1983: 47).
In this period there was also a retailing boom; by 1817 there were 153 fashion shops in London's Oxford Street.
Certain social groups began to be regarded as consumer target populations.
Plumb (1983: 289–315) and Forty (1986: 63–91) document the rise of goods aimed at specific consumer groups such as children, later developed as youth groups demanding particular age-based products.
In complementary essays on Josiah Wedgwood, McKendrick (1983: 100–45) and Forty (1986: 13–41) chart the strategies which fostered new patterns of emulation and marketing, and the birth of the modern professional designer.
Forty suggests that the attraction of the neo-classical, which emerged from a somewhat wider range as the most successful of Wedgewood's styles, was that it provided an acceptable facade for the introduction of the advances being made by ceramic science, the most modern techniques thereby being employed in the improvement of reproductions, a tension in commercial styling which has been strongly asserted ever since.
Once again, it is striking that these transformations, which include  the development of many of the forms of marketing, design and distribution characteristic of mass production, occurred before the rise of machinery in this industry.
They were principally organizational, being based on handmade products.
With this in mind, the new findings of scholars working in the Marxist tradition to show the importance of putting-out systems of production such as the Verlag in proto-industrialization, take on a new significance (e.g. Kriedte et al.1981:101–7).
The Verlag system is one in which patterns may be supplied by merchants to household-based manufacturers from a wide variety of markets, and are then copied by people who have no direct contact with these markets.
This system is finely attuned to new ventures in marketing and distribution, and is probably quite similar to the major South Asian forms of production which had previously established the foundations for large-scale international trade, in the absence of industrial machinery; although, in that case, divisions in the production process, which allowed for control by merchants and middlemen, were more closely articulated by social divisions such as caste and purdah .
Machine-based production began, not only in textiles, but in a range of goods which were particularly sensitive to this type of flexible demand, and only later on concentrated on the heavier industrial goods we now particularly associate with factory-based machine production (McKendrick 1983: 31–2).
It is these goods which provided the material for the ‘nation of shopkeepers’ image of Britain held by her contemporaries.
In other areas where similar changes occurred at a slightly later date, the rise of mass material culture and retailing was the subject of some incisive commentary.
The aura of the emerging high street was captured by Simmel and Baudelaire and later reconstructed by Benjamin in his arcades project (1983).
The processes of emulation and democratization were to extend these into the large department stores as harbingers of the modern retailing world of today (Fraser 1981; Miller 1981).
Recent work by Williams (1982) in analysing a dynamic and important debate about the nature of consumption in France suggests that a century ago there was a far more balanced view of changes in the relationship between consumption and production as historical transformation than exists today.
There is an explicit concern in the writings of Zola, Gide, and Tarde, not only with the effect of mass consumption, but also with the proper response of the worker as consumer.
These authors were situated within a more active public debate centered on displays such as the world fairs (Benedict ed. 1983) and movements such as the consumer cooperatives and programmes for a ‘socialism of consumption,(Williams 1982: 287–98)
Criticisms have already been made in chapter 3 of Marx's tendency to overemphasize production as opposed to consumption, but this was in relation to abstract theory.
It is interesting to note a similar problem with attempts to put some of his ideas into practice.
An illustrative case may be found in the work and practical impact of William Morris, who sought not only to recognize but also to ameliorate the social and aesthetic impact of the machine, partly under the influence of socialist ideas.
Through the emergence of the arts and crafts movement, Morris succeeded in establishing a craft tradition in which the individual could retain some control over every stage of manufacture from design to execution, and thereby gain a far more satisfactory relationship with the product.
Unfortunately, because this tradition tended to ignore the problem of consumption, the main impact of this craft revival was to promote a conspicuous handmade image, explicitly separate from the products of mass consumption, and immediately recognized as a quality or luxury product which signified, and thereby helped reproduce, the new moneyed elites.
The impact of Morris's ideas as channelled through the sphere of consumption, provided an effective means for the further development of precisely those class differences which in turn helped reproduce the conditions for the exploitation of labour.
Given the history of socialist economies, it is doubtful whether even a far more radical and complete transformation of the relations of production would, of itself, have removed this basis for class differentiation, and for this reason Morris remains a problematic model for contemporary socialism.
The second example of how the historical transformations underpinning modern society may be examined from unconventional perspectives which emphasize consumption as well as production comes from a series of studies in American historical archaeology.
These have been concerned with documenting changes in American colonial society, from its inception to recent times, through the analysis or material culture, mainly derived from archaeological excavations, but also from extant buildings.
A summary of the main argument is provided in a slim volume by Deetz (1977) who compares changes in pottery, gravestone design, and house construction, with asides on music and eating patterns, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (see also Glassie 1975; Leone 1984).
At the start of the period, following the traditions or Stuart yeomanry, custom demanded a mainly communal use of a variety of household materials, with pottery playing only a minor role, mainly in dairying.
From 1660 onwards, pottery was more frequently used in food preparation and consumption, and there was the first ceremonial  use of plates in parlour display.
After 1760, mass produced English wares were in use, with a large increase in plates, cups, saucers and chamber pots.
These marked a shift from communal use to individual use, although individual items were connected at a household level by a common pattern, as found in the modern set of china.
Gravestones also underwent a three-phase change.
In the early period the death's head was the predominant motif used in churchyard-based cemeteries, in which by no means every individual received a grave marker.
Through stylistic development, the death's head was gradually transmuted into a cherub in line with the revivalist period of Christianity, and inscriptions show a concern to separate the mortal body and immortal soul.
By the third period, there was a new fashion for urn and willow motifs, which had become commemorative symbols on graves marking the achievements of the individual in life.
Such motifs were particularly common in well-ordered separate family cemeteries.
The next set of materials, house forms, has been most fully studied by Glassie in an analysis of eighteenth-century extant folk housing in Middle Virginia.
These dwellings belonged to the poorer white small holders, and were built without consultation with architects or planners.
Through a sophisticated structural analysis of features ranging from window position to door latch, Glassie-reconstructs a major change taking place around the late 1870s (1975: 182, 185), in which chimneys and central halls became incorporated into the main building, and a new concern with symmetry appears, along with a homogenization of the exterior around a more conspicuously ordered façade.
Similar analyses indicating new ordering principles have been carried out on the gardens of aristocrats (e.g. Leone 1984), furnishings, the disposal of rubbish and forms of cutlery (Deetz 1977).
Overall, these studies mark the emergence of what has been called the Georgian style, which employs bilateral symmetry, the individualization of personal space and property, and the specification of discrete elements reunited in a cohesive unity.
The style is interpreted as a new form of conservatism based on an alliance between poorer white farmers and an aristocracy beleaguered by a combination of factors, including a fall in tobacco prices, a rise in slavery, and a shift in local identity.
Whatever the particular context of such changes, these studies demonstrate that a set of transformations in material culture which may be found to permeate almost every trivial domain, from chimneys to rubbish disposal, can be understood as a largely unconscious and unintentional response by a variety of social groups, which produced new forms of demand and new means of incorporating the emergence of mass produced items.
Many of the familiar aspects of modernization, such as a rise of individualism and of specification in material culture  use and scientific-rational order, may be traced in these studies, but the evidence provides a means of analysing such changes in terms of the structural organization of everyday objects for the population as a whole, and acts as a balance to the more common literary and self-reflective accounts or these changes.
This balance is important, since, for example, some accounts whose critical focus is the rise of the individual, private, property-owning self, almost appear to conspire with that reification of the self which they seek to criticize in contemporary culture, by isolating and concentrating on this single factor.
In these studies, by contrast, this transformation is understood as one of a whole series of cultural changes, heading towards new forms of abstraction and specificity.
From certain unusual perspectives, history may therefore complement the standard picture of the industrial revolution to provide a basis for the study of the mass consumption which dominates contemporary life.
Studies of contemporary Consumption
Several of the more extensive areas of analysis of modern consumption will be dealt with quite briefly, since they lie largely outside of the scope of the present work.
First, and perhaps most bizarre, is the field entitled design history.
As conventionally studied, this is clearly intended to be a form of pseudo art history, in which the task is to locate great individuals such as Raymond Loewy or Norman Bel Geddes and portray them as the creators of modern mass culture.
The analysis is usually based on the strict modernism which was the ideology of the professions involved, and is epitomized in comments such as‘we seem to find that the aesthetics of an industrial product will take care of themselves automatically after we have provided a balance between function, simplicity and utility’(Bayley 1979: 71).
This approach has recently been subject to an effective critique by Forty (1986), who points out that designers have always been handmaidens to the business interests they serve, and to separate them out as self-determined arbiters of cultural form is even less convincing than in the case of high art which strives for such autonomy.
In effect this design history is a study of the industrial artefact which quite ignores the consumer.
A more recent critical tradition in this field, as in the journal Block , provides an alternative approach much more closely concerned with the social context of cultural innovation.
Forty provides abundant examples of the complex manner in which commerce developed new goods around perceived divisions in the target population and a series of beliefs about the nature of hygiene, domesticity, science and modernity which become enshrined in and reproduced through the appearance of everyday objects, although again the transformation of goods in consumption is largely ignored.
Within anthropology, there has always been a tradition seeking to locate underlying and generalizable processes and patterns in material culture studies.
Kroeber and his followers devoted considerable effort to studies ranging from changes in skirt length over several decades to the diffusion and diversity of artefact styles amongst Californian Indians (Kroeber 1939).
More recently, studies of modern objects by archaeologists working in the sub-discipline of ethno-archaeology have sought to provide ‘general and testable’ laws of stylistic behaviour, strongly influenced by an extreme and exquisitely inappropriate form of positivism which took hold of the discipline in the 1960s, and appears to have been retained long after most other social sciences threw off its shackles (e.g. Binford 1972; 1978; Gould and Schiffer eds 1981, see Hodder 1982a and b for a critique).
Such studies exemplify the kind of fetishism to which material culture studies are always prone, when people are superseded as the subject of investigation by objects, and become essentially labels for their movement or pattern.
By far the most extensive research into the relationship between society and mass consumption objects has been conducted in the world of commerce itself, and its offshoots in marketing and advertising, which are strongly linked to the discipline of economics.
In common with ethno-archaeology, such research tends towards an abstract positivism, using complex mathematical models to predict the behaviour of certain social groups in response to a new product.
Societies are divided, not only by conventional sociological categories such as occupation and housing, but also in relation to psychological attitudes and other aspects of known consumer performance.
There is a large number of books and journals devoted to different aspects of such research, which may be employed, though with some caution, for other purposes (e.g. Engel et al.1973; Crimp 1981).
Conventional economic approaches to consumption tend towards a macro-scale of analysis whose assumptions about the nature of society, demand, and the actual relationship between goods and people can generally be reduced to certain highly simplistic and dubious notions, with the social demand for goods being replaced by the quite insufficient symbolic equation with price.
Douglas and Isherwood (1978) provide a useful and informed critique of this literature.
At one level, the total separation of such research from anthropology is quite artificial, given that these studies are often directly parallel to anthropological concerns with social organization and  stratification.
There are, however, highly specific concerns in business-oriented research, which limit its more general interest.
First, it is almost always concerned with the point or sale; there is no reason for researchers to be concerned with the social value and longer term implications of products.
Secondly, business studies tend to affirm a consumer passivity in response to marketing initiatives.
People working in these professions often take pleasure in describing a sales campaign in which surplus stocks of milk were dispersed by persuading the public that it had a taste for a new mass product, such as yoghurt, or in reminding us that ploughman's lunches could be invented to persuade a new group to patronize pubs.
Such stories, and they are legion, are quite accurate with respect to the intention and perspective of business and marketing interests, but it will be argued in the next chapter that they may be a poor foundation for an understanding of the nature of consumption.
Business literature is therefore vital for understanding business, which is one of the major forces in modern culture, but it is more limited when it comes to a study of the consumer and his or her relation to the object.
Connected with these studies, though quite different in emphasis, is the rise of consumer protection and associated legislation, which is more concerned with the implications of goods, but tends to be restricted to functional efficiency and safety, rather than wider social relations.
One approach which is curiously similar to business studies in its view of the populace is that of some contemporary Marxism.
This tradition tends to focus upon mass consumption as the instrument of capital for which the individual subject is created as consumer, and provides important critical accounts of the mechanisms by which producers construct their markets (e.g. Haug 1986).
Capital is devoted to the creation of desires and needs which can only be fulfilled by the latest developments of the market.
Needs are always related back to capitalism's demand for the social reproduction of its labour force.
Preteceille and Terrail (1985) provide a recent elaboration of this position, taking into account the various approaches emerging from cultural anthropology, but they retain the classic Marxist conception that modern ‘needs’ can only be accounted for in terms of the search by capital for greater profits, and that consumption is always subservient to production interests (e.g. 1985: 37–81).
In many current studies, it is the state which is abstracted as the complementary prime mover in the development or new collective forms or consumption (e.g. Castells 1977), and largely functionalist arguments are derived to indicate how any changes which appear to have occurred can always be found to have accorded with the ‘interests’ of these two forces, capital and the state, which are usually in harmony  as ‘state monopoly capitalism’and always in direct conflict with the interests of the population as a whole.
A modern twist to the Marxist critique of the commodity has emerged with the application of semiotics.
Although often associated with structuralism, semiotic analysts is involved in the details of representation and signification, while structuralism proper eschewed this concern with a drive towards more abstract models of cognition and culture.
The results of the application of these techniques have been varied.
Sometimes objects are perceived merely as alternatives to words, as signs to be used in pseudo-linguistic formal analysis.
In the hands of writers such as Barthes (1973) semiotic analysis becomes an extension of the critique of the commodity and bourgeois culture, a series of denunciations Barthes termed ‘semioclasm’.
Objects are analysed as myths which provide artificial resolutions to real contradictions in society.
The process of signification is what accomplishes the task of the myth; it subverts simple denotation through its wider connotation, it naturalizes culture as the given order of the day, and it utilizes the ambiguities and tendencies of the process of signification itself in order to effect its apparent closures.
In the later development of Barthes' work, and in the work of others who followed similar trajectories (e.g. Coward and Ellis 1977), this analysis moves further from the specific contents of the objects and their social impact, to address the problem of the media itself, and the nature of the sign.
The older style of semiotic analysis is replaced by the post-structuralist tradition in which the subject is constructed in terms of a larger discourse, and analysis is devoted to topics such as narrative structure and deconstruction.
In chapter 9, this will be reviewed in relation to the earlier critique of mass culture.
In opposition to the above studies are those which have been carried out by anthropologists, who have applied traditions more central to that discipline.
One of the most important recent examples of such a study was the result of joint work by an anthropologist and an economist, and focused on critical appraisal of many of the assumptions about goods current in economics (Douglas and Isherwood 1980).
In this work, rather than being reduced to utility or competitive status display, goods are examined in terms of their expressive and symbolic function, and the central thesis with respect to this is one which has largely been assumed in the present work.
The references by Douglas and Isherwood to conventional economics are complemented by Sahlins' critique of similar assumptions in Marxist economics (1976a), which in part extends the work of  Baudrillard; and both of these works use symbolic analysis in order to attempt more general assessments of the relationship between divisions of goods and divisions of peoples.
The work of Douglas and Isherwood may be related to that Durkheimian pre-structuralist tradition which sees objects as aiding in the creation of a cognitive order based upon social divisions.
They argue that goods are used to make ‘visible and stable the categories of culture’(1980: 59).
These cognitive categories are, however, themselves derived from a deeper base: social structure.
Thus, ‘It would seem then that the clue to finding real partitioning amongst goods must be to trace some underlying partitioning in society’(1980: 907).
The authors, stress on cognition has the advantage that it leads to an appreciation of the importance of the distribution of knowledge about what goods should represent, rather than merely of the distribution of the goods themselves.
They tend, however, towards what Sahlins has castigated as a ‘sociability fetishism’(1976a: 120), in which social structure is often treated as both prior to, and ontologically superior to, its appearance in goods.
Despite his critique of Douglas, Sahlins' own attempt to construct an approach to consumption (1976a: 166–204) is subject to quite similar limitations.
In their enthusiasm to criticize economistic assumptions concerning utility, both works tend to overstress the autonomy of the features they assert.
The result is that in perhaps, too stark contrast to the approaches above, they entirely ignore the interests and power of commercial institutions.
They tend to assert the overwhelming desire for cognitive order, and thus offer an unrealistically cohesive model of cognition itself which ignores the problems of ideology and framing.
Most importantly, they fail to acknowledge the genuine lessons of Marx's work, as, for example, reflected in Bourdieu's Outline of a Theory of Practice (1977), in which the significance of artefacts is seen to consist in their simultaneous operation in both the material and cognitive worlds, thereby exposing the artificiality of a dichotomous approach.
In short, these anthropologists tend towards several of the dualisms which the concept of objectification has been used to oppose, while nevertheless providing important assertions and exemplifications of the process of consumption as culture.
An ethnographically-based study set in Chicago (Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton 1981) provides an example of a very different approach to an anthropology of consumption.
This work is based on the examination of the goods used by some three hundred individuals in eighty-two households.
The limitations of this study as an approach to consumption in general derive not only from a rather  unbalanced subjectivism in the authors' theoretical models, but also from the particular selection of objects of concern.
The analysis undertaken is not of goods in general, but of those selected as the most ‘cherished’ possessions by the informants.
Not surprisingly, the pattern of reasons given for such a selection tends to be highly personal and particular, with emphasis being placed mainly on the objectification of personal relations, for example, with deceased friends and relatives.
The self to whose development the authors relate this process tends to be a highly individualist subjective self, of the psychological rather than the anthropological tradition, with given psychic needs.
Although Simmel is quoted, there is none of the subtlety of his analysis of the necessary contradictions of industrial society, and the emphasis on goals of happy homes and cohesive families appears cut off from the wider realms of social action.
A far more satisfactory, if idiosyncratic, account of the cultural contexts within which modern commodities operate is provided by Appadurai (1986), especially in the introduction to this varied set of essays and examples, which follows from traditional anthropological concern with the nature of exchange.
Consumption as Social Differentiation
After these relatively brief accounts of a variety of approaches to the study of consumption as a social phenomenon, one particular perspective demands more substantial resumé and analysis.
This perspective is here distilled out of the similarities between two major studies of consumption, one of which may almost be credited with initiating such studies, while the other provides the most extensive contemporary survey.
These are Bourdieu's recent book Distinction (1984) and Veblen's The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899, here 1970).
Although the former makes no mention of the latter, and despite a number of differences, the two share certain central assumptions.
One of the distinctions between these two works is that Veblen's goal is more limited; he is not concerned with consumption in general so much as a specific type of consumption which was of particular importance in the period during which he was writing, a period which may be seen as marking the transition to the age of mass consumption.
Veblen, like Simmel, had the advantage of seeing as new and shocking many phenomena of mass consumption which today are regarded as commonplace and natural.
Veblen's particular interest in the leisure class determined the direction of his argument.
Leisure is to be understood as the ability to absent oneself from work.
Thus, for a  particular segment of the rich it was less wealth per se which was of importance, than wealth displayed as a conspicuous distance from the world of practical necessity.
The class of people for whom this may have been of paramount importance was not the traditional aristocracy which had never been involved in work, having merely inherited their estates, but those termed the nouveaux riches , the use of which term implies a much more direct involvement in the work process as the basis for capital accumulation.
Veblen portrays this class as determined to create a distance between themselves and that world of necessity which was the foundation of their fortune.
They also desired to emulate that other class for whom time and birth had provided legitimacy, and for whom wealth appeared as a natural attribute rather than a possibly transient accretion.
The rise of industrial work processes and domestic labour, both of which appeared as particularly servile pursuits, only encouraged the capitalists, desire to distance themselves from their origins.
However, just as they had formerly worked to obtain their fortune, so also the nouveaux riches were obliged to employ material goods to assert their social pretensions.
It was this nouveaux riches strategy which so jarred with those such as Veblen who had been raised on the more general American ethic that work itself was a highly moral activity in which pride should be taken, as in the case of Weber's Protestant ethic which valued utility and austerity.
Veblen's achievement was to capture the strategies of the leisure class in a series of classic phrases and categories and exemplify them clearly and in detail with a masterful sense of irony.
He showed that the mere absence from work or possession of wealth was translated into highly exaggerated forms which he termed conspicuous consumption and conspicuous leisure.
The individual being insufficient for the expression of these values, they might be extended in vicarious forms such as footservants who had nothing to do but to display their own superfluity, or pets, which provided surfaces for the further display of luxury.
As well as outlining the ways in which the leisure class expressed their status, Veblen clarified the two major means by which such strategies were extended into society in general.
The first or these was through control over matters of taste.
Good taste became associated with the expression of distance from the world of work, the practical or the natural world, and was termed ‘refined’ or ‘cultivated’, being dissociated from that which could be regarded as ‘cheap’(1970: 112).
This became extended through the process of emulation, by which lower groups in the hierarchy sought to copy the higher groups, a strategy so fundamental that Veblen believed it to be the foundation  for the concept of private property (1970: 33–40).
In America, where there was a comparative absence of a long term aristocracy, these social hierarchies took on a particularly strong pecuniary emphasis.
Through these processes the leisure class, which might itself represent but a small fraction of society, could extend its influence over the whole.
Wealth was, however, not the only factor discussed by Veblen, and it is of particular interest that he ends his account of the leisure class with a chapter on ‘The higher learning as an expression of pecuniary culture’, and with an emphasis on Classics as the key at that time to the concept of high culture.
Unfortunately, Veblen's emphasis upon particular strategies related to very particular segments of the population has tended to become generalized in popular accounts as a basis for understanding consumption per se (Douglas and Isherwood 1979: 4)
The tradition which links Veblen and Bourdieu is evident in their mutual emphasis on the area of taste as the key dimension controlling the significance of ordinary goods, and their common location of the source of taste in distance from work.
Bourdieu, though less witty and stylish, achieves a large number of advances over Veblen's account in terms of the sophistication of his analysis and his ability to move this critique away from the characterization of a particular segment of the population to the analysis of French society as a whole, and from simple emulation and display to complex forces of strategy and social reproduction.
These moves are necessary, given both the democratization of mass consumption and the growth in sophistication and subtlety of the ideological practices of dominant groups in the intervening period.
Bourdieu's first task is to rescue taste as preference from essentialist doctrines of aesthetics, and thereby free it as a potential tool for the contingent historical analysis of society.
He achieves this by taking a central pillar in this tradition, Kant's concept of the aesthetic as distanced contemplation which transcends the immediacy of experience, and demonstrating that this is only a single perspective, that of the dominant class.
The Kantian aesthetic is one of refusal, a forgoing of the immediate pleasure of the sensual and the evident in favour of a cultivated and abstracted appropriation through an achieved understanding.
It therefore tends towards a rejection of representation of the signified or naturalistic, in favour of the principles of convention, the esoteric and formal.
The overt display of wealth and consumption by Veblen's leisure class is challenged by a more subtle, detached and inconspicuous form to be appreciated only by those sufficiently cultivated or civilized.
It is an aesthetic clearly expressed in the cool, detached and ‘difficult’ forms of modern art.
The Kantian aesthetic achieves its meaning only by contrast to what Bourdieu terms an anti-Kantian aesthetic.
This is the aesthetic of popular culture, a preference for immediate entertainment, pleasure, the gut feeling, a regard for the sensual and the representational.
Here, it is the substance and the signified which are of importance.
A telling illustration resulted from questions concerning suitable subjects for photography.
The Kantian perspective prefers cabbages and a car crash, the anti-Kantian favours sunset and first communion (Bourdieu 1984: 34–41).
For the former, beauty is created through the mode or representation; for the latter, it is inherent in the subject.
These differences in taste, which are equally evident in a wide range of media — for example, a preference for ‘difficult’ as opposed to popular music — provide the basis for unearthing a deep classificatory device which Bourdieu identifies as an example of that ‘habitus’described in chapter 6.
As habitus, this distinction between the Kantian and anti-Kantian aesthetic is both derived from material conditions, and in turn provides an insight into a classificatory scheme which may be applied to an infinite number of actual material and consumption domains.
The term ‘taste’ provides a clue to its deep rooted nature.
When faced with what we regard as consummately bad taste, or people who seem to revel in exactly the behaviour we abhor, we often feel revolted, nauseous or acutely embarrassed, as when parents say the wrong thing in front of a child's peers, or that child is forced to wear clothes whose image he or she rejects.
When mapping these differences in taste, the sociological criterion used by Bourdieu tends to be either occupation or educational level, but both are related to the common conception of class, as upper, middle and working.
Taste is then seen principally as the cause of ‘classism’, which can be defined as the kind of  distaste the middle and upper classes feel for the vulgar in fun fairs, cheap commodities, artificial copies, or lack of style, and the contempt working people feel for the pretentious, cold and degenerate middle and upper classes.
The source for the basic difference in taste is traced by Bourdieu to the different experiences of these classes in modern society.
The immediacy of working people's tastes derives from the immediacy of their work experience, and the pressure imposed by their needs.
A person who provides manual labour, and whose access to the basics of sustenance and comfort is not guaranteed, has a respect and desire for the sensual, physical and immediate.
An individual who has been brought up in the abstractions of education and capital, and who is certain of obtaining daily necessities, cultivates a distance from these needs, and affects a taste based in the respect and desire for the  abstract, distanced and formal.
These objective conditions are interiorized through habitus as desire expressed in taste.
Habitus thereby mediates between material conditions including, but not entirely reduced to, productive relations, and the observable practices of the social group.
Although in Veblen's time dominant groups could flaunt their birth or wealth, these were already undergoing the crises of legitimacy indicated in the venom of Veblen's writings.
Much of Bourdieu's work in Distinction and other books is concerned with how these legitimatory principles have been replaced by others based on the education system.
Education is used to support current social differences, since it claims to generate distinctions based on merit rather than birth or wealth, being itself the means by which differential ability is identified.
Along with other sociologists (e.g. Goldthorpe et al.1980; Halsey, Heath and Ridge 1980) who have used statistical analyses of education and occupation over several generations to question assumptions concerning increased social mobility, Bourdieu is able to demonstrate the largely illusory nature of this claim (1984: 135–68).
The rise of mass education saw a decline in social mobility and merely an inflation in employers' demands for qualifications.
The basis for education's ability to bring about this process of social reproduction lies in what Bourdieu terms cultural capital.
Cultural capital is based on time invested in obtaining certain kinds of knowledge.
Learning Classics or memorizing the year by year achievements of a football club will enhance the individual's reputation in certain environments, but will prove a poor investment if used in the wrong circumstances.
Bourdieu's main original contribution to analyses of education is to distinguish between that which is directly inculcated in the education process and that which is indirectly absorbed.
Some capital may be obtained through direct transference, as when an acquired skill for keeping in touch with the latest developments and information in a given academic field is then applied to the world of fashion.
Less obvious is Bourdieu s evidence that education fosters a general tendency towards the use of high culture.
His surveys indicate that the likelihood of visiting the theatre, art galleries or museums will depend not upon subjects studied or grades of qualification achieved, but simply upon the length of time spent in a higher academic institution.
One possible reason for this relationship between education and culture is brought out especially clearly in an earlier article by Bourdieu (1968).
The increasing abstraction of modern art has tended  to extend this distance from the immediacy of forms, and to make such art increasingly difficult to interpret for those not familiar with the conventions and history of the field.
This is true for abstract modern theatre, painting, avant-garde music, literature and so forth.
In a sense, if cultural products are regarded as a code which must be interpreted, this code has become increasingly difficult to decipher without access to some key.
Education, on the other hand, has become increasingly important as a discriminating variable, that is, in terms of the level of education achieved.
It also provides the key to the translation of high culture by emphasizing the importance of attaining knowledge about abstract and esoteric subjects.
Thus, the difficulty of deciphering the cultural code has been compounded by the difficulty of gaining access to the devices for its decoding.
These two factors act together to create and reproduce social hierarchy.
At the top of the scale there is a close relationship with high avant-garde arts and esoteric social theories, the best current example of which is the relationship between post-modernism and post-structuralism (e.g. Foster ed. 1983).
The relationship between the two kinds of capital — cultural and economic — is uneasy.
On the one hand, education provides a means by which business capital may reproduce its social order.
The children of the rich may work in health food shops or other faddish and esoteric pursuits which utilize their educational experience and may provide a more acceptable form of class reproduction than simple inheritance.
There is, however, also an antagonism between the two orders, as the holders of cultural capital deride money capital as mere wealth and its conspicuous expressions as high vulgarity, while the holders of money capital regard the pretensions and esoteric forms of high cultural capital as parasitic and irrelevant.
In modern British society, this often takes the form of a left-right political division between fractions of the upper classes.
Bourdieu's own analysis of politics, however, stresses rather the division between the ‘knows’ and the ‘don't knows’, in relation to the pressure put on the general public to have an informed opinion on often very distant issues (1984: 397–465).
Society, then, is not to be understood in terms of a simple hierarchy, but as a continual struggle over the hierarchy of hier-archies; that is, whether, in this case, that of wealth should prevail over that of knowledge.
In a sense, this is the modern version of ancient struggles between church, state, military and trading concerns, and the continuance of the French court traditions studied by Elias (1978).
Each group attempts to project its interests, its ‘capital’, as the proper source for social reputation and status.
In the main, the holders  of cultural capital can be regarded as the dominated fraction of the dominant class.
Although the examples above related to the arts, the importance of using the concept of taste is that it applies equally to the world of mass consumption.
Bourdieu provides a fascinating array of domains divided according to the criteria of taste.
An obvious case is that of food, which may be graded according to the social position of the consumer.
Working people are found to prefer the immediacy of abundance, a plentiful table proclaiming its sustenance, strong red meats, solid breads and cheeses, an unfussy array of quantity wherever possible.
Middle class food becomes cuisine.
Taste is here based on knowledge of the proper methods of preparing and presenting foods, and there is a moral interest in food as wholesome, healthy and sustaining.
Food for higher classes is increasingly split between the two fractions of the dominant class.
The food associated with economic capital is characterized by rich sauces and desserts, and rare and luxurious items such as truffles.
The ultimate food for the display of cultural capital today is the nouvelle cuisine , which refuses any suggestion that food might be for sustenance, a minimalist food which emphasizes the aesthetic of presentation, an austere but cultivated pleasure.
A similar set of divisions can be identified in a vast range of goods.
The middle-class children's toy is never intended for mere amusement or pleasure; its prime interest is its educational value, the child must absorb the toy as a challenge, something from which it will learn in order to improve itself.
Similarly, there is an array of products for producing the body beautiful, a tall elegant figure disdainful of practical or even biological constraint.
In every consumer domain, fashion provides opportunities for differentiation, in terms of speed of access to knowledge.
Through such examples, it becomes clear how the habitus acts both to generate the diversity of forms and, in turn, to classify these same diverse fields.
It provides a set of dispositions promoting self-recognition and the creation of relationships such as friendships and marriages with others who share that set of prejudices concerning the correct nature of things; but the individuals concerned rarely possess any awareness of the social origins of these tastes.
It is this structuralist mode, through which the particularities of the object world at a given time may help generate the objectifications by which a set of social relationships comes to know itself through an array of everyday taxonomies which makes Bourdieu's work such an advance on previous analyses of consumption.
It accounts for the way in which goods not merely reflect distinction, but are an instrument of it.
It indicates the power and importance of consumption trivia, both  in everyday social encounters and at the level of meta-social alignments.
Bourdieu's habitus is as deeply rooted in material culture as in cognitive orders and social divisions, and it provides the means for combining an approach to all three.
It also accounts for the extraordinary ability of shoppers to select from a huge array those goods most appropriate to themselves and their close friends or relatives.
As a modern social analyst, Bourdieu is exemplary in his refusal to reduce his model of society to any single social attribute.
Although he often uses occupation and length of time in educational institutions as the axes for his displays and charts, in the text he attempts to encompass a far greater range of differences based on gender, age and expectation.
He clearly regards these as always interconnected; the meaning of gender depends upon one's class, and vice versa.
He provides a polythetic perspective on social position, exhibiting the structuralist preference for relationships over entities, so that all social attributes are understood primarily in terms of their co-variant properties.
This relational approach is opposed to Marx's theory of class, conflating a theoretically constructed concept with a given body of people defined largely by economic position; although Bourdieu recognizes that such has been the impact of Marx and Marxism that class as representation has by now been realized, through sheer symbolic efficacy, to an extraordinary degree (Bourdieu 1985).
Bourdieu also attempts a balance between relativism and moral judgement.
One of the work's main strengths is that it covers all social positions.
A radical lesbian whose main concerns are CND and South Africa is as likely to be placed in terms of education and occupation (e.g. teaching or social work), as the home-loving, conservative, television absorbed, do-it-yourself enthusiast might represent the aspiring white collar working class.
The work is, however, clearly intended to expose the pretensions to a superior rationality of middle-and upper-class taste.
Although Distinction is surely the most significant contribution to the study of consumption made by any anthropologist, and one of the major resources for obtaining a better understanding of our own culture, there are certain important limitations to the work.
Perhaps the main weakness in the text, which accounts for a number of others, is the methodology employed.
Despite having worked previously as an ethnographer, Bourdieu makes no attempt to employ the ethnographic method in this work, relying instead on a lengthy questionnaire reproduced at the end of the book.
Although highly inventive and productive, this questionnaire can provide only explicit responses, rather than insight into actual practices, and, through  processing, has created a normative characterization of the diverse social fractions involved, which are seen as an exemplars of a larger, statistically-based model of class.
The actual brilliance often displayed in the art of living in modern society by people of all classes, and the use of ambiguities, inconsistencies, resistance, framing and such devices in individual and social strategies are thereby lost.
What is especially curious is that this questionnaire is strongly reminiscent of others which are well-established as a marketing technique, and are supplemented by actual marketing surveys.
Like marketing, it classifies informants according to sociological classes combined with consumption patterns.
It is not unacceptable for an academic to employ a technique developed in industry, but what is strange is that this is combined with a remarkable lack of consideration for the impact of marketing itself.
However welcome Bourdieu's analysis of consumers may be when contrasted to the more common attempt to explain the same material as a simple expression of business interests, the book's impact is not enhanced by its entirely ignoring the sphere of production.
Bourdieu's habitus does not spontaneously generate a world of goods, only a set of dispositions.
To understand how the congruity between the two is achieved demands an investigation of marketing, designers (as by Forty 1986) and other distributive agencies.
It is not sufficient merely to talk of the articulation of two independent spheres (Bourdieu 1984: 230).
Despite the striving for the autonomy or consumption activities, resulting in an exaggerated separation from business interests, in some respects Bourdieu's major source of analogy tends to fall back, not on to an economic, but perhaps on to an economistic model.
Capital both economic and symbolic appears as an investment open to calculation, and social hierarchy tends to be reducible to these two main linear strands through which capital can be exploited in social positioning.
The result is very different from the ideas expressed in chapter 6, where it was suggested that one of the many results of the rise of material culture as a mode of cultural form was its ability to multiply and keep apart a plethora of hierarchies and diverse spheres.
Also surprising, given Bourdieu's work as an ethnographer in Algeria, is the lack of consideration for the nature of mass consumption as an historical phenomena.
The world of Distinction is ‘given’, and the sense of modernity as a dynamic form found in the writings of Simmel (1978) or Berman (1983) is quite absent.
As a result, the corresponding differences between these societies are not underlined, and this ahistorical representation lends itself to a simplification of both subject and object.
The subject as agent of strategy appears as highly constrained and normative.
The actual  complexities of modern working-class life, the use of distancing or parody, as emerges, for example, from studies of popular culture, is lost in the drive for a consistent congruence through habitus engendered by class interests and constrained possibilities.
Working people are reduced to a relationship of immediacy from which they cannot escape.
This is much less subtle than the characterization of strategy given in Bourdieu's Outline of a Theory of Practice , and is consistent with a simplification of the concept of the object.
Despite the exemplary use of material culture as evidence, there is no discussion of its nature and growth as compared to other media.
Distinction tends to revert to a notion of objectification which consists mainly in the external sedimentation and subsequent reproduction of class interests.
To locate objects in relation to interest and power, however sophisticated and non-reductionist, is only one perspective upon mass consumption.
Other aspects of culture are ignored.
The problems of alienation and estrangement are reduced to problems of access to knowledge.
Projects based on religion, morals, the nature of the self and so forth cannot be fully incorporated within this framework.
The focus on class fragments is, however, often based less on the problem of exploitation than on a Romantic vision of the working class as an authentic humanity, whose sensuality and desires are preferable and proper.
Ironically, such a view rests on an aestheticization of labour.
Bourdieu implies the same Romantic preference for the work ethic and antipathy towards abstraction as Veblen.
As in many similar Romantic writings on the left of the political spectrum, the working class is considered authentic by virtue of precisely those attributes which have been forced upon it by oppression from above.
Despite his structuralist methodology (and abstract style of writing), Bourdieu does not appear to perceive the  necessary relationship between abstraction and specificity and the contradictory nature of modern culture brought out by Simmel.
For these reasons, however valuable Bourdieu's work may be in identifying the patterns and relationships or the society or mass consumption, it is limited with respect to the present project.
Distinction does not provide a theory of either consumption or material culture as the form of modern culture.
Many of the areas most fully developed theoretically in Bourdieu's earlier work are simplified in the interests of achieving an understanding of the underlying structure of such a complex phenomenon as modern French society as a totality.
When Bourdieu's approach is set against the range of other approaches discussed in this chapter, certain highly divergent tendencies become evident.
Some approaches, including the conventional account of the industrial revolution, certain Marxist analyses and  business-oriented researches, appear to emphasize productive forces as the prime mover, and are concerned with consumption only as the outcome of capitalist interests and the problem of ensuring that desire and demand correspond with the needs of industry.
Other approaches, including those of Douglas and Bourdieu, are concerned with consumers themselves as groups with interests, both cognitive and material, which are projected in patterns of objects, and in this case it is industry which is seen as handmaiden to the pattern of consumer group demands.
This difference is crosscut by one of the major questions addressed by Bourdieu in his earlier work (1977) but largely ignored in Distinction , which is the balance between objectivist approaches such as those found in archaeology, and subjectivist approaches, the most extreme of which would be design history or the study of Chicago homes.
The intention of the next chapter is to examine, through actual cases of consumption, the means by which some balance may be achieved between the relevant factors.
What, however, should already be evident as a result of both the historical and anthropological materials investigated in this chapter is that, just as with material culture in general, in many social studies (with the conspicuous exception of economics) a stress on consumption is a necessary corollary to its previous neglect.
The development of a study of consumption may then be integrated, not as dichotomous to relations of production, nor as a universal social function, but as a continually growing element of modern culture, which must therefore play an increasingly prominent role in attempts to understand the nature of contemporary societies.
9
Material Ideology
Bourdieu's Distinction , in common with several other approaches to consumption, such as that of semiotics, is largely based upon the mapping of differences between goods on to differences between social groups, which, in the more reductionist instances, are often treated as prior social divisions unaltered by this process of signification.
An alternative approach, which will be adopted in this chapter, is to concentrate rather on the possibility of identifying divisions which pertain to particular object domains and which may not be consistent with any cohesive representation or society.
In such cases, the significance of the social divisions associated with objects is most evident from the study of the goods themselves.
Within such an approach, objects may not be reducible to the workings of a central hierarchical principle, or be directly related to what are otherwise considered the most important social divisions.
In at least one example, the distinction between goods is more closely related to contradictions within one given set of individuals than to differences between social groups.
As mass consumption, a particular array of objects may be found to represent and assist in the construction of perspectives relating to control over production or rivalry between consumers, but also to wider issues concerning morality and social ideals.
As external forms, however, objects may also be independent of the interpretation of any one particular group, and their consistency as a material presence may belie the actual variety of meanings they evoke.
To set any analysis of the styles of artefacts within the social context of contemporary Britain would appear to require consideration of a wide range or agents and relevant factors.
These include forms or production and  commerce and the demands of profit, the interests of and constraints on manufacture, design, marketing and advertising, whose role it is to create the images of industrial goods in relation to specified target populations, and the interests of and constraints on the consumer population, who use and in their turn manipulate the meaning of these forms through differential selection, placement, use and association.
As an initial example, one of the most fundamental ranges of objects in contemporary British society will be examined, that is the variety of house styles found in residential developments.
Fortunately, major contemporary building styles have been subject to detailed analysis in terms of their social significance.
There is the work of Muthesius on the terraced house (1982), of King on the bungalow (1984), of Oliver et al.on the semi-detached house (1981), and of a multitude of authors on the leading architects of the modernist styles, which emerged as the dominant from taken by council properties.
The major distinctions emerge clearly from these accounts.
On the one hand (Oliver et al.1981: 78), there are the attributes held to be exemplified in the half-timbered, suburban, semi-detached, middle-class house: an ambivalent position in relation to town and country, an expression of individualism extended in the modern do-it-yourself tradition, a concern with compromise and a rejection of extremes, all set within statements about tradition and nationalism.
Some of these are further extended in the detached bungalow analysed by King (1984), as part of an opposition to elements of modernity and urbanization which constitute the major transformations of the environment over the last two centuries.
In stark opposition to the values of suburbia are the images projected by the council estate, which appears on the landscape as a powerful expression of the ideals of communality, of technological supremacy over the slum, and of modernist statements on the possibilities of present and future society, often tied to concepts of socialist planning as formulated by the Bauhaus and promoted by a number of British local councils.
Muthesius documents in detail the interests of the professions involved in building streets of terraced properties: the speculators, suppliers of materials, planning controllers and architects.
Jackson (1973: 145) shows that these interests were hidden by the demands of style, as in the semi-detached properties which employed a basic frame but added a spurious individuality on the façade in order to make the house more attractive to prospective buyers, or the modernist-style buildings, which proclaimed their scientific nature to the degree that elements of the internal construction which would not normally have been visible were externalized onto the façade to display a commitment to the appropriation of new technologies.
The symbolic function of the different styles present in the built environment which is the context for everyday action suggest that  they might fuel an apparently active and sustained debate between suburban individualism and inner city communalism.
The implication, however, that these differences represent actual conflicts in society or the emergence of competing and alternative traditions is quite false.
This becomes evident when consideration is given to the processes by which these styles are produced and consumed.
The modernist council properties have long been one of the strongest fiefdoms of professionalized architecture, being extremely closely linked to development planning and local political interests, and subject to the intervention of both civic authorities and the state.
These links are evident in modernist style which extends also to the large blocks used for government administration and the offices of major commercial organizations.
The development of this style, then, should be credited not only to architects, but to the whole range of bureaucratic and business interests, academics, developers and systems builders, and the various strata of decision makers.
When taken together, these amount to a large part of one of the dominant interests of contemporary British society: the professional middle class.
As a style, modernism visibly lends itself to this appropriation.
It projects an ethos based upon the advances of science, the adaptation to systems technology, and the destruction of tradition, which accords well with those elements of technological dominance discussed by Habermas and his Frankfurt School predecessors in their critiques of modernist rationality and the ideology of technological efficiency.
What is curious is that the members of this same dominant group which may be held responsible for the emergence of modernist architecture, and its appropriation by the state as an authority, do not, by and large, choose family homes of their own built in this style, which is clearly incompatible with their personal desires and images.
Instead, their own households are more likely to be typical of the larger examples of the detached, the semi-detached and the bungalow, which are extended, in part through emulatory processes, to other sectors of our society with similar aspirations, to such a degree that these styles virtually command modern private development.
The consumption of modernist architecture as residential form is almost entirely through state allocation.
The consumers of this architecture, the council tenants, have been notoriously restricted in their ability to transform the façade of these dwellings.
The suburban dwellers documented by Oliver et al.(1981), who are able to alter the appearance of their homes, tend not to use modernist styles, which, in any case, do not lend themselves to such appropriation.
What this implies is that a group of people who, as consumers, constructed and sustained this image of the individualist tradition  also, as producers, constructed the very image of change, community and modernity to which it is opposed.
The source of the apparent opposition between these two styles then becomes evident.
Clearly, they represent a structural polarity through which the semantic power of the ‘semi’, as traditional, ambivalent and individualistic, gains its full resonance only by contrast with modernism.
To put it the other way around, it is through the state appropriation of the language of change and urbanicity that the construction of an opposite which is perceived as unchanging and  suburban becomes sustainable.
The representation of the interests of a particular group is greatly clarified if that group is also able to construct an antithetical image (for the details of this argument see Miller 1984).
King provides evidence of the power of this structural logic in his example of the attempt by bungalow builders to ‘invade, the countryside to such an extent as to threaten the forces which had, until then controlled the spatial distribution of various styles.
The result was legislation curtailing any further extension of this form into ‘inappropriate’ areas (King 1984: 184–92).
This suggests that in studies of material representation it should not be assumed that the consumption of a given group will be represented as a coherent and consistent set of forms.
The same segment of the population working as producers and consumers here creates quite contrasting images, although analysis reveals them as emanating from a consistent set of interests.
This separation allows for further twists in the nature of representation, since the failure of the modernist council estate could be (and was) manipulated by the media to appear as evidence for the failure of the ideals of communality such estates appeared to represent.
It was indeed a failure of such imagery, but it must be remembered that the very image of society, and in some cases of socialism, the council estate embodied was that imposed by academics and professionals, and never that of the residents, who have neither a place in the construction of that image, nor the means for its appropriation.
This analysis of the dominant building styles of our society suggests that a set of representations derived from the interests and perspectives of a particular group in society not only denies access to this aspect of culture to alternative perspectives, but at the same time causes these representations to appear to be the image of those who have been excluded.
There are comparable cases in other areas of culture studies (e.g. Williams 1961), where what appears to us as the image of one section of society is actually fabricated by a quite different class.
In such cases, the object, in this case building form, may act as a kind of material ‘ideology’, but the meaning of this term is open to considerable dispute.
The root of the modern use of the term ideology lies with Marx.
The theory of value which was the cornerstone of Capital asserts clearly that the very terms and their accepted connotations used in conventional descriptions of the political economy of the time, mystified and suppressed the true nature of, for example, exchange value, as an outcome or the dominance or capitalist interests.
Marxism invented itself as the proper understanding of the nature of history seen from the perspective of labour, and should therefore have become the perspective and consciousness of labour.
In the later history of Marxism, the re-education of the peasantry and workers, along with the transformation of production processes, has always been a prime instrument in the securing of revolutionary goals (Hinton 1972).
This practice is saved from its apparent idealist overtones by its claimed congruence with inevitable historical transformations whose roots lie elsewhere.
This argument was refined by Lukács' (1971) suggestion that only certain historical transformations could bring the proletariat to realize their true interests and thereby allow them to commence revolutionary action.
In view of this, Marxist teaching can be seen as a kind of catalyst.
Not surprisingly, this doctrine has become especially important to those who feel as a matter of Marxist science that the proletariat ought by now to have enacted a revolutionary response to the crises which are seen as always present; and their failure to do so is therefore commonly explained as an aspect of false consciousness, which prevented them from recognizing their proper historical duty.
Recent criticisms have been made of several aspects of this approach.
Historical analysis suggests that the argument that the perspectives of dominant groups are so pervasive as to permit no alternative or popular forms of representation is untenable (Abercrombie, Hill and Turner 1980).
Marxists influenced by Gramsci's analysis have also often asserted the impact of dominant ideas, but, in their view, acquiescence has been always problematic; it has to be worked for through the establishment of hegemony and can never be simply taken for granted.
Furthermore, it is commonly met by diverse forms of resistance (e.g. Hall et al.1976).
One approach to this problem may be derived from the theory of objectification according to which access to culture, as the externalization through which the social group is constructed, is the basis for social development.
In so far as society is divided into different interests, of which labour and capital are the prototypical examples, it may well be that some interests have more control than others over the development of representations which accord to their perspective and thus their interests.
As Foucault has shown (1981: 92–102), the  power they hold is productive, not merely suppressive, of culture.
The concept of perspective implies that understanding is derived from a particular position in the world.
If two groups have different perspectives, then, in so far as they are able to create the world, they naturally attempt to do so in accordance with their own perspective, or ‘habitus’.
In as much, however, as the cultural forms thereby produced become the external environment through which emerge other groups whose interests are not identical, and indeed may be contrary, to their own, we are faced with the situation described in the discussion of building styles above, where the dominated group is forced to attempt to invest itself in the domain of culture represented by the built environment in terms of a set of objects whose initial meanings are antagonistic to its own interests.
What this suggests is that despite valid criticism of their pretensions as theoretical perspectives, the notion of both a dominant ideology and a false consciousness do have at least some place in a theory of ideology.
One group may dominate large areas of cultural production, while another, through lack of access to cultural form, may be less clear as to the nature of its own interests.
The problems arise when these are reified as essential attributes of an entire spectrum of cultural form.
The class which is defined in relation to buildings, essentially that of private as against public tenure, is not the same as that defined by another division such as profession.
Although dominant as far as building styles and the press are concerned, this same social segment may be less influential in the areas of trade unions and popular culture.
Following this expressivist logic, if a group is unable to objectify its interests in certain domains it may attempt to create its own cultural forms in some other field, although some groups without any resources are bereft of both power and prospects in virtually all spheres.
One of the results of the quantitative increase in material culture, providing new domains of representation all working in particular ways, is to complicate further the problem of what may be termed material ideology.
The Limits of Objectivism
This complexity is ignored by many of the approaches to ideology which have in common a tendency towards what may be termed ‘objectivism’, a term which emphasizes a general antipathy towards a subject- or agency-centered perspective.
Where the question of ideology is paramount, the concern is with the manner in which control over cultural forms is used to suppress contradictions or conflicts (Larrain 1982: 15).
In recent years, however, analysis based  upon a given concept of ideology has been complemented by other projects, some of which also analyse buildings as repressive mechanisms or authoritarian representations (e.g. Foucault 1977b), but whose overarching concepts such as‘power’ or ‘discourse’imply a still greater distance between interests and representations, and thereby a greater commitment to objectivism.
Critical objectivist approaches have tended towards a totalizing perspective, by virtue of their style of analysis which tries to rise above culture.
When applied to the world of goods, such approaches therefore tend to subsume the whole spectrum of industrial commodities under a variety of notions of cultural dominance.
In most cases, this is simply inferred in a phrase about the evils of commodity consumption.
There has been, however, a range of attempts to emphasize the place of commodities in exemplifying some general condition of dominance, which goes beyond the more particular implications of ideology.
Examples of such studies might include aspects of Marcuse's One Dimensional Man (1964), the earlier work of Lukács (1971), Barthes's Mythologies (1973), Lasch's The Culture of Narcissism (1979), and studies by Ewen and Ewen (1982) and Haug (1986).
Although these works commonly refer to the bourgeois world as a specific interest group within society, the actual material analysed, such as blue jeans, soap operas or boxing, often represents the cultural forms adopted by the whole spectrum of society.
As an illustration of what appears to be the inevitable result of a strongly objectivist analysis which presupposes its equal relevance for all commodity forms, there follows a brief summary of the trajectory taken by one of the more sustained attempts to focus on the commodity as the central object of research, by the French social theorist Baudrillard.
Baudrillard began his studies in the earlier tradition of symbolic analysis, with an attempt to examine the significatory properties of modern mass consumption (e.g. 1981:.
29–87).
From the beginning, however, he was concerned to overturn one of the most important of the assumed signifieds, that is utility as defined on the right and use value as defined on the left (1975, 1981: 130–63).
His critique of Marx's concept of use value helped to open the way for anthropological studies of the cultural construction of need (e.g. Sahlins 1976a), and suggested that the ideas of ‘true, and ‘false’ needs sometimes used in critical studies (e.g. Marcuse 1964) were severely problematic.
In time, however, these ideas developed into a much more general critique, in which objects not only did not signify use value but were found not to signify anything outside of themselves.
In the modern world, they were held to have become so totally interchangeable that there was no value which could not be  reduced to this cycle of exchange.
In contrast to Bourdieu, Baudrillard believed that people have become merely the vehicles for expressing the differences between objects.
Rather than representing, the sign becomes the front behind which the actual disappearance of the signified goes unnoticed, and we are left merely with the medium itself.
The resulting argument is typical of that current in post-structuralism (e.g. Sturrock ed. 1979); that is, we think we create objects in history which we use to communicate/signify/represent/constitute, but actually today there is simply a world of objects in terms of which our notions of self and society are created.
In short, our identity has become synonymous with patterns of consumption which are determined elsewhere.
Taken to its logical conclusion (and the advantage of Baudrillard is that he does just this), this view entails a denial of all signification.
Baudrillard's argument becomes highly convoluted, as in his The Precession of Simulacra (1983), which postulates the annihilation of all content, but the outcome of this contention is clearly nihilistic, since any opposition to this trend, or any radicalism, would be simply subsumed by this subversion of the sign.
Che Guevara, Marx and Baudrillard  himself are therefore destined to become merely a set of surfaces to play with as commodities which have lost the possibility of any further depth.
In the case of Baudrillard, this appears to have been a self-fulfilling prophecy, and he is mainly quoted today within the avant-garde arts, where he is indeed very much in vogue (Frankovits ed. 1984).
Baudrillard's biography provides a clear example of the limits of extreme objectivism as an approach to mass commodities (compare Anderson 1983: 32–55 on post-structuralism in general).
In a less sustained form, this is still a much used line of attack.
Indeed, some of the ideas developed by Baudrillard in the early 1970s recently resurfaced in a critique of the culture of late capitalism by Jameson (1984; see also Foster ed. 1983).
Jameson puts forward the  familiar argument that society has lost any possibility of depth or effect, and is reduced to mere pastiche and superficial self-comment.
We are left with a play on signs which has no ultimate reference point other than the commodity.
The cultural forms of late capitalism have thus become entirely pervasive and able to subsume any attempt at opposition.
The context for this argument is a critique of post-modernism.
This term usually refers either specifically to a movement in architecture which emphasizes a return to a popular façade based upon the design of mass commodities (e.g. Jencks 1977; Venturi, Scott Brown and Izenours 1972), or else to the more general movement towards  pluralism and primitivism which followed the critique of modernism.
In Jameson's critique, it is precisely this populism and celebration of kitsch which is denigrated.
This results in a quite misguided emphasis.
Jameson seems to object to the fall of modernism and the decline of a critical aesthetic, and fails to learn from the quite genuine failure of modernism itself with regard to its popular acceptability.
What he thereby misses is that post-modernism represents simply a new façade or twist to architectural style as ideology discussed earlier.
It serves to hide the professional, that is elite, structure through which it continues to operate by assuming the  mantle of the popular for itself.
It purports to be an appropriation of the public building by the people, when it is actually an appropriation of a particular version of the populist by one dominant group.
Jameson's approach is typical of that conservatism which regards all other periods of history as authentic, but the present as the final inauthentic state.
It is a Romantic version of modernism which is viewed as genuinely progressive and critical, rather than merely the means by which capitalism destroyed any tradition which might have opposed its hegemony.
A similar point is made by Anderson (1984) with respect to a still more eloquent defence of modernism by Berman (1983).
Modernism certainly had its place in the destruction of the ancien régime , but it is only one particular form of social change and has recently been most conspicuous in its failures.
Furthermore, modernism created a considerable degree of misery and frustration by insisting that only one particular dominant style had the right to be considered the appropriate form for the expression of socialism.
In relation to the object world, all analyses based on strong objectivism tend to produce similar results.
They act to reproduce what has been called the mass culture critique (which may come equally from the political right or left, see Hebdige 1981a), in which the objects of mass consumption today are treated as so tainted, superficial and trite that they could not possibly be worth investigating.
There may also be the tacit and covert implication that those people who have to live in and through such an object world are equally superficial and deluded, and are unable to comprehend their position.
This implies a rejection of any activities undertaken by the mass of the population (always with the exception of direct revolutionary action) as a possible basis for learning about the future development of our society.
The argument is that people cannot construct socialism out of kitsch (sometimes with the equally problematic implication that they can out of art).
In the terms of Bourdieu's Distinction , these often esoteric academic critiques tend to align closely with the avant-garde arts as holders of cultural capital.
There are many varied precursors to this modern branch of the mass culture critique, for example, the work of Morris, Adorno and Marcuse (e.g. Horkheimer and Adorno 1979), as well as several early versions of the notion of false consciousness.
A typical contemporary assumption is spelled out by Gortz, who claims that ‘working-class demands have turned into consumerist mass demands.
An atomised serialised mass of proletarians demand to be given by society, or more precisely the state, what they are unable to take or produce’(1982: 240).
Such a position does not lend itself to anthropological analysis, since one of the objectives of the discipline is to learn something of value from the practices of the people one is studying.
The argument that there is a thing called capitalist society which renders its population entirely pathological and dehumanized, with the exception of certain theorists who, although inevitably living their private lives in accordance with the tenets of this delusion, are able in their abstracted social theory to rise above, criticize and provide the only alternative model for society, is somewhat suspicious.
The clear lesson of the history of modernism is that the academic left is quite capable of fashioning a central instrument for the reproduction of the interests of the dominant class at precisely the moment when it is making the most strident claims to the contrary.