

5
COUNTRY BOYS FORCE THE PACE: AUNG SAN AND THAKIN NU
In negotiating with Jinnah and Nehru the British were dealing with leaders they had to recognise as their political and also social equals.
As an outstanding barrister, Jinnah enjoyed a distinction equal to — for example— Stafford Cripps.
Nehru, educated at Harrow and Cambridge, could be at home in any English country house, as when he stayed at Blickling Hall with the Marquess of Lothian.
Moreover, both these leaders served immensely long political apprenticeships before finally winning independence; Jinnah was at the forefront of Indian politics for nearly 40 years before he got his Pakistan; Nehru was hailed as the Crown prince of Indian nationalism over 20 years before he was able to keep his tryst with destiny.
By contrast, Aung San and Thakin Nu were unknown less than ten years before they compelled the British to concede their demands.
When they first had to negotiate with the Burmese leaders, Attlee, Pethick-Lawrence and their colleagues thought they were dealing with a bunch of rustics, uncouth, and ignorant of the ways of high politics.
On 5 November 1946 Pethick-Lawrence commented on their ‘political immaturity’, and again on 9 December he told the Cabinet that: ‘We are dealing with a body politically immature, singularly lacking in experience of the outside world, and with no appreciation of the weakness of Burma or of the difficulties…she is likely to face.’
They were to discover that these country lads were the equals — perhaps the superiors — of their Indian counterparts in political sagacity.
Aung San may not have known which knife and fork to use when he dined at Government House but he had a sure grasp of the realities of power.
Neither Nehru nor Jinnah gained all that they wanted (or what they had announced as their objectives) but Aung San and Thakin Nu did obtain all their demands, despite British objections.
Traditional Forces in Burmese Politics
These young men represented a different kind of leader from those we have so far considered; the Burma from which they sprang had been  influenced by the West far less than India, and only a tiny middle class had assimilated Western education.
The British conquest had been achieved by forces predominantly Indian.
Indians formed the mainstay of the urban workforce and (along with Chinese) provided the infrastructure of trade and manufacturing.
The economic superstructure was entirely controlled by a handful of big British firms.
The Burmese remained peasant farmers; paddy cultivation was their customary way of life.
Traditional Burmese culture centred upon the monasteries, found in every village and town, so that in the 1920s more than half the males in Burma were literate in their mother tongue (compared to a literacy rate of 13. 9 per cent in India).
This old world survived largely intact, particularly in Upper Burma, annexed only in 1886: when years of guerrilla resistance followed.
Hence, by the 1920s and 1930s, only a tiny minority of Burmese politicians had come up via the ladder of education and training in Britain, by which Gandhi, Jinnah and Nehru had risen.
Such were U Chit Hlaing, a member of the English Bar, who led the Wunthanu , the original political movement for ‘the preservation of the nation’, and Dr Ba Maw, graduate of Cambridge and Bordeaux, first Premier after separation from India in 1937.
Most of the leaders in Burma in the 1920s and 1930s appealed to an older tradition.
There were the political monks, U Ottama and U Wisara, and there was the supposed king, Thupannaka Galuna Raja, known to the British as Saya San, whose revolt in 1930 affected one-quarter of Burma.
Neither of these styles provided the basis for the emergence of Aung San and Nu.
A few years earlier Aung San might possibly have taken to the jungle, bandit or resistance fighter according to one's viewpoint, known only within a few miles of his own home.
Nu might have been a village schoolmaster, or a teller of tales, respected for his piety.
Because they were able to participate in two kinds of experience which were new and unexpected — radical university politics in the 1930s, and Japanese stage-managed ‘independence’ in 1943 — 5 — they became successively prime ministers of Burma and the architects of independence.
Leadership by rural, lower-middle-class folk remains rare in Asia.
These two pioneered their own forms of politics; and this was indeed creating a revolution in a way that Nehru and Jinnah, despite their involvement in mass politics, did not attain.
Leaders From the Countryside
The man who was known first as Ko (‘Elder Brother’) Nu, then Thakin Nu, and finally U Nu was born in 1907 at Wakema, a small market town (9000  people) in the lush Delta of Lower Burma.
His parents ran a cloth store.
Aung San (successively called Bo , or ‘Captain', and Bogyoke , ‘General’) was born in 1916 at an even smaller place, Natmauk, in Magwe District in the dry plain of Upper Burma.
He claimed his family were ‘rural gentry’, meaning they were hereditary headmen.
His grandfather, Bo Min Yaung, had fought as a guerrilla against the British when they occupied Upper Burma.
For men like these a university education would have been unthinkable a few years earlier, but in 1920 Burma obtained its own university on a campus outside Rangoon.
Under intense political pressure the strict academic standards which first prevailed were relaxed, and entry was broadened.
Nu entered in 1926 and was awarded his BA in 1929.
He left for a few years to manage a national school, independent of the British system, but returned to read law.
Student Politics
The early 1930s were a bad time; the world depression particularly hit Burma as agricultural prices dropped.
In the 1920s it had been relatively easy for the students to obtain good jobs: but not now.
Their frustration created a climate in which nationalist politics could flourish.
Ko Nu was elected President of the University Students' Union; the students looked up to him as their mentor.
Aung San became editor of the student magazine Oway .
Between them they transformed the Union from a social centre into a political cockpit.
Nu specialised in inflammatory speeches in earthy, often vulgar, Burmese.
As a youth he had been a rip.
The tolerance of the university authorities was strained too far.
Nu was expelled for his extravagant language, and so was Aung San who published an article about the Burmese university bursar entitled ‘Hell-Hound at Large’.
The student body thereupon came out on strike.
At the end of four months the Principal readmitted the two offenders under pressure from Dr Ba Maw as premier.
Nu promptly left, but Aung San remained as President of the Union.
They and other student leaders joined a fringe political group,Do-Bama Asi-Ayone , ‘We Burmans’, modelled on Sinn Fein in Ireland.
They adopted the prefix of Thakin , previously employed exclusively by the British and equivalent to Sahib.
Nu found himself the ‘treasurer without treasure’ in his own words.
The party was too poor to pay the electric light bill and their parliamentary wing,Komin Kochin , only won three of the 132 seats in the legislature.
However, they were not interested in parliamentary politics but in arousing the workers.
Their first major venture was to organise a strike amongst the workforce of the Burmah  Oil Company in 1938.
Though the strike was broken, the strategy of urban industrial action had been demonstrated.
Leftist Causes
Alongside these activities, Thakin Nu — whose literary leanings were already emerging — set up the Naga-Ni or Red Dragon Bookshop just off the university campus to sell the publications of the Left Book Club and also Marxist literature.
His associates were Thakin Than Tun and Thakin Soe.
Than Tun's background was much the same as that of Aung San and Nu.
He was born in 1913 in Toungoo District in central Burma.
He went to a village school and to the Teachers' Training College.
He worked as a vernacular teacher.
Soe was an employee of the Burmah Oil Company.
Nu's literary friends included Ko Thant (later Secretary-General of the UN) and Thakin Thein Pe, who achieved early notoriety as author of Tet Pongyi , ‘The Modern Monk’, a satire on decadence in the monastery.
He spent some time in Calcutta where he came into contact with the Indian Communist Party.
They linked up with the Thakins and in 1939 the embryo of a Burmese Communist party was formed with Aung San as Secretary-General, Thakin Soe as leader, and H.N. Goshal, a Burma Indian (also known as Thakin Ba Tin), as another early member.
Early in 1939, Aung San was arrested for conspiring to overthrow the government.
He was soon released.
As Communists they followed the party line only loosely.
As we have seen, Aung San had a great admiration for Nehru and in 1940 he attended the annual Congress at Ramgarh, regarded by Communists as bourgeois.
Nu's Solidarity With China
The war in the Far East produced cross-currents among these young radicals.
Nu was drawn strongly to the Chinese struggle against Japan and paid a visit to China under KMT auspices.
Aung San saw in the Japanese a strength which could overthrow the British Empire.
Rangoon was sprinkled with Japanese: ostensibly doctors, dentists and business men, they were actually secret agents.
In May 1940 a reporter from a newspaper,Yomiuri Shimbu , arrived.
He was actually Colonel Suzuki Keiji, known as Minami Matsuo.
Aung San Joins the Japanese (1940)
The CID were not unaware of these activities.
They responded by arresting politicians under wartime emergency rules.
First they caught the  small fish: in July, several Thakins — Than Tun, Soe, and Nu.
Then in August a big fish was taken into the net: Dr Ba Maw, the late Premier.
A warrant was out for Aung San, but Suzuki helped him and another young Thakin, Hla Myaing, to escape by ship.
This was a Chinese vessel which made port in Amoy.
There are different versions of how they got to Japan, but eventually they were accepted as useful allies and were sent back to recruit more potential fighters in Rangoon.
It is not even clear whether they travelled in a Japanese or a Chinese ship: but either way they made secret contacts with Thakin friends who agreed to accompany them back to Japan.
They were given intensive military training on Hainan island prior to going to Thailand in preparation for the invasion of Burma which was at an advanced planning stage.
In Bangkok the little band had a final celebration in December 1941.
According to custom, they each contributed blood from their veins to a silver bowl and all drank therefrom.
This thwe-thauk , or blood drinking, sealed eternal comradeship and they all assumed titles signifying their compact: Aung San became Bo Teza (Fire General), Thakin Shu Maung, a former postal employee, became Bo Ne Win (Sun of Glory General), Hla Pe, who had assisted the first escape, was Bo Let Ya (Right Hand General), while Aung San's first fellow-traveller, Hla Myaing, was Bo Yan Aung.
The band became known as the Thirty Comrades, their heroic status reflecting the company gathered round the great king Alaungpaya, although they were 68 in number.
Colonel Suzuki also took a Burmese pseudonym as Bo Mogyo (Thunderbolt).
The group were accompanied by a slightly older Thakin, Tun Ok (born 1907) who was expected to head the civil government.
Launch of the Burma Independence Army (1942)
The Thirty Comrades entered the southernmost districts of Burma alongside the rapidly advancing Japanese.
They recruited their soldiers from the more adventurous or the more unruly on their route.
The Japanese tried to control them; Bo Mogyo was in overall command, and ‘battalions’ were commanded by Japanese.
However, the BIA or Burma Independence Army (as it was called) acquired an unenviable reputation for indiscipline.
Their worst excesses were committed when they reached the Delta districts where amid the Burmese there were villages of the Karen minority.
Treated with contempt by the old Burmese kings, the Karens had welcomed British rule and, probably more important, their best people had become Christians under the influence of the American Baptist missionaries.
When the Japanese invaded, most of the population showed indifference, or actively welcomed the invader.
The Karens in the army  fought them stoutly and the civil population passively resisted.
They now felt the retribution of the BIA, whose conduct was aggressive, often violent.
Aung San had given them an example in the early stages of the advance when he accorded summary trial to an Indo-Burmese or Muslim-Burmese headman who had assisted the British: Bo Aung San ran him through with a bayonet.
The Japanese High Command pulled out the BIA, sent Colonel Suzuki back to Japan, and finally disbanded his private army in July 1942.
One cause of friction was the discontent of BIA officers over the failure to implement promises of independence made publicly by General Iida of the Japanese army when the BIA first entered Tavoy in the south.
Aung San had planned to set up a government at Moulmein, but was put off.
Thakin Tun Ok was appointed head of a baho asoya or central administration for a brief while until the Japanese turned to Ba Maw, released from Mogok jail, who headed an ‘Independence preparatory Committee’.
He called in the veteran politician Ba Pe (his former rival) and also approached some Thakins.
In March 1943 Ba Maw paid an official visit to Tokyo accompanied by Aung San.
They were invested with Japanese decorations and Aung San was given the rank of Major-General.
To the Burmese he was Bogyoke , the historic term for general.
Burma's ‘Independence’(1943)
All this was in preparation for a proclamation by General Kawabe on 1 August 1943 declaring that Burma was independent, and was at war with Britain and the United States.
Ba Maw was named as Adipadi , Head of State, with a government which was a mixture of old and young politicians.
Aung San became Minister of Defence, Thakin Nu was Foreign Minister and Than Tun was Minister for Agriculture, while Thakin Mya (an older man) was named Deputy prime Minister.
The new government established relations with some countries under Axis control and actually sent an Ambassador to Japan.
In place of the BIA the Japanese now created a Burma National Amy (BNA), much smaller in number and under strict Japanese control.
Bo Ne Win was named as its commander.
Six infantry battalions were organised and a so-called Pom Pom battalion.
Discipline was much stricter than in the BIA and face-slapping by Japanese instructors was an everyday occurrence.
The best officer material was sent to Japan.
The BNA was dressed in Japanese uniform; they were required to salute the Japanese, but not vice versa.
The propaganda value of Japan's ‘gift of independence’ in the Greater  East Asia Co-prosperity Sphere was emphasised by a gathering of heads of puppet states in Tokyo in November 1943: besides Ba Maw there were the heads of Manchukuo, Thailand and the Philippines, with Subhas Bose as head of the Free India Government and the unknown ‘Prime Minister of China’recognised by Japan.
The politics of collaboration was not accepted without dissent.
Nu only joined the government belatedly and reluctantly; he confessed to ‘suddenly wake up to find ‘Made in Japan’ printed on his forehead.’
Thakin Soe never accepted the occupation and organised a resistance movement with virtually no support from the British.
Thakin Thein Pe made his way out to India where he received scant encouragement until he was taken up by the cloak-and-dagger organisation, Force 136, which was desperately trying to justify its mysterious and expensive existence.
Burmese agents were infiltrated into Rangoon and returned, reporting early in 1944 the emergence of an anti-Japanese or anti-Fascist movement.
Later that year Thein Pe told Force 136 that there were many ‘sympathisers’ and even some activists; he added ‘Thakin Nu is what I may call an active sympathiser.
He gave shelter to our party workers.’
He concluded, ‘Aung San is now brought back to party line.
He understands his past mistakes and means to amend them.
…After all, he is a true patriot.
…Yes, he is anxiously waiting for the word from us.’
The Japanese were increasingly suspicious of their Burmese supporters; they even organised the assassination of Ba Maw which however, misfired.
This year of 1944 saw the supreme Japanese effort to break the deadlock which had bogged down the Burma front.
A series of attacks were launched in March, with the main thrust into the Manipur plain.
Bose committed his INA to the attack with the slogan Chalo Delhi (‘Delhi here we come’).
The attack was broken; 50 000 Japanese troops died in the operation while the fighting spirit of the INA was destroyed.
The BNA was assigned duties in the rear areas.
Aung San observed the disaster with an appraising eye.
This was the turn-around in the fortunes of the war.
The Japanese Retreat (1945)
The forces under Mountbatten as Supreme Allied Commander were launched into Upper Burma and into Arakan.
After fierce fighting, Mandalay was captured (20 March 1945).
Aung San got through a message that he was ready to come over to the Allies while the Japanese understood that he would be fighting for them.
The rising was timed for 10 April, but because of the speed of the British advance was put forward to 27 March.
Instead of moving against the British they disappeared into  the jungle and their Bogyoke announced, ‘We are now at war’— at war with Japan.
Simultaneously, Than Tun — touring central Burma — went underground in his native Toungoo.
He was contacted by a mission from Force 136 who did not find him cooperative.
The most effective operations against the Japanese were launched by the Karens of the border hills who had never given up, awaiting the British return.
They virtually wiped out a Japanese division.
Before he departed, Aung San wrote a farewell letter to Ba Maw, ‘My dear Adipadigyi’.
Cryptically he said, ‘I shall be coming back to Rangoon and if conditions do not worsen so unexpectedly I hope to meet you again.’
He went on: The worst happened when British-Indian forces took over Rangoon on 3 May.
The Japanese army had pulled out on 23 April, taking Ba Maw along with them; Thakin Nu and his wife also went along.
Thakin Nu's journey ended near Moulmein, but Ba Maw pressed on and finally reached Tokyo where he went into hiding, eventually surrendering to the Allied occupation authorities.
Aung San Confronts the British
Meanwhile, the senior British military commanders were at cross-purposes over the treatment to be accorded to the BNA and the resistance identified as the AFO (Anti-Fascist Organisation).
Force 136 asked permission to arm the AFO.
The military advice given to Mountbatten was that they should not be armed, but he overruled this and gave his recognition to the AFO.
He had to tell London what he was doing, and this was not easy.
In the prevailing atmosphere, those who had collaborated with Japan were traitors.
Mountbatten thought otherwise: he was strongly under the influence of his Cambridge friend peter Murphy, a Communist, whom he had added to his staff.
He justified his policy to the Chiefs of Staff by arguing, ‘We shall be doing no more than what has been done in Italy…in turning people who were satellites…into co-belligerents.’
The Cabinet were much less happy about this, as were Mountbatten's own staff: however, General Slim, in command of 14th Army, showed more understanding, declaring (19 April): ‘Help already given by BNA has gone long way towards expiation of political crimes.’
The Civil Affairs Service, formed to provide a military administration and recruited mainly from British civil servants ejected from Burma, objected strongly to this policy.
So did the Governor, the ex-Cabinet Minister, Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith, when he heard what was happening.
Slim continued to support Mountbatten.
With the campaign against the Japanese army still raging he observed, ‘We have in Burma a potentially dangerous situation…not dissimilar to that which developed in Southern Ireland after the [last]war.’
Eventually, when Rangoon was won, Aung San crossed over to meet General Slim.
He claimed to represent a provisional Government of Burma whose president was Thakin Soe.
Slim informed him that ‘he and his amy have no legal status’.
This meeting took place just when the AFO was passing a series of resolutions which demanded the ‘right of self-determination…forthwith’ and the organisation of a national army.
Dorman-Smith cabled in alarm protesting against ‘even semblance of recognition’ for Aung San's claims.
Mountbatten tried to reassure him, but added, ‘I foresee having to fight a civil war against 10000 armed Burmese soldiers at a time when it is vital that my forces should be better employed.’
He inquired whether Dorman-Smith had ‘alternative sugges-tions’?
Just one day after the Slim — Aung San meeting, a Statement of policy was given to the House of Commons (issued as a White Paper).
This emphasised that after military government was terminated the civil Governor would return to function as sole authority until December 1948.
Thereafter, a general election would take place and the legislators would be invited to draw up a new constitution on Dominion lines.
Even then, the hill areas occupied by the frontier tribes would remain under ‘a special regime under the Governor’.
This uninviting prospect was offered to a people who, in name at any rate, had tasted independence.
Communist Leadership in National Movement
The AFO now called itself the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (AFPFL) and its general secretary and political spokesman was Thakin Than Tun.
He issued statements cast in tones of reason, doubtless to reassure the British.
If Mountbatten was worried about a possible rising, the AFPFL had cause to be worried about British repression.
Trained  members of the BNA numbered 7000 at most, and the forces under Mountbatten (not all in Burma, of course ) numbered one million.
A rising could be put down; even though the BNA might dissolve into guerrilla bands it could not hope to take over the country.
Than Tun continued to call for a national government but made it clear that armed struggle was, for the present, not envisaged.
The message was ‘cooperation’.
Aung San Protects his Burma National Army
During these months the main concern of Aung San was the future of his BNA: Mountbatten announced that all the men considered suitable would be enlisted in a newly-raised army on British lines.
The intention was to distribute the men of the BNA (now called patriot Burmese Forces: PBF) as individuals among the new battalions.
Those unfit would be demobilised.
Those against whom criminal offences were proved would be tried.
This programme held no appeal to Aung San who saw his army as his main weapon in the demand for independence.
Meeting after meeting was held at which he found reasons for further delay.
Meanwhile, the campaign in Burma was coming to an end with the virtual extermination of the Japanese forces trying to escape over the Sittang river.
Mountbatten now faced the precarious venture of a seaborne invasion of Malaya and Singapore, but just as this was launched came the news of the atomic bomb and the Japanese surrender.
Mountbatten's task was not simplified when General MacArthur saddled him with the additional responsibility of taking over Indonesia and Indo-China, previously within the American sphere.
Moreover, the new Labour government was anxious to speed up the demobilisation of British servicemen.
Mountbatten was heavily dependent on the formations of the Indian Army under his command; he had no wish for a trial of strength with Aung San.
With the Japanese surrender, Dorman-Smith pressed the new Labour Government for the return of civil administration to Burma.
He issued an ultimatum: unless there was an early return, he would resign.
The Burmese also were quick to realise that a new situation had emerged.
Than Tun stepped up the propaganda campaign to end military government.
A mass conference was convened to formulate demands and some 5000 or 6000 attended.
Shops in Rangoon were closed.
it was a symbol of the new mood in the country that ordinary people wanted to participate in politics whereas in the past protest had been expressed through local guerrilla risings and religious demonstrations.
The mass rally now became a powerful expression of national feeling.
What became  known as the Naythuyein Mass Meeting heard Aung San speak about the Burmese contribution to the Allied cause; he saw Labour's victory as a sign that imperialism was on the way out and he affirmed that ‘99 per cent of the PBF would be unwilling to serve in the fighting forces of a country that was not free’.
Hesitant when speaking in English, Aung San was eloquent, even verbose, in Burmese.
Than Tun followed, presenting a manifesto, ‘World Peace and Free Burma’, in which he proposed the immediate establishment of a Provisional Government.
The contribution of these two speakers was significant: Aung San supplied the inspiration, Than Tun produced a programme.
Which was to prove more important?
Trying to sort out the problems posed by Dorman-Smith and the BNA, Mountbatten arranged a high-level meeting at Kandy, attended by the British military top brass and Aung San, Than Tun and other representatives of the former BNA and the AFPFL.
At a preliminary meeting of the British commanders Slim bluntly observed that ‘the root of the trouble lay in the fact that the Burmese distrusted us’.
However, it seemed as though agreement had been reached when Aung San and Than Tun signed the so-called Kandy Agreement on 7 September, whereby the BNA/PBF would be embodied in the regular army as separate units under their own officers.
The new Burma Army would have a British Inspector-General and two Deputies, one from the PBF and one from the ethnic minorities who had made such an important contribution to harassing the Japanese.
Mountbatten tried to tempt Bogyoke with the post of Deputy Inspector-General and the British rank of Brigadier: he was too shrewd to be side-tracked in that way.
He was not ambitious for British rank.
Dorman-Smith also came to Kandy (though he refused to meet the BNA and AFPFL leaders).
Somewhat reluctantly Mountbatten agreed to hand over the administration in Burma the following month.
When Attlee was consulted he wrote, ‘There is an obvious risk in moving so fast’, but he acquiesced.
The Civil Governor Resists the New Nationalists
On his return to Rangoon in mid-October, Dorman-Smith announced that he would go further than the 17 May statement: he would appoint an advisory council.
He invited the AFPFL to submit names, but when they demanded the right to nominate a bloc of their own people to the council he rejected their terms and chose his own council from among superannuated pre-war politicians.
Later he was able to bring in the malcontent Thakin, Tun Ok.
The Governor conducted negotiations with AFPFL through intermediaries.
This was typical of his aloof, olympian  style.
The main go-between was U Tin Tut, the senior Burmese member of the ICS.
He was trusted by Dorman-Smith and increasingly he won the confidence of Aung San.
However, he could not bring the two sides together.
Dorman-Smith was advised by his private Secretary and others that AFPFL was going to split into factions.
This was not totally without justification: there were signs of tension between Aung San and Than Tun supported by the Communists.
A decision which was to affect future events in Burma was now concluded in New Delhi.
British Indian forces had been despatched to Java as part of Mountbatten's directive to disarm the Japanese and rescue allied prisoners of war.
As we shall find, they became embroiled in the nationalist struggle.
Mountbatten, Wavell, and Auchinleck as the Commander-in-Chief India were deeply concerned about the effect this would have on Indian national feeling.
At an Inter-Command conference it was decided that if a similar situation emerged in Burma the Governor should be warned that Indian troops would not be available to quell a national rising.
Mountbatten hoped this would stimulate a sense of urgency from Dorman-Smith, but he was not stirred.
Even a danger that spelled immediate trouble was allowed to simmer.
Aung San's action in bayoneting a headman in 1942 now became known.
The Governor referred the question to the Cabinet, who advised that if there were ‘a strong prima facie case…proceedings would have to be instituted’.
Having obtained this ruling the Governor did nothing.
He seems to have supposed things were quietening down: ‘Aung San is a tired and deflated little man’, he told London.
Mass Mobilisation
However, the AFPFL was far from inactive.
In mid-November another mass meeting reaffirmed the Naythuyein resolutions and called for the dissolution of the recently formed Governor's Council.
An All-Burma Congress of the AFPFL was held in the precincts of the great Shwe Dagon pagoda, 17 — 23 January.
According to Than Tun there were 100000 present at the open sessions, while even the Governor's Secretary admitted that numbers were ‘some 20 — 30000’.
This was quite an achievement for an organisation only a few months old.
The keynote speech was delivered by Aung San, who accused the Governor of economic Fascism: ‘the Governor is the dictator of Burma.’
Besides mobilising thousands in mass rallies, thus involving the common people as Gandhi had done in India in 1921 and 1931 and somewhat chaotically in 1942 (but not in the final tussle for power) Aung  San also constructed a power base in the people's Volunteer Organisation or PVO (in Burmese,Pyithu Yebaw Tat ).
Some 5000 former members of the BNA were now enlisted in the regular army, but this left thousands more outside, restless and discontented.
They were given uniforms; there was a rudimentary organisation; they practised drilling and, in secrecy, weapons training.
Early in 1946 there were over 150 units or rats with nearly 6500 members.
The Code, or Rules of Conduct, commanded that ‘Duties…shall be faithfully and strictly carried out with an iron will, ready to meet death.’
During these months, Thakin Nu withdrew from active politics and retired to a little town (or large village) in the Delta, Moulmeingyun, where he was writing-a book called What is Marxism ?
He did make a visit to Rangoon, either in December 1945 or January 1946, when he called on the Governor who noted on a draft ‘Nu snubbed’.
He also brought together Aung San and Than Tun, for he was worried about the obvious rift between them.
Although married to sisters (the daughters of a Christian), the two men were temperamentally quite different.
Than Tun — often called the ‘brains’ of the League — was methodical, well-organised, even-tempered and versed in international Marxism.
Aung San was moody, given to long silences and sudden outbursts, eloquent in rhetoric, impetuous, erratic: and a hero to the people.
The two were actually complementary in what they had to offer, but increasingly differences emerged.
Nu's efforts to bring the two men together were only partially successful.
The position of Thakin Soe, who had the longest record of underground resistance, was even more unclear.
Supposedly he was in disgrace for an affair with a female student (the AFPFL, and particularly the Communists, were strictly puritanical) but he was preaching a stiffer line against the British than any of the others.
Finally, in March 1946, Soe's group broke away to form the ‘Red Flags’(as they were called), while Than Tun's following were known as the ‘White Flags’.
Aung San Accused of Murder
A potentially explosive element was introduced when Thakin Tun Ok publicly accused Aung San of the headman's murder, and his widow petitioned the Governor for justice.
Belatedly, Dorman-Smith sought London's permission to prosecute, and at first Attlee — in charge of the affairs of Burma while Pethick-Lawrence was in India with the Cabinet Mission — agreed that the law must take its course.
However, when Pethick-Lawrence was informed he objected: a prosecution might  prejudice their discussions with Indian leaders.
Dorman-Smith was ordered to hold back.
There followed a frantic exchange of telegrams between Rangoon and Whitehall in which the Governor offered various solutions to the prevailing deadlock, finally coming up with the unexpected suggestion that a new coalition ministry was possible with Paw Tun, the last premier of Burma before the invasion; U Saw, his predecessor as premier, an unscrupulous schemer who had been interned for dealing with the Japanese; and Aung San, previously portrayed by Dorman-Smith as a murderer and an enemy.
Confusion Over the Murder Charge
Now he wanted to promote this triple alliance: he told Attlee, ‘The iron appears to me to be hot.
With what force do you think I should strike?’
This was the last straw for Attlee.
Dorman-Smith's erratic behaviour had exasperated him already.
On 7 May 1946 he cabled Pethick-Lawrence: ‘It is obvious he has lost [his]grip.
He changes his position from day to day.
I am convinced he must be replaced.’
The Governor was instructed to return.
The AFPFL renewed their demand at a meeting of the Supreme Council of the League, 16 — 23 May.
They condemned the Governor's ‘unrepresentative, powerless Executive Council’; they demanded a real national government; and in case of the demand not being met, they signalled a ‘freedom struggle’ and empowered the Supreme Council to take all necessary actions.
As before, Dorman-Smith belittled the demands of Aung San; a ‘definitely puzzled man’ he was called.
However, the next move indicated that the political temperature was rising fast.
The Governor Defied, and Replaced
The PVO increased its show of strength, choosing as a special focus the little town of Tantabin, 40 miles from Rangoon, where the first BNA action against the Japanese had been staged in 1945.
There were parades on 13, 14 and 15 May 1946.
Dummy rifles were carried.
On 18 May a procession of 1000 to 1500 persons marched in defiance, beating drums and carrying flags.
The police and the Burmese magistrate in charge ordered them to disperse, and then fired, killing three and wounding others.
Afterwards 81 were arrested.
Dorman-Smith, yielding to Aung San's personal intervention on 23 May, ordered release of the detainees: this was against the advice of his Chief Secretary.
Subsequently Dorman-Smith agreed that the ring-leaders, 50 in number,should be prosecuted.
All this reinforced Attlee's determination to get a new governor installed as soon as possible.
The arrival of Sir Henry Knight, a senior member of the ICS, not a political appointment, created an internal for reassessment.
It was known that his was a temporary posting.
At first it was conjectured that Dorman-Smith had gone to London to obtain a new policy, but on 5 August it was announced that he had resigned ‘for health reasons’ and was to be succeeded by Major-General Sir Hubert Rance, whom Mountbatten had appointed in May 1945 to head his military administration after he fell out with the Civil Affairs officers who wanted to get rid of Aung San.
During his brief period as Governor, Knight did his best to boost the sagging morale of the civil service, and also to improve the flow of imports.
He found an ingenious legal device to eliminate the possibility of Aung San facing prosecution, thus clearing the way for his being invited to join the Executive Council.
More controversially he outlawed Thakin Soe's Communist party because of its armed threat to government as well as to rice production in the Delta districts.
Thakin Thein Pe exerted himself to bring the two Communist parties together again, on the grounds that both ‘Had a common object…in contesting British imperialism’.
Knight asked Aung San to meet him on 9 August; he looked ‘very thin'.
He told the Governor that ‘Rance must come out with a new policy, with proposals that go beyond the White paper [of May 1945].
…If not, it is no use his coming.’
Knight passed this on to London, but in actuality when the Cabinet approved a ‘Line of policy for Sir H. Rance’ this began by stating the objective as: ‘To secure within the scope of the White paper of 1945 and the Act of 1935 an Executive Council more representative and broader based’.
He was told not to promise any date for attainment of Dominion status: ‘There is no advantage in fixing paper dates’, and he was even told not to use the term Dominion status and on no account to make any reference to independence.
Armed with these unpromising instructions he arrived and assumed his post on 31 August 1946.
Aung San Outfaces the Communists
During the last days of Knight's governorship there was a significant change within the central management of the AFPFL.
As General Secretary, Than Tun had held an important policy-making role.
Now the Supreme Council of the League elected a new General Secretary, the moderate Socialist Kyaw Nyein.
He received 52 votes while the Communist candidate, Thein pe, got only 33 votes.
Aung San was consolidating his overall position.
The New Governor Walks into a Crisis
In his first speech Rance acknowledged, ‘I have not returned to Burma prepared to announce epoch-making changes.’
Changes were on the way; but not because the British government or the Governor initiated them, Dorman-Smith and Knight had managed to stone-wall for almost a year; largely because Bogyoke was occupied in building up his power base.
Now that he was secure he could begin to take action.
However, crisis was precipitated by an event outside the AFPFL.
On 5 September the Rangoon police went on strike, demanding better pay.
Their grievances were genuine: Knight had negotiated a temporary settlement but now their union called them out.
Rance quickly decided that the Executive Council he had inherited from Dorman-Smith was useless while most of the senior British officials seemed to lack any ideas.
As regards the political solution, Rance told Pethick-Lawrence, ‘I'm playing a lone hand here.’
Rance sought an early meeting with Aung San, but he replied that he was sick with dysentery.
Seeking to interpret the political aspect of the strike, Rance concluded that the veteran Ba pe was manipulating the policy: ‘I suspect he is Aung San's evil genius.’
Was this illness real, or assumed in order to gain time?
When Rance gave an interview to U Saw, the former premier, on 12 September he told the Governor that he did not consider Aung San ‘a strong character, as initially he was controlled by Than Tun and now he was in the pocket of U Ba Pe’.
Regarding his illness, Saw commented ‘that this conformed to his idea of Aung San's character…[he will]always be sick when anything big is on hand’.
Future events were to disprove U Saw's analysis.
Rance was convinced that a change of policy was necessary: he told Pethick-Lawrence, ‘we are in one big morass here which has to be cleared,.
London agreed that he should offer AFPFL improved terms of entry into the Council.
This was against the threat of the strike spreading throughout the public services.
Perhaps this prospect also worried Aung San.
At any rate he wrote to Rance (17 September): ‘I am worried about the whole situation deteriorating throughout the country.
…Here I am, helpless in bed, and I must remain quiet, God alone knows how long.
I feel I must meet you instantly.’
Rather quaintly, the Governor observed that it was ‘strange’ for a Buddhist, ‘although not perhaps a practising one’, to invoke the name of God; he concluded that Aung San's wife, Khin Kyi, with her Christian upbringing inspired this: Rance went to their house at nightfall under conditions of secrecy.
Rance tried to convince Aung San of British goodwill but he replied that when Dorman-Smith had first returned ‘there  was more goodwill being shown by Burmese to the British than ever before’.
He alleged that Dorman-Smith had repelled them: ‘down came the iron curtain'.
Concerning the current strike he declared ‘AFPFL originally had nothing to do with it but now they were backing it and he was finding difficulty in restraining some of his party from adding fuel to the fire.’
Thakin Soe was ‘very active and the country might well swing in that direction’.
Rance departed feeling ‘more hopeful’.
Aung San's combination of terms for possible cooperation with hints of possible insurrection was shrewdly devised.
While the Governor felt his way towards a political solution, military intelligence feared ‘open rebellion’.
In view of the embargo on the employment of Indian troops to suppress Burmese nationalism, the Acting Supreme Commander South-East Asia informed the Chiefs of Staff that substantial British reinforcements must be despatched from Malaya, weakening the position in that territory whose rubber was much more important to Britain than Burma's rice: and incidentally delaying the troops' repatriation and demobilisation, a politically sensitive issue.
As an unwanted distraction, an attempt was made to assassinate U Saw on 21 September: he was not killed, but his sight was badly impaired.
Ba pe blamed ‘Those damned Communists’, but Saw firmly believed that Aung San was responsible and stored up a grudge against him.
Aung San Assumes Lead in New Council
Rance reached agreement with Bogyoke on the composition of a new Executive Council.
The AFPFL did not get things all their way: they had to accept six seats on the new Council (no better than Dorman-Smith had offered the previous year).
However, Aung San obtained the Defence portfolio (previously supervised by the Governor) and was Deputy Chairman of the Council: exactly as Nehru had just become in Wavell's Council.
This was vitally important to the Burmese who attached the utmost importance to keeping up with India in constitutional advances.
Like Congress in India the AFPFL secured the key Home ministry.
Besides the six AFPFL members, U Saw was given a minor post.
Thakin Ba Sein, the first leader of Do-Bama Asi-Ayone , who had fallen out with the younger Thakins and formed a rival party, came in.
Most important was the inclusion of U Tin Tut, no longer in the ICS, who was given the vital Finance ministry.
He was regarded as an independent, but increasingly he became Aung San's adviser, supplying the inside knowledge of British forms of government and administration which Bogyoke lacked.
Among the AFPFL nominees was just one Communist: Thakin Thein Pe.
This reflected the changed balance of power.
The first task was to deal with the strikers, and Aung San achieved this at considerable cost.
When the settlement was negotiated the Communists attempted to prolong the strike, but with limited success.
Rance noted, ‘There is no doubt Communists are out to embarrass AFPFL as much as possible’(21 October).
The AFPFL members of the Council therefore came up with an announcement intended for public consumption as much as for adoption by the Council.
This laid down a future programme in which, among the many proposals, they called for Burma's recognition within the family of nations and admission to the UN, and finally ‘the establishment of a sovereign state in the very near future’.
Should these objectives not be realised ‘we shall not hesitate to resign’.
Break With the Communists
At a conference of the Supreme Council of AFPFL commencing on 1 November, Aung San made the inaugural speech.
His main target was again British imperialism, and he compared Burma with India where a ‘Divide and Rule’ policy had ‘estranged’Hindus and Muslims.
Burma was ‘in a politically stronger position’ though ‘in bad shape, economically and financially’.
At this meeting the differences between the Council-entry portion of AFPFL and the Communists at last reached breaking-point.
The Communist attack was led by Thakin Chit, formerly of Do-Bama , who taunted Aung San's following as the ‘Dominion Status AFPFL’.
Trades union leaders supported the Communists and Thein Pe made what was called ‘a humorous speech’: he commended Aung San ‘to the care of worthy guardian angels like Thakin Nu, Thakin Kyaw Nyein and U Ba pe’.
It would appear that this advice was sarcastic.
Than Tun wound up; ‘He solemnly stated that the time for parting of the ways had verily come.’
When he had finished the Communists walked out, and were then expelled by unanimous decision.
In the enormously long statement which followed the Communists were branded as ‘Vipers in the bosom’.
The AFPFL were left to prove that they had not sold out.
Demand for Independence within One Year
In a memorandum drafted by Tin Tut detailed demands were advanced: in effect that Burma's political advance would be in step with that in India.
Rance urged the Cabinet to accept the need for a new policy but the unhelpful response was ‘do your best to put the brakes on’.
The AFPFL  raised their demands in a statement made public on 13 November: the British Government must announce before 31 January 1947 that Burma would be free within one year.
Because the Cabinet still hesitated, the AFPFL insisted on further concessions: the next election must choose a Constituent Assembly ‘for the whole of Burma’.
Under the 1935 Act the hill areas were excluded from the political process.
Rance told London that the ‘Time for equivocation is past.
In my opinion HMG must now be prepared to be definite or accept the consequences.’
These consequences were spelled out by Field Marshal Montgomery to the Cabinet: ‘The situation might require up to two [British]Divisions.
These did not now exist.’
Reluctantly the Cabinet acquiesced.
They had just experienced the utterly fruitless meeting with Nehru and Jinnah: it was not a good moment to turn down the Burmese.
Rance's proposal to ask an AFPFL delegation to come to London for discussions was accepted, and Attlee informed parliament that they would ‘hasten forward the time when Burma shall realise her independence’.
The policy enunciated as recently as August 1946 was now scrapped in December.
Nu's Political Comeback
While these momentous changes were happening, Thakin Nu was installed as Vice-President and Treasurer of the AFPFL.
Aung San overcame his plea that he just wanted to go on writing and brought him to Rangoon.
Nu regretted the break with the Communists, but accepted that it was inevitable.
He later claimed that he initiated the demand for independence within one year: he asserted that he saw the Governor who promised to pass on his message to London.
But Rance sent no such report.
What does seem clear is that Nu was one of the hardliners: he was suspicious of the British Government's intentions, particularly with regard to keeping the Frontier Areas apart on ‘Divide and Rule’ lines.
When the delegation for London was selected, Aung San was automatically leader.
Tin Tut went along as his adviser and draftsman.
Besides the AFPFL delegates (who also included old Ba Pe and Thakin Mya, Home Member) there were two from other parties: U Saw and Ba Sein.
Presumably Rance wanted to emphasise the ‘All-Party’ nature of the group.
Kyaw Nyein went along as an Adviser, and Rance also wanted Thakin Nu to go: he was, he told London, ‘The most important member of AFPFL Working Committee excluding Aung San’(29 December), but he remained behind to give direction to the League while the others were in London.
If the discussions did not go well it would be his responsibility to organise ‘mass struggles and freedom fights’.
Aung San travelled separately from the others, stopping over in Delhi to confer with Nehru who warned him to examine the British proposal ‘with particular care…and not to be caught by it as I was’.
The Bogyoke had lunch with Lord Wavell who recognised him as ‘a strong character’ but also warned Pethick-Lawrence that their negotiations would be difficult: ‘He struck me as a suspicious, ignorant but determined little tough.’
While in India Aung San gave a press conference where he snapped out that he was ‘Hoping for the best but prepared for the worst’.
Negotiations in London (January 1947)
Among those Cabinet Ministers entrusted with the discussions the view was expressed that in talking to the Burmese they would not encounter ‘the purely ‘Bazaar approach’.
The more frankly we could discuss with them the better.’
They were still bruised from the Nehru — Jinnah encounter!
The talks lasted from 13 — 27 January 1947, with ten formal meetings and a lavish exchange of memoranda.
A mood of trust began to emerge, and an agreed formula began to evolve, although the concessions were mainly from the British.
A sticking-point seemed to be the Burmese demand for the Frontier areas to be brought into the constitutional process.
Attlee and his colleagues clung to the established view that the Frontier peoples were a special British responsibility which could not be abandoned.
Eventually agreement was reached that a Committee of Enquiry composed equally of AFPFL members and representatives of the hill peoples would ascertain their true wishes.
Cripps drafted the agreement with his customary dexterity in skating round tricky comers, and they all met to finalise the agreement on Sunday evening, 26 January.
At the beginning, Aung San sprang a surprise: they wanted the British to sign, while they waited until they returned to Burma to signify their agreement.
However, this was too much for Attlee and Cripps: they flatly declared, ‘Unless agreed conclusions were reached there was no point in negotiating.’
The startled Burmese team withdrew, and returned saying they would endeavour to join in agreed conclusions.
A last-minute hiccup remained; U Saw and Ba Sein announced that they could not sign, but Aung San brushed this aside: ‘Let them resign and say they do not agree with the final statement and do not accept any responsibility for it.’
Next day the agreement was signed by Attlee and Aung San and the delegation departed: apart from the two dissidents they were well satisfied.
Meanwhile, Burma waited uneasily.
Nu had told Kyaw Nyein to send  him a one-word message when the end was reached: ‘Orange’ would mean success, ‘Lemon’would indicate the failure of the talks; but there were neither oranges nor lemons.
In Rangoon Nu announced: ‘AFPFL is not calling for a general strike among workers at the present time.
But should the fight start there will be country-wide strikes involving all classes of workers.’
The Red Flag Communists did not threaten: they acted.
On 13 January a mob stormed the Secretariat, the headquarters of the administration.
The police responded with their lathis , iron-bound staves, and the Communists were arrested and expelled.
Nu commented, ‘The public got fed up with Communists’ rowdyism.…press and public do not take the incident seriously'; however, five days later all public services in Rangoon came to a standstill at AFPFL behest and most shops and bazaars were closed.
Clearly, Nu was barely in control.
On 21 January the Communists numbering up to 3000 made another assault on the Secretariat and were again repulsed.
The reply by the AFPFL members of Council was to demand that the Red Flags should be banned.
Rance remained uneasy.
Despite their differences it seemed likely that if no result was reported by 31 January the AFPFL and Communists would both revolt.
Before news of the agreement could be circulated a rebellion did start in three districts: Myaungmya, Magwe and Tavoy.
AFPFL envoys were hastily flown to these places to persuade them to stop.
Chaos had been averted, though strikes in the public services sputtered on.
Leaders of the Hill Peoples Accommodated
Aung San's return did much to calm the situation.
He claimed that AFPFL demands had been conceded in full.
The tide was flowing strongly his way.
His next triumph was to secure agreement from important Frontier leaders to an agreed constitutional solution.
The hill peoples were sending their representatives to a gathering at Panglong in the Shan States.
Aung San suspected that this meeting would be ‘fixed’ by the British to prolong the status quo.
Nu said openly that, ‘although the London agreement looked very well on paper he strongly suspected that HMG had first of all made sure that the frontier peoples would not agree to any form of union with Burma’.
However,Bogyoke went up to Panglong and discovered that the more shrewd and realistic Frontier leaders had grasped that a new political situation was emerging.
The Shans and Kachins claimed their own states within a Union of Burma: this was accepted.
The Chins were content to receive a ‘Special Division’.
Only the Karens remained outside this atmosphere of unity.
Along with the Frontier leaders, Aung San signed a special Panglong Agreement on 14 February.
The hill peoples would be associated with the constitutional process.
Resounding Election Victory
The time for the general election was approaching.
With Aung San riding high the AFPFL had almost no opposition.
The White Flag Communists contested 13 of the 91 general constituencies (each returning two Mps) and won in three of them.
No other party risked ignominious defeat.
The 176 AFPFL MPs included every important figure, save one.
Thirty MPs prefixed their names with Bo , indicating that they had been in the BNA and were now active in the PVO.
With support from the MPs chosen from the Frontier areas AFPFL was unassailable.
Thakin Nu was the one prominent leader to stay out of the Assembly.
He flatly rejected the pleas of Aung San to stand for election.
One who did put up was Ba Pe, but Aung San was nauseated by his persisting with the corrupt practices which had disfigured pre-war parliamentary politics: and anyway his usefulness was exhausted.
Ba pe was sacked from the Cabinet early in May: Aung San told the public that his Ministers ‘enjoyed an untarnished reputation for incorruptibility and honesty of purpose [and]should not be made to suffer on account of anyone who strayed from the path’.
Soon after, Ba pe resigned from the Assembly.
Aung San's Lifestyle
The Bogyoke certainly lived up to his words.
A Reuter correspondent wrote of meeting him:
There was much to do.
He informed Attlee (13 May) that independence must be attained ‘early in 1948’(Attlee had already announced that  Britain was leaving India before June 1948).
The next move was to bring forward the draft of the new constitution: the first that the Secretary of State knew of this was when he read a report in The Times (20 May) headed ‘A Republic of Burma’.
The draft was unveiled to a Convention of the AFPFL members of the new Assembly in Jubilee Hall, 20 — 23 May.
The first clause proclaimed that Burma would be ‘an independent sovereign republic’.
This put paid to British hopes that Burma would stay in the Commonwealth as a Dominion owing allegiance to the Crown.
Winding up the Convention,Bogyoke claimed that they were framing ‘a new type of democratic government that best suited the Burmese’; it was largely drawn from Yugoslavia.
He admitted ‘time alone would prove whether or not the form chosen was the best’.
He was working for unity among all the peoples of their country and he hoped this would lead to ‘the complete unity of all South East Asia countries’.
All this was news to Rance, for although Burma was not formally independent he had been excluded from decision making since the Attlee — Aung San Agreement had transferred virtually all power to the Council, functioning as a Cabinet.
The British had never envisaged such a rapid build-up to this situation: India's constitution was not finalised until 1950, while Pakistan had to wait until 1956 for its soon-overthrown constitution!
Nu becomes President of Constituent Assembly
At this juncture, the MP for Mergui was travelling to his distant constituency when he was drowned at sea.
Aung San renewed his appeal to Nu to come in.
He asked for time to consider, but this was brushed aside and Nu, willy-nilly, became MP for Mergui, a place he had never previously visited.
It was natural that he should be President of the Constituent Assembly when it met.
First, however, he was chosen to lead another mission to London.
The Burmese had appeared content with the constitutional timetable until Mountbatten's announcement that India and Pakistan would become independent — as Dominions — in mid-August.
They had always attached importance to keeping level with India, and now they renewed the pressure, It was explained that the Dominion status option was open to them, with the same timetable as India; but if they became a republic this would require more contentious legislation and the negotiation of an Anglo-Burmese Treaty.
Nu's task in London was somehow to keep the republic, while securing constitutional concessions.
He found Attlee and his colleagues friendly, but unyielding.
Nu advanced the ingenious  suggestion that instead of the existing Commonwealth structure there should be a federation of Socialist states.
Attlee dismissed the suggestion as neither ‘desirable or feasible’.
All Nu could secure was agreement that the ‘Interim Government’ of Burma would be called the ‘provisional Government’and the Members of the Executive Council would be Ministers, and their chief recognised as Prime Minister.
With these cosmetic concessions he returned.
Almost immediately he confronted the biggest crisis of his political life.
Aung San Assassinated: Nu becomes Premier
On 19 July, gunmen burst into the Council chamber where Aung San was holding a cabinet meeting.
Aung San, his deputy Prime Minister, Thakin Mya, and five other Ministers were murdered.
One of the gunmen had been instructed to kill Thakin Nu, who was elsewhere, but he could not bring himself to slay this man known for his religious piety.
The Cabinet already suspected that U Saw was planning some act of retaliation (he resigned on returning from London and did not attempt to contest the election).
Arrested the same day, Saw was found to have concealed large stocks of arms and ammunition in sealed containers in the lake near his house.
It emerged that these had been supplied from British army depots on indents supposedly from the police.
Certain British officers had been friendly with Saw, while Military Intelligence had been indicating since May that Saw was planning to seize power.
All this encouraged many Burmese to believe that British interests were behind the assassinations.
Fortunately the Governor seized the initiative and the same day called on Nu to take over as prime Minister.
Nu built his team around the nucleus of surviving Ministers.
Bo Let Ya became his Deputy, responsible for Defence, Kyaw Nyein became Home Minister and Tin Tut took on Finance; this appointment, Rance commented, ‘is certainly speeding things up’.
Nu made his first priority his public insistence of confidence in the Governor and the British Government.
He pressed on with measures to stiffen national security by recruiting ten battalions of auxiliary armed police (many from the PVO).
An early decision was a Defence Agreement with the United Kingdom (29 August) whereby a British military mission would help to train and equip the armed forces: no other foreign power would provide military assistance.
Nu returned to his old idea that a reconciliation with Than Tun and the White Flags could be arranged: it did not work.
Another major concern was the continuing  estrangement of the leaders of the Karens.
Early in September the Secretary of State (now Lord Listowel) paid a brief visit With the dual object of tidying up loose threads in Britain's future relationship with Burma while also endeavouring to mediate between the AFPFL government and the Karens, who still attached great importance to the British connection.
Despite conciliatory moves by Thakin Nu, and earnest pleas from Listowel, the Karens could not even be brought to agree among themselves.
The Constituent Assembly now finalised the provisions of the Constitution, enacted on 24 September.
In his speech proposing its adoption, Nu declared that the regime would be leftist, but he warned against the people expecting that a new millennium would dawn on the morrow.
Though he claimed all the peoples of Burma were now united he admitted that this unity ‘is only in the initial stages…tender and fragile’.
Nu Signs Independence Treaty
Accompanied by a delegation of his Cabinet colleagues, Nu arrived in London on 15 October for a treaty ceremony to ratify the end of British rule.
Much still remained to be settled, but the treaty was signed at 10 Downing Street on 17 October by Attlee and Nu for the two countries, Article 1 read: ‘The Government of the United Kingdom recognises the Republic of the Union of Burma as a fully independent State.’
The necessary legislation went through Parliament in November, despite Churchill summoning the Conservatives to oppose the Bill.
Independence Day was fixed for 4 January 1948.
Thakin Nu made yet another attempt to bring the White Flag Communists back into the AFPFL.
This was repulsed, though Than Tun claimed that they desired unity which was the wish of the masses: ‘The Rightists of the AFPFL submitted to the Imperialists in the Nu — Attlee Treaty, now also they are doing the same in discarding the Communist Party.’
He concluded by claiming that the Communists ‘have adhered to our principles of AFPFL’.
Post-Independence Dangers
A further danger threatened.
A large part of the PVO inclined towards the Communists.
An attempt was made to accommodate them by founding a Marxist League, of Socialists and PVO.
It was against this uneasy background that independence was celebrated in a brief euphoria  which all too soon evaporated.
Nu had indicated his intention to retire from office six months after independence, but events made that impossible.
At the end of March, Than Tun made a defiant speech in Rangoon's Bandoola Square and then vanished, setting up an underground resistance based on Toungoo.
Soe was already in revolt in the Delta.
Nu replied by promoting yet another Leftist unity programme, There was no response; instead a major part of the PVO went underground while all the former BNA battalions of the army except that commanded by Ne Win mutinied and joined the rebels.
Nu was still supported by the minorities, including the efficient units of the Karen, Kachin and Chin Rifles.
Amid all this turmoil, Nu followed Gandhi in announcing to his wife that henceforth he would live in celibacy (like the Mahatma, he waited until after they had five children).
From now on he slept in a hut behind their house.
He tells us in his autobiography that this decision produced a breakdown in his wife's health, but it was all part of his efforts to become a pure Buddhist leader and hence bring benefit to burma.
Among the disasters of 1948, Tin Tut was assassinated in September.
Inevitably the Communists were blamed, but it was whispered that the order was given by a prominent member of the government.
The PVO rebels went back to their old game of harassing the Karens who had been restless ever since their claims to a separate state on ambitious lines had failed.
They now had a Karen National Defence Organisation (KNDO) which was armed.
At Christmas 1948 the situation exploded with the KNDO fighting the PVO, and then units of the Karen Rifles fighting the ex-BNA units of the Burma Rifles.
The Delta towns, and even Rangoon, came under threat.
The civil service unions chose this moment to strike for better pay.
In March 1949, Nu toured Upper Burma to try to calm the panicky officials.
In his absence, the Socialists gave him an ultimatum: he should hand over to the Communists.
Nu refused; and the Socialists, led by Kyaw Nyein, resigned.
Nu reconstituted his Cabinet, bringing in General Ne Win as Minister of Defence.
Slowly, the situation improved.
Mandalay, the rebels' biggest prize, was recaptured in April.
By November the initiative had passed to Nu's government, and the next two years saw the rebellion reduced to the scale of Jungle resistance.
Those who had deserted Nu (who in 1950 discarded the prefix Thakin and was called U Nu) now thought again: as Nu wrote later: ‘Only when the tide turned did the opportunists return to the government's side.’
Nu Wins Through
There followed a few years when the situation looked bright.
Nu launched his Pyidawtha , or Welfare State; he also sought to inspire his people through Buddhism.
In 1951 the World Peace Pagoda was built, and in 1954 the Sixth Great InternatIonal Council of Buddhist monks and learned laity was opened (the fifth had been at Mandalay in 1871 under the patronage of King Mindon).
The Council closed in May 1956, the 2500th anniversary of the Buddha's decease.
All seemed set fair.
Then in 1958 a split opened in the ruling AFPFL.
The background was another move by Nu to withdraw from politics.
This set the various factions manoeuvring, while Ne Win also came in.
There were two AFPFLs: the group led by Nu was labelled the ‘Clean AFPFL’; that led by Kyaw Nyein was called the ‘Stable AFPFL’(presumably emphasising continuity).
Rumours of a military coup were rife (1958 was the year of General De Gaulle, General Ayub Khan in Pakistan, and other military takeovers).
Nu decided to pre-empt any coup by offering to propose to parliament that Ne Win should take over as Prime Minister.
Ne Win governed for two years, and then staged another election.
He calculated that the ‘Stable AFPFL’ would win, with support from the army.
Instead, Nu scored a landslide victory, winning 159 seats to the 41 the Stable group secured.
He renamed his party Pyidaungsu , emphasising its attachment to the soil.
His campaign was marked by an insistence that the people,Ludu , formed the nation (he wrote a play called The People Win Through).
He categorised the politicians who would deceive the people under the label ‘Mr Zero’.
Nu had given some delicate promises in his campaign.
He undertook to make Buddhism the state religion (Aung San had thrown out any reference to Buddhism in the 1947 constitution), and he promised to create two new ethnic states, one for Arakan, and one for the Mons of Tenasserim.
It was this which led to his downfall.
Nu Ousted
A conference on constitutional reform opened on 1 March 1962.
At 2 a.m. next morning he was awakened by noise in the compound.
A squad of soldiers had arrived to arrest him.
Along with all the other leading politicians (including Kyaw Nyein and the Socialists) and the leaders of the ethnic minorities he was interned.
This time General Ne Win was getting rid of the 1947 constitution and with it the AFPFL and both groups of leaders.
He formed his own party,Lanzin , to promote ‘The Burmese Way to Socialism’.
Nu was incarcerated for more than four years.
He was then released, on condition he went into exile.
At first he was associated with a motley collection of opposition leaders who tried from Thailand to organise a new resistance movement (the Communists and the Karens were still in the field: Than Tun was gunned down in 1968).
Then Nu went to India to the Buddhist centre, Bodh-Gaya, near Patna.
His Buddhist piety led representatives of the thousands of Untouchables who had embraced Buddhism to invite him to be their leader.
He declined.
He was still writing.
He published an autobiography in 1975: he chose to portray himself as a rapscallion (internal evidence suggests that it had been written in jail).
Some passages in Saturday's Son verge on the gross, as when he speaks of his own denunciation of Soviet Communism: ‘Mother-fornicating Russians.
…Stalin comes nowhere near General Aung San, even when the latter is baring his penis and pulling the foreskin back.’
Nu's Buddhist Apotheosis
This was one U Nu, but not the deeper man, who had searched for so many years for enlightenment.
In 1980, Ne Win released all political prisoners and invited those like Nu who had been in exile to return.
Nu was no longer concerned with politics; he devoted himself entirely to Buddhism.
He did not retire into a monastery but lived in Rangoon as a layman, under constant police surveillance.
He appealed for funds to begin a translation of the Ti Pitaka : within one week the public subscribed more money than he needed.
The ‘Three Baskets’ comprise the teachings of the Lord Buddha, 40 volumes in all: the Vinaya (Rules of Conduct),Sutta (Discourses) and Abhidhamma (Exposition of the Four Ultimate Realities).
Nu proposed to write an outline or, as he called it, ‘a glimpse of the Ti Pitaka ’.
During 1981 — 2, three instalments were issued amounting to more than 2000 pages.
As editor, or commentator, Nu sometimes introduced his own experiences to illustrate the Buddha's teachings.
He tells us that as prime Minister:
Despite all his endeavours, Nu felt he had not fully acquired jhana , which he defines as ‘extraordinary mental concentrations’ which exclude  fleshly attachments.
There are four jhanas , the fourth, both ‘ordinary’ and ‘extraordinary’, on a much higher plane than others.
Nu relates:
So we leave U Nu, once freedom lover and statesman; now contemplative mystic.
Some Burmese regard him as a future Buddha.
Almost all Burmese regard Aung San as a national hero and martyr.
With his death on the brink of independence, he receives all the acclaim for this achievement and none of the obloquy attached to subsequent conflicts: even though his former BNA and his PVO became heavily involved in the insurgency.
He is a figure in Burmese mythology, like the kings Alaungpaya and Anawratha who united the Golden Land in centuries past.
His enigmatic features gaze down in every public place of assembly.
Few stop to ponder what he was actually like as a mere man.
6
SUKARNO AND THE VOCABULARY OF REVOLUTION
Viewing each leader in turn as one of his particular generation, Sukarno comes after Jinnah and Nehru and before the Burmese leaders.
Jinnah and Nehru were fully adult before 1914: Jinnah was already an experienced politician.
Throughout the 1920s they were acknowledged as leaders of national status and by 1939 each was at the head of his political movement: though in the case of Jinnah some thought he was past his prime.
Nu and Aung San only grew to early manhood in the 1920s and 1930s.
In 1939 they were still politically unknown outside their own little circle.
Born at the start of the twentieth Century, to Sukarno the Russo-Japanese war which signalled the reawakening of Asia can have meant nothing: neither did other political events before 1914.
Though the Netherlands and the Dutch East Indies were largely insulated from the full impact of the Great War, the 1920s saw the first stirrings of contemporary nationalism in Indonesia and the young Sukarno responded.
His rise to prominence in political leadership was punctuated by long periods of withdrawal enforced by the colonial government: in this respect he was like Nehru during these same years, also held incommun-icado by the colonial power.
Sukarno's moment came in 1942 when Japan overran South-East Asia: the same moment as for Aung San and thereafter for Nu.
During the next three years, when Nehru was totally isolated from political involvement, Sukarno became spokesman almost overnight for Indonesian nationalism.
When the war ended, the political journeys of Jinnah, Nehru — and very soon also Aung San and Nu — were obviously getting near to their hoped-for destination.
It soon became evident that their overlords, the British, intended to hand over power at an early date.
In India and Burma the fundamental question was no longer if or when would the British give up, but who would inherit their legacy?
In India, who could bargain most successfully, Congress or League?
In Burma, who would win the final struggle, Communists or Nationalists?
Indonesia in the years immediately after the Japanese surrender was in tumult.
The British, when they arrived, had only the most limited objective: to disarm the enemy and release their captives.
Their softly-softly approach to Indonesian nationalist claims was quickly overwhelmed.
The Dutch returned, determined to reintroduce their former system of control with only watered-down self-government.
For a further four years, Sukarno found himself at the centre of a political maelstrom of which the outcome seemed obscure.
At times, his grip on the nationalist forces appeared to be failing.
If, now, we place him in the pantheon of Afro-Asian leaders who decisively influenced the course of events it is because he was a survivor, to whom the drama of revolutionary struggle was an end in itself.
To him, independence was not something achieved: it was a leitmotiv , a mode of existence.
He was no hero: his final exit was ignominious.
Yet during his day he featured as a significant Afro-Asian leader, a ‘charismatic’ personality like Nehru who made a far greater impact on the international scene than Nu with his disarming frankness and humility.
Yet Sukarno's background corresponded much more to that of the Burmese.
He too was a country boy, and like Aung San he claimed descent from gentry, though his family circumstances were equally modest.
He too received his higher education not in the metropole but in a newly-founded colonial college, thus opening up horizons which previously would have been closed to Indonesians like him.
Sukarno: Name of Magic Power
The man who became Sukarno was born on 6 June 1901.
His father was descended from the Javanese nobility,priyayi .
Though his own circumstances were modest, he was entitled to be called Raden (chief) Sukemi Sosrodihardjo.
As priyayi he obtained an education in a Teachers' Training School and was sent off to the little island of Bali.
This island alone in Indonesia has clung to the old Hindu religion and culture.
There he met his future wife, Idayu Njoman Rai, said to belong to a Brahman  family.
They married and had a daughter.
Sukemi applied for a transfer back to Java and was sent to Surabaya, a major port.
There a son was born and named Kusno Sosro.
His sister died, and to avert evil influences the boy was given a new name: Sukarno, or Karno.
This was highly auspicious, being a modern rendering of Kerna, King of Awangga, in east-central Java.
This mythical prince was one of the pandavas, the heroes of the Javanese epic,Bharata Yudha , taken from the Hindu classic, the Mahabharata .
The Bharata Yudha — in Raffles' translation, the ‘War of Woe’— was between the ‘good’ Pandavas and the ‘evil’Kauravas who had usurped their realm by stealth (the parallel with the Dutch in Java was obvious to anybody).
Kerna is represented as valorous: This was no ordinary name, and it was familiar to almost all Javanese for the Bharata Yuda was famous as performed in the wayang kulit , the so-called shadow play, though that description does not do justice to the whirling world beyond the lighted screen; a world of magic.
And magic was always close to Sukarno's imagination as he acquired Western knowledge.
Only in 1914 were Indonesians admitted to schools where the medium was Dutch (these were intended for Dutch and Eurasian students).
As his father was a teacher and priyayi , Sukarno was among the favoured few.
His father coached him in Dutch, and also introduced him to theosophy.
By now they were living in a small town, Modyokerto.
Sukarno was sent to Surabaya, where he experienced loneliness and sought shelter in the Theosophical Society library where he became acquainted with the great Europeans from Rousseau to Marx.
His heroes included Mazzini and Garibaldi.
He lodged with the scholarly Tjokroaminoto whose household was a kind of ashram, and who introduced the latest arrival to the new nationalism of Sarekat Islam.
Sukarno joined an off-shoot which in 1918 began to be called Jong Java , Young Java.
College Years and Marriage (1922)
In 1921 he went on to the Technical College at Bandung, founded only the previous year.
It was about now that he was married to his guru Tjokroaminoto's daughter, a girl of 15.
It was more like a betrothal than a marriage and they did not live together.
Most of the College students  were Dutch; in the year of Sukarno's enrolment there were 29 Dutch, six Indonesian and two Chinese students.
The atmosphere was not conducive to nationalism, yet he found ways of joining in discussion groups outside.
Another important development was his growing attraction to his landlady; in 1922 he divorced his teenage bride and married Inggit Garnasih.
She shared none of his growing absorption in politics but was attuned to him in the world of magic.
The major radical political force was the Partai Kommunis Indonesia (PKI).
Founded in May 1920, this was the first Communist party organised in Asia.
They became active in the trades unions and increasingly militant.
Sukarno came under the influence of their man Musso.
There was an ill-organised series of revolts; first in west Java in November 1926 and subsequently in Sumatra in January 1927.
The government easily quelled these revolts; 4500 supporters were jailed and 1300 exiled in Dutch New Guinea.
The PKI was banned and did not re-emerge until 1946.
Sarekat Islam was damaged by its association with the PKI: hence, as Sukarno began to appear on the political stage, there was something of a vacuum.
His first notable work in print appeared in Indonesia Muda (‘Young Indonesia’) and was a series of articles on ‘Nationalism, Islam, Marxism’.
Already he was arguing that these three different ideologies were facets of the same truth.
Despite his limited education he was widely read, absorbing the ideas of the European Marxists in the medium of French, German and English as well as Dutch.
One who knew him in the Bandung period, Takdir Alisjahbana, recalls: ‘A fascinating personality…few [were]able to resist his charm.
…To all this must be added his famous talent for oratory, and his resonant carrying voice.
…He possesses a skill of dramatisation that fascinates and moves his audience.’
Founds National Party (1927)
On what may have been chosen as an auspicious day, 4 July 1927, Sukarno founded his own party, known as Partai Nasional Indonesia (PNI) or Persatuan Nasional Indonesia (Indonesian National Unity).
He aimed to break the mould of the multi-party system which the Dutch had initiated.
This was almost the only time during the twentieth century when Dutch rule assumed a relatively progressive face.
A.C.D. de Graaff arrived as Governor-General late in 1926 and appealed to the nationalists for cooperation while some Dutch officials endeavoured to counteract their countrymen's reactionary spirit by forming De Stuuw (Forward  Movement).
Among them was Dr Hubertus Van Mook, destined to be the head of the post-war administration.
Sukarno began to tour Java, addressing massive crowds on the theme of the awakening of national consciousness.
He urged the formation of a ‘Brown Front’ to overcome the White Front of Dutch dominance.
He cited the example of India, where Gandhi was creating an ‘indissoluble union’ to include the objectives of Indian Muslims.
At other times he was scornful of anhimsa , non-violence, and he criticised Gandhi and Nehru as ‘philosophemes’ inclined to philosophical concepts which weakened the Indian nationalist movement.
His speeches ignored most social issues which had so concerned Sarekat Islam.
He concentrated on attacking Dutch interests, claiming that ‘Our opponent indeed already feels the earth tremble under his feet.’
Despite his magnetic personality and his enormous popularity the PNI was slow to win members: one calculation is that by September 1929 there were less than 6000.
Sukarno's speeches became ever more extravagant.
He revived the legend of the prophecy of Jayabhaya (reigned 1135 — 57) who foretold that the Pringi (Feringhi , Europeans) would conquer Java but that ‘the prince of Kling’ would send armies to drive them out and then, after five years, ‘return to his own country’.
A ‘prince of Kling’ would come from south India, but Sukarno interpreted the prophecy as applying to Japan.
His prediction excited the people in their thousands and the Dutch authorities found it necessary to explain away the Jayabhaya legend.
Sukarno's defiance could not be ignored indefinitely by de Graaff, and on 29 December 1929 he was arrested.
Jailed for Bold Rhetoric (1930)
His trial was a long-drawn-out affair.
To the Dutch judge the case was a miasma of fact and fantasy.
The prosecution attempted to show that the PNI was connected with the League Against Imperialism with which Nehru was then linked.
Mohammad Hatta was involved with the League: Hatta resided in the Netherlands from 1921 to 1932 and became an MP in the Dutch parliament: but his association with the PNI started only on his return.
The evidence against Sukarno was flimsy and when he was eventually sentenced to four years' imprisonment in December 1930 one eminent Dutch professor, J.M.J. Schepper, condemned the verdict as violating the great Dutch legal tradition.
De Graaff commuted the sentence to two years, and in actuality Sukarno was released on 15 December 1931.
During his absence his PNI disintegrated.
Former members were  drawn into Hatta's ‘new PNI’ or PNI Bahru .
Opponents formed Partai Indonesia (Partindo).
Hatta was assisted by another Holland-returned politician, Sutan Sjahrir, who had also spent several years in the Netherlands and become an admirer of the Dutch Socialist movement.
However, they had to accept the enthusiasm with which Sukarno was welcomed back.
He had not adjusted to prison life as Nehru was able to do; he had found it ‘a shattering experience’.
Now, he had the adulation of the masses again.
He became known as ‘Bung Karno’.
Abang means elder brother, and bangsa the nation, the people.
Sukarno was hailed as the Elder Brother of the Indonesian people.
‘Marhaen’: Symbol of Exploitation
During the next 20 months while he was at liberty Sukarno launched a campaign on quasi-Marxist lines.
This centred upon the philosophy of Marhaenism, drawn from the name of a poor peasant he once talked to.
He declared that 90 per cent of Indonesians belonged to this class of small farmers, labourers, urban workers: and he did not direct his attack upon the other 10 per cent but upon the Dutch who had exploited them and the Chinese entrepreneurs who lived off their labour.
Instead of the class struggle enunciated by Marx he externalised the struggle and insisted that all Indonesians could live in harmony in a gotong-royong ‘mutual help’ society.
In this philosophy he was in accord with Gandhi who believed that in India employers and employees shared a common interest.
Sukarno went beyond Gandhi to declare war on the foreign exploiters.
Independence would provide a ‘golden bridge’ whereby the Marhaens could attain a just social order.
These ideas were expounded to mass audiences.
They yielded ample results.
Out of the former PNI, Sukarno had taken up partindo, and within one year its membership soared to 20000.
The authorities could not allow this to develop further.
The relatively liberal de Graaff had been replaced as Governor-General by de Jonge, a hardliner (it was he who pronounced that Dutch rule would continue for another 300 years), and the Colonial Minister was H. Colijn, whose notorious book,Colonial Problems of Today and Tomorrow (1928), had declared that the Indonesians could not expect self-government ‘in the humanly foreseeable future’: indeed, he dismissed the notion that there was any Indonesia: ‘The islands…are a unity for the reason that they compose the Netherlands Indies and for that reason alone.’
Sukarno should have anticipated what happened: his arrest in August 1933.
But already he was taken with ‘monumentalism’, in professor  Alisjahbana's words, ‘fond of everything spectacular and imposing’, a manifestation of der Machtmensch described by Nietzsche, ‘the will to power’.
After three months of being examined in prison, awaiting sentence' he announced his renunciation of non-cooperation.
The news shocked his thousands of admirers.
One who was no extremist, Dr Sutomo, wrote: ‘It was he who had demolished the crumbling walls that had divided the various groups of the people from one another.
…For them he was Bung Karno.
…They saw in him only the prophet of freedom.’
Sukarno then announced his withdrawal from Partindo because he no longer accepted its policies.
His foremost biographer attributes this withdrawal to his inability to endure the prison existence.
Needing the adulation of the masses he abhorred solitude — the complete opposite to the introspective Nehru.
Banishment (1934)
His apparent apostasy did not secure his release.
The Dutch colonial exorbitante rechten gave the Governor-General power to send anyone considered a threat to peace and order into exile.
In February 1934 he was transported to Flores, the remote island in the Lesser Sundas, far from Java.
His political rivals, Hatta and Sjahrir, were also transported to the Dutch equivalent of Devil's Island, Boven Digual in New Guinea.
Probably Sukarno's renunciation of non-cooperation did ensure a less severe fate for him.
He was permitted to take his family with him, but the only intellectual companionship he found was among the Catholic missionaries: the local inhabitants remained strangers to him.
Although banned from any political correspondence he was allowed to explain his position on non-cooperation: ‘While it could be a source of strength for our movement [it]could never really furnish an ideal.
…I have always been able to accept non-cooperation only as an effective instrument of nationalist propaganda.
…I have never been able to base a philosophy upon it.’
It was now that he became ‘converted’ to Islam.
Of course all Javanese are formally Muslims, but most incorporate Hindu and animist elements in their religion.
Those who are strict are called santri and for them Islam is all-embracing.
Sukarno did not follow that path; rather he examined the modernist position adopted by the Aligarh school in India.
He criticised the backwardness of Islamic orthodoxy; nevertheless he wrote on 17 October 1936, ‘a soul that was only superficially Islamic has become a soul convinced of Islam…a soul that daily rendered homage to HIM’.
Sukarno suffered from malaria; in 1938 he was moved to Benkulen in Sumatra, perhaps for humanitarian reasons (in 1936 Hatta and Sjahrir were moved from their vile jungle camp), or perhaps because the Dutch hoped that a more Islamic environment would complete his ‘conversion, from politics to religion, for Islam in Sumatra was more powerful than the syncretic faith of Java.
He was closely associated with the Muham-madiyah, inspired by an Egyptian reformist movement.
The Muham-madiyah accepted government aid for its schools and was therefore abhorrent to radical nationalists.
They now provided Sukarno with a vehicle for polemic and controversy which enabled him to regain a place in the public eye.
He explained his position in an article, ‘Sukarno by Himself’, which appeared in June 1941: ‘There are men who say Sukarno is a nationalist; others say he is no longer a nationalist but a Muslim; and others again say he is neither nationalist nor Muslim but a Marxist.
…What is this Sukarno?
Is he a nationalist?
A Muslim?
A Marxist?
Readers, Sukarno is —a mixture of all these isms .’
War: Sukarno's Fascist Leanings
He grew ever bolder in what he wrote.
The occupation of the Netherlands by Nazi Germany in 1940 left the Indies isolated, out on a limb.
However, the Dutch authorities made no move to conciliate national feelings.
A question in the Volksraad about the Atlantic Charter was answered evasively.
Some of their opponents, like Hatta and Sjahrir, expressed sympathy for the sufferings of the Dutch, but Sukarno offered no word of sympathy.
Alisjahbana declares that even before the war he ‘showed a leaning towards…
German Fascism with its mythbuilder Alfred Rosenberg, its agitators Hitler and Goebbels’.
What is certain is that he quoted approvingly words he attributed to Nehru: ‘Even if the Indian people do not agree with Nazism and Fascism, even if the Indian people recognise the evil of Nazism and Fascism…they will surely part company with the British.
They have no wish to help the British in the present war.’
As was his custom, Sukarno adapted Nehru's actual words to reflect his own hostility to the Dutch and his growing admiration for Japan.
Increasingly, he envisaged a great war in the pacific and many others shared his expectations: the prophecy of Jayabhaya was again on everyone's lips.
Surely, this was the promised time?
Following their occupation of Malaya and Singapore the Japanese invaded Indonesia.
The disastrous naval battle of the Coral Sea on 27 February left Java exposed; on 9 March the Dutch commander-in-chief surrendered.
The Governor-General was taken prisoner, though the  Lieutenant-Governor, Dr Van Mook, escaped to Australia.
Almost everywhere the Japanese soldiers were received with shouts of Banzai : the Japanese made much of the Jayabhaya prophecy and most Indonesians believed that now they would be free.
However, it was quickly made plain that independence was not on the Japanese agenda.
Two weeks after their arrival the Japanese banned the Indonesians' flag.
They even partitioned the archipelago into three quite separate military commands; Sumatra, Java, and the Great East.
Their role was to provide oil, tin, rubber, sugar and other essential materials for the Japanese war economy.
Thousands of Indonesians were conscripted into labour corps, and these romushas were treated with that callous indifference verging on brutality which characterised Japanese practices throughout South-East Asia.
Adopted by the Japanese (1942)
Sukarno awaited events in his Sumatran exile.
He was contacted, and one week after the Dutch surrender agreed to cooperate with the Japanese.
They were in no great hurry to make use of him; not till 9 July was he returned to Java without ceremony in a small motor launch.
Hatta and Sjahrir were already back home.
The three men met, and it soon became clear that their intentions were different.
Sjahrir was not prepared to cooperate; the others decided to go along with the Japanese in order to extract concessions from them.
There was a new corporate directorate, the Empat Serangkai or ‘Four Leaf Clover’, representing important elements in the national life.
Sukarno was included as the populist leader of the masses (his seven years in exile notwithstanding); Hatta was chosen as a cosmopolitan intellectual; Jaji Mas Mansur was former chairman of Muhammadiyah; and Dewantoro was an educationist, sponsor of national schools on similar lines to Tagore.
They headed an organisation called Pusat Tenaga Raiyat , ‘Centre of power for the Countrymen’, or Putera in common usage.
What had they gained?
They applied to the Japanese for permission to fly the national flag and sing the national song,Indonesia Raya .
After six months the answer came back: ‘No’.
Early in 1943, Tojo Hideki announced that Japan would bestow independence on Burma and the Philippines.
There was no reference to Indonesia which was allotted the status of a colony.
Increasingly a public figure, Sukarno experienced another change in his private life.
A girl he had come to admire in Sumatra was brought to Java to be his third wife after he divorced Inggit.
Alisjahbana has identified a leading aspect of his personality as ‘idealised sensualism’.
He was drawn irresistibly to ‘beautiful women with full breasts’.
His new wife Fatmawati gave him his first son, Guntur, whose name means ‘thunder’.
The Indonesian nationalists acquired a friend in Rear Admiral Maeda Minoru, head of military intelligence.
Like Colonel Suzuki he developed a romantic sense of identification with these people so very different from his own, rather like Lawrence of Arabia.
They needed any friend they could find, for Japan had no intention of making any real concessions.
Sukarno was accorded the title of Pemimpin Besar , Great Leader, but his role was largely confined to that of speechmaker, which he performed very effectively.
Yamamoto Moichiro, Colonel — later General — who became Gunseikan , head of the military government, looked down on Indonesians as ‘natives’.
He made it clear that they must carry out orders ‘exactly’.
This was the job of the Central Advisory Committee,Tjuo Sangi In , for which Sukarno was chief Adviser.
Experience was being acquired in other ways which would serve to advance independence.
The machinery of government, previously firmly under Dutch control, was now staffed by Indonesians almost to the top level.
Many were priyayis , formerly the lower echelons of the administration.
They were formed into Djawa Hokokai (Javanese Service Movement) and instructed to organise neighbourhood associations for communal purposes.
Islam was mobilised through a Consultative Council,Majlis Sjuro Muslimin Indonesia , or Masjumi .
Both these developments were based on traditional leadership but new prospects were opened up by the formation of auxiliary military forces known in Indonesian as Pembela Tanah Air , Fatherland Defence Force,Peta for short.
Japanese — Indonesian Military Forces
Beginning in October 1943 this force was formed into battalions (Daidan ) about 500 strong.
Their junior commanders were mainly young urban middle-class men, the sort who had formed the audience for Sukarno.
Trained by Japanese instructors they became tough and disciplined.
Their numbers expanded rapidly until there were 66 daidan in Java and another three in Bali: a total not far short of 35000 (five times larger than the BNA).
The Peta was intended only for local defence but there was also the Hei-Ho whose strength in Java was close on 25000.
The officers of the Hei-Ho were all Japanese; their role was mainly to operate as labour battalions.
Role of the Pemuda , ‘The Young Braves'
These young soldiers were potentially political activists.
Even before the war the sumpah pemuda or ‘Youth Oath’ had been a pledge of Indonesian  unity, and now the pemuda were poised to become the standard bearers of national revolution.
There was virtually no resistance movement, except on distant Ambon whose protestant inhabitants had formed the backbone of the Dutch Indies Army (very like the Karens in Burma).
Sjahrir later acquired the reputation of a resistance leader, but although he refused to collaborate with the Japanese all he really did was to monitor the declining fortunes of Japan on his illegal radio.
A more important development was the re-emergence of an illegal PKI.
Paradoxically this was encouraged by Admiral Maeda.
Wikana, arrested by the Dutch in 1940 for PKI activities, was recruited.
Also involved was the veteran Communist, Tan Malaka, who returned from abroad only in 1942 and was employed to speak on ‘Radio Tokyo’(actually at Bantam).
Then there was Subardjo, who was a former journalist on the daily Matahari (Sun) as was also Iwi, an outlawed Communist.
These and other radicals were introduced by Maeda into his political training school,Asrama Indonesia Merdeka , and encouraged to indoctrinate pemuda students among whom was Aidit, the future Communist leader.
Japanese Encourage Hope of Independence (1944)
During 1944 the tide of war in the East turned against Japan, although the Allies were still far from her shores.
Tojo resigned, succeeded as premier by Koiso Kuniaki, another general, pledged to intensify the fight, but more aware of the need to conciliate Japan's underlings.
On 7 September 1944 it was announced that Japan would grant independence to Java — perhaps along with Sumatra — after the war.
Permission was given to fly the national red and white flag and to sing Indonesia Raya .
The standing of Sukarno and the other collaborators revived.
He had been denounced (rather unfairly) for assisting the recruitment of the romusha forced labour to a total of perhaps 500000.
Liable to serve wherever they were sent, only 70000 returned.
Resentment at press-gang methods had caused sporadic revolts in rural Java, though the full extent of this horror was not yet known.
Meanwhile, Sukarno was again the idol.
The Japanese had calculated cleverly.
Sukarno and his associates could expect little sympathy from the returning Allies; surely then the Dutch would be restored?
An appeal to nationalism was the best method of anchoring the Indonesians to the victory of Japan.
Even so, political progress was slow.
The pemuda showed their discontent; on 14 February 1945 a Peta battalion stationed at Blitar in east Java, far from the capital Jakarta (as Batavia was known after 1942) marched out of barracks in protest.
The rising was suppressed, but it was an ominous sign.
A Preparatory and Organisational Committee was belatedly convened.
The 62 members met on 28 May 1945.
It represented all shades of opinion, but it was dominated by Sukarno.
His ideas were those adopted.
He rejected parliamentary democracy, the ‘Ins’ versus the ‘Outs’.
He pleaded for mufakat , an Islamic term for the gotong-royong he had long advocated: consensus, harmony, unity.
He called for a Führerstaat in which the president would personify the general will.
He enunciated a philosophy for the future Indonesia, entitled Pantja Sila , the Five Principles, on 1 June.
He asked the Committee ‘Upon what Weltanschaung do we intend to establish the state of Free Indonesia?’
These principles were Nationalism: extending from Sumatra to Irian [New Guinea], Internationalism (meaning links between nations), Consultation (mufakat again), Social Justice, and finally Belief in God.
Sukarno's Dream of Greater Indonesia
On 11 July Sukarno told the Committee: ‘At no time…have I declared that my struggle was confined to the claim to the former Dutch held territory.
…In fact I have on one occasion in my life dreamt of a Pan-Indonesia which will include not only Malaya and Papua [ie. Australian New Guinea]but also the Philippines.’
Sukarno was rebuffed when he asked that there should be a Greater Indonesia including the British territories, Malaya, Singapore and North Borneo.
Marshal Terauchi, Commander-in-Chief of the Southern Region, dismissed this claim (17 July) though he agreed that the former Netherlands Indies would be given Japanese-style independence.
On 7 August Sukarno announced the formation of a Committee for the Preparation of Indonesian Independence (Panitia Perisiapan Kemerdekaan Indonesia : PPKI).
Together with Hatta and the new President of the PPKI, Sukarno flew to Dalat in Vietnam.
There Terauchi informed them that independence would be proclaimed.
According to a Japanese source, Masaaki Tanaka, the appointed day would be 7 September.
All this occurred after the two atomic bombs had been dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
When they returned, thousands awaited them at the airport with Yamamoto to the fore.
Sukarno: Bringer of Independence
When they reached Sukarno's residence, Sjahrir burst in upon them to say that Japan was sueing for peace.
The two leaders went to military headquarters for confirmation and were told that the staff were otherwise  engaged.
They managed to see Maeda who dropped hints and told them to be circumspect.
It was decided to convene the PPKI next day, 16 August.
When the members arrived they found Sukarno and Hatta missing.
It transpired that the previous evening students from the Asrama Merdeka led by Wikana along with student followers of Sjahrir presented an ultimatum to Sukarno: you must proclaim independence immediately.
Sukarno procrastinated; tempers flared up, the students withdrew.
Later (most accounts say early in the morning) the students returned and compelled Sukarno and his family, and also Hatta, to come away with them; their destination was the Peta barracks at Rengasdenglok, about 70 miles away.
There they argued inconclusively, and the students prepared to stage a coup in Jakarta.
Pemuda Force Sukarno to Declare Independence
Maeda came to hear of all this: his advice was to go ahead with independence.
They all went to Maeda's residence in Jakarta; he sent messages to the high command, but nobody turned up.
This was not surprising as by now instructions had been received from the Allies prohibiting any further Japanese initiative.
However, Maeda insisted that the proclamation be given, pledging his own word on behalf of Japan.
A short statement was drafted and signed by Sukarno and Hatta.
Next morning it was publicly read out by Sukarno: ‘We, the people of Indonesia hereby declare Indonesia's independence.’
It was signed ‘In the name of the Indonesian people, Sukarno — Hatta, 17 August’.
Next day, the PPKI adopted the constitution agreed the previous month.
As president, Sukarno appointed and dismissed all the Ministers, who were responsible to him.
He also had the right to make laws with the agreement of the elected assemblies.
Until these were chosen (and this never happened) all State powers were exercised by the President assisted by an advisory committee (KNIP) which he appointed.
On 31 August Sukarno named his Cabinet.
A major setback was the disappearance of all military force: the Japanese disarmed and dissolved the Peta and Hei-Ho .
It was about their last overall assertion of authority, and was carried out smoothly and simultaneously so that the Indonesians were unable to reply.
However, as in Burma, the demobilised soldiers did not just return to civilian life: they formed a quasi-military organisation similar to the PVO, though on an ever larger scale, the People's Security Organisation,Badan Keamanan Raykat (BKR).
Many Japanese officers were sympathetic: they pictured themselves as bringers of independence to fellow-Asians against the  West.
Arms began to be transferred to the BKR under local arrangements; they even acquired some tanks.
Struggle or Negotiation?
Sukarno's role, as so often, was to articulate and dramatise the attainment of the national will.
One course forward was that symbolised by the young activists —perjuangan , or mass action — and at the same time as BKR was being created badan perjuangan , ‘struggle groups’, were formed.
One such was the Barisan Banteng , Wild Buffalo Corps (whom the British called the Black Buffaloes).
The course which Sukarno sought to follow included perjuangan but also hoped to extract dividends from diplomacy (diplomasi ).
In a major speech on 2 September he brought this out: ‘The policy now adopted by the Indonesian republic must be oriented to the international world.
For this the prime condition is diplomasi .
…Behind that diplomasi …must be a power force.
…We are now organising the aggregate will of the people…a will to feel themselves independent.’
Sukarno's pretensions were criticised by Sjahrir in a manifesto called Perjuangan Kita , ‘Our Struggle’, which exposed the rhetoric of revolutionary nationalism.
No-one could label him ‘collaborator’, and a wide spectrum of the population began to look to him in the chaotic aftermath of the Japanese defeat.
Supported by 50 members of the KNIP advisory committee, Sjahrir denounced the ‘Japanese Fascist mentality’ of the presidential regime and demanded that legislative authority be shared with the KNIP.
Sukarno gave way.
Indonesia Made British Responsibility
Perhaps the disorganised regime might have been overwhelmed by the arrival of the occupation forces if as much, or worse, confusion had not also halted them.
When South-East Asia Command (SEAC) was formed in 1943, Mountbatten was assigned responsibility for retaking Malaya and Sumatra.
Java and the Great East were to be regained by General Douglas MacArthur and his South-West Pacific Command.
MacArthur's headquarters were in Australia and a Dutch military and civil planning and propaganda unit worked alongside him in Brisbane.
The general was drawn directly into the invasion of the Philippines and plans to invade Japan.
He decided to shift responsibility for the Dutch Indies onto other shoulders, judging that anyway it was, in language he was accustomed to, a ‘can of worms’.
Mountbatten resisted this enormous additional responsibility, and it was actually only on 15 August, the day after Japan's  surrender, that Indonesia and also Indo-China south of the 16th parallel were assigned to SEAC (though there was an American joke that this stood for ‘Saving England's Asiatic Colonies’).
Plans for the reoccupation of Malaya were well advanced and some ships had already put to sea.
Then, with characteristic egotism, on 19 August MacArthur used his position as Supreme Commander of all forces in the Far East to issue an order that no surrender might be taken from any Japanese commander and no landing attempted before the formal signing of the surrender in Tokyo Bay.
All operations had to be halted.
The signing ceremony, fixed for 28 August, had to be postponed until 2 September because of a typhoon.
Meanwhile the British warships had to ride out the monsoon.
This postponement of the SEAC invasion timetable by two weeks meant that British forces did not land in Singapore until 9 September.
The surrender ceremony applying to Southern Region on behalf of Marshal Terauchi was held on 12 September.
British Military Occupation Delayed
Since Java had been outside his area, Mountbatten had no intelligence about conditions there.
British forces arriving in Malaya and Singapore had received a warm welcome; the same might be expected in Indonesia (in Sumatra the British arrival proceeded without serious incident).
These illusions were encouraged by the assurances given by Van Mook and other Dutch administrators that the Indonesians would welcome their return also.
Reality soon dawned.
Some of the Dutch civilian internees walked out of the camps which had been their prisons for three-and-a-half years, despite instructions to stay inside.
Many were roughly handled; some were killed.
One of the few to grasp what was happening was Lieutenant-Colonel Laurens Van der Post, the South African writer who had been a POW and who spoke Dutch.
Until he was contacted the arriving forces had no idea of what to expect.
The cruiser Cumberland was the first ship to arrive at Tanjong Priok, the port for Jakarta, on 15 September, five weeks after the republic had been proclaimed.
Dr Van der Plas, the senior Dutch official aboard, went on shore and then hastily re-embarked.
It was not what he expected.
The British assignment was to disarm the 60 000 Japanese troops and liberate the 100 000 allied prisoners, many being women and children.
They were instructed not to interfere in the internal politics of Indonesia but to hand over, in due time, to the legitimate authority: that is, the Netherlands.
It proved quite impossible to carry out the task assigned without involvement in the still fluid political situation.
The task of recovering POWs and disarming the enemy was given to 23 Indian Division whose advanced elements landed on 2 October at Jakarta.
Already relations between the British and the Dutch were those of mutual incomprehension.
On 30 September Mountbatten had listened to an exposition of the situation by Captain J.P.H. Perks of the Dutch navy who informed Supremo that: ‘The Indonesian forces were not organised, that…all resistance would collapse as soon as the Allied forces appeared.
…Negotiations implied weakness: the use of force which the Dutch had employed for three centuries was the most suitable course to pursue.’
These sentiments were held equally by the Dutch government, newly returned to The Hague.
Pieter Gerbrandy, the leader of the wartime government, was an authority on the Indies, proud of the historical record like most of his countrymen.
Mountbatten attempted to persuade the Dutch to adopt the same liberal policy he had followed in Burma.
He had some success with Van Mook but none with Admiral Helfrich, commander of their forces in the East.
Van Mook was rebuked: the Dutch ambassador in London advised that any Dutchman who negotiated with Sukarno would be tried for treason.
The British forces were instructed to move only into key areas from where they could carry out their task of rescuing POWs.
Besides Jakarta, these were Bandung (one brigade), Semarang (an improvised brigade) and Surabaya (one brigade).
They were in position by the end of October.
Their deployment was accompanied by bizarre, often bloody encounters between Indonesians and Japanese garrisons.
The most curious incident was at Surabaya where there was a major pre-war Dutch naval base.
Admiral Helfrich smuggled in a Dutch naval officer, Captain Huijer, who ordered the Japanese commander to deliver all arms into his custody.
Having no-one to guard them he entrusted them to Sudirman, formerly of Peta , who undertook to guard the arms pending the Allied arrival.
Sudirman promptly handed over a vast cache to the city pemuda .
Occupation Escalates into Warfare
This was the situation when the British-Indian brigade began to disembark on 26 October.
Initially all went well, but fighting flared up; whether started by Indonesian or British provocation depends un your witness.
The senior British officer in Java, Major-General D.C. Haw-thorne, prevailed on Sukarno to fly to Surabaya.
He patched up an agreement, but later the same day (29 October) the local British commander, Brigadier Mallaby, was shot dead.
Bitter fighting followed.
Three days later a new formation arrived, 5 Indian Division.
After a week of negotiations, fighting was resumed: Mountbatten's report goes on, ‘Our casualties were very heavy…concentrations of naval and artillery fire were put down and bombing attacks were made by Thunderbolts and Mosquitos’(bombing planes).
Fighting continued for three weeks; British casualties numbered 1000, the Indonesians lost many more and the city became a desert.
Sukarno also mediated at Semarang where pemuda extremists attacked the Japanese garrison and were in turn attacked, losing an estimated 2000 in six days.
British troops guarding 11 000 ex-prisoners were under siege.
On 1 November Sukarno was called in and a ceasefire arranged.
His interventions were resented by many, and when he declared: ‘Don't let us be forced to face alone the whole military power of England and the Allies.
…If there are problems we must and shall follow the path of peace’, although this was sound advice, it was not to the liking of his audience.
Sukarno Loses Control
Power was slipping from his hands.
Hatta, as Vice-president, announced the KNIP would provide a Working Committee to ‘share responsibility for the fate of the Indonesian people’.
Sjahrir and his colleague Amir Sjarifuddin were designated formateurs ; in Dutch constitutional terms, those who put together a new government.
This development occurred before the disastrous events at Surabaya and Semarang.
Then on 12 November Sjahrir became Prime Minister; Sukarno was now in effect merely ceremonial head of state.
The government was in Sjahrir's hands.
The government of India told Mountbatten that no more Indian troops would be sent to Java.
Out of the 30 battalions there, only four were from the United Kingdom.
General Christison in overall command insisted that no more Dutch troops should come in, while the Dutch civil affairs units (NICA) were demilitarised, placed under British control, and renamed Allied Military Administration.
It was all very tense.
Sjahrir seemed more likely to be acceptable to the Dutch government and late in November he indicated his willingness to begin ‘tripartite’ negotiations.
The response of Dr Logermann, Dutch colonial minister, was to reject negotiation as ‘impossible’.
Mountbatten saw this as ‘a virtual declaration of war’.
The country was sliding into chaos, or as the British official historian puts it, there was a vacuum ‘into which the British military authorities were quickly sucked’.
Typical of this situation was an incident on 13 December 1945 when the greater part of the village of Bekasi was burned in retaliation for the murder of the British and Indian crew and passengers of a crashed Dakota by the Wild (or Black) Buffaloes.
There was ‘bitter and adverse comment in India’: and of course even more in Java.
Mountbatten  offered the British government two courses; either there should be negotiations between Dutch and Indonesians with a view to bringing in a general ceasefire (plan X) or else punitive action against ‘Known or suspected terrorists’(plan Y).
The second course was advised by Ernest Bevin.
Fearing some such development, Sukarno and Hatta slipped away from Jakarta to the inland city of Jogjakarta whose Sultan commanded the allegiance of his subjects and who was also loyal to the Republic.
Sjahrir remained in Jakarta to negotiate.
This weakened his position as a symbol of the national struggle.
New Indonesian Army Formed
The British had to reckon now with an Indonesian army.
The Tentara Keamann Raykat (TKR) was formed out of the BKR.
Although some senior staff officers were from the old Dutch colonial army the leaders of the fighting formations were almost all ex- Peta and ex-BKR.
They were armed exclusively with Japanese weapons: Colonel Sudirman, the most successful in obtaining arms, became army commander.
Amir Sjarifuddin was Minister of Defence and there was some friction between him and Sjahrir on one side with their ‘resistance’ reputation, and officers who were ‘collaborators’.
Sukarno regained importance as consensus figure: ‘If it should ever turn out that Sjahrir is not maintaining the demand for 100 per cent Merdeka…then I have the right to dismiss him’, he told a wildly cheering crowd on 17 February 1946.
On 28 February Sjahrir resigned from the premiership: but Sukarno and he needed each other, even if they suspected each other : on 2 March he was back as Premier.
Meanwhile Plan Y was being put into effect.
Despite his knowledge of the trigger-happy propensities of the Dutch soldiery Mountbatten agreed to the introduction of Netherlands forces, previously held back in Malaya, early in March 1946 because ‘the quality of these Netherlands troops was far superior to that of the forces which had originally landed in Java’.
Their numbers soon equalled two divisions in strength.
The senior Dutch officer ordered them to extend the territory they occupied to double the previous area.
Control — such as it had been — was passing out of British hands.
On 4 April, Lord Inverchapel (sent as diplomatic intermediary) accompanied Van Mook and Indonesian negotiators to The Hague.
Agreement was confined to arrangements for evacuating Dutch internees to the ports.
There was a new Lieutenant-Governor, Dr Blum, and a new Dutch commander, Lieutenant-General Spoor, replacing Helfrich.
Sjahrir continued to negotiate with them.
This inevitably made him suspect to the more militant.
Sukarno was not loath to encourage his detractors.
Communist Bid for Power
On 29 April the PKI emerged as an open party.
Its leader, Tan Malaka, had made an abortive bid for power and was in jail, but Wikana and others were active, having the Wild Buffaloes as their allies.
Ex- Peta elements in the army distrusted Sjahrir who created the elite Siliwangsi division as a highly professional force to counterbalance the largely out-of-control TKR.
Sudirman decided to act.
On 27 June Tan Malaka and other leading Communists were set free and Sjahrir was kidnapped just as Sukarno had been the previous August.
An ultimatum was presented to the president to appoint Tan Malaka head of the government with Sudirman in total control of the armed forces.
When this was followed by the demand that Sukarno resign, the President resisted.
Sudirman realised his error.
Sjahrir was liberated by loyal troops and Tan Malaka rearrested.
On 31 October Sjahrir announced his third Cabinet.
Its 31 members included four Communists.
Consensus was again in fashion.
Sukarno had demonstrated once again in a crisis that he represented unity.
The first post-war Dutch government, a centrist coalition reflecting the myriad interests represented under the List System, was led by the Labour Premier, professor W. Schmerhom.
The election of 1946 reflected a small swing to the right and the new Premier, Dr Louis Beel, belonged to the Catholic people's party.
It was Schmerhom, however, who was despatched to lead a negotiating team to meet the Republican leaders.
Their discussions produced the Linggajati Agreement, as it is called from the hill station where they met (12 November).
Abortive Netherlands — Indonesian Agreement (1946)
The Dutch recognised the Republic as the de facto authority in Java and Sumatra.
A federal state would be created, the constituent units including the authorities which the Dutch had inspired in the ‘outer islands’.
The whole conglomerate would be part of a Netherlands — Indonesia Union with Queen Wilhelmina as head (the model of the British Commonwealth is obvious).
This compromise was hard to swallow and the final signature was not appended till March 1947.
Linggajati enabled the British to leave with a good grace, and the last units were withdrawn by 30 November 1946.
They had pleased nobody.
Sjahrir complained to President Truman that they had reimposed Dutch rule.
The Dutch complained that they had strengthened the hands of the Indonesians: they were presented with a bill by the Dutch for the use of barracks, railroads, and other facilities during their occupation (which was not paid).
Endorsement for Linggajati had to be obtained from KNIP.
A bloc in this assembly known as Benteng Republik (Republican Fortress) utterly opposed the deal.
Sukarno decreed that the total would be increased from 200 to 514.
Resistance was prolonged from December to February 1947 when at length Sukarno secured approval for the change by putting his position to the test: if they refused, they must find a new president.
He declared (25 February): ‘I am neither a president à la française nor à l'americaine .
I am a president of the Indonesian revolution…guiding and leading the people.’
The new body included 80 representatives of Workers and peasants, the numbers of Masjumi were almost doubled and there were greatly increased numbers from Sumatra.
Although Sjahrir was responsible for Linggajati, his Socialist group dwindled.
He paid a visit to India to attend the Inter-Asian Conference.
He was entertained by the Viceroy whose press officer reported the lunch with Sjahrir and ‘his buxom, blonde Dutch wife’: ‘Sjahrir must be the smallest statesman since Dolfuss, the Austrian pocket premier.’
It was good public relations: but the Dutch were planning their counter-attack.
On 27 May they presented an ultimatum.
Sjahrir made concessions, but they wanted more; three Left-wing members of his Cabinet withdrew support and he resigned on 26 June.
No alternative was practicable, and on 20 July the Dutch launched their euphemistically named ‘police action’.
They thrust deep into Republican territory.
The UN called for a ceasefire but before this was agreed the Dutch secured all major ports and the authority of the republic was confined to a mere one-third of Java, centred on Jogjakarta.
UN Intervention
Australia brought the issue to the UN: with a Labour government in office, and militant solidarity with Indonesia among the dockworkers, normally conservative White Australia was supporting Asian nationalism.
On 30 July 1947 the UN Security Council ordered a ceasefire.
The Dutch continued to probe into Republican territory until they had established a satisfactory perimeter, the ‘Van Mook Line’.
The new Indonesian army, under yet another name,Tentara Nasional Indonesia (TNI), although huge in number proved deficient against the hard-hitting Dutch.
A UN ‘Good Offices’ Committee was formed: Australia was nomin-ated by the republic, Belgium was the Dutch choice, and the United States provided a ‘neutral’chairman.
The American position was equivocal: Roosevelt's anti-colonial sentiments had been offset by a growing  awareness of the need to support Western Europe against Communism.
For Dean Acheson this was the major consideration.
The Good Offices Committee convened on board the US naval transport Renville anchored off Jakarta.
They had to bring together bitterly opposed forces.
When Sjahrir resigned, his successor was Amir Sjarifuddin, a Christian and supposedly a moderate.
Sukarno's role throughout the long crisis was to reassure his bewildered countrymen, especially all those outside Java apparently abandoned to the Dutch.
His belief in diplomasi rather than struggle,perjuangan , was severely tested, but he continued to maintain a balancing act.
Negotiations in Renville arrived at a precarious agreement, signed on 17 January 1948, by which the Van Mook Line was accepted, in return for virtually nothing.
A plebiscite was promised in the areas surrendered to the Dutch.
Dr Frank Graham, the American chairman, persuaded the Indonesians to accept these humiliating terms by telling them that this would internationalise the dispute:diplomasi again.
Sukarno urged acceptance over the radio, arguing, ‘If ideals can be achieved peacefully why should we fight?’
His appeal fell on deaf ears.
Amir had to resign, and Hatta was asked to be formateur .
He now became premier of a broad-based Cabinet responsible to the president: virtually a return to 1945.
The attempt to legitimise Renville met widespread opposition.
Talks with the Dutch went on, but although the Republicans withdrew their forces behind the new agreed boundaries there was no move to begin the plebiscite in Dutch-occupied areas: to the contrary, on 9 March an interim federal government was installed for their projected United States of Indonesia.
Of the 16 ministers, nine were Dutch.
An unexpected diversion was the announcement by USSR on 26 May that they would exchange consuls with the Republic.
This contravened the Dutch understanding that Renville banned foreign representation.
To please the USA the Republic stalled.
The Communists responded with hostility.
Amir now announced that he had all along been a Communist!
From Moscow the sinister Musso returned after 20 years in the Soviet Union.
He arrived in Jogjakarta on 11 August and was immediately elected Secretary-General of Gerakan Revolusi Rakyat (People's Democratic Front) dominated by Communists.
Their line was that the Dutch Communists had been wrong to advise cooperating with the Netherlands: a national revolution was the only path to freedom.
Almost simultaneously, a general election in the Netherlands had produced a Labour-led coalition.
If this seemed propitious, the fact that the Catholic people's Party assumed control over Indonesia proved calamitous.
The new colonial minister, E.M.J.A. Sassen, was committed to  a tough line.
Van Mook was recalled home and the outgoing Catholic premier, Beel, was sent out as High Commissioner.
Attempted Communist Takeover
Trouble was brewing in the 4th (Senapati) Division stationed around Surakarta in east Java.
The situation was complicated by the presence at Madiun of the Tan Malaka battalion.
Tan Malaka was released from jail.
Fighting broke out between army units.
The Red Flag was hoisted over Madiun town hall.
Sukarno proclaimed a state of emergency and called on the people to choose between himself and Musso: ‘My beloved people, in the name of the struggle for Indonesian independence I appeal to you.’
Musso replied by abusing Sukarno, reviving the accusation that he had recruited romusha slave labour, accusing him of a sell-out to America.
Musso was backed by 30 000 rebel troops, but the crack Siliwangsi Division launched an attack.
Musso was killed; Amir was executed.
The revolt was over.
The Dutch Kidnap Sukarno
However, the Madiun revolt gave the Dutch a big opportunity.
Their federation was in being: 15 states, with only the Republic lacking.
On 19 December Jogjakarta was seized by Dutch paratroops.
Sukarno, Hatta, their ministers and Sjahrir (retained as an adviser) were all arrested and flown off to places of exile.
In the confusion Tan Malaka made another bid for power.
There was an element of choice in Sukarno's arrest; he could have escaped into the surrounding countryside, but he awaited capture, perhaps calculating that in arresting him the Dutch were outraging international opinion.
If so, he was right.
India Mobilises International Pressure
First to respond was Nehru, who convened a conference of Pacific and Indian Ocean states, including Egypt, Ethiopia, the Philippines, Australia and New Zealand, but not Britain or the USA.
They agreed to ban the Dutch from their ports and airfields and demanded that the UN Security Council take action.
On 28 January a UN resolution called for the cessation of hostilities, the release of the Indonesian leaders and the restoration of their authority within the Van Mook Line.
The resolution called for the resumption of negotiations and transfer of sovereignty to a United States of Indonesia  before 1 July 1950.
The Dutch had ignored previous resolutions, but this time the United States exerted pressure by suspending part of the aid programme.
Sassen resigned from the colonial ministry but his successor, Beel, also belonged to his party.
The agreement made by Dr H.J. Van Roijen with Muhammad Rum, a second-rank leader, under the auspices of the American H. Merle Cochran, left much of the recaptured territory in Dutch hands, but accepted the principle of a Round Table Conference and the release of the captured leaders.
Before they returned, Tan Malaka (called by some Father of the Republic) was executed by order of Colonel Nasution.
Dutch forces did not leave Jogjakarta until 30 June and Sukarno and the others returned there one week later.
They returned as heroes.
Hatta re-formed a Cabinet, and a month later departed for The Hague to lead the Republican delegation.
The Sultan of Pontianak in Sumatra led the rival delegation from the 15 Dutch-sponsored states.
The conference lasted from 23 August to 2 November.
It was eventually agreed that sovereignty would be transferred to a United States of Indonesia (USI) before 30 December 1949.
Dutch Recognise Federal Indonesia (December 1949)
There would be a Union with the Netherlands under the Dutch Crown.
The considerable Dutch business interests were safeguarded against nationalisation or expropriation.
The Dutch colonial army would be disbanded by July 1950 and all units withdrawn from Republican territory.
The agreement left the Indonesians dissatisfied in two important respects.
They had to assume a national debt of 4300 million guilders (US $1130 million) of which 1.291 million guilders ($339 million) must be paid in foreign currency.
The main charge was for military operations waged against the Republic!
The status of West New Guinea (West Irian) was left to be determined within one year: meanwhile, Dutch rule continued there.
Sovereignty was formally transferred on 27 December; but the occasion was unlike the independence celebrated in India and Pakistan on 15 August 1947 and in Burma on 4 January 1948.
This was more like a pause in the struggle.
Sukarno was elected President of the USI.
He directed four formateurs to submit names for the federal Cabinet and chose Hatta as Prime Minister and Foreign Minister.
The Cabinet included two Sultans from Sumatra and South Celebes (Sulawesi) though most of its members were Republican politicians.
Sjahrir was not among them.
Only later did Sukarno reveal the full venom of his animosity (‘While I was  taking hammer blows on the head his entire underground effort can be summed up by saying he sat quietly and safely away somewhere listening to a clandestine radio’).
Sjahrir never again held Cabinet office.
The uneasy beginning to the federal republic was shattered by the eruption of ‘Turk’ Westerling into Java.
Westerling, a Dutch officer, had pacified (or terrorised) Sulawesi in 1946.
Part of the Dutch legacy was a separate state in west Java, Pasundan.
From there he issued demands to the Republic and failing any reply captured Bandung (22 January 1950) and planned a coup to depose the USI government in Jakarta.
He was disavowed by the Dutch government and compelled to leave hastily, but his buccaneering had done no good for the federal idea or for the Netherlands.
Also in January 1950, Sukarno paid a state visit to India which was returned by Nehru in June: in a typically ruminative speech (so different from Sukarno's declamatory style) Nehru told his audience, Politicians are accustomed to making this kind of speech on a foreign tour, but we may believe that Nehru, with his almost mystical sense of Asian-ness, meant every word.
Dutch Retain New Guinea
The new state was beset by many problems but over-shadowing all was the Dutch refusal to hand over New Guinea.
This issue was exploited by Sukarno until the Dutch finally gave way, in 1962.
He then found another foreign territorial issue in the inclusion of the British North Borneo territories in the newly-formed Malaysia.
In a sense, his whole presidency was dedicated to his own vision of an Indonesia stretching ‘from Sabang to Merauke’, next to what was then Australian New Guinea.
The first move was to liquidate the federal structure and instal a centralised system.
Westerling's rash adventure provided a starting point.
All the outer states capitulated to the Republic except for the most easterly islands which proclaimed a Republic of the South Moluccas.
The TNI arrived to take over but were opposed, mainly by Ambonese  ex-soldiers of the Dutch colonial army.
By November 1950 resistance was virtually over.
Many of the rebels were evacuated to Holland where a South Moluccan government in exile addressed pathetic appeals to the UN, which were ignored.
On 14 August 1950 the new set-up was endorsed by the legislature established by the USI who thus ended their own existence.
As Vice-president, Hatta affirmed that the revolution had been completed.
Sukarno insisted that it had to go on ‘with united forces and tireless energy’.
as if to signal their displeasure the Dutch parliament passed a constitutional amendment in 1952 incorporating West New Guinea into the Netherlands and closing off further discussion of the issue.
Trials of Indonesian Democracy
Already the Indonesian multi-party system was demonstrating its inherent weakness.
There were over 20 parties.
In the parliament the strongest were Masjumi , the Islamic party founded under Japanese auspices with 49 members; the PNI, Sukarno's old party refounded in 1946, with 36 members; the Socialists (PSI), Sjahrir's party with 17 members, and Indonesia Raya , with 17 also.
The PKI came next with 13: in total there were 232 MPs.
In 1952 Masjumi split into two, one group calling itself Nahdatul Ulama .
The fragility of the parliamentary system was already apparent.
A major legacy of the revolution was a swollen undisciplined army.
Parliament attempted to reduce its numbers and in so doing upset regional and sectional forces.
On 17 October 1952 tanks were lined up in front of the presidential palace and a group of officers led by Nasution called on Sukarno to dissolve parliament.
The president handled the officers coolly; the plot was a half-baked affair, and it fizzled out.
Nasution was allowed to retire.
All was far from well in parliamentary politics.
There were five prime ministers between September 1950 and March 1956.
All headed coalitions on the Dutch model, for despite their hatred for the Dutch they accepted their constitutional forms as their own.
When at last a general election was held on 29 September 1955 it was with proportional representation on the Dutch list system.
The new parliament of 257 MPs included 57 PNI, 57 Masjumi , 45 Nahdatul Ulama and 39 PKI.
The once prestigious PSI returned 5 members only; indeed, none of the other 23 parties represented were in double figures: most had one or two members.
These phantom parties increasingly became the butt of Sukarno's scorn.
Asian — African Conference (1955)
The year 1955 was most memorable for what was probably the high point of Sukarno's presidency, the Bandung Conference, which assembled in April.
Invitations went out to 25 countries.
The majority were in Asia and the Middle East.
The only African states invited were Ethiopia, the Gold Coast, Liberia and the Central African Federation: this White-dominated state came up with the sole refusal.
Both North and South Vietnam came, but not North or South Korea.
Nehru saw himself as the central figure; the veteran of the fight against colonialism and the apostle of non-alignment.
He expected to act as sponsor to Chou En-lai in the unfamiliar field of international diplomacy, but it was actually Chou who took over centre stage (as The Times pronounced, 25 April 1955, ‘It has been Mr Chou En-lai's week’).
Nehru had to acknowledge that he demonstrated ‘reasonableness, restraint and good breeding’, but also he was seen to possess authority and a firm grasp of Afro — Asian realities.
The final communiqué was notable for its extraordinary length and a good deal of self-congratulation (as when it referred to ‘the age-old tradition of tolerance and universality’ which the assembled countries personified), yet no-one could deny its significance as a symbol of the Third World renascence.
Sukarno was about to become the storm-centre of his country's affairs after several years of standing above the battle.
Indonesia attempted to reactivate the New Guinea (or West Irian) question through the UN.
The Bandung communiqué had stressed the urgency of an early solution, and strong Afro — Asian support was expressed for the Indonesian case at the UN though eventually the familiar device of a Good Offices Commission was accepted.
Impatient at the delay, Indonesia abrogated the Netherlands — Indonesia Union on 13 February 1956.
There was no Dutch response, and it was shown that a nice observance of legality was not essential.
Sukarno Preaches Politics of Consensus
During 1956 dissatisfaction with the existing system simmered and eventually boiled.
On November 28 Hatta resigned from the office of Vice-president, deploring the drift towards chaos: ‘All our rebellions and our splits, our political anarchy and adventurism, and all the steps taken in the economic field which have created chaos, are the result of the fact that our national Revolution was not dammed up at the appropriate time.’
The revolts he mentioned were being led by dissident army officers in Sumatra and elsewhere.
Sukarno denied Hatta's indictment.
For him the  problem was ‘free fight liberalism’.
He declared (24 December 1956): ‘For 37 years I have worked for unity.
…How can I, who have worked for unity…say ‘Hey, Indonesian people, unite, unite, but…the Communists are not included?’…
Can we create unity while bunging…the Communists down a mouse-hole?’
This was a prelude to his speech on 21 February 1957 when he proclaimed his konsepsi (conception) of what was to be Guided Democracy.
He called for a gotong-royong Cabinet composed of all political groups, including the PKI.
He invented a new slogan,Nasakom , meaning Nationalism, Religion (agama ) and Communism.
Army commanders in the outer islands proclaimed a state of emergency and replaced civilian governors by military men.
In this crisis the last parliamentary Cabinet resigned and was replaced by a ‘business cabinet’(Kabinet karja ) headed by Djuanda, not identified with a party.
Attempts were made on Sukarno's life.
On 14 March 1957 Sukarno declared a nationwide state of war and siege and assumed full powers.
In July 1959 he dissolved the Constitutional Assembly and reinstated the 1945 constitution by decree.
Against this background the escalation of the dispute over West Irian was a welcome diversion.
Acts of violence were committed against Dutch people and firms; 45000 Dutch citizens were expelled.
This was to continue until by 1962 300 000 Dutch citizens had been sent back to the Netherlands, 280000 of them being ‘Brown Dutchmen’, Eurasians, strangers to Europe.
These measures caused economic chaos; in particular, 80 per cent of inter-island traffic had been carried in Dutch ships which now moved hastily out of the archipelago.
1962: Dutch Quit New Guinea
At last, in 1962 the Dutch abandoned their costly and useless possession.
An agreed formula provided for a brief period of UN control before Indonesia moved in, early in 1963.
The final ceremony was witnessed by U Thant as UN Secretary General.
The Papuans were supposed to be consulted but the method — reference to tribal councils — provided only nominal assent.
1963: Sukarno President for Life
In the aftermath of this triumph, in May 1963, Sukarno was elected President For Life by the People's Consultative Congress which had replaced parliament.
At the same time Britain devolved its last colony in  South-East Asia to the new Malaysia.
Sukarno denied that this would be truly independent: ‘There was a world revolution of new emerging forces against the old established order…a revolution against the exploitation of man against man.
That is why we support the struggle of the people of North Kalimantan’[Borneo].
Confrontation with Malaysia
This speech signalled another of those magic slogans or mantras in which Sukarno delighted,Nefo (New Emerging Forces).
The struggle produced one of his most memorable images,Konfrontasi , confrontation.
In July 1963 Sukarno's intentions were clearly expressed: ‘We will destroy Malaysia.
Malaysia is against our ideal, against our evolution, and against our State — our revolution is a confrontation to destroy the old order and build a new order in Indonesia and elsewhere.’
Sukarno hoped to employ the same techniques as had broken Dutch resistance in New Guinea.
The British replied by building up their forces in the jungles and coastal waters of Borneo: for there was still a defence agreement with Malaysia.
A ‘Crush Malaysia’ propaganda campaign was mounted.
However, the international support which had been so important over West Irian was generally lacking.
Konfrontasi brought further economic decline.
Inflation — rampant since independence — now went mad.
The Indonesian rupiah, worth ten to the dollar in the 1950s, was 300 per $1 in 1961, by late 1963 it was 1200 per $1: by 1965 12000 rupiah bought only one dollar.
Sukarno's reply to this economic stagnation and disruption was again monumentalism: the national monument 110 metres high in Merdeka Square; the Istiqlal Mosque, largest in South-East Asia; the stadium for the Asian games or Ganefo (Games of Newly Emerging Forces) built by the Soviet Union.
‘New Emerging Forces’ as Alternative to UN
The USSR was one friend, China was another.
When Malaysia was admitted to the Security Council of the UN in December 1964, Sukarno played his last card: he took Indonesia out of the UN, declaring (in words made familiar by Hitler)‘our patience has come to an end’.
He attempted to launch a rival international body Conefo (Conference of New Emerging Forces) to bring about a world ‘without imperialism or exploitation’.
This envisaged association with the revolutionary states: China, North Korea and Communist Vietnam.
His internal policy was the same.
Communist Party Given New Strength
The alliance between Sukarno and the PKI grew ever stronger.
By 1963 there were over 2 million members in the PKI while 12.5 million were in Communist mass organisations.
Sukarno made it clear where his Nasakom doctrine was leading (17 August 1964): ‘I am a friend of the nationalists, but only the revolutionary nationalists!
I am a friend of the religious groups, but only of the revolutionary religious groups!
I am a friend of the Communists, because the Communists are revolutionary people!’
The PKI formed the spearhead.
Sukarno planned to employ these forces to counterbalance the growing political threat posed by the army.
Certain military commanders were, however, PKI sympathisers, including the air force chief, Air Vice-Marshal Omar Dhani, who visited Peking and negotiated the delivery of 100 000 small arms to equip a people's militia or Fifth Force.
This was the situation in 1965 which triggered off the ‘30th September Movement’:(invariably called in Indonesia by another acronym Gestapu , for Gerkang (movement) September, and Tigapolu (thirtieth).
Sukarno's Waning Sexual Potency
The prelude to the crisis was occasioned by Sukarno's apprehension that his physical powers were failing.
He had always been proud of his virility.
Like any Eastern potentate he was celebrated for his wives.
In 1955 he had followed the example of King David of Israel who coveted Bathsheba, wife of Uriah the Hittite.
Sukarno became fascinated by Hartini, wife of an oil magnate.
Despite the scandal, he married her in 1955.
Later, he married Ratna Sari Dewi, a Japanese bar-girl of ethereal beauty, and Hariati, thus completing the quartet allowed under Islamic law.
Hence, his fifth wife, Yurike Sanger, did not have their status in the eyes of the Muslim community.
Like an old-time Mormon, Sukarno kept each of his wives in a separate establishment in a different part of town.
Perhaps it was not surprising that he complained of physical debility.
In June 1961 just before his sixtieth birthday he told Hartini that he was old by Indonesian standards.
He did have a kidney weakness, but although he was no longer as trim and fit as before he was still an impressive man.
Yet it began to be whispered secretly that he was dying.
Probably the putsch of 30 September 1965 was intended to pre-empt the power struggle which must ensue when the president died.
What  happened is not in dispute;why it happened has never been properly explained.
The Plot Against the Generals (1965)
Just before dawn on 1 October, six generals and brigadiers were murdered and their bodies thrown down a well at a nearby military base, Halim.
Their most important intended victim escaped: General Haris Nasution, chief of staff (retired in 1952, then recalled) managed to escape from his house and jump over the garden wall amid a hail of shots.
His five-year-old daughter was killed.
Unaccountably, Lieutenant-General Suharto was not on the death list, and it was he who brought the Siliwangsi division into action, and occupied Jakarta.
The murders were executed by troops under Lieutenant-Colonel Untung, commander of the palace guard, but other more senior officers were involved, notably Brigadier-General Supardjo.
They were supported by two battalions of paratroops and other crack forces.
At 7.20 a.m. the radio announced that the putsch was ‘an internal affair of the army’.
Those purged were said to be in the pay of the CIA, and described as ‘counter-revolutionary’.
It was announced that a Revolutionary Council had taken over.
While all this was happening, Sukarno was at the house of his Japanese wife, Dewi.
He set out for the presidential palace about 6 a.m. but heard the place was surrounded.
He went to Hariati's house and decided to make for Halim, where he met Air Vice-Marshal Dhani and General Supardjo.
Without declaring for or against the coup, Sukarno issued an ordinance stating he had taken over command of the armed forces.
General Suharto Takes Over
This was an empty gesture as Suharto had already assumed that position.
Hearing of his movements, Suharto ordered the president to leave Halim as an attack would shortly go in.
He travelled to Bogor where his wife Hartini was waiting in the palace there.
Suharto visited Sukarno at Bogor and told him firmly who was in control.
Sukarno made a radio broadcast of sublime meaninglessness: Such rhetoric had gone down well in the past, but now made little impact.
Already the army was moving against the PKI, and soon there were mass arrests and executions.
By 13 October the CIA in Washington was claiming that there was ‘incontrovertible evidence’ of Sukarno's involvement in the putsch in conjunction with the PKI in order to eliminate the military.
The State Department was said to be ‘unconvinced’ by the ‘rather meagre’evidence.
Although Sukarno fought to retain his authority he was steadily out-manoevred by General Suharto, hitherto little known, so that The Times (2 March 1966) had to announce: ‘Remarkably little is spoken of him.
…He is reckoned of average intelligence…and is said to have a moderate faith in Islam.’
This shadowy figure organised the extermination of thousands labelled as Communists: 150 000 is given as ‘a conservative figure’.
Thousands more were exiled in labour camps on distant islands with no hope of release.
Were the Communists responsible for Gestapu ?
This is flatly denied in the influential though anonymous ‘Cornell paper’ issued from the university in January 1966 which accepts that Sukarno and the PKI became involved but claims they did not initiate the plot.
The paper blames dissident army officers such as Untung and Supardjo who wanted to get rid of Masution and the general staff.
Whatever the truth, the Communists were ruthlessly eliminated and Sukarno humbled.
The chosen instrument for his humiliation was the student body — those same pemuda who had forced Sukarno his hand in August 1945.
Sukarno Stripped of Office
Endless demonstrations in Merdeka Square called for his removal.
‘Hang him, hang him’, they cried, and demanded that he go on trial.
The students were encouraged by highly respectable people like Mrs Mang Sudewo, wife of a Brigadier-General, who ran a kitchen to feed them.
The Speaker of the people's Consultative Congress assured the students, ‘The end of the modern Pharaoh of Indonesia is imminent.’
On 5 July 1966 that Congress, which had made him president For Life, revoked this decision and also handed over the authority to appoint Cabinets to General Suharto.
In January 1967, Sukarno offered to go into exile providing he could  retain his office.
This was refused, and next month he handed over what powers still remained to Suharto.
In March Suharto was sworn in as acting President and in December 1967 Sukarno was placed under house arrest in Bogor.
Not until March 1968 did the general adopt the full presidential title and role, stripping Sukarno of everything.
Last Humiliations
His personal life followed the same pattern; of his wives only Hartini did not secure a divorce from him.
On 16 June 1970 he became seriously ill and died five days later.
He was buried in an obscure grave at Blitar in East Java: not so far away from the kingdom of the legendary Kerna.
But nobody remembered that any more.
7
THE LONG MARCH OF HO CHI MINH
Among these creators of new states none is quite like Ho Chi Minh who, despite having the spotlight of publicity turned upon him by the world's press, remains in many ways a mystery man.
The first problem is his name.
Was he first Nguyen Tat Thanh?
Known for more than 20 years as Nguyen Ai Quoc, ‘Nguyen the Patriot’, under this name he was reported as attending international conferences and became the author of numerous articles.
However, as an undercover man for the Comintern he also used innumerable pseudonyms.
Some of these will be mentioned, but the reader need not try to remember them.
He assumed the name Ho Chi Minh, ‘the Enlightened’, at some time between 1942 and 1943 and soon thereafter he began to acquire fame.
In this account he will be called ‘Nguyen Ai Quoc’ until 1941/2 and ‘Ho Chi Minh’or ‘Ho’thereafter.
A Mystery Inside an Enigma
Yet that is not the end of the mystery.
There are puzzles about many of his movements, recorded differently by different writers; and when he emerged as a national and international leader, almost immediately a myth-making process began.
This may also be true of Aung San, Sukarno, and others; but the careful investigator can disentangle myth from reality for most of their important moves and decisions.
One reason for Ho's elusive quality is that he became used to operating unobtrusively; so far as possible, invisibly.
He seems to have maintained this style to the end.
Nobody could have been more opposite to the flamboyant Sukarno, or even the haughty Jinnah or the mercurial Nehru.
The American major, Archimedes Patti, who headed the cloak-and-dagger Office of Strategic Services (OSS) mission which was in part responsible for assisting Ho into power in 1945, was asked, ‘What impression did he make on you?’
He replied: ‘Really he didn't impress me very much, to be honest about it.
To me he was just another old Vietnamese’(Ho was then 55).
However, this unassuming manner  concealed an iron will.
The image of ‘Uncle Ho’ fostered in national propaganda was almost as illusory as that of Uncle Joe for Stalin.
Ho possessed a nerve which never cracked; he pursued his chosen ends with complete ruthlessness.
And yet, to those who came to know him well, like Jean Sainteny, his adversary and friend, he was warm, relaxed, affectionate.
In endeavouring to give an account of his life one cannot really be satisfied that the truth is emerging: not the whole truth.
The subject of this study was born in the village of Kim-Lien in the Nghe-An province, about half way between Hue and Hanoi.
His birthday is officially given as 19 May 1890.
Like other Vietnamese of his day he was given two names; his first, ‘sacred’ name bestowed at birth was Nguyen Van Coong (modification of Cung and meaning ‘respectful’).
His second, literary name assumed when he went to school was Nguyen Tat Thanh (Uguyen destined for success').
He belonged to a family of literati.
His father, Nguyen Sinh Huy, a notable Chinese scholar, was awarded a doctoral degree.
He gave up his minor post in the administration because he refused to conform to French practices.
He joined the Scholars' Movement in 1907, was arrested, and some say imprisoned on the notorious island of Pulo Condor, where political prisoners were exiled.
On release he became a practitioner in Chinese medicine.
Travels to the West
Nguyen Ai Quoc was the youngest child.
Unlike his older brothers he went to a Franco — Annamite school and obtained a certificate in 1907.
He seems to have taught for a while, but already politics called him, and with his father's support he took ship for France.
He signed on as a steward, having acquired some skill in cooking.
He remained at sea for a few years and probably visited the United States.
Then he came ashore in London and obtained a position as a cook in the Carlton Hotel.
Here he acquired some proficiency in English.
He spent most of his free time working for the Overseas Workers' Union, a clandestine anti-colonial organisation chiefly recruited from Indians and Chinese.
His new friends urged him to go to France, where he could do effective political work among the thousands of Vietnamese the war had brought to Europe to fight as soldiers, in the labour corps, and as civilian employees replacing the French who were fighting.
He made his living as a photographer (or one who retouched photographs).
In 1919, like many from countries under Western domination, he tried to interest the Versailles Conference in self-determination for his country.
He was ignored.
At first he was associated with various Left-wing groups — anarchists, syndicalists — but eventually he joined the Socialist Party.
His hero was Jean Jaurès (1859 — 1914), who in 1904 rounded the newspaper l'Humanité .
Jaurès worked for reconciliation — especially at the international level — and discouraged conflict.
He contributed to l'Humanité, ‘Souvenirs d'un exile ’.
These articles were signed by his newly assumed name, Nguyen Ai Quoc.
It was perhaps in the spirit of reconciliation that he became friendly with a policeman responsible for supervising the Vietnamese in France, Louis Arnoux.
They met at a café near the opera, and Arnoux urged his political chief Albert Sarraut to meet this remarkable young man (Sarraut had previously been Governor-General of Indo-China).
That is one version: another is that Arnoux was using Nguyen as a police spy, a charge that was to be made again and again.
However, we need not assume a sinister motive for these meetings.
Arnoux was intelligent, and Nguyen Ai Quoc enjoyed their conversations.
Unlike most of the Vietnamese revolutionaries he was never anti-French and he welcomed the company of French writers, politicians, and even of one general, Leclerc.
Helps Found French Communist Party (1920)
He made his first important political appearance at the Socialist Congress in Tours in December 1920.
A contemporary photograph shows the young Vietnamese addressing elderly bearded French Socialists: paying no attention at all.
He had been reading Lenin's Imperialism: The highest stage of capitalism , and his ideological position had hardened.
Hence, when a large majority of the delegates at the Tours Congress voted to join the Third International, against the advice of their leader, Léon Blum, the political heir of Jaurès, Nguyen Ai Quoc was among them.
He stated a little later, ‘At the start it was patriotism not communism which moved me to believe in Lenin and in the Third International.’
However, he was now a founder-member of the French Communist Party, taking part in the Communist Congress at Marseilles in December 1921.
L'Humanité was now a communist paper, and we find him writing in its columns condemning ‘The indifference of the proletariat in the metropole with regard to the colonies.
…To the French worker a ‘native’ is an inferior.’
In 1922 he published his first book,Le Dragon de bambou , ridiculing the reforms in Annam.
He also published a study of colonialism in general which his biographer describes as ‘si malhabile, si médiocre ’ that he doubts if Nguyen Ai Quoc was the real author.
He paid his first visit to Russia later that year, participating in the Fourth Comintern Congress of November — December 1922.
The Comintern was the Third International, established in 1919, and at an early stage the  Indian M.N. Roy emerged as its colonial theoretician, almost equal to Lenin.
At the Fourth Congress Roy emphasised the counter-revolutionary character of bourgeois nationalist movements, such as Congress under Gandhi; Tan Malaka of Indonesia urged that international Communism should support pan-Islamic movements, the opposite argument.
Zinoviev, presiding over the Congress, blurred these differences and declared that just as the Russian Communist party was assisting the Chinese communists, so the French and Dutch parties should take care of Indonesia and Indo-China; a curiously neo-colonialist policy which was to persist for several years.
Nguyen Ai Quoc does not seem to have been prominent in these discussions although he was included in a group photograph with Roy, Tan Malaka, and other Asian delegates including three from Japan.
He returned to Paris and edited Le Paria (The Untouchable).
Now the picture becomes confused, for Nguyen Ai Quoc returned to Moscow in 1923 for training at the agitprop school called the University for the Toilers of the East.
He took part in the Fifth Comintern (June — July 1924) where he did make a mark.
He called for a more energetic anti-colonial policy by the French and British parties and demanded that the Comintern take ‘some concrete steps immediately’ in South-East Asia.
He emphasised the role of the peasants as a revolutionary force: ‘The rising of the colonial peasantry is imminent.’
He declared that risings had already begun ‘but each revolt is drowned in blood’.
International Communist Agent (1925)
Doubtless because he impressed the Congress he was asked to join Mikhail Borodin as Comintern agent in Canton.
He arrived (probably) in January 1925.
His assignment included organising a pan-Asian propaganda, ‘League of Oppressed Peoples of Asia’.
This achieved little success.
His main work was among his own countrymen.
By mid-1925 he had organised the Viet-Nam Coach-Mang Thanh-Nien Hoi , Vietnam Revolutionary Youth Association, usually called Thanh-Nien .
He was much influenced by Sun Yat Sen at this period.
A network of conspirators was created in Vietnam, but probably more important was the training of potential leaders, many of whom were enrolled in the Whampoa Military Academy, staffed largely by members of the Soviet Military Mission led by General Galen.
This academy was to produce the leaders of the KMT armies and many KMT administrators: and, paradoxically, many Chinese Communist generals.
Alongside them were young Vietnamese; the best known later was Pham Van Dong who in 1955 became prime Minister of North Vietnam.
The deplorable side of this training programme was that candidates who were deemed ‘unreliable’ were betrayed to the French Sûreté on their return to Vietnam.
Even more despicable was the betrayal of Phan Boi Chau, a nationalist leader who had been fighting the French since 1908.
This venerable leader was lured to Canton by Nguyen in 1925 and persuaded to go on to Shanghai to an address just within the French concession.
There, he was arrested.
It has been alleged that Nguyen Ai Quoc received 100 000 piastres (a fortune) for this act.
On being returned to Vietnam, Phan Boi Chau was sentenced to a term of hard labour, later commuted to house arrest (he remained in Hue till his death in 1940).
All these activities suddenly came to an end when Chiang Kai-shek broke with the Communists after the USSR had tried to take over the KMT.
Nguyen Ai Quoc had a Soviet passport (thus escaping the fate of the Chinese Communists) but had to leave with Borodin and Roy, making an epic journey across the Gobi desert.
Back in Europe he once again faded into the shadows, though it seems probable he attended the Congress of Oppressed Nationalities in Brussels, along with Nehru and Hatta.
He was sent to Thailand, where he toured Vietnamese villages on the eastern border.
He seems to have adopted the saffron robe of a Buddhist monk.
Enters Hong Kong (1930)
By January 1930 he had arrived in Hong Kong where he established the Vietnamese Communist Party which soon merged into the Indo-China Communist party or Dong Duong Cong-San Dang .
The meeting to implement this merger of separate groups is said to have been held during a football match on 3 February 1930 (presumably the match distracted attention from the little group).
The party formulated a ten-point programme: complete independence for Indo-China, a government of workers, peasants and soldiers, an eight-hour day and equality for men and women.
While this idealistic programme was being assembled a massive revolt broke out in Vietnam: bigger than any outbreak since 1908 or 1916.
A Vietnamese battalion mutinied at Yen Bay near Tonking, killing the officers and NCOs.
This was suppressed, and the leaders guillotined.
The mutiny was not Communist-inspired, but the spirit of rebellion was exploited to incite peasant risings.
One was centred in Nghe-An, Nguyen's birth-place, while in Cochin China (known to the Vietnamese as Nam Bo ) several revolts broke out in the Mekong delta.
The French employed troops and also aircraft to crush the rebels, yet they were  unable to impose their control completely for several months.
Among the rebel leaders was Truong Chinh, born 1909, whose real name was Dang Xuan Khu (he also assumed a literary name).
He was on the Sûreté list and was arrested in November 1930 and sentenced to 12 years penal servitude in September 1931.
He went to the infamous Son-La forced-labour camp in the jungle on the Thai border where hard-core Communists were able to indoctrinate their fellow convicts.
Arrested: then Freed
The Sûreté had not overlooked Nguyen Ai Quoc who was living in Hong Kong, posing as a Chinese, Sung Mancho.
Acting on a French tip-off, the British police arrested him on 6 June 1931, along with a young woman, Li Sam, described as his niece but more probably his mistress.
The arrest was irregular in many ways and he was freed from the threat of deportation on 20 August 1931.
His case was handled by a British lawyer, F.H.
Loseby, apparently instructed by the League Against Imperialism.
Another deportation order was served, and the case was taken before the privy Council in London.
D.N.
Pritt, KC, later Chairman of the Society for Cultural Relations with the USSR, appeared for Nguyen Ai Quoc, and Stafford Cripps for the Hong Kong government; he quickly decided that he had a weak case and deportation to French territory was dropped.
Nguyen Ai Quoc now applied to visit Britain, but this was refused.
He secretly visited Singapore and on return to Hong Kong was again arrested.
But for the authorities this was enough, and he was shipped off to Shanghai on 6 January 1933.
Next he was at the Lenin School in Moscow, 1933 — 6.
These were the years of Stalin's purges, and it was fortunate that he had spent so long away at a great distance.
One who then worked at Moscow University, Nguyen Khanh Toan, suggests that during his Moscow years he was provided with a Russian wife.
With the emergence of Léon Blum's Popular Front government in France, repression in Vietnam was relaxed.
Truong Chinh and most of his fellow prisoners were released.
The better atmosphere did not last long.
With the outbreak of war in Europe the Communist party was banned in France, and hundreds of Vietnamese communists were rounded up, including Truong Chinh.
He was able to persuade his judge to free him and he quickly disappeared.
An order for the arrest of Vo Nguyen Giap also went out.
He was a licentiate in law of Hanoi University working as a history teacher.
Giap went underground, but his wife and her sister — also revolutionaries — were caught.
Giap's wife was sentenced to life  imprisonment, and died in jail; her sister went to the guillotine.
Giap escaped, and went underground, as did Truong Chinh.
Meets Underground Vietnamese Communists (1941)
Nguyen Ai Quoc reappeared in the borderland of Yunnan.
A key meeting took place between 10 and 19 May in 1941: the 8th plenum of the Indo-China Communist Party (ICP), where the veteran agent from the Comintern probably had his first encounter with Truong Ching and Vo Nguyen Giap.
The young leaders who had founded the underground movement and endured the hardships of physical struggle were reluctant to accept this stranger as their mentor.
However, they were shrewd enough to recognise that his international contacts could contribute an essential element to their hitherto isolated effort.
His overall leadership was acknowledged, but the younger group retained actual control over their organisation and this dichotomy persisted throughout all the years that followed.
Those who participated in the 8th plenum became members of the Tong-Bo , the central committee of the ICP.
Truong Chinh was appointed Secretary-General.
As a front to the core organisation a League for the Independence of Vietnam was formed:Viet-Nam Doc-Lap Dong-Minh , usually known as the Viet Minh .
Assumes Name ‘Ho Chi Minh’: Harsh Captivity
Nguyen Ai Quoc went into Yunnan early in 1942 to link up with the many other Vietnamese exiles who were known collectively as Dong Minh Hoi .
They were under the patronage of Marshal Chang Fa-kwei, the commander of the units of the KMT army throughout the area.
He was not in control of security and Ho Chi Minh (as we may now begin to call him) was suspected by them as a Japanese spy.
He probably tried to get himself cleared by borrowing someone else's papers after his arrest.
It did not work out like that.
Ho was made a prisoner, a convict, ‘loaded with chains, covered in sores, put amongst the worst bandits, associated with the condemned, like one dead’.
His way of staying sane was to compose poems in classical Chinese which he somehow kept with him.
How long was he held in captivity?
Bernard Fall says very precisely that he was held from 28 August 1942 to 16 September 1943.
Other writers give different dates, none so precise, but all are agreed that he was a prisoner.
Marshal Chang (who later ran a restaurant in Hong Kong) insists that Ho was never imprisoned by him.
The next question is why was he eventually released?
The most probably explanation is that Chang discovered that the man he had previously selected to head the Dong Minh Hoi , Nguyen Hai Thanh, was ineffective: and argued that a now chastened Ho Chi Minh would be more inspiring while still following the Chinese line.
A few writers suggest that the Allies (that is, the American OSS) demanded his release so that they could get better reporting on the situation inside Vietnam than the aged Nguyen Hai Thanh, long absent from his own country, was able to provide.
While Ho was incarcerated, Vo Nguyen Giap was training guerrillas for action against the French.
Although Japanese forces entered French Indo-China in 1940 they left the administration and armed forces intact.
Their own forces there were not large, for Vietnam was merely a staging-post.
Hence when Giap began operations there was no contact with the Japanese.
His first action was on 22 December 1944 when he led a band of 34 against a French outpost (one is reminded of Aung San and his Thirty Comrades).
They captured several outposts and with the arms they gathered were able to equip larger forces.
Giap behaved ruthlessly towards the French-led levies and even village chiefs who were condemned as French collaborators.
Giap, remembering his wife's sufferings, felt a hatred towards France which Ho with all his old
Ho made contact with the OSS and their chief, Colonel Helliwell, who agreed to give supplies, arms and equipment in return for information.
Although the OSS remit was vague, it was shaped by Roosevelt's general anti-colonialism and his special venom concerning the French record.
FDR made it clear there must be no assistance to the French; indeed he was ready to transfer Indo-China to Chiang Kai-shek, who was too realistic to rise to the bait.
While the Viet Minh forces were deployed in the liberation of the northern border provinces they were also able to create a reserve (one writer estimates 10 000 troops) who were trained for the ‘big push’.
Ho seems to have remained in Kunming until 1945 where he cultivated the OSS, portraying himself as a Communist who was above all a nationalist.
To Major Patti he stated (in excellent English), ‘I put in fifteen years of service to the Party and I believe I paid my debt.
From now on I am independent and I can do as I find best for my country.’
Just what an American would like to hear!
French Collapse: Underground Forces Advance (1945)
The situation altered abruptly on 9 March 1945 when a Japanese putsch liquidated the whole French administration and military power overnight.
By then, the British were in Mandalay and the Americans had landed in Luzon.
The Japanese interned those who surrendered without a struggle and killed all those French elements who put up a resistance.
General Alessandri fought his way out into Yunnan with a force of 6000.
They received a stony welcome.
A Free French representative was there, Jean Sainteny, who had a heroic resistance record.
He opened negotiations with the Viet Minh and was given a statement amounting to a demand for a substantial handover of French authority.
Ho moved steadily nearer the plains as his guerrillas consolidated their hold.
By mid-1945 they controlled about one-third of northern Vietnam.
As they advanced they conscripted able-bodied males into their army.
Sainteny tried to persuade them to accept French fighters in their advance, but he was given a brush-off.
Finally, six representatives of France and the United States were parachuted into Viet Minh headquarters on 16 July 1945.
They achieved very little.
Like everyone else, the Viet Minh were unprepared for the A-bomb and the Japanese surrender.
In the north, Ho was able to move fast.
He sensed what he called ‘le moment favorable ’(a slogan from Lenin) and on 13 August proclaimed the Committee for the Liberation of Vietnam, which he claimed was ‘equivalent to a provisional government’.
On 21 August he arrived in Hanoi.
A spectator records seeing ‘a strange person in shorts, walking stick in hand, crowned by a peculiar sun-helmet, coloured brown’.
This was actually the garb worn by most of Hanoi's pedicab drivers.
He took a packet of American cigarettes from his shirt pocket; the spectator when told his name was surprised, and asked ‘Are you the famous revolutionary?’
Ho replied ‘I am a revolutionary.
When I was born my country was a land of slaves.
Since adolescence I have longed for its liberation.
That is my sole virtue.’
Vietnamese Independence Proclaimed, Hanoi
Next day, Major patti arrived by plane, bringing Jean Sainteny who claimed to resume the authority of France.
He moved into the palace of the Governor-General.
He found the French officials and soldiers had all been interned and he was virtually a prisoner.
There was nobody to oust the Viet Minh, and this was accepted by the Emperor of Annam, Bao Dai, whom the Japanese had acknowledged as ruler.
On 26 August he  abdicated and recognised the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
This was officially proclaimed on 2 September when Ho read a declaration to a vast assembled crowd:
The new red flag with its yellow star was hoisted and among those saluting and standing to attention were the American officers.
They had come a long way very fast.
British Occupy Saigon and South
In the south, it was all different.
At Potsdam Mountbatten had been given responsibility for accepting the Japanese surrender south of the 16th parallel.
As in Indonesia, he had to implement this decision with virtually no guidelines.
Major-General Gracey had to take over.
The Saigon river was closed to shipping, so on 13 September his division began to fly in via Bangkok.
Douglas Gracey was a typical Indian Army officer.
Commissioned in 1914, he had fought at Gallipoli with his Sikhs.
Since 1943 he had been in action with the 20th Indian Infantry Division.
He took good care of his men and he believed that soldiers should stay out of politics.
His instructions were to recover the allied prisoners of war, to disarm the Japanese, and to hand over to the lawful authority as soon as possible.
However, although General Leclerc, whose armoured division had liberated Paris, was waiting at Kandy, the only French force within thousands of miles (other than the Vichy forces now interned) was the 5th Colonial Infantry Regiment in Ceylon.
Gracey was on his own.
While independence was being proclaimed in Hanoi on 2 September there was a rising against the French in Saigon.
British and Australian POWs who had freed themselves tried to quell the disorder.
On 21  September, Gracey (whose division was not yet all in Saigon) issued a general order stating that the transition from war to peace conditions would be carried out all over southern Indo-China under his command.
No demonstrations were permitted; looters and saboteurs would be shot.
Two days later he released and armed the interned Vichy troops.
They attempted to take over the city; for three days they fought the Viet Minh, and in the cross-fire Lieutenant-Colonel Dewey of OSS was shot dead.
Gracey was compelled to make use of Japanese troops against the rebels.
The conflict was abated.
A strong protest against Gracey's action was sent by the Democratic Republic of Vietnam to the British Prime Minister on 26 September.
This was said to constitute ‘a great violation of our national rights…and non-observation of attitude of neutrality by the British disarmament forces’.
Mountbatten was worried by these developments.
He urged Leclerc to compromise: ‘You cannot put back the past: there is a new situation.’
Leclerc replied, ‘What you say makes sense but it is not French policy.’
Leclerc arrived in Saigon in October with the first French reinforcements.
He was in military command, but supreme political authority was given to Admiral Thierry d'Argenlieu, a strange, remote figure previously a Carmelite monk.
His principal qualification was total loyalty to de Gaulle.
He did not actually arrive until early in 1946; meanwhile, Leclerc consolidated his hold over the south and Gracey's role was phased out.
By the end of January 1946 only two British-Indian battalions remained.
Although the French now controlled Saigon and the other towns the rural areas were largely in Viet Minh hands.
Their leader, Tran Van Giau, used extreme methods to enforce compliance from the people which probably went beyond the policy of Ho.
KMT China Occupies North
The KMT Chinese entered Tonking in massive numbers.
General Lu Han had 180000 troops with him and they lived off the country in the traditional Chinese manner, looting and exporting industrial plant to China.
Having experienced a Chinese jail, Ho was cautious in his dealings with them.
He was compelled to accept the ‘nationalist’ Vietnamese who now came in from China in a United Front government.
Under these circumstances, Sainteny and his colleagues seemed to offer the possibility of an insurance policy.
Ho first met Sainteny on 28 September 1945.
The latter wrote: ‘This ascetic man…was a person of high calibre.
…His wide ranging culture, his intelligence, his unbelievable activity and his absolute impartiality  won for him his unique prestige and popularity with the population.’
(It should be recalled that when he first appeared in Hanoi in August, everyone asked ‘Who is Ho Chi Minh?’)
Sainteny realised that a military reconquest demanded too high a price.
He told his superiors in Paris that 300 000 troops would be required to achieve anything (an accurate estimate of what the French eventually had to commit in Indo-China).
‘We should negotiate’, he concluded.
Ho separately reached the same conclusion.
He restrained his more intransigent lieutenants; he fostered the image of Uncle Ho.
On 11 November he publicly dissolved the ICP.
The Viet Minh made a deal with the Vietnamese ‘Nationalists’ whereby they were guaranteed a proportion of seats in the new national assembly elected early in 1946.
Ho Forms Coalition Government (1946)
France signed an agreement with China whereby in return for giving up the territorial concessions in the treaty ports, handing over the Yunnan railway, and meeting sundry other Chinese demands, they agreed to withdraw their troops from Indo-China by 15 March.
Negotiations went on in Hanoi between Sainteny and Ho.
Meanwhile, on 2 March Ho formed a coalition government.
The Foreign Minister was Nguyen Tuong Tam who had been in south China but not as an associate of Ho Chi Minh (he fled from Hanoi in June 1946).
The Minister of the Interior, Huynh Thuc Khang, was non-party.
He was placed in overall charge when Ho went to negotiate in France.
Leclerc supported the move to negotiate; d'Argenlieu was hostile, but the new Colonial Minister, Marius Moutet, was (for the time being) persuaded.
It was a near thing.
French warships approached Haiphong on 6 March, and despite the agreement were fired on by Chinese batteries.
They replied in kind, and proceeded to land.
The Viet Minh viewed this development with alarm and a declaration for all-out war was issued.
This was overtaken by the convention also concluded on 6 March between Ho and Sainteny.
The convention was avowedly made on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam and for Admiral d'Argenlieu.
Accordingly, France recognised the Republic ‘as a free State, having its government, its parliament, its army and its finances and as part of the Federation of Indo-China and of the French Union’.
Reunion of Nam Bo with the north would be accepted by France if ratified by popular referendum.
In return, the introduction of the French army was agreed, though under careful conditions: only ‘French of metropolitan origin' were to come — no colonial troops.
These were to be phased out completely within five  years.
Further negotiations would determine the diplomatic relations of Vietnam with foreign countries and the future status of Indo-China (that is, Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos).
Ho put all his authority into the acceptance of the convention by his wilder supporters.
To receive Sainteny he asked the former emperor Bao Dai to stand with him and endorse the agreement.
To his supporters he said ‘Keep calm and maintain discipline.
I will not let you down.’
The French became increasingly equivocal.
A conference was held at the hill station, Dalat, between Giap and Pierre Messmer.
The demand that Nam Bo come in with Vietnam was resisted; the referendum must wait until conditions were more stable.
On 30 May Ho left by plane for France to work out a settlement.
Two days later d'Argenlieu proclaimed a separate republic for Cochin China with its own army and separate budget: he had yielded to the colons .
Unknown to Ho, his seeming friend General Leclerc was also working against him: on 6 June he warned Georges Bidault that Ho was ‘un grand ennemi de la France ’.
Ho Heads Negotiations in France
In the French general election of 21 October 1945, 75 per cent of electors had voted for Communist, Socialist or Popular Republican Movement (MRP) candidates.
The resistance record of the Left, compared with collaboration on the Right, was a major factor.
However, when the Assembly presented a new constitution to be decided by referendum, the MRP joined the Right in telling the electors that there were inadequate guarantees against Communist subversion and against disintegration of the French empire.
By a narrow margin the draft was rejected on 5 May.
A second Assembly was elected on 2 June and produced a modified constitution which was endorsed on 13 October.
The head of the government, the MRP resistance leader Bidault, was a believer in the continuing mission civilisatrice .
He cold-shouldered Ho, who insisted that at the national parade on Bastille Day he be placed next to Bidault.
The Communists were scarcely more sympathetic.
Their leader, Thorez, had deserted from the army and been stripped of his citizenship in 1939.
He made his way to the Soviet Union.
He returned to France in November 1944 and was rehabilitated, but was under some pressure to demonstrate his patriotism, including support for the empire.
Ho was kept hanging about at Biarritz.
A conference was convened at Fontainebleau, but France was represented mainly by officials, not politicians.
There was nobody from the Communist Party.
In desperation, on 5 August, Ho declared: ‘I have come here to make peace.
Do not send  me back to Hanoi empty handed.’
When eventually a modus vivendi was reached on 14 September this purported to bring provisional solutions to the most important questions of immediate interest arising between France and Vietnam'.
This covered secondary problems and made no concessions concerning independence within the French Union which Ho had expected.
On 19 September Ho embarked on a packet boat which took four weeks to reach Hanoi.
He was said to be in good spirits, but this was assumed: he feared he would be denounced as a traitor on his return.
When he landed on 20 October it seemed that the magic of Uncle Ho had not faded.
He still hoped for a settlement, but each time he sent a communication to Bidault it was unaccountably held up by d'Argenlieu.
General Valluy, the military commander, demanded that all Viet Minh forces be withdrawn from the Haiphong area, following a brush with the French navy.
At this moment d'Argenlieu was in Paris, and he persuaded Bidault to teach the Vietnamese a lesson.
This took the form of an artillery bombardment in which 6000 were killed.
By 28 November the French had total control of Haiphong and its airport and harbour.
End of Negotiation: Hostilities Begin
A last chance of compromise seemed possible when the veteran Léon Blum became the head of government in December: his pre-war record towards Vietnam had been good.
Yet the message which Ho despatched on 15 December did not reach Paris until 26 December, and then yielded no response.
Ho could no longer restrain the hardliners.
On 19 December hostilities began.
The Viet Minh attacked in Hanoi; many French people were killed and wounded, among them Sainteny who had always pressed for compromise.
The French forces won back the city, but when they reached the residence of Ho Chi Minh they found he had gone.
Next day he issued a proclamation: ‘Save the country.
We will win.
Long live the independent, indivisible Vietnam.’
Thus began the French phase of the Vietnam conflict which was to last eight years.
It would cost France over 77 000 of her sons, including 2000 officers (among them the sons of two Marshals of France and of 20 Generals) and even heavier casualties among the Foreign Legion, the colonial troops from Algeria, Morocco and Senegal: and of course the Vietnamese soldiers conscripted by France to fight the Viet Minh.
French policy sought to create a substitute for independence by designating the protectorates of former French Indo-China, and subsequently Cochin China, as associated states within the French Union.
Bao Dai was persuaded to become head of state.
At first French military  activity seemed to succeed.
The Red River delta was cleared of the Viet Minh, who retired to the hills.
Aid from Communist China Received: 1949
The situation altered radically when in 1949 Mao Tse-tung's forces reached the border of Yunnan.
Thereafter, the Viet Minh could rely on a supply of weapons (mainly American, taken from the defeated KMT).
From 1951 a Chinese advisory unit was stationed in Tonking under Wei Kuo-ch'ing.
Ho himself had especially good relations with the Chinese leaders in Kwangsi down to the 1960s.
France appointed one of her finest generals, de Lattre de Tassigny, to take command in 1950.
De Lattre was a commander in the Napoleonic style but he was also a desert general who relied on an arc of Beau Geste-type forts.
Gradually, taking heavy losses in men, the Viet Minh infiltrated into the Delta.
The French expeditionary forces numbered 250000 men.
General Giap had about the same number of soldiers, but these were reinforced by para-military elements.
His strategy was later described in his own book,People's War, People's Army .
This emphasises the importance of support from the civilian population, while ‘disintegrating the enemy’ by propaganda.
Gradually, the French people turned against the sale guerre .
France Disillusioned: the United States Intervenes
In 1952 a secret meeting took place in Rangoon between the Deputy, Jacques Raphaél-Leygues and Viet Minh representatives.
This was abruptly called off when the United States promised a sizeable increase in military aid to the French in Vietnam.
Laniel became premier in 1953, announcing that his government ‘was ready to seize all occasions to make peace, whether in Indo-China or at the international level’.
Ho seemed ready to respond when he gave an interview to a Swedish journalist, Löfgren.
This reflected his former affections: Ho Chi Minh's outburst was a reflection of the growing American involvement in the suppression of the movement they had previously supported.
American military supplies first arrived in June 1950.
By 1952 they were contributing $400000000 a year and John Foster Dulles gave enthusiastic support as part of his anti-Communist crusade.
Ho was correct in identifying America as early as 1953 as the principal enemy.
His message got through: Laniel approved a proposal to send a Socialist Deputy, Alain Savary, to open up preliminary talks, but Bidault, now Foreign Minister and still a hawk, refused: ‘Ho Chi Minh is giving in; do not support him by this contact.’
A few months earlier, in July 1953, a new French commander took over in Vietnam: General Henri Navarre.
He is supposed to have reported back that the war could not be won; but the United States exerted strong pressure to continue.
General Giap realised that his best course was to knock out the French before American aid increased decisively.
In a series of lunges he cut off a sector of north Vietnam and isolated much of Laos.
Navarre's reply was to establish a massive fortified camp near the Lao border at Dien Bien Phu.
It was here that the French finally threw in their hand.
France's Last Stand: Dien Bien Phu (1954)
Navarre committed 12 infantry battalions, artillery and some tanks to a place that could only be supplied by air.
He calculated that the Viet Minh would be destroyed in any attempt to capture his position.
Giap launched his assault on 13 March; for nearly two months the fighting raged.
What was a total surprise to the French was the appearance of heavy enemy artillery, hauled up the steep mountainsides.
Soon after midnight on 7 May the Viet Minh overran the last French positions held by the Foreign Legion and Algerian colonial infantry.
Those who were not dead marched away into captivity.
With prescience Ho proclaimed: ‘Great as was the victory it was no more than a beginning.’
On 8 May the international conference at Geneva to resolve the Vietnam imbroglio was opened.
Bidault spoke intransigently.
Pham Van Dong represented the Democratic Republic, and put forward eight conditions which still included the possibility of ‘free association within the French Union’.
There was no response from the United States or from Bao Dai's henchman.
On 25 May, Dong suggested demarcation of zones of control, representing a single holding', on which a ceasefire might be  based: or in plain language, partition.
There was still no French response, until at 2 a.m. on 18 June the Radical Socialist Pierre Mendès-France assumed the premiership, promising to find a solution within 30 days.
Vietnam Formally Divided, North and South
Mendès-France succeeded: on 21 July the conference issued a final declaration.
This followed an armistice agreement signed by representatives of France and the Democratic Republic the previous day accepting the division of the country along the 17th parallel with a demilitarised zone between.
Military regrouping was to be completed within 300 days, and the introduction of new forces into either part of Vietnam was prohibited.
The final declaration had no signatures appended (the United States and the Bao Dai regime remained aloof).
Nevertheless, according to Article 7, ‘The Conference declares…the Viet-Namese people [shall]enjoy the fundamental freedoms…established as a result of free general elections by secret ballot.
…General elections shall be held in July 1956 under the supervision of an international commission.
…Consultations will be held on this subject between the competent representative authorities of the two zones from 20 July 1955 onwards.’
The USSR and the People's Republic of China had recognised what we may now call North Vietnam since 1950.
India and Burma, while sympathetic to the struggle, had awaited results.
Now both Nehru and Nu visited Ho Chi Minh soon after his return to Hanoi.
Friendship of Nehru and Nu With Ho
Nehru noted in his diary for 17 October 1954: ‘He came forward — almost leapt forward — and embraced and kissed me.
Obvious that this was not a showpiece.
He felt it and meant it.
Fine, frank face, gentle and benign — not at all one's idea of a leader of a rebellion.’
Nu did not set down his impressions till many years later, but they are very similar:
This was Uncle Ho, as two representative Asians saw him.
Soon, some of his ‘children’ were to endure harsh treatment.
First, there was an exodus of thousands of Catholics to the south, where they became the most implacable opponents of the Communist north.
This exodus was mainly caused by the anti-Communist attitude of their priests: and most of all by the new premier of what we may now call South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem.
Diem, an ardent Catholic, a former mandarin, was plucked out of a Maryland seminary to become premier by the Americans in 1954.
However, the brutal application of the new land collectivisation programme in the north must be ascribed in part to Ho Chi Minh, even though he ceased to be prime Minister in August 1955.
Active leadership of this programme was taken by Truong Chinh, Secretary-General of the Lao Dong , the cover name for Workers' Party, which the Communists now used.
The land reform which Truong initiated followed the prevailing Maoist line.
Almost all, except the poor peasant occupiers, were indicted as reactionary landlords.
They were brought before tribunals formed of peasants and deprived of their land.
They were executed or sentenced to long periods of forced labour.
Within a short while it became clear that this policy was damaging the rice crop.
The north had always relied upon importing from the Mekong delta; this source was now cut off.
Truong Chinh and others of his group were removed from office, confessing to ‘major errors’.
Ho Calms Discontent in North
Ho resumed charge of the party Secretariat.
When the 10th Plenum of the Central Committee met in September 1956, Vo Nguyen Giap read out a long list of errors, some quite devastating: ‘We have failed to realise the necessity of uniting with the middle-level peasants.
…Executed too many honest people.
…Failed to respect the principles of freedom of faith.
…We resorted to…disciplinary punishments…executions.
…Worse still, torture came to be regarded as a normal practice.’
A rehabilitation programme restored most ‘middle peasants’ to their homes  and wives, leaving those who had benefited from their expropriation resentful.
This reversal of policy came too late to prevent an outbreak in a Catholic area, the Quynh Luu revolt in part of Nghe-An province, in mid-November 1956.
Anticipating Mao's ‘Hundred Flowers’ experiment in liberalisation, the intellectuals who had been cowed Into silence were now encouraged to speak out.
There was some indirect criticism of Ho.
One poem taken as applying to him runs:
By 1957 it was judged that the crisis of confidence was over.
Ho's biographer insists that he was never blamed for the excesses; the people distinguished between their revered leader and his ‘entourage’.
Emphasis was given to the simplicity of his life-style.
Although he occupied the palace of the former French Governor-General he actually lived in the gardener's lodging and grew flowers and tomatoes.
He dressed the same as all other Vietnamese: a drab tunic suit and sandals made out of old lorry tyres.
It does appear that from the late 1950s he took a back seat, leaving the direction of affairs to a collective leadership: Giap as military chief, Pham Van Dong as premier, Truong Chinh as formulator of ideology, Nguyen Duy Trinh as planner and programmer and Le Duan, brought back from the south, taking over as party chief from Ho late in 1957.
Moves for Reunification Resisted by South
In foreign policy first priority was given to implementing that part of the Geneva accords which provided for elections throughout Vietnam, originally scheduled for July 1956.
Innumerable communications passed between pham Van Dong and the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference, representing Britain and the Soviet Union.
The British Government professed to ‘have always regarded it as desirable that these elections should be held and have advised the Government of the Republic of [South]Vietnam to enter into consultation with the Viet Minh authorities [sic]in order to ensure that all the necessary conditions obtain for a free expression of the national will’.
In the next sentence the British Government added that they ‘do not agree’ that South Vietnam ‘were legally obliged to follow this course’.
It was stalemate, and as  neither Ngo Dinh Diem nor his American masters intended to allow nationwide elections what had seemed the main advantage of the Geneva agreement was denied to the Democratic Republic.
As in divided Germany and divided Korea, Ho Chi Minh and his comrades might have accepted that this was the reality: especially as it became ever more clear that the United States intended to uphold the status quo with all their power.
When Ngo Dinh Diem was proclaimed President of the ‘Republic of Vietnam’ in October 1955 compromise seemed impossible as he began to suppress all opposition, whether political or religious.
In the North, in the Democratic Republic, the army shed all guerrilla characteristics and became a professional force.
The particular role of Ho Chi Minh seemed increasingly to be performed in the international arena.
As a rift opened between a ‘revisionist’ Soviet Union and a ‘doctrinaire’China, Ho endeavoured to keep open communications, visiting Moscow and Peking frequently.
He also cultivated friendly neutrals, such as Indonesia: in March 1959 he issued a communiqué jointly with Sukarno invoking the ‘spirit of Bandung’.
Any foreign visitor of any distinction would be welcomed in the presidential palace in Hanoi where Ho was adept at revealing the human face of Communism.
National Liberation Front formed in South (1960)
Yet all the time the Communists looked forward to ‘the end of the beginning’.
This was brought about when, somewhere in the ‘liberated area’ of the South, a rally was held in December 1960 to establish the National Liberation Front.
In a sense, this was a recognition of the division of the country, as the Front was now the organisational base for activity against the Diem regime.
However, the Front was increasingly built up and reinforced by the North via the route which became known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
It is argued that the year 1960 also saw the recognition of Le Duan as second in the hierarchy to Ho, representing the new generation of leaders.
The focus was now on the South, where despite ever-increasing American aid the West was not ‘winning the war’.
Diem, once the main hope, was regarded as an obstacle to improvement.
On 1 November 1963 he was ousted in an army coup almost certainly promoted by the Americans.
Three weeks later, President Kennedy was also killed.
In 1963 there were 16 000 American ‘advisers’ in South Vietnam; two years later their number was over ten times greater.
Vietnam had become an American obsession.
The air bombing of the North began on orders from  President Johnson in February 1965.
Interviewed by a Left-wing British journalist and television producer, Felix Greene, Ho declared: ‘You have seen the country.
You see the sufferings which air raids have caused our people.
Who would wish this frightful war to continue?
They give us no choice but to fight.
We shall not give up our independence.’
Concern for the worsening conflict was expressed when the Commonwealth heads of government met in 1965.
The Afro — Asian leaders were especially critical of the American escalation.
Harold Wilson, as Britain's Labour Prime Minister, was pulled two ways.
The Left wing of his party demanded an end to American aggression; the Foreign Office under Michael Stewart defended American policy calling uncertainly for an international conference.
This was the situation as the Commonwealth leaders sought to find a formula.
The best they could suggest was a Commonwealth exploratory mission.
Nigeria and Ghana were to be participants.
Nkrumah Tries to Mediate (1966)
Early in 1966 President Johnson ordered that the bombing of the North be resumed after a temporary pause.
This was condemned by several outside powers, including France.
General de Gaulle wrote to Ho Chi Minh on 8 February 1966, stressing that peace could only be restored by a return to non-intervention; the United States was not named, but clearly this was in de Gaulle's mind.
This was the background to an attempt by president Nkrumah of Ghana to break through the impasse.
He had been in correspondence with Ho, and now determined to make a personal visit to Hanoi to search for peace.
Before departing, he sought an assurance from Lyndon B. Johnson that he would respond, asking that the talks should not be sabotaged by American air raids.
Johnson's reply lacked enthusiasm, but contained a passage which afterwards struck Nkrumah's colleagues as ominous: ‘If you go to Hanoi, Mr president, you will be in no danger of military action in Vietnam.’
Nkrumah flew to Rangoon, taking his Foreign Minister and a large party with him.
There they boarded a Chinese plane and flew to Peking for preliminary discussions.
When they arrived, the Chinese had to inform him that in his absence he had been deposed by a military coup in Ghana.
He did not get to Hanoi.
Although almost by chance, the Vietnam war had claimed another Head of State (its first victim being Ngo Dinh Diem).
It was to terminate the careers of two more; Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon.
Ho received a visit from his friend and adversary Jean Sainteny in July 1966.
They reminisced about old times, particularly their weeks together  at Biarritz.
Ho was not under any illusion: the Americans were erecting massive bases at Da-Nang and Cam Ranh Bay.
He still hoped that France under de Gaulle would provide ‘an opening to the west’, whereby they could negotiate for ‘engagement de dégagement ’.
He did not know that ten years would have to run before on 2 July 1976 the National Assembly of the united Socialist Republic of Vietnam endorsed the unification of the nation, proclaiming Saigon to be Ho Chi Minh city.
As American pressure increased, so the response of the Democratic Republic and the National Liberation Front, the Viet Cong, also reached a new level.
In the propaganda war, Ho and his men were sowing seeds of doubt within the United States.
A notable convert to their point of view was Harrison Salisbury of the New York Times who argued that American withdrawal from the South would not produce a takeover by the North.
He quoted Le Duan as promising that the Lao Dang stood for ‘socialism in the north, democracy in the south’.
The South could operate a mixed economy: the two parts of Vietnam would work it out ‘as between brothers’.
Tet Offensive Cracks American Resolve (1968)
This was the soft sell; the hard sell came with the Tet offensive, January — February 1968, when Viet Cong forces penetrated almost all American bases and even moved into Saigon.
The operation was hideously expensive in lives, and yielded no immediate results; yet as at Dien Bien Phu they crashed through the enemy's psychological threshold.
General Westmoreland might successfully call for reinforcements, until there were 510 000 American combat troops in Vietnam, with 50000 South Koreans and smaller contingents from the Philippines, Australia and New Zealand: they could not secure victory.
The climax was in sight: the seeds of doubt had been sown on almost every campus across America, in the churches, in the press, in Congress.
Ho Chi Minh was nearing the end of his long life.
He died, as he had lived, without fuss.
Some time before, he observed, ‘My death?
It won't interest anyone.
It is what I have done today that counts.’
He died on 3 September 1969, after a heart attack.
His funeral was attended by Kosygin and many leading statesmen, from China, Algeria and other ex-colonial countries.
Sainteny represented France.
Deputies of the Assembly of South Vietnam proposed sending a deputation to Hanoi, and Nguyen Xuan Oanh, acting Premier of South Vietnam during 1964 — 5, praised him in the Assembly as a Vietnamese hero: one who might be called an Asian Tito.
Ho's Prophecy: ‘Total Victory'
Ho's will was read to the 250000 people who came to the funeral.
He deplored the split in the international Communist movement: ‘I firmly believe that the brother countries and parties will unite again.’
He accepted that victory was still distant, but ‘total victory’ was an ‘absolute certainty’.
He was writing ‘in anticipation of the day when I go to join the revered Karl Marx and other revolutionary elders’: ‘Our country will have the singular honour of being a small nation whose heroic struggle has defeated two big imperialists, the French and the Americans.’
It was no vain boast.
8
KWAME NKRUMAH: THE PURSUIT OF BLACK UNITY
Kwame Nkrumah belongs to the age group of Nu and Aung San.
Like them he came from a rural family, right outside the westernised professional class.
Like Aung San (and also Sukarno and Ho Chi Minh) there was a family tradition of descent from ancestors of good pedigree, former chiefs.
Unlike those others he grew up in a colony where higher education was still in its infancy.
Overcoming great obstacles he obtained academic training in the United States.
Unlike Aung San and Sukarno he was a model student, excelling despite his marginal position.
Yet, like them, he saw university education as the portal to political struggle.
When he returned to the Gold Coast he had been absent for 12 years: he had departed far too young to have made any mark.
The African colony to which he returned was regarded by the British government as ‘advanced’— in African terms — which meant that it had made a start on the road to self-government; however, the Colonial Office reckoned that the goal was still distant.
Within four years of his return, Nkrumah had emerged as the acknowledged national leader whose stature required a rapid acceleration in the political process.
The independence of Ghana in 1957 had a ‘knock-on’ effect on the other British African colonies similar to the knock-on effect of India's achievement in 1947 whereby Burma and Ceylon also emerged from their imperial past.
Like Martin Luther King, Nkrumah could say ‘I have a dream’: a dream of an Africa united and free.
His African vision was consistent with other wider associations, notably those of the Commonwealth and the UN.
One might suppose that this statesmanship would have gained him international acclaim.
Instead he was denigrated, almost from the moment he emerged as a leader.
In particular, the British press made him a bogeyman.
Nehru was also hounded by part of the press led by the Daily Express , almost to the day of his death.
Nehru was able to shrug off this carping criticism.
For Nkrumah it was more than a nuisance because influential elements in Ghana were acutely sensitive to British comment.
He responded defensively, becoming eventually what his enemies had  called him all along: a dictator.
Just as his rise was spectacular, so was his downfall.
Yet was his fall due to hubris, the fatal idée fixe about power, which has overtaken so many world leaders, including Sukarno?
The reader must judge from this account, written by someone who approached his subject with no preconceived ideas either way.
Village Childhood
Kwame Nkrumah was born in September 1909: like Nu he was Saturday's son.
His mother, his father's senior wife, was living in a village, Nkrohl, near the little town of Half Assini almost on the border of the French Ivory coast: it was there that his father, a goldsmith, practised his trade.
The claim to be descended from Chief Aduku Addaie came through his mother's line.
Nkrumah's mother was converted to Christianity by a German Roman Catholic priest and the boy followed her into the Church.
He attended a local school and then became a pupil-teacher at Half Assini.
There he came to the attention of the Principal of the government teachers' training college.
About this time the Prince of Wales' College at Achimota was opened and Nkrumah found himself there.
He was fortunate; the Governor, Sir Gordon Guggisberg, was interested in higher education as an element in changing the structure of government and society.
The Gold Coast had fallen back from the situation 50 years earlier when English-educated Africans had played a leading part in administration, Christian leadership, the judiciary and the learned professions.
During Joseph Chamberlain's tenure of the Colonial Office all that had changed; Africans had been replaced by British.
There remained an African elite, very conscious of their historic role in West Africa, usually termed ‘the intelligentsia’, and still dominant in the legal profession and private medicine.
However, as in India, the British preferred the traditional leaders of society and emphasised the importance of the chiefs.
In the coastal belt these were really only minor functionaries but in the middle belt, Ashanti, they were powerful.
Receives Best Education in Colony
This was the background to Guggisberg's efforts towards modernisation.
He managed to attract to the new Achimota college a remarkable principal, Alek Fraser, who had a long record of educating the leaders of society in Ceylon.
Achimota was organised on the lines of a British  public school with the boarders grouped in ‘houses’ which were supposed to inculcate the team spirit: however, it was more than a boarding school.
In the absence of a university college it was the nearest the Gold Coast had to an institution of higher education.
Nkrumah (who had been given the Christian name of Francis) responded readily to this challenge.
Fraser gave ‘inspiration and encouragement’ by his talks in chapel, but it was really the Vice-Principal, Dr Kwegyir Aggrey, who stirred up the young student and aroused his first thoughts about nationalism; though Aggrey firmly believed in partnership between White and Black.
Looking back, Nkrumah pronounced that the ‘Achimota days…were among my happiest’.
He returned to teaching in Catholic schools, being chosen as the first African to teach at a seminary for future priests near Elmina.
For a time he believed he had a vocation to be a priest himself but he reverted to a previous plan to save sufficient money to go to university.
Enters American College (1935)
His ambition was stimulated by Nnamdi Azikwe, a Nigerian, who had spent many years (1925 — 34) in the United States doing graduate work at Lincoln University and the University of Pennsylvania.
When he returned to Africa to work in journalism it was to the Gold Coast he came in 1934.
His encouragement stimulated the young Nkrumah.
He had inadequate funds to go abroad but a relative advanced him some money and off he went in 1935.
Like Azikwe, Nkrumah enrolled at Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, founded in 1854 as a college for Blacks, which introduced a theological faculty in 1869 affiliated to the presbyterian church.
The library contained a collection of African materials.
Nkrumah was to study at this somewhat remote, paternalistic institution until 1942, acquiring the degrees of Bachelor of Arts and of Theology.
He worked his way through college in characteristic American fashion, taking menial jobs in the vacation, eventually settling on work as a steward at sea, like Ho Chi Minh.
However his teachers recognised his exceptional qualities and he was given junior teaching posts which enabled him to register at the University of Pennsylvania, where he obtained his Master's degree and began to work towards a PhD, specialising in philosophy.
Increasingly he was attracted to Black America, first as a preacher in Black churches and then in civil rights organisations such as the NAACP and the Urban League.
He met C.L.R. James with his individual brand of  Marxism and pan-Africanism (James had broken with the Comintern), and he studied the writings of Marcus Garvey which ‘did more than any other to fire my enthusiasm’.
An American academic writer has quoted a classmate of Nkrumah at Lincoln as asserting he acquired an anti-American complex during these years.
This really does not fit the evidence.
In his Autobiography he reports a personal experience of racial harassment with restraint (p. 42).
It is difficult to imagine a more ardent disciple of the American work ethic, combining spartan living with high academic endeavour: he was the epitome of the Get Up And Go philosophy.
When Lincoln University awarded him an Honorary Doctorate (1951) his delight was obvious.
If he later showed hostility to policies of the United States this was quite separate from his personal feelings about the American people.
Arrives in England (1945)
In May 1945 with the termination of the war in Europe and the easing of Atlantic travel he crossed over to Britain.
He records: ‘I quickly felt at home in England.
…Nobody bothered about what you were doing and there was nothing to stop you getting on your feet and denouncing the whole of the British Empire’(pp. 48 — 9).
His first intention was to continue his philosophy studies in London University, combined with reading for the Bar: but this was soon abandoned because of his ever-growing fascination with pan-African politics.
His first acquaintance was George Padmore, the veteran opponent of colonialism from Trinidad.
Nkrumah was hastily coopted into the preparations for a Pan-African Congress to be held in October 1945 in Manchester.
This was the Fifth (or Sixth, according to one's definition) such Congress: most had taken place in Europe, but that preceding the Manchester meeting was held in New York in 1927.
The doyen of the movement was the sociologist W.E.B.
Du Bois (1868 — 1963) who argued that the mainline American negro policy of accommodation to White America was harmful: he urged people to see ‘Beauty in Black’.
The Africans had little reason to look to British political parties.
When the Labour party issued a statement of post-war aims in 1943 (The Colonies: the Labour Party's post-war policy for the African and Pacific colonies ), it affirmed: ‘For a considerable time to come these peoples will not be ready for self-government, and European peoples and States must be responsible for the administration of their territories.’
Nkrumah was an omnivorous reader and certainly took in the meaning of this paternalistic pronouncement.
Helps Promote Pan-African Congress
In Manchester, Jomo Kenyatta attended to the preliminary work.
The Manchester Congress was significant in representing the emergence of the Africans as a key element.
Du Bois still presided, but the United States sent few other delegates.
The Caribbean was well represented by (among others) C.L.R. James, George Padmore, Peter Milliard (a doctor from British Guiana practising in Manchester) and T.R. ‘Otto’ Makonnen, roped in like Nkrumah as organiser.
Most of the Africans, apart from Kenyatta, were new names; political unknowns outside their own territories.
There were several from the Gold Coast besides Nkrumah, notably Joe Appiah, a barrister and one of the Ashanti aristocracy, and Dr Kurankyi Taylor, another lawyer, a Fanti from the coast: a neighbouring tribe to Nkrumah's Nzima people.
Other important Africans present were Wallace Johnson, the trades unionist from Sierra Leone, Peter Abrahams, South African writer, and — one of the few Francophone delegates — the poet Raphael Armattoe from Togo.
The communiqué issued afterwards, like the Bandung communiqué ten years later, was a general statement concerning the Rights of Man.
However, the final resolutions addressed to the Colonial powers and the colonised peoples provided an agenda for action: ‘We demand for Black Africa autonomy and independence’; ‘We affirm the right of all colonial peoples to control their own destiny.
All colonies must be free from imperialist control, whether political or economic.
…Today there is only one road to effective action — the organisation of the masses.’
In the Gold Coast the last sentiment was potentially practical politics, for mass politicisation had begun among two important sections of the people of the coast, the cocoa farmers and the ex-servicemen: indeed, the cocoa farmers had first flexed their muscles in 1937 when they refused to sell to the European firms who bought 98 per cent of their crop (fixing the market) and also imposed a boycott on European imports.
The war years had seen a boom in cocoa prices: in 1938 cocoa earned £5½ million for 300 000 long tons; by 1948, because of disease, production had fallen to 200 000 tons but earnings had increased to £41 million.
Nevertheless, the farmers had to sell at a controlled price and vast sums were retained by Britain, exporting cocoa for dollars.
This was to become a major grievance.
The second group were returning soldiers, restless after service overseas.
By 1945, 63038 of the Gold Coast population were in the armed forces and 30 500 had served in the Burma campaign where two Divisions (the 81st and 82nd) came from West Africa.
Most of the infantry soldiers were recruited from the more backward tribes of the  north, but many NCOs and the few junior African officers were from the literate south.
Perhaps more important, the motor transport required by a modern army was supplied with drivers by conscripting bus, lorry and taxi drivers from Accra and the other big towns.
The others had gone willingly, but the drivers had a feeling of resentment from the start; army pay was less than their civilian earnings.
Gold Coast Unrest: Minor Political Concessions (1946)
This potentially explosive situation was not defused by the introduction of a new constitution in 1946.
The governor, Sir Alan Burns, was a member of the Caribbean White upper class.
For the first time there was an elected majority in the legislative council (18 out of 32 total).
However, the elected members were chosen by an electoral college dominated by the chiefs and the clear intention was to provide political training for the chiefs and the so-called intelligentsia while the Governor retained all power.
Bums believed he had answered political demand: ‘The people are really…satisfied with the new constitution they have gained’, he told the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, adding, ‘It is no good trying to hurry the Africans.’
He forecast that the constitution would have a life of at least ten years: perhaps lasting till about 1970.
Within two years it was condemned by the Commission of Enquiry into Disturbances appointed by the Labour Government as ‘out-moded at birth’.
These events in his native land must have appeared insignificant to Nkrumah, engaged in building up a structure of organisations to develop an awareness of African identity and solidarity.
He was Secretary of the West African National Secretariat, editor of a paper,The New African , and founder of the Coloured Workers' Association.
Unlike most of those reading for the Bar or enrolled in university he felt a responsibility for less privileged Africans washed up on British shores, mainly seamen, who had no recognised place in Britain.
He worked almost unbelievably long hours and subsisted on occasional cups of tea (rather as Krishna Menon had done during his long, lonely London years).
Nkrumah Asked to Organise Political Party (1947)
News about this dynamic activist was sent back to the Gold Coast, and he seemed just the man they needed to organise a political organisation to associate a mass following with the upper-middle-class political elite, who were already restless within the confines of the Burns constitution.
Nkrumah was told by his friend Ako Adjei (whom he had got to know in America) that a new organisation, the UnIted Gold Coast Convention (UGCC), required an organising secretary.
Some time after, he heard from Dr J.B. Danquah, a lawyer and a mainline member of the intelligentsia, urging him to take on the job.
Nkrumah was undecided; was he really intended to promote the political interests of the intelligentsia?
He consulted the West African National Secretariat: they urged him to go back.
He made plans to return.
His Return: Was He a Communist?
When in November 1947 he arrived in Liverpool to embark for home he found that the passport officials were reluctant to let him go.
The Special Branch had been watching him, and had accumulated an extensive dossier on his activities.
The main question was: did he belong to the Communist Party?
Later writers have answered this question with a resounding Yes .
In his Autobiography Nkrumah adroitly sidesteps the question, ack-nowledging that he admired some of the British Communist Party leaders and rather unconvincingly declaring that he had a blank party card among his possessions.
Let us assume he was a Communist: what does that mean?
In 1945 it was clear that ‘there was little difference between Labour colonial policy and that of the Tories’: the words are those of Nkrumah, but this opinion was shared even by moderate British Socialists, including the Fabian Colonial Bureau and Dr Rita Hinden, its Secretary.
Creech Jones, the Colonial Secretary, had been a champion of colonial causes before he took office: now he was falling in with the policies of powerful officials like Sir Andrew Cohen.
Nkrumah could still admire certain Labour stalwarts, especially Fenner Brockway, but in general the party was a great disappointment.
What more natural than that he should gravitate towards the Communist Party?
This certainly did not mean that he had become a tool of Moscow, but that he made a shrewd assessment of which ideology was most likely to speed up progress in Africa.
The UGCC was founded at Saltpond on the coast on 29 December 1947 to work for ‘government…of the people and their Chiefs’.
J.B. Danquah, half-brother of a paramount chief, was the moving spirit, along with Akufo Addo, a close relation of Danquah, William Afori Atta, another relative of Danquah, Obetsibi Lamptey, from Accra, Ako Adjei, and now Nkrumah.
All except the latter were lawyers, mostly flourishing lawyers.
This became the Working Committee of the UGCC, but Nkrumah rapidly discovered that there was little else: there were only two branches, both inactive.
Nkrumah decided to get out on the road.
He  was given an ancient, unreliable car and in this he made long journeys and addressed crowded meetings.
His first appearance in Accra was on 20 February 1948; Danquah was in the chair; he assured the packed meeting that ‘Kwame Nkrumah would never fail them.’
Among the issues raised were ex-servicemen s grievances.
Riot by Returned Soldiers: Nkrumah Arrested
Two days later there was an ex-service demonstration.
About 2000 formed a procession to take their demands to the Governor.
They were halted by the police, stones were thrown, and the European Superinten-dent opened fire on the crowd, killing two and wounding five others.
This started a riot; the big stores were looted, and the gates of the prison were battered down and some prisoners released.
By then Nkrumah and Danquah had returned to Saltpond.
When they heard the news they issued statements: Nkrumah demanded the recall of the Governor and called for a Constituent Assembly.
For some days the government did nothing, shaken by these unprecedented disturbances.
Then, on 12 March, the ‘Big Six’ of the UGCC were arrested and taken to the remote northern territory where they were separated and held incommunicado.
In parliament, those on the Left pressed for an inquiry into the causes of the riots.
When Willie Gallacher, the solitary Communist Mp, questioned the Colonial Under-Secretary, Rees-Williams, on 1 March about the riots, Rees-Williams retorted, ‘I guarantee that when the facts come to light’ then Gallacher ‘will not like them’.
The old diehard, Lord Winterton, asked whether they were ‘due to Communist dupes of the Third International, including the Communist party in this country?’
Rees-Williams replied darkly, ‘There was certainly Communist incitement.’
By 8 March there were 27 dead and 227 wounded in the rioting; later it was disclosed that 2000 persons had been detained ‘behind barbed wire’.
When Reginald Sorensen inquired what steps were being taken to deal with grievances, Rees-Williams replied blandly that the attitude of the chiefs and native authorities was ‘most helpful’.
Watson Commission Urges Reform (1948)
It was then announced that a Commission of Inquiry would be constituted, with Andrew Aiken Watson, KC, Recorder of Bury St Edmunds, as chairman.
When the Watson Commission arrived, the Big  Six were released and called to give evidence.
The remaining five had retained Dingle Foot, a leading barrister and Liberal MP, to advise them.
Danquah's evidence was somewhat defensive, even apologetic: Nkrumah felt that their intention was to distance themselves as far as possible from his pronouncements and actions.
All the allegations about his membership of the Communist Party were paraded and much was made of his role in London in leading a little group known as ‘The Circle’.
Its motto was ‘Service, Sacrifice, Suffering’— not, one might have supposed, very different from the teaching of Christ — but its final goal was announced as ‘a political party embracing the whole of West Africa, whose policy then shall be to maintain the Union of African Socialist Republics’.
This was proof, according to the Commission, that: ‘Mr Nkrumah has not really departed one jot from his avowed aim for a Union of West African Soviet Socialist Republics.
…[He]has never abandoned his aims for a Union of West African Soviet Socialist Republics and has not abandoned his foreign affiliations connected with these aims.’
Commission Pillories Nkrumah
By inserting the word Soviet into the actual language of The Circle's credo the Commission managed to invest this document with sinister implications: it was worthy of Joe McCarthy, though his technique had not yet been launched.
If the Watson Commission intended to drive a wedge between the radical secretary of the UGCC and the upper-class leaders they succeeded.
The break came rapidly, though the complaints of the intelligentsia were forced.
They objected because Nkrumah had set up a ‘Ghana National College’ for the education of students expelled because of their support during the banishment of the Big Six; they objected to his launching of the Accra Evening News , an anti-colonial voice which achieved immediate popularity; most of all they objected to his Committee on Youth Organisation, set up as a branch of the UGCC.
This soon became the main vehicle for nationalist demand.
The Report of the Commission (which was not published until the autumn, when the Government had worked out its response) was strangely two-faced.
The colonial government was upbraided for being out of touch; failing to grasp that the colony had been exposed to liberal ideas from the outside world: ‘The star of rule through the Chiefs was on the wane’, it declared.
While urging rapid constitutional reform they concluded: ‘We have no reason to suppose that power in the hands of a small literate minority will not be used to exploit the illiterate majority.’
Nevertheless they recommended that a committee should be formed  from Gold Coast leaders to chart a programme of reform.
The Governor (1947 — 9), Sir Gerald Creasey, who was a Whitehall official, lacked a sure touch; despite the Watson Commission's comments on chiefly authority he selected a group strongly representative of the chiefs and their allies.
The Chairman was Judge Henley Coussey.
Of the 40 members, nine were chiefs; the remainder belonged to the old intelligentsia.
Six from the UGCC were included: Danquah, Akufo Addo and Obetsibi Lamptey; and three from outside the Big Six: B.D. Addai, Combina Kessie from Ashanti and ‘pa’ Grant, the father figure of the UGCC.
Nkrumah was excluded: and as the other UGCC leaders remained preoccupied with their task, he strengthened his political standing with the public.
The UGCC working committee attempted to impose discipline.
A meeting was held in August 1948, when Akufo Addo asked Nkrumah the question: ‘Why do you persist in using the word Comrade as a term of address?’
Pa Grant demanded his removal from office; other committee members thought he might be neutralised by making him treasurer.
They knew that Nkrumah enjoyed a popularity which none of them could emulate.
Through the Youth Organisation he was building up an alternative body of supporters, notably K.A.
Gbedemah, educated at Achimota.
He was almost as active and enterprising as Nkrumah.
Other supporters were Kojo Botsio, Krobo Edusei, Dzenkle Dzewu: the young men.
Nkrumah Founds His Own Party: CPP (1949)
At length, at a meeting on 12 June 1949 at a sports ground in Accra, speaking to a crowd estimated at 60000, Nkrumah announced the formation of the Convention people's Party (Cpp), to create ‘the new Ghana that is to be’.
This move was timed to pre-empt the UGCC from dismissing him.
The crowd sang ‘Lead Kindly Light’, which became the anthem of the CPP.
It was Gandhi's favourite hymn: not exactly a call to revolution (‘One step enough for me’).
This was the scene when a new Governor arrived in August.
Sir Charles Arden-Clarke, who had spent most of his career in northern Nigeria, Lugard's country, was a reliable paternalist.
Next came publication of the Coussey report in October.
The final recommendation (the committee had divided almost equally) was for an assembly of which two-thirds would be directly elected with one-third elected by the territorial councils of chiefs.
The Colonial Office diluted these proposals, announcing a legislature of 100 members: 37 from the chiefs, 33 (rural) chosen by electoral colleges, five (urban) directly elected, two chosen by  the Europeans, and three officials.
The vote was restricted to house-holders in the towns and taxpayers in the rural areas.
Creech Jones congratulated the committee on producing a constitution which would have the effect of cutting the CPP down to size.
The Colonial Office Report, 1949 — 50, declared, ‘The people of the Gold Coast…refused to be coerced into irresponsible action by a handful of extremists of the Convention People's party’.
Crackdown on CPP: Jail for Leaders
When Nkrumah announced a programme of positive Action, this was, in effect, a Gandhian campaign of civil disobedience.
In addition he convened a People's Representative Assembly which was not confined to the CPP but included others.
Positive Action was begun in January 1950.
The government began by arresting the less important members of the CPP as a warning and only on 22 January was Nkrumah pulled in.
He was arraigned on three different charges and sentenced to three periods of one year's imprisonment with hard labour to run consecutively.
There was no question of giving special treatment to a political prisoner, as in the case of Nehru.
Nkrumah was thrown into a cell along with ten others.
For eleven men there was one latrine bucket.
They slept on the concrete floor.
No reading or writing materials were allowed.
Nkrumah managed to keep up a correspondence by writing on lavatory paper which he wheedled out of his cellmates.
Nkrumah Contests Election from Jail
The long sentence was punctuated by the announcement of a general election under the Coussey constitution to be held on 5 and 6 February 1951.
Because, technically, his jail sentence was for one year, Nkrumah could register as a voter and then stand for election.
He persuaded the CPP to nominate him as one of the two candidates for the Accra double-member constituency.
Gbedemah unselfishly withdrew and stood for another seat.
Nkrumah was able to write the party manifesto on his borrowed toilet paper, and smuggle other messages out of prison.
The UGCC concentrated their resources against Nkrumah and his running mate, T. Hutton-Mills.
The tribalism of the town's Ga majority was given heavy emphasis.
They should reject this stranger, this Nzima.
Despite all the propaganda, the electorate — often described as petit bourgeois— came down decisively for Nkrumah and the CPP.
In Accra, Nkrumah headed the poll with 20 780 votes while Hutton-Mills was given 19 812.
Their UGCC opponents, both Ga and former friends, Obetsibi Lamptey (1630 votes) and Ako Adjei (1451 votes) were humiliated.
Dramatic CPP Victory (1951)
Throughout the colony in urban constituencies the Cpp received 58 855 votes, while all others received only 5574.
In the rural electoral colleges the Cpp had 1938 votes and all others 780 votes.
Because of the indirect system the UGCC was able to return three candidates: Sir Tsibu Darku and K.A.
Busia, Chiefly dignitaries, and Tachie Meson, a business tycoon from Sekondi on the coast.
Of these, Busia was to make his mark later: an Oxford graduate, the first African to be taken into the Colonial Service (in 1942), he was exactly the type the British would have preferred.
However, the unpalatable fact was that the CPP had won a resounding triumph.
After an awkward pause, while the Governor and the Colonial Secretary digested the unwelcome news, the release of Nkrumah and the other six CPP leaders still imprisoned was announced.
Nkrumah emerged, drawn, and obviously still dazed, to a tumultuous welcome from virtually the whole of Accra.
Governor Accepts Nkrumah as Leader in Council
Making the best of the situation, Arden-Clarke invited Nkrumah to meet him and submit his list of names for the majority of the Executive Council who would now become Ministers.
The dangerous Communist agitator had been transformed overnight into the Governor's principal councillor.
It was a situation often to be repeated in the following years in British colonies.
Out of the seven Africans who now took over as Ministers, all except one were Cpp members: the odd man out was J.A.
Braimah of the northern territory which had played no part in the election.
What were the attitudes of the two leading figures?
The Governor's position is shrewdly summed up by one observer: ‘A deal with Nkrumah and the CPP would give the British a breathing space, perhaps a long one.’
This was now the prayer of all British colonial administrators: ‘peace in our time’.
The old vision of a British Empire lasting for centuries, like Rome, had faded.
And so ‘The government in Britain, and indeed the outside world as a whole, watched with amazement the steadily growing friendship between these two very different men, as they steered the Gold Coast towards independence.’
In this as in subsequent encounters with Englishmen, Nkrumah was  very sensitive to atmosphere.
He could work with men whose background and beliefs were entirely opposed to his own, provided he was assured of their goodwill.
Any suspicion that he was being deceived or double-crossed would induce extreme hostility.
For the moment, all seemed well.
He was aware that his powers were limited: ‘The civil service, the police, the judiciary, defence and external affairs were all in the hands of the Governor and…all decisions thereon had to come from Whitehall’(p. 147).
He settled for a gradualist policy.
Late in October 1951 Labour gave way to a Churchill-led Conservative government.
There was no reversal of policy: Nkrumah had been right in assessing their relative positions on Africa, only now the Tories were out to show that they had shed pre-war Conservatism.
In March 1952, Nkrumah's ambiguous status as ‘Leader of Government Business’ was upgraded to that of Prime Minister.
He pressed for further constitutional advance, and his proposals were published by the British Government as a White paper in June 1953.
Discussion in Cabinet was aided by the absence of Churchill — and also Eden — because of illness.
The Colonial Secretary, Oliver Lyttleton, announced in October that all the proposals were accepted save only for the suggestion that the Gold Coast should at once be transferred from the Colonial Office to the Commonwealth Relations Office.
On 28 April 1954, the Colonial Office Minister told parliament they had reached ‘the last stage before the Gold Coast assumes full responsibility for its own affairs’.
He Secures Promise of Self-Government (1954)
Did Nkrumah's policy of accommodation mean following the middle way?
Sometimes this seemed indicated, as when he told the legislature they must beware ‘When we are freeing ourselves from one form of imperialism [against those who would]…bind us to another one which would swiftly undo all the work that has been done in recent years to foster…a free and independent nation’; ‘As we would not have British masters, so we would not have Russian masters.’
Yet the Cpp was becoming a political monolith, a ‘Tammany-type machine’ as an American observer wrote: no longer the party of the masses.
This tendency was reinforced by Nkrumah's almost obsessive working habits.
Because he sat at his desk from early morning until night he was not getting around to see what was happening among the ordinary people: and many of his henchmen were using their positions of power for personal or family advantage.
All this surfaced when a second general election was called to provide a bridge to lead into that ‘last stage’ before Independence.
The 1954 election was held under the same franchise as before (giving the vote to about half the adult population) but this time the whole country was divided into 104 single-member constituencies.
There was keen competition to obtain the Cpp ticket, and many would-be candidates not selected stood as ‘rebels’: altogether there were 323 candidates for the 104 seats.
There was a rival party in the field, the Ghana Congress party (GCP), founded in 1952 by Dr Busia; it included several of the erstwhile UGCC leaders, but despite some impressive names it operated from a narrow base.
The GCP formed an electoral pact with the other opposition groups, among which the Northern People's party (NPP) was the most formidable.
Nkrumah dealt with the rebels by expelling 81 CPP members; many of them drifted over to the NPP.
After the election, the CPP held 72 seats and the opposition 32.
The NPP gained 16 seats, but only Busia was successful from the Congress, beating his Cpp rival by nine votes; Danquah was defeated by over 1100 votes.
Nkrumah refused to recognise the Npp in the new parliament as the official opposition.
Opposition Develops in Ashanti
During the ‘last stage’ an unexpected groundswell of opposition developed.
Cocoa production had largely shifted from the coastal area, where disease had destroyed many cocoa trees, into Ashanti.
The cocoa farmers in this middle belt felt the same grievances against the CPP government that earlier the southerners felt towards the British: they were carrying others on their backs.
The initiative was taken by Bafuor Osei Akoto, a prosperous, go-ahead cocoa farmer of Kumasi.
He organised a demonstration on 19 September 1954, out of which was born the National Liberation Movement (NLM), a name which in the past the LPP had employed.
The new movement was endorsed by the Kumasi chiefs, and several rebels from the Cpp joined.
A dramatic fillip was given to the cause when three major CPP Ashanti leaders announced their adherence in January 1955: these were Joe Appiah, R.R. Amponsah and Victor Owusu, while from the coast Kurankyi Taylor (expelled from CPP in 1952) also declared for the NLM.
Appiah and Taylor had taken part in the historic 1945 Manchester Congress.
Appiah had been in England from 1944 — 54 and married the daughter of Stafford Cripps.
His prestige stood high, and it made a sensation when he denounced the CPP for corruption and waste.
The big chance came in July 1955 when a by-election in the heart of Ashanti was caused by the death of its Cpp MP.
The NLM candidate won with almost 70 per cent of the vote.
It seemed that their claims must be  taken seriously.
They demanded that the Gold Coast become a federation with four states: the north, Ashanti, the south, and Togoland (the former German colony, now divided between Britain and France).
The CPP dismissed the NLM claims as irrelevant to the main issue: early independence for Ghana.
The response of Conservatives who followed colonial affairs in Britain was less than friendly to the NLM; one article asserted: ‘It is not by breakaway and territorial fragmentation that opponents of a government in power should seek to get their way but by fighting the government as a nation-wide party and finally throwing it out.’
A Select Committee of the Gold Coast parliament — which the opposition refused to join — rejected federalism in July 1955.
Nkrumah now asked for a constitutional adviser to be sent from England.
In place of a constitutional expert, the Colonial Office despatched Sir Frederick Bourne, formerly an Indian Governor, and then Governor of East Pakistan.
Was this a sinister move?
Apparently not, as Bourne also advised against federalism.
London Imposes Conditions on Independence
The Colonial Secretary, now Lennox-Boyd, invited Nkrumah to visit London but he would not leave at this critical time.
Lennox-Boyd then laid down that independence would only be granted if wanted by ‘a substantial majority of the people’; if Bourne's proposals were accepted by NLM as well as CPP then they could go ahead: ‘If he failed then there appeared to be no alternative but to call a general election’(p.245).
Nkrumah summoned a constitutional conference with Bourne in attendance; several organisations joined in but not the NLM and its allies.
The atmosphere of uncertainty was reflected in an increased level of violence, including attacks aimed at Nkrumah (Law and Order was still the Governor's responsibility).
Holding another general election might entail a general breakdown: Nkrumah again urged that the time was ripe for independence now .
In parliament, Lennox-Boyd restated his position on 11 May 1956: ‘If a general election is held Her Majesty's Government will be ready to accept a motion calling for independence within the Commonwealth passed by a reasonable majority in a newly elected legislature and then to declare a firm date for this purpose.’
CPP Win Another Election: Independence Conceded So there was no escape.
The second election in two years was fixed for July.
The NLM endeavoured to expand its activities beyond Ashanti — largely at the urging of Kurankyi Taylor — and thereby became  overextended.
Despite all their expectations (and ample campaign funds) they did not do much better than the GCP in 1954.
The CPP won 71 out of the total of 104 seats.
The NPp won 15 in the north (one less than in 1954) and the NLM took 13 of the Ashanti seats.
The difference in the popular vote was less dramatic: for the CPP, 398 141 (plus five uncontested seats, where presumably they could have had a landslide); for the combined opposition, 299 116 votes.
On 3 August Nkrumah introduced a motion in the legislature calling for independence; it was passed by 70 to 0 as the opposition boycotted the occasion.
The Colonial Secretary announced that parliament would put this into effect.
However, Nkrumah's own proposals for an independence constitution were vetoed in favour of a Colonial Office draft which imposed limitations on Ministerial authority in the new Ghana.
A Public Service Commission controlled all appointments; there were 13 entrenched clauses which could only be altered by the vote of the five regional councils: a not altogether  unbiased observer called this ‘Government by Civil Servants behind a Parliamentary facade’.
Lennox-Boyd visited Accra in January 1957 to inform Nkrumah that he had to accept these provisions, or forgo independence.
He chose the lesser evil, and on 6 March 1957 Ghana became independent as a Dominion.
The name was symbolic, commemorating a West African kingdom originat-ing about 800 AD whose boundaries were unknown.
Ghana symbolised West Africa before it was carved up by the Europeans; it symbolised the African federation Nkrumah longed to assemble.
As constitutional head of the new state, Arden-Clarke briefly became Governor-General until Lord Listowel (former Secretary of State for India and Burma) arrived.
Nkrumah had his first opportunity to meet his fellow prime Ministers at a Commonwealth Conference, June — July 1957.
Before their first meeting, Nkrumah called upon Harold Macmillan, who had become prime Minister five months earlier.
In his diary, Macmillan recorded that he ‘certainly has considerable charm’.
Nkrumah's first encounter with Nehru was less happy.
Nkrumah Meets Nehru (1957)
As Indian High Commissioner, Mrs Pandit had her brother staying with her.
She invited Nkrumah to breakfast, and he first met Mrs Pandit's grand-daughter: However, reportedly, Nehru was not amused: ‘From then on he considered Nkrumah an opportunist of the Sukarno stamp.’
In 1958 Nkrumah was able to make a start on implementing his dream of African Union.
He had convened a pan-African conference in Kumasi in 1953 but that had necessarily been limited to consultation.
Now in April 1958 there was a conference of independent states.
Black Africa could provide only three participants: Ghana, Liberia and Ethiopia, the oldest of them all.
The other five were Egypt, Tunisia, Libya, Sudan and Morocco.
In addition, Algeria (whose independence was not recognised until 1962) sent a delegation.
Frantz Fanon, who was there, related: ‘Dr Nkrumah made a point of receiving our delegates among the first.
For more than one hour the Algerian problem in its relation to the liberation of the African continent was studied.
Once again, the Ghanaian Chief of State pledged the support…of the people of Ghana.’
Nkrumah promised to recognise the provisional Government of Algeria: ‘in the immediate future.
…Africa must be free, said Dr Nkrumah in his inaugural speech.
We have nothing to lose but our chains and we have an immense continent to win.’
It was rhetoric: but effective rhetoric.
In December 1958 Nkrumah convened another All-African peoples Conference with representatives of 28 territories still under colonial rule to meet at Accra.
He deliberately shared the limelight with Tom Mboya of Kenya who showed himself a brilliant chairman.
Mboya declared that they were ‘facing a rough patch in the independence struggle’,; symbolised by the continuing detention of their leader, Jomo Kenyatta.
Help for Guinea Against French Pressure (1958)
Of more immediate consequence, Nkrumah stepped in to assist a West African neighbour in difficulty.
De Gaulle had become President, determined to transform the French African empire into a francophone community of autonomous states.
He invited them to decide by referendum whether to opt for autonomy, with full French support, or for independence outside the community.
Only Guinea, led by the activist Sékou Touré, decided for independence in October 1958.
France gave a demonstration of what this would entail: all French personnel were withdrawn, investment was suspended, and even government and  economic facilities already installed were taken away.
Nkrumah's response was immediate: on 23 November a Ghana — Guinea union was proclaimed, and the new partner was given a credit of £10 million.
This allowed Guinea to survive, and by its example encourage its less confident neighbours, Senegal and French Sudan, to ask for independence, amalgamating as a new state, Mali.
Nkrumah also made an African tour, in which he built up his relationship with president Nasser, and went on to visit Nehru in India.
Visits were very much in the air.
In January 1960 Macmillan set out on a tour of Africa, first stopping in Ghana: ‘Nkrumah was an engaging character with much charm of manner and courtesy’, he writes.
Ghana's intention of shortly becoming a republic was discussed and no objection was raised, though the British prime Minister insisted this ‘must follow an orderly course’.
Macmillan recorded meeting Nkrumah's wife (he had married an Egyptian Coptic Christian) and noted ‘the pride and pleasure which he took in his newly born son.
Whatever may have been his public faults…he had many private virtues.’
Referendum Endorses Republic (1960)
In order to obtain a republic, Nkrumah announced a popular referendum, though others taking this step had not considered a referendum necessary.
Reportedly, he wrote to all Heads of Commonwealth governments inviting them to send observers to check the conduct of the elections.
Most ignored his letter but Nehru ‘denounced the idea as derogatory to the sovereignty of the new state and reproached Dr Nkrumah for ever issuing the invitation’.
Not surprisingly he was ‘upset’.
The referendum was accompanied by an election for president: Danquah chose to oppose Nkrumah.
The result showed a majority of 900000 for the constitution (1008 740 for, 131 425 against) and a slightly larger majority for Nkrumah as president (Nkrumah: 1 016 076; Danquah: 124 623).
The most careful assessment decides that the vote was fair in the towns and in the south but was rigged in Ashanti and neighbouring areas.
The conclusion is that Nkrumah would have otherwise won by the two-thirds majority which was the general election pattern.
Now began the long-drawn-out tragedy of the Congo which, according to General H.T. Alexander, ‘produced a fundamental change in Ghana's position vis-à-vis the West’, while Basil Davidson observes ‘experience in the Congo…seems to have formed for Nkrumah the final demonstration that policies of ‘tact’, of ‘continuity’, of conformity with Western wishes had nothing more to offer.’
Writing from two very  different political positions they draw the same conclusion: the Congo experience had a traumatic effect upon Nkrumah's view of Ghana's relations with Britain, the United States and the Commonwealth.
Henceforward his concept of non-alignment was much more critical of Western motives in Africa and the Third World.
It was with great reluctance that the Belgians recognised Patrice Lumumba as a national leader.
However, in elections to a National Assembly held on the eve of independence, Lumumba's party (Mouvement National Congolais : MNC) won 41 of the 137 seats.
The next grouping in this hastily cooked-up Assembly gained only 13 seats.
Manoeuvres to block him failed to stop the Assembly endorsing his claim to form a government, and he went ahead on 23 June 1960.
Independence was granted one week later.
In July the Force Publique which Belgium had created broke out in mutiny.
Pleading danger to the many thousand Belgian nationals who remained in the Congo, paratroopers were flown in.
One of their tasks, it emerged, was to support a breakaway movement in the mineral-rich province of Katanga producing the main Belgian investment.
Lumumba appealed to the UN and then, failing a response, to the states of Africa.
Help for Lumumba in Congo
Nkrumah at once despatched a mission to Leopoldville.
His choice of emissary was odd: Andrew Djin was a party hack who, when manager of the Cocoa Purchasing Company, had been censured by a Commission of Enquiry for ‘irregularities’, and was not a ‘fit and proper person’ to run the firm; though the Commission hinted that Nkrumah was ‘indebted to Mr Djin'.
Immediately after the Djin mission, Nkrumah sent his Chief of Defence Staff, the British Major-General Alexander to Leopoldville.
In his view there was imminent danger of the Congolese mutineers and the Belgian soldiers being embroiled in conflict.
On his own initiative Alexander went to the mutineers’ barracks and persuaded them to lay down their arms.
When he heard, Djin was furious at this move.
Nkrumah decided to order the immediate airlift of two of the army's three battalions to Leopoldville to give muscle to the UN who, meanwhile, had established a mission in the Congo.
These were the first forces to come in.
They were supported by a contingent of Ghana police and various other services, such as doctors.
They introduced some order into near-chaos.
Nkrumah gave total commitment to Lumumba from the start: other non-aligned were more cautious.
Nehru hesitated.
Perhaps because he considered Nkrumah an opportunist he instructed Krishna Menon at the  UN in New York to hold aloof and ‘if pressed…vote against direct military assistance’.
This was ironic as later India was to provide a complete brigade for the Congo.
Meanwhile, Lumumba had paid a brief visit to the UN.
On his way back he halted in Accra.
On 8 August he and Nkrumah put their signatures to a document intended to seal their partnership: they would form a Federal Union and ‘any state or territory in Africa is free to join this Union’.
This agreement was kept secret.
It was as momentous — and as unfulfilled — as Churchill's offer in 1940 to form a Franco — British Union.
From this moment, everything went wrong for Lumumba.
On 5 September President Kasavubu dismissed his prime Minister, although he secured a vote of confidence from both Houses of parliament.
Lumumba attempted to appeal to the public over the radio but he was turned away by Ghanaian troops acting under UN orders (heading the UN mission was Ralph Bunche).
The Ghana representative, Djin, was totally ineffective in this emergency: when he visited UN headquarters he was informed that ‘the Congolese no longer had any confidence in us’.
He ascribed this loss of confidence to ‘General Alexander's intrigue and subversive action’.
A few days later Lumumba was arrested, and then released.
He had turned against the Ghana army and the same day (12 September) he gave an ultimatum to the Ghanaians ‘to cease all activities in the Congo within one hour’.
Nkrumah continued to despatch long letters of brotherly advice to the Prime Minister of the Congo but the situation had passed beyond both of them.
Power was seized by the Congo amy now controlled by Colonel Mobutu.
In November the General Assembly of the UN recognised the government of Kasavubu on a vote which split the African states: Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Morocco and Egypt supported Gizenga as Lumumba's heir; the remainder, solidly francophone, voted for Kasavubu.
Meanwhile, the Ghanaian presence ‘on the spot’ ceased to be very relevant.
Djin went back to Ghana and his role was assumed by Nathaniel Welbeck, an old associate of the president, who was a rabble-rousing speaker but no diplomat.
The UN officials became increasingly irritated by his bumbling interventions.
Having been declared persona non grata his residence was attacked by Congolese soldiers; Tunisian troops defending Welbeck suffered casualties.
He was ignominiously bundled home by Alexander, and the Ghana mission closed.
All this time, Lumumba had been under house arrest in Leopoldville.
On 27 November he slipped away, heading for Stanleyville and Gizenga.
He was intercepted on 2 December.
This roused Nkrumah to a fresh effort on his behalf.
He asked Macmillan to intervene: ‘It was quite wrong for  other people to incarcerate a ‘legal prime Minister’.’
In his whimsical way the British prime Minister observed, ‘This argument naturally had some appeal to me on general grounds’: but he did not respond.
To Nkrumah it seemed that the British — and also the United States and France — were behaving in a devious and cynical fashion, pretending to uphold the UN but in reality sanctioning the separatist regime of Tshombe in Katanga.
Shocked by US — UK Response to Lumumba's Murder Several Afro -Asian states withdrew their contingents in protest against the ineffectiveness of the UN: neither Ghana nor India withdrew.
In January Lumumba passed into the custody of Tshombe; Nkrumah was at his wits' end.
He told Macmillan that if any harm befell him ‘it would have a most serious effect upon the relations of Ghana with the Commonwealth…the failure to help Lumumba would never be forgotten by the people of Africa.’
Nevertheless, Lumumba was murdered: probably on the day he arrived in Katanga (17 January) though the details never became known.
On 14 February 1961, the day after news of Lumumba's death was released, Nkrumah made a long broadcast over Ghanaian radio.
He indicted the UN which had failed to preserve law and order; he castigated the failure to remove the Belgians and their mercenaries; he asked why ‘modern and expensive armaments’ were turned on unarmed peasants and he declared, ‘The rulers of the United States, of the United Kingdom, of France…must answer these questions.’
Unstated was the belief that the American Central Intelligence Agency had a hand in the downfall and death of Lumumba who had appealed to the USSR, and thereby upset the United States and also Britain (Macmillan wrote ‘our long-term interests would best be served by…a Congo Government…largely depending on American rather than Russian aid and support’).
Non-alignment could be tolerated, providing the Afro — Asians were non-aligned away from the USSR.
One immediate consequence of the Congo experience was the division of the independent African states into two opposed groups.
First, the francophone group (excluding Guinea and Mali) became known as the Brazzaville States.
In January 1961, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Egypt, Morocco and the Algerians launched the Casablanca group.
In May 1961 African moderates joined the Brazzaville faction as the Monrovia States.
There was also the Pan-African Movement for East and Central Africa (PAFMECA) in which Julius Nyerere took the lead.
Nkrumah saw this as a contradiction, and was critical, thus annoying Nyerere who should have been a natural ally.
Nkrumah's disillusionment with Britain was displayed in his decision to  terminate Alexander's services (despite cordial personal relations) and those of other officers from the UK.
He accepted a Soviet offer to train army cadets, thus upsetting the Sandhurst-trained Ghanaians.
However, there was no complete break with Britain.
Macmillan's diary was still favourable: Nkrumah was ‘moderate and reasonable’.
Over the question of the expulsion of a racist South Africa from the Commonwealth he was cautious.
When the Commonwealth Prime Ministers met to consider the issue in March 1961, others forced the pace: Nkrumah said publicly he had ‘no wish for a showdown’.
Macmillan eventually realised that only Australia and New Zealand would resist the pressure and advised South Africa not to press for readmission as a republic.
Asserts Non-Alignment not Pro-Soviet (1961)
That Nkrumah still desired friendship with Britain was demonstrated by his ardent wish for a visit by Queen Elizabeth.
Busybodies in England tried to block the visit.
Was it safe for Her Majesty to go to a land which was virtually Communist controlled?
Nkrumah reassured Macmillan in a long letter (26 September 1961).
He flatly denied: Macmillan expressed relief that no ‘shift of policy was taking place’.
The Queen's visit went ahead and ‘the genial and warm-hearted people [of Ghanaj gave her an unprecedented reception.…
never had…the Queen looked happier or more charming.’
So Macmillan was happy too.
A few months later The Times Africa Correspondent (W.P. Kirkman) wrote two long centre-page articles (25 and 26 June 1962) on the new African leaders which do more than most to illuminate Nkrumah's position.
Kirkman saw Nkrumah as ‘the Rousseau of the African revolution…
Senghor is its Montesquieu and Dr Azikwe its Voltaire.’
The politicians coming along in the states decolonised in 1960 ‘have benefited from the spadework done for them.
…They have inherited…both the ‘African personality’ that President Nkrumah sought with such labour, and the sophistication of the ‘Black Europeans’.’
This analysis does much to elucidate what is often dismissed as Nkrumah's plunge into Communist (or was it Fascist?) dictatorship.
Certainly he was becoming ever more a man on his own.
Perhaps the incapacity of his lieutenants in the Congo made him feel he could rely only on himself.
An indication of his worsening view of party faithfuls and their organisations had been revealed in his ‘Dawn Broadcast to the Nation’ delivered on 8 April 1961.
He castigated those who had become wealthy by exploiting their political standing for private gain.
Soon many of the old guard felt his hand upon them.
Gbedemah and Botsio were asked to resign.
Their places were taken by ‘new men’ who owed their rise entirely to Nkrumah, Tawia Adamafio, formerly Busia's lieutenant, and Coffie Crabbe among them.
Nkrumah's style of politics had become ‘the manipulation of factions’, as Davidson observes.
Former Colleagues Tried for Bomb Plot
On 1 August 1962 on his return from a visit to Upper Volta, Nkrumah's party halted at a place called Kulungu.
A bomb was thrown, a boy talking to the president was killed, and he was injured.
Suspicion lighted on Adamafio and Nkrumah's friend of long ago, Ako Adjei, together with Coffie Crabbe.
They were arrested along with others, supposedly their associates.
The case did not come to trial until 1963.
First, the lesser fry were tried and five out of seven found guilty of treason.
Then in August 1963 the trial was begun of Adamafio, Adjei, Crabbe and two others.
As in the first trial a Special Court presided over by Chief Justice Sir Arku Korsah heard their case.
On 9 December judgment was delivered by the Chief Justice who took five hours to review the case.
The three main defendants were acquitted although the other two were found guilty.
Two days later Sir Arku Korsah was removed from the office of Chief Justice despite remaining a member of the Court of Appeal.
The verdicts were set aside on 25 December by means of a law passed on 23 December empowering the President to quash any decision of the Special Court.
One Party State (1964)
The people of Ghana appear to have taken this development calmly, but for White liberal friends of Ghana this seemed like the parting of the ways.
On 2 January 1964 a police constable shot at the President from close range.
He missed, killing a security guard.
The Commissioner of Police was dismissed along with eight other senior officers.
Things were getting out of hand.
Nkrumah announced another referendum to enable him to dismiss the judges and also to establish a one-party state.
The referendum gave him a huge majority: 2773920 votes for and 2452 against the President.
The result was patently a fraud, in Davidson's words.
The one-party state was authoritarian but not unrestrained.
When Ako Adjei, Adamafio and Crabbe were given a second trial they were condemned to death: but the sentence was commuted by Nkrumah to life imprisonment.
When Lieutenant-General J.A.
Ankrah, commanding the Ghana army, was retired he was due for retirement anyway (he had come up through the ranks and served in Burma).
The Winneba Ideological Institute and the party newspaper The Spark were viewed as instruments of international Communism, but were not particularly effective.
More serious is the allegation that in these latter years Ghana was allowed to accumulate extravagant debts: an amount of £500 million is often quoted, though the true figure seems to have been about £120 million.
The sudden fall in cocoa prices in 1964 was partly responsible, but on the positive side great new projects — Tema deep water harbour, and above all the Volta River Hydro-Electric scheme — had come into operation.
Evidence of Nkrumah's perilous position is given in an account by Mrs Pandit of an official visit to Ghana at this time:
Nkrumah and African Unity
In foreign policy, Nkrumah took a leading part in the new Organisation of African Unity (founded in 1963, this had ended the Casablanca/ Monrovia division).
Rhodesia had long presented an affront to Ghana and other Black African states, yet Nkrumah still valued the Commonwealth connection sufficiently to support Britain's compromise proposals.
When Ian Smith proclaimed UDI in November 1965 this was too much.
As before, in the Congo, Nkrumah burned to take action.
A specially convened meeting of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) called on those African states who belonged to the Commonwealth to sever their links with Britain.
Nyerere was the first to break off relations; Nkrumah followed on 16 December, though the break was made without any display of hostility against Britain.
His Mission to Vietnam
The spectacle of a White-dominated state defying Afro-Asian opinion may have given the impulse to the decision to fly to Vietnam.
Nkrumah must have realised the risk he was taking.
Africa had its first military coup in 1958, in Sudan; the danger of military intervention was graphically illustrated in 1964 with army mutinies in Kenya, Tanganyika and Uganda; as recently as January 1966 the Nigerian coup had cost the lives of the Prime Minister and the Premiers of the Northern and Western regions.
Knowing the risk he was taking, he still set out for Peking: why?
The only  credible explanation is that Nkrumah, with Rhodesia fresh in his mind, felt he could not tolerate superpower indifference to the Third World any longer.
The aeroplane stopped at Cairo for a discussion with Nasser, and then at Delhi to consult Mrs Gandhi.
So far, all appeared normal.
Then on arrival at Peking he was told that a military coup had occurred in Ghana.
The head of the Ghanaian army, Major-General Barwah, refused to surrender to the conspirators; he was shot out of hand.
The Guard Regiment formed by Nkrumah for his protection fought the mutineers and only gave up when they threatened to kill Nkrumah's wife and three infants.
The nominal head of the ‘National Liberation Council’, as it was styled, was the retired General Ankrah; the Deputy Chairman was J.W.K. Harlley, demoted after the abortive assassination attempt of January 1964.
Nkrumah attributed the coup to the Black American ambassador Franklin Williams, alleging that he had offered $13 millions for carrying it out.
Certainly, the United States administration had vastly over-reacted to Nkrumah's book Neo-Colonialism: The last stage of imperialism (1965), though the views he advanced were becoming the commonplace of Third World writing.
Deposition and Exile (1966)
Most of the large entourage the president had brought with him quietly left him.
With a select few, he flew to Guinea: the nearest point to Ghana where he would be accepted.
President Sékou-Touré gave him a warm welcome.
Nkrumah was given the honorary title of co-president.
He settled at Conakry, the capital, expecting that his stay would be brief.
He was to remain there for a further six years.
He assembled a large secretariat, some 80 in number.
His hopes seemed justified when on 17 April 1967 three lieutenants led a Reconnaissance Squadron of the army to seize the radio station and the former president's house.
They proclaimed their achievement on Nkrumah's behalf: and then succumbed to a counter-attack.
Two of them were executed, the third received 30 years in jail.
In 1969 the National Liberation Council handed over power to Dr Busia, the moderate politician amenable to Western counsels.
During the three years he was in charge over £300 million in foreign debts were accumulated.
Then on 13 January 1972 the army dismissed Busia; a group of officers led by Colonel Acheampong assumed control.
Death and Posthumous Rehabilitation
There was no hope for Nkrumah; he had contracted cancer and on 27 April 1972 he died in a Bucharest hospital, aged 63.
The military leader, Colonel Acheampong, wanted him to have a state funeral.
After much ceremony in Accra he was buried in his birth-place, Nkroful.
Acheampong delivered a graveside eulogy: ‘He waged a relentless war against colonialism and racism.
…We mourn the loss of a great leader whose place in history is well assured.’
The Colonel added ‘Like all of us, Dr Nkrumah had his shortcomings.’
This verdict is underlined by the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth: