

I
THERE'S something about Mondays.
If the weekend is wet you can bet Monday morning the sun will beat down so fierce they have to hose the streets.
If the weekend is fine the rain waits for Monday, just so it can give the working week a gloomy send off.
Me, I don't care much either way.
I don't have any working week.
Sometimes I'm working and sometimes I'm not.
If I am, weekends don't mean much in my life.
People get murdered, they disappear and sometimes they even break the law at weekends.
Somebody ought to make a rule.
Take yesterday.
Jack Mahoney gets two in the chest, and three guys bust open a safe in a downtown jeweller's.
The Waldron City Herald night editor must have had a fit trying to decide which one got the three inch banner.
Mahoney won.
I grinned to myself as I flipped through the rest of the paper.
Not even Tim Wilson would try to question me about the Mahoney shooting.
I'd been away for the weekend to a little shack a hundred miles away.
I hadn't been alone on this drinking jag.
Witness?
Certainly.
Members of the jury, I summon Lieutenant Tim Wilson of Homicide, fisherman, drinker and owner of the shack in question.
The sports page was pretty dull.
Waldron Buffaloes had played a marathon the night before, finally got squeezed out by the L.A. boys.
Personally, I think the Buffaloes  play sandlot baseball.
I haven't been out to the park in a couple of months and that visit was strictly business.
I tossed the paper on the desk and looked moodily out of the window.
One thing about my ritzy office accommodation, you get a swell view of the city, with the sea just visible between the corners of two blocks on the other side of the street.
I get a good view and I make the most of it.
Not that I don't deserve a view when you consider the rent of the place.
It was ten o'clock in the morning and the streets were almost deserted.
You know that period between all the workers getting started and the women coming out to do their marketing.
A man with a little tin cart was keeping our beautiful city clean, like it says on the posters, watched by the usual couple of loafers, one of them sitting on a fire hydrant.
A large black automobile pulled in opposite the building, and a woman in a grey fur coat got out.
She was beautiful.
If you want to know how I could tell that from the seventh floor, you have to remember I'm supposed to be a detective.
I didn't look at her at all, just watched the two loafers.
They took a peek, and then did everything but lay down and wag their tails.
So she was beautiful.
Simple?
That'll be five dollars please.
There was some mail neatly stacked in front of the telephone.
Miss Hinkle was always trying to make me an office magnate, dictating letters and answering telephone calls.
She even introduced a filing system a couple of years back.
Funny thing is the whole place seems to run better her way, so I let her get on with it.
Take this mail, now.
Left to myself I'd leave it there two maybe three days, pick up an envelope now and then and try to guess who sent it.
But the Hinkle doesn't let me get away with that kind of thing.
I ripped open the envelopes.
Three ads, two deserving causes and a guy offering to sell me information.
That made a total of six people trying to sell me something.
I  filed them neatly in the waste basket and helped myself to a cigarette.
The buzzer went.
I flicked down the key.
‘Mr. Preston, there is a lady here to see you.’
‘What lady?’
I said.
‘She prefers not to give her name, and will only discuss her business with you personally.’
I stared at the wall.
‘Is she my type?’
I could feel Miss Hinkle's disapproval.
‘Shall I ask her to make an appointment?’ she wanted to know.
‘All right, Miss Hinkle, send her in.’
I pretended to be looking at some papers when the door opened and Grace Hinkle ushered in a sophisticated-looking female of about twenty-eight.
Silver grey costume, grey suede shoes and over it all a grey fur coat.
Very nice.
Very expensive.
Her hair was shining gold.
‘Mr. Preston?’
She stood inside the door.
‘The same.
Please, come and sit down.
Cigarette?’
She took off her glove before removing one from the pack I held over the desk.
Long slender fingers, wedding ring, and a huge ruby on another ring.
The girl was worth money.
I gave her an ashtray and tilted back my chair.
‘My secretary tells me you refused her your name.
Would you like to tell me what it is?’
‘Porter.
I'm Barbara Porter.’
‘Uh-huh.
Well now Mrs. Porter, what can I do for you?’
She fiddled with the cigarette.
‘I'm in terrible trouble.
Terrible.
I don't know where to begin.’
There was a catch in her voice.
I hoped it would be a long story.
I could sit around and listen to that smoky voice all day.
Smoky voice and smoky eyes.
Quite a girl.
‘Take it easy Mrs. Porter.
Don't hurry.
Tell me something about yourself first.
You don't hail from Waldron City do you, for one thing?’
She shook her head.
‘No, I'm from New York.
That's where I met my husband.
When his work brought him out here a year ago we bought a house along Westminster Drive.
That's at the Beach end of town you know.’
I nodded.
‘Yes, I know it well.
What does your husband do?’
‘He's a doctor.’
She tapped at the ashtray.
‘A doctor of philosophy that is.’
That part seemed like an afterthought.
‘I see.’
I got up from my chair.
‘Would you excuse me for a moment?
There are some instructions I should have given my secretary.’
‘Of course.’
I slipped out and had a word with the Hinkle.
When I went back into the office Mrs. Porter was walking up and down smoking furiously.
‘Sorry about that.
You were telling me about your husband.’
She stopped opposite the desk, rested her hands on the surface and leaned nearer.
She was a knockout.
‘I've made up my mind.
How much will you charge to kill somebody?’
Her voice was strained.
That was one for the book.
No shilly shally about this girl.
I tried a feeble grin.
‘Well that would depend on the circumstances.
Tax collectors I knock off very cheap.’
She fell back into the chair and started to cry.
Deep racking sobs that shook her whole body.
It made me feel uncomfortable.
I opened my favourite drawer and took out a pint of bourbon.
Having filled two glasses I sat and drank one while the storm was dying.
Her hair was disarranged  all round her face when she finally looked up.
If anything, she looked more attractive then than before.
I slid the glass over.
‘Drink that.
It might make you cough, but you'll feel better.’
Like a small child being told by stern parent she picked up the drink and tossed it back at a gulp.
Then she caught her breath sharply.
‘Phew.’
Not a very lady-like expression if you ask me, but I let it pass.
‘Thank you.’
She waved her arms.
‘I'm sorry about —about…’ her voice trailed away.
‘Forget it.
You were making some interesting conversation about me killing somebody just now.
What possessed you to ask a screwball question like that?’
‘Oh, I don't know.
I've been worried sick for such a long time now, I'm afraid my mind is playing me tricks.
I've often read about you in the papers, and there were a couple of reports about you having killed people and —’
‘Mrs. Porter, let's understand each other.
I defended myself when I had to, but that doesn't make me a killer.
You're overwrought obviously.
Try to get a grip on yourself and tell me about it.’
‘It's not a very nice story.’
They never are.
Some of the stories people had told me in that room would make your hair stand on end.
But not at the first interview.
First time round you get a few facts, a whole lot of lies and masses of irrelevant material.
The truth was somewhere at the end of the line and the first facts were a kind of starting point.
I couldn't see any reason why this story should be different from the rest.
‘Maybe you'd better tell it just the same,’ I said.
‘After all, you kind of whetted my interest with the part about me killing somebody on a cash basis.’
She smiled a little.
It wouldn't have surprised me if she had walked across and jumped out of the window.
Nothing surprises me any more.
Especially women.
‘Years ago, I went to live in New York.
I was young, pretty green I guess.
I wanted to be a singer.
Nobody was as excited to see me as I'd expected.
Seems there are quite a few singers in New York already.’
‘Some,’ I nodded.
‘Not only that.
Every girl in New York who is not a singer is only waiting for the right break to come along so she can get to be one.
May I have a cigarette?’
I'd taken out one for myself without thinking.
‘Sorry.’
I passed the pack and she took a small gold lighter from her purse.
She inhaled deeply and threw her head back to blow the smoke towards the ceiling.
There were fine lines around her eyes.
Probably worried too much.
‘As I was saying, progress was slow.
I took a number of jobs.
Hostess, hat-check girl, cash register in a delicatessen, you know the kind of thing.’
I said I knew the kind of thing.
‘Then I met a man.
He was a songwriter and pianist.
He seemed to know a lot about the business.
Said he could help me.
We formed an act and started to get a few dates.
Things seemed to be going quite well.
One night we had a celebration and I got very drunk.
I was quite young at the time of course.
This man took me home.
He often had before, so I had no objections.
But this wasn't like the other times.
He — he —’ Her voice ran down like a phonograph record.
‘This isn't very easy for me.’
‘Don't embarrass yourself unnecessarily, Mrs. Porter.
I get the general idea.’
She flashed me a grateful look.
When she started talking again her voice was not much louder than a whisper.
I had to strain my ears to catch what she was saying.
‘From then on, things were different.
He wasn't — very kind to me.
Now and then, he'd threaten to kill me.
I don't think he meant it, looking back, but I believed him at the time.
Finally, he left me.
I think he was in trouble with the police.
He never told me much, but some of the people he mixed with were nothing to do with show business, or any other kind of business.
Anyway, he left suddenly.’
‘I see.
And now he's turned up here in Waldron City and started blackmailing you.’
I figured it was time I interrupted the monologue.
Her eyes opened wide.
They were lovely.
Great smoky orbs with those long blonde eyelashes curling up in front.
‘How did you know that?’
‘I didn't know really.
It just seemed to fit in with the story and the early part of your visit about somebody getting killed.’
‘Oh.’
More fiddling with her gloves.
‘Well, you're right.
Absolutely right.
I'd no idea he was here.
About three months ago, my husband and I had a celebration dinner in town.
I went out to the powder-room and as I was going back into the restaurant somebody tapped me on the shoulder.
I turned around and there he was.’
‘Did your husband see this?’
‘No.
I was in a panic in case he did.
I've been paying ever since to keep him from finding out.
You see he doesn't know much about what happened before he met me.
We're very much in love, Mr. Preston.
This would hurt him terribly.
He wouldn't leave me, but things would never be the same again if he found out.
Can you understand?’
‘I think so.’
I looked out of the window.
The view hadn't changed.
‘So you've been paying this other man for three months.
Why not go to the police?’
‘No.
No I couldn't do that.
Once somebody — anybody knows about this, it'll all come out.
I'm sure it will.’
I had to agree with her there.
Some nosey guy from a yellow sheet would find out who the mysterious Mrs. X was in a blackmail case, and smear it all over the front.
‘Well, you don't want to keep on paying do you?’
‘I can't.
We're not poor people, but this man's demands are too much.
When I tell him he laughs at me.
Says I should pawn my jewellery.
But my husband is not a fool.
He'd soon miss anything like that.’
‘So what do we do?’
‘I don't know.’
Her lip started trembling again.
‘If only he was dead.
I think I'll kill him myself.’
‘And solve nothing.’
I pulled her glass across the table and got generous with my bourbon again.
‘Here, drink this and try thinking straight.’
I watched her sipping at the stuff, making faces.
Pity to screw that nice face about the way she did.
But at least there were no tears this time.
‘Now let's talk.
When are you supposed to see this man again?’
‘He's given me until tomorrow to produce a thousand dollars.’,
‘Nice round sum.
Can you do it if you have to?’
‘No.
He's had over seven thousand from me the past three months.
That was all the money I had.
I'd have to go to my husband for any more.’
She was watching me anxiously, waiting for good old Dr. Preston to prescribe two tablets right and morning.
‘H'm.
Do you want me to go and see the guy?
Not that it'll do any good.’
‘Would you?’
She was excited.
‘Tell him the position.
Tell him I'll give him anything he wants but I must have time.’
She passed the whole thing over to me.
Must be my kind face.
I knew how much good I could do in a case like this.
A blackmailer isn't interested in reasons, only money.
Still, I could try to throw a scare into him.
He'd probably laugh in my kind face.
‘I'll see what I can do.’
‘Oh, thank you, thank you.
Would you go this afternoon?
I can't wait to hear what he says.’
Shall I tell you now little lady?
I thought.
Out loud I said’ Sure.
This afternoon.
What's the address?’
I wrote it down.
‘And his name?
You haven't told me that yet you know.’
‘Haven't I?
I thought I mentioned it.
It's Jack Mahoney.’
I laid the pencil on the blotter and sat back looking at her.
If she was ribbing me she was doing a swell job.
I said nothing.
‘What's wrong?
Do you know him?’
‘I've heard of him.
Mrs. Porter, what were you doing last night?’
‘Last night?
We stayed home.
Why?’
‘Did you watch television or hear the radio newscasts?’
‘No.
I don't understand this.
Why do you want to know?’
‘Does your husband take the paper with him when he leaves in the morning?’
‘Why yes, he does.
He reads it during lunch.
Will you please tell me what this is all about?’
For answer, I picked up the newspaper from where I'd thrown it on the desk.
I unfolded it carefully and turned it around so she could see the front page.
She slipped forward out of the chair and hit the floor in a dead faint.
I buzzed for Hinkle.
When she came in she stood looking at the figure stretched out on the floor.
Some day that woman's going to look surprised.
I hope I'm there to see it.
‘What did you do, smile at her?’
Miss Hinkle has a  special voice she uses for her jokes.
Me, I'll take Amos'n Andy.
‘Ha, ha.
Very funny.
The girl's fainted.
Can't you try to do something about it instead of standing there making sidesplitting remarks?’
‘Why me?
Why didn't you pick her up yourself?
I'd have said she was approximately your weight.’
She walked across and bent over the girl.
I came round the desk then and raised Mrs. Porter by slipping one arm around her shoulders and heaving her into a sitting position.
Her head lolled against my shoulder.
It felt natural.
I could have wished she was conscious.
I slapped gently at the sides of her face, without much success, while Miss Hinkle produced a glass of water.
Finally, the head on my shoulder lifted away.
It had been nice while it lasted.
‘Oh.
Oh dear.
Why I'm — Whatever did —?’
‘You passed out Mrs. Porter.
Do you feel well enough to sit in a chair?’
She nodded.
Hinkle grabbed her other arm and between us we heaved her up and into the chair.
She smiled ruefully.
‘I'm terribly sorry.
I don't usually act this way.’
She grabbed her purse from the desk and rummaged around inside.
Finally she came up with a small hand mirror and inspected herself in it.
‘Lord, what a mess.
Would you excuse me, Mr. Preston, while I try to do something about this?’
‘Of course, you go ahead.’
I addressed Miss Hinkle.
‘Thanks for your help.
I think Mrs. Porter will be O.K. now.’
‘Very well.
If you need anything Mrs. Porter, don't hesitate to call me in.’
Barbara Porter looked up with a lipstick pencil in her  hand and smiled at the Hinkle.
When she smiled all the dark comers in the office lit up.
Even my frosty secretary thawed out.
‘You've been very kind, thank you.
I'm sure I shall be all right now.’
When we were alone in the room, she carried on with the repair job.
Ordinarily, I get a trifle fidgety around females who can't leave their faces alone, but this one had a good excuse and anyway it was like watching an artist in front of a canvas.
Finally, she was through.
Slipping all her equipment back into the bag she turned to me.
Her face was maybe four feet away from mine.
‘There,’ she said.
‘That's all over.
Will I do?’
Not a very nice question to ask a poor defenceless male on a hot morning.
‘Mrs. Porter, any attempt on my part to give you an adequate answer to that question would probably destroy the delicate professional nature of our relationship.
Shall I just pretend you didn't ask me?’
Her eyes twinkled.
‘Of course.
I oughtn't to flirt with you and I apologise.
The fact is, I feel as if ten years worry has been taken off my shoulders in the last ten minutes, and I'm a little light-headed about it.’
She tapped the paper with one slim hand.
‘Do they know who killed him?’
‘They haven't arrested anybody for the shooting.
He's not dead you know.’
I watched as I spoke in case she passed out again.
Her eyes clouded over.
‘Not — dead?’
The voice was just a whisper.
‘No.
He's been shot twice in the chest and is in pretty bad shape.
At present he's in a coma, but the doctors say there's a chance he may pull out of it.’
‘Oh.’
All the sparkle was gone again.
Her voice became  hysterical.
‘Oh, let him die, please let him die.’
She looked at me oddly.
‘I suppose you think that sounds pretty strange.
But I hope he dies.
How I hope that.
He isn't fit to live anyway.’
I felt pretty uncomfortable.
‘In any case, your particular problem can rest a while.
Even if he makes it he won't be up and around for a month at least.’
‘That's true.
And in the meantime there's nothing I can do but hope.’
She stood up and took a roll of bills out of her purse.
‘I'm afraid I've taken up a good deal of your time for no purpose Mr. Preston.
I insist on paying for this interview, although there's nothing further for you to do at present.’
‘That won't be necessary.’
I rose and faced her across the table.
‘If I do anything for you, you'll get a bill pretty fast from my office.
At the moment you've made a very dull morning very interesting and I'm grateful to you.’
She held out her hand and I took it.
‘You've been kind.
I've been worried out of my head for so long it was a tremendous relief to me just to be able to talk to someone.
Thank you.’
Suddenly she leaned across the desk and kissed me quickly on the mouth.
just a friendly little peck with nothing behind it.
Then she turned around and walked out.
I knew I would probably never see her again, and in a way I was glad.
After all, she was happily married, and I was happily unmarried.
I leaned against the window and watched the street below.
Traffic was a little heavier now and there were more people on the sidewalks.
The two loafers had disappeared, no doubt to some early-starting poolroom.
After a few minutes a woman in a grey fur coat began to cross the street from my building.
She headed for the outsize black car that was parked opposite.
So I  had been right about that.
Several of the men in the street turned to get a better look at her and I could appreciate their point of view.
I half hoped she would look up and wave, though of course the idea was ridiculous.
I was just one small window in a forest of glass.
The car slid away from the kerb, followed by a small blue roadster, and I thought with some regret that I was probably watching Mrs. Barbara Porter driving out of my life.
In a way I was right.
I was still standing there when Miss Hinkle came in.
‘Shall we be acting for Mrs. Porter?’ she asked.
‘I don't know yet.
It depends.
Not for some weeks anyway I fancy.’
‘Mr. Preston, if I may say so that was pretty cold blooded of you to leave her lying on the floor until I came in.’
Miss Hinkle had one of her severe moods on.
She seldom has any other kind.
I turned to answer her.
‘Oh come now, you know better than that.
I didn't know what kind of play she might have been pulling.
For all I knew she might have been a psycho or a girl with a little blackmail on her mind.
Very tricky business being a private shamus.
Plenty of guys in this racket have found themselves in front of a jury for a lot less than picking a dame up off the floor.
And you know it.
I like witnesses around when anything like that happens.’
She sniffed, but I could tell she was at least partly mollified.
‘Sam Thompson is going to phone in that information you wanted as soon as he can,’ she volunteered.
‘Thank you.’
I could see she was on the point of leaving.
‘You've forgotten to ask whether Mrs. Porter left a deposit.’
She gave me that icy smile which is reserved for making me feel uncomfortable.
‘It wasn't necessary to ask.
She didn't.
Not money anyway.
You've got lipstick all over your face.’
And using that as an exit line she stalked out.
I wiped my face with a handkerchief and thought about Barbara Porter.
Whatever the world had done to the little wide-eyed innocent who got eaten up by a bad wolf in the big city, it hadn't taught her much.
She'd just walked in to the nearest doorway and spilled the whole thing to a complete stranger.
It hadn't occurred to her that I might take up the blackmail where Jack Mahoney had left off.
As it happens, blackmail is a little out of my line, but she wasn't to know that.
I wondered whether Mahoney would die.
Not that it was any skin off my nose one way or the other.
Just for the sake of neatness, I'd asked Miss Hinkle to set Sam Thompson to work finding out about Mrs. Porter and her big black car when I excused myself early in the interview with her.
It was routine, I didn't think he'd turn up much.
That's the story of my life.
You turn up a little here and a little there.
Finally you put it all together and find you got a nice solid looking case.
Then some damned smart lawyer comes along and shoots it full of writs and affidavits.
So you pick up the pieces and start turning up a little here and a little— but you get the idea.
If you think about it long enough you'll go nuts.
2
AROUND noon, I decided I'd earned a break.
The week-end had been great, but men left to themselves are apt to get a mite slipshod about such matters as mealtimes.
Wilson and I hadn't had a proper meal the whole time and now my stomach was beginning to remind me there were other things in life besides Scotch and bourbon.
And it didn't mean rum.
I usually walk around the corner to a place nearby, but today I thought it might be worthwhile to eat at a small Chinese restaurant several blocks away where a lot of newspaper guys gather.
The rain was holding off for a while and the streets were drying in patches.
I watched a girl in front of me trying to hop from one patch to another so as to avoid ducking the two strips of leather somebody had sold her as shoes.
She missed her footing in the end and stepped into a puddle about two inches deep.
A man leaning in a shop doorway had been watching her performance too.
When she splashed he roared with laughter.
Furious, she swung around and I was the nearest to her.
Some of the things she called me would have won the admiration of Hell's Kitchen.
I speeded up the walking a little to get away from there.
Thirty minutes later I felt better, having worked my way through two platefuls of what the menu called Typical Chinese Dishes on one side and a lot of laundry symbols on the other side.
I was on my third cup of coffee and looking around at the other  coolies when I saw a familiar blue overcoat coming through the door from the street.
Jerry Connors.
He saw me and waved, then set about finding somewhere to park the coat.
I was a little worried in case he left his wallet in it.
For one thing you can't be too careful these days, and for another I always manage to get stuck with the check when Connors eats with me.
‘'Lo Preston.
What's new?’
He parked himself in the seat opposite and picked up the menu.
I had a look at him.
Pushing forty but kind of athletic for his age, a worried grey face and hair going a little thin.
He patrolled the crime beat for the Globe and was on friendly terms with half the criminals in town.
There wasn't a heist man or second-storey expert in the neighbourhood who wasn't first-names with Connors.
The strange thing was they didn't seem to mind that he was on the same terms with judges, cops and lawyers.
Even shamuses like me.
‘What did you have?’
He waved the menu at me.
‘Typical Chinese Dishes,’ I told him.
‘Sounds great.
Waiter, ham and eggs.
Sunny side up.
And coffee.’
He took one of my cigarettes from the pack on the table.
I never could remember to put them back in my pocket.
‘Thanks.
I tried to call you this week-end.
Where were you?’
‘I was out of town.
What was it about?’
He grinned.
‘Friend of yours got a little shot up yesterday, or don't you read the papers?’
‘Just the funnies.
I know too much about the guys who write the rest of the stuff to be able to stomach it.’
‘Fellow named Mahoney.
Jack Mahoney.
Does it all come back to you now?’
‘I've heard the name.’
‘Yeah, that's what I thought.
Didn't you and he have a slight argument one time?’
I swallowed some coffee.
‘Well, I don't know whether you'd call it an argument exactly.
Far as I remember he called me a nasty name and I slapped his wrist.’
‘I know.
I was at the hospital when he came out of it.
We thought he'd been knocked over by a hit and run driver.’
I didn't like the direction he was going.
‘Look Connors, what's on your mind?
I was with Tim Wilson all day yesterday.’
He smiled widely.
‘Just kidding you.
I know where you were yesterday.
I know where everybody was yesterday.
And the day before.
The fact is —’ He broke off as the smiling Chinese waiter set his food on the table.
Carefully he inspected the eggs.
‘Fine Charlie.
That's just fine.’
The waiter bowed until his head nearly banged the table, then shuffled away.
It was all a gag really.
The guy probably had two cars and a son running for governor.
When he'd gone, Connors picked up where he'd left off.
This time his voice was a lot lower.
‘The fact is my friend, that the boys at headquarters don't like this shooting a bit.
Not a bit.
You see, there was no reason for it.’
‘No reason?
Somebody seems to disagree with that.’
‘The guy with the gun?
Yeah, but who was it?
With a rat like Mahoney you can usually bet he's been rubbed out for business reasons.
This time, that doesn't jell.’
‘Why not?
All the cops know about Mahoney is that he  worked for Joey Bonanza.
I haven't noticed Bonanza issuing any monthly company reports.’
Connors was busy emptying all the ketchup bottles over his eggs.
Idly I wondered why he insisted on them being cooked sunny side up.
He'd be lucky if he could find them at all under that mess.
He frowned at me.
‘I don't like to seem stuffy friend, but if Bonanza and Mahoney were on the outs I would know it.
They weren't.
And as long as they weren't, nobody else in this town would dare to shoot off any cannons at one of Bonanza's men.’
‘How about another outfit?’
I suggested.
He threw up his arms in despair.
When he spoke there was somet–g like pity in his voice.
‘Another outfit?
I'm ashamed of you, Preston.
Somebody in the rackets gets a bullet in him, people holler gang war.
A Chinese gets run over, they shout tong war.
A Negro dies of heart failure, they blame it on racial segregation.
What's the matter boy?
You been out in the sun too much?’
He liked to talk, and that was what I wanted.
‘All right, you know it all.
But tell me, who did kill him?’
I asked.
‘Kill him?
Nobody killed him.
He isn't dead.
Chances are he'll come out of it.
At least long enough to make a statement.
That's another thing.
You don't imagine a hired gun would do a sloppy job like that do you?’
‘Maybe you're right.
What do the cops think?’
He leaned across the table.
‘Mahoney was spending a lot of money on himself.
He always was a fancy dresser as you know.
Now,’ he waved a fork at me, ‘if the guy was spending more money than Bonanza expected and Bonanza didn't seem to mind what's the obvious thing?’
‘You tell me.’
‘Blackmail.
That's the only way he could get extra money without cutting into Bonanza's territory.
It has to be blackmail.’
‘Or a dame?’
I suggested.
‘Uh, uh, that's out.
He's been shacking up with a girl from Bonanza's club for months.
She's had a breakdown over this.’
‘What's her name?’
‘Connie Frazer.
Why?’
‘I was thinking maybe she had a husband or a brother or somebody who didn't think much of the set-up.’
‘No, that won't do.
Connie's from Philadelphia.
The cops have checked all those angles.’
The newsman finished his food and sat back.
I made a grab for my cigarettes just too late.
‘Don't be such a skinflint, Preston, you earn good money.’
He chuckled as he exhaled cigarette smoke across the space between us.
‘Not enough to keep every writing hack in town,’ I said bitterly.
‘Tut, tut.
It would serve you right if I didn't tell my piece de resistance.’
‘I know, you're going to buy some smokes of your own.’
He beamed and flicked ash into an empty ketchup bottle.
‘Mr. Joseph Bonanza, a prominent and respected citizen of this community, has posted the sum of five thousand dollars for information leading to the arrest and conviction of Jack Mahoney's killer — if he dies.’
I whistled softly.
‘Now you cheap shamus, with the underhanded methods you use you ought to be able to figure this out before the cops get around to it.
What do you say?’
‘What's the deal?’
I said.
‘I'll keep you in touch with anything new that breaks.
Strictly as a silent partner.
I don't want to lose any of my good friends.
If you pull it off, I get fifteen hundred.
O.K.?’
I thought about it for a moment.
‘And you won't go and make a similar deal with half the people in town?’
‘An unworthy remark.
I ignore it.’
He wasn't really mad.
We'd known each other a long time.
‘All right, I'll buy it.
On one condition.’
He raised his eyebrows slightly, but said nothing.
‘You buy me a pack of cigarettes out of the fifteen hundred.’
‘Deal,’ he said.
‘The Commissioner's giving a pep talk this afternoon about all the progress he's making on this shooting.
I'd better blow.
You coming?’
‘Not yet.
I could use another cup of coffee.’
‘Well, I'll be seeing you.’
He got up and moved over to where he'd left his coat.
He spoke to the waiter, and struggling into his coat made for the street door.
As I helped myself to a cigarette from the depleted pack I was turning over some of what he'd told me.
Connors was no fool.
He knew I'd be interested in the reward money before he started telling me all the details, otherwise he'd have kept most of it to himself.
If the police were thinking about blackmail it wouldn't be long before they got to Barbara Porter.
And although I was fairly certain she had nothing to do with the shooting, if the police started asking questions her husband would find out the whole story anyway.
It seemed from where I sat that she was in trouble whether Mahoney lived or died.
The grinning waiter set down a cup of coffee by my hand.
Connors must have told him I wanted it.
Then I looked at the table.
That wasn't all Connors had told him.
I was stuck with the check.
When I got back to my office, the Hinkle was still out at lunch.
I let myself in, and stopped to look around me in the small outer room.
Good carpet on the floor, dark oak panelling on the lower half of the walls, Miss Hinkle's desk situated strategically at the far end by the side of the entrance to my own room.
Inner sanctum.
I thought wryly of the days, not many years before, when I was holed up in one dark room on the wrong side of town.
All the trimmings were Hinkle's work.
While you waited to see me, you had plenty of time to reflect on just how good I had to be to afford a suite of offices like this one.
It gave the clients confidence in my abilities, and also told them any hopes they may have had of getting away with a fifty dollar fee should be left with the receptionist.
Closing the door, I went through into my own room.
I hung up the coat and sat down.
On the table was a typewritten message.
‘Thompson called in just after you went to lunch.
The lady in the black car is Mrs. Laura Channing, 1027, Westminster Drive.
Husband, Arthur Channing, accountant employed by Ogden Textiles.
Moved here about fifteen months ago.
No children, seem very devoted couple.
Thompson says will that be enough or do you require a complete rundown?’
I let the piece of paper float out of my fingers.
I was thinking about Mrs. Laura Channing who was married to an accountant, and Mrs. Barbara Porter who said she was married to a doctor of philosophy.
Dames.
They have to complicate everything.
And for another thing, they're illogical.
Here was this girl who seemed to think I was capable of clearing up her troubles, but didn't think I'd have enough brains to find out her identity.
Anybody but a complete knucklehead could find a beautiful woman in a place like Waldron City inside twenty-four hours.
It irritates  me when people give me phoney information.
Of course, they do it all the time but that doesn't make it any easier to get used to.
Outside I could hear the sounds made by Miss Hinkle as she returned from lunch.
She stuck her head round the door.
‘Oh, you're back.
Did you read my note?’ she asked.
‘Uh, huh.
What else did Thompson say?’
‘He said the whole thing was simple.
It didn't seem to occur to Mrs. Porter — or rather Mrs. Chalmers —‘
‘Channing,’ I put in, ‘Laura Channing.’
Miss Hinkle sniffed.’
— Channing then.
It didn't occur to her she might be followed.
Thompson said she just drove straight home, parked the car in the drive and went in the house.’
I thought about that for a moment, then, ‘O.K. pay him will you?
And ask him to phone tomorrow.
I may have something for him.’
‘Very well.’
She withdrew.
It was very warm in the office.
The Typical Chinese Dishes with plenty of good hot coffee on top of them seemed to combine with the heating in the place to make me sleepy.
I tried very hard to think about something, anything, that would help me keep my head clear.
But I kept closing my eyes and nodding off.
In the distance I could hear something, something I had to pay attention to.
A fire?
No, an ambulance.
No.
Telephone, that was it, telephone.
I raised my head from the desk and groped with unresponding fingers for the receiver.
‘Preston, is that you?’
A man's voice.
‘Um, aw, woosh,’ I said, or something like that.
‘Quit kidding Preston, this is Connors.
You drunk or something?’
My head was clearing now.
‘No, no. just a little sleepy, I guess.’
‘Well wake up sandman, and make sure you hear this good.
Our friend Mahoney cashed in about fifteen minutes ago.’
I was properly awake then.
‘Tough break,’ I returned.
‘Did he make any statement?’
‘No, he didn't have much chance.
Somebody put two more slugs in him.’
‘What?’
I shouted the word down the phone.
‘You heard me brother.
The guy was dressed up as a hospital orderly.
just walked into the room.
There was a cop on duty but he didn't take any particular notice of one more orderly.
Then the orderly beats him over the head, pumps a couple of .38's into Mahoney with a silenced gun, turns round and walks out.
Brother you should see that hospital.
It's crawling with cops.
They're finger-printing guys who've been bedridden for years.
The department's going to hear about this for a long time.’
Connor's voice was gleeful.
I tapped with my fingers.
‘No point in asking if there's any leads on the orderly,’ I said.
‘No point at all my gumshoe friend.
The cops are out on a limb.
And by the evening editions every hack in town will be sawing away at the other end.’
That was a safe bet.
‘Well, I guess this means our deal is on, huh?’
‘Sure thing.
Why else would I spend a nickel phoning you the glad tidings.’
‘Look, Connors, I suppose you didn't knock him off yourself, so Bonanza will promote the five thousand?’
‘Tut tut.
I deserve better from you.
Here I'm doing you a favour and all I get is crummy insults.’
‘And fifteen hundred bucks,’ I reminded him.
‘Well polish up your blood-hound and get on with it  shamus.
If you need me you know where to find me.’
After he hung up I fished the morning paper out of the wastebasket and re-read the story on the Mahoney shooting very carefully.
It took up a lot of space, but the facts were few.
Mahoney had been walking down the street on his way to the Bonanza Club when he was shot down.
According to a number of reliable witnesses the assailant was a tall man in a grey coat walking towards Mahoney, a short woman in a green hat hiding in a doorway, a masked figure in the back seat of a car and an unseen person who fired from behind a parking sign.
In fact, the shooting took place in the dark and none of the witnesses arrived on the scene for something like ten seconds.
And in that time a whole regiment of cavalry could have got away.
I made a note of Mahoney's home address and returned the paper to the waste basket.
Then I grabbed my coat and went out.
‘I'm going out, Miss Hinkle.
Probably shan't get back this evening, so I'll leave you to lock up when you're through.’
‘Shall I be able to reach you at 1027, Westminster Drive?’ she asked.
‘You have a one track mind, Hinkle.
If you really want to know I'm going to look through a corpse's personal effects.
Want to come along?’
She shuddered and returned to her typewriter.
Joey Bonanza paid his men pretty well, but not well enough for Jack Mahoney to be able to afford the address he'd been living at.
Tucked away in a quiet part of the town, mostly inhabited by better-class salesmen and small businessmen, it was a second storey apartment.
I ignored the elevator and walked up.
There wasn't much point in pressing the bell so I fooled around with a small bunch of keys I keep for occasions like this and finally felt the tumblers turn in the lock.
There was no one around  in the hall to see me as I stepped inside.
The interior was probably quite well furnished in the ordinary way, but right now it looked as if a tornado had been through it.
Everything that could be turned upside down was upside down.
Drawers littered all over the floor, cushions ripped open.
Somebody had been looking for something.
A door across the room probably led to the bedroom.
I walked across and opened the door.
Everywhere was the same confusion.
I stood for a moment looking at the mattress on the bed where a knife had been used to open up the sides.
I heard the noise, and had my hand halfway to my gun when somebody beat me over the head with the Empire State Building.
Groggily I tried to turn as the room spun round.
Somehow my two feet had different ideas about direction.
I was on my knees when the second blow came, and a blinding red agony shot through my skull.
The floor punched me in the nose and I stretched out on it.
I could hear voices far away and then something hurt my shoulder.
It was a leathered foot.
‘Wake up mac, this ain't no flophouse.’
Somebody laughed, and the foot hurt me again.
I put weight on my hands and tried to push myself up off the floor.
A jolt of pain in my head made me wonder whether it was such a good idea.
Slowly I opened my eyes.
The carpet had a flowered pattern, white roses on a blue background.
The few square inches of it that I could see were spoiled by the sticky red blood which had pooled out over them.
My blood, from my nose probably.
‘Hey, you, shake it up will you.
We ain't got all night.’
Again the cackling laugh from somewhere above and behind me, then a dull pain as the shoe hit my shoulder again.
I rolled sideways and looked up.
There was a chandelier  directly overhead, and a thousand little tingles of pain edged back into my head as I looked into it.
When I got used to the light I could see two men sitting grinning at me.
They were flashily dressed in cheap, bright, suits and screaming bow ties.
The big one was a punchdrunk character named Battler.
I'd seen him around a few times.
The little tubby man with him was a stranger.
‘What do you say mac?
You all through sleeping now?’
He had a mouthful of gold teeth.
‘Hey Rico, maybe I should put him back to bed, huh?’
Battler cackled again.
I fumbled for my gun.
The gold teeth disappeared as Rico's mouth snapped into a tight straight line.
‘Don't start nothing, shamus.
We got the rod.’
He held up his hand.
My gun was in it.
I put a hand up to feel my head.
There were two large lumps that I hadn't had before, but at least the skull didn't seem to be broken.
I struggled up into a sitting position, my back resting against a chair.
My head was throbbing and the shoulder was beginning to ache from the kicking, which had probably been going on for some time before I came round.
My throat was dry, and my swollen tongue felt like sandpaper.
The dried blood from my nose was smeared all over the front of my mouth and it cracked when I tried to move my lips.
I got out a handkerchief and began to wipe it off.
I felt great.
‘Ain't very pretty is he?’
Battler saw himself as a wag.
‘Do you mind if I smoke?’
I croaked.
‘Sure.
Help yourself.’
Rico waved the gun in the air.
The cigarette tasted like engine grease filtered through sawdust.
‘I bet you guys feel pretty tough, slugging me from behind.’
Battler snorted.
‘What's he mean, ‘slug him from behind’?
This guy is nuts, Rico.’
‘Sounds that way,’ Rico agreed.
‘I don't get you, pally.
We just got here, and there you was stretched out on the floor.
We thought you was a stiff.’
‘Yeah, that's right,’ growled the Battler.
I thought about it.
‘Maybe.
What're you guys doing here anyway?’
‘Ain't that rich.
The nerve of the guy.
What are we doing here he says.
What are you doing here, mac?’
Rico was not amused.
‘I'm Johnny Preston.
A private cop.’
‘We know all that stuff.
We been through your pockets.
What you doing here?
And you ain't in no position to argue with us, mac.’
He was right about that, at least.
‘I came to see if there was anything in the apartment to give me a lead on who killed Mahoney,’ I said.
‘Why, what's it to you who knocked him off?’
Rico was suspicious.
‘You better ask Joey Bonanza about that.’
‘Joey?’
Battler sounded apprehensive.
‘Where does Joey fit in this deal?’
‘Shut up.’
Rico silenced the big guy with an impatient gesture.
He turned to me.
‘You a friend of Joey's?’
‘He's put up a reward for Mahoney's killer.
Hadn't you heard about it?
If I nail the gun, that makes me Joey's friend, right?’
‘Double talk.
What did you think you'd find here?
And why tear the joint inside out?’
‘I didn't do that.
Somebody got here in front of me.
Must have been in this room when I got here.
I came inside, took a look around and then got beat over the head.
Next thing I know you guys start acting tough.’
‘I don't know.
What you think, Battler?’
Battler pawed at his chin.
His fist was about the size of a sack of potatoes.
‘Sounds all right.
I guess it sounds all right.’
Rico was still not satisfied.
He sat quite still chewing it over in his mind.
‘You didn't find nothing, that's for sure.
Your pockets wasn't worth picking.’
He thought some more.
‘And you got a clunk on the head all right.
We'll see what Joey says about this.’
Battler nodded vigorously.
‘Yeah, that's a swell idea.
We'll phone Joey, he'll know what to do.
There is one smart operator.’
He spoke like a child who'd found a way of handing over a responsibility to its parents.
His brow cleared after the terrific mental exercise he'd been putting in.
If anything, he looked even uglier when he wasn't worrying.
‘O.K. You watch this guy while I make the call.’
Rico stood up and left the room.
I could hear him pick up the telephone and dial a number.
When he spoke his voice was low and I couldn't catch what he said.
Battler sat back and beamed at me.
‘Don't you worry none,’ he said.
‘If Joey says you're in, you're in.
Joey looks after his friends.
You bet.’
‘That's great.
What happens if Joey says I'm out?’
It was wrong to ask him a question.
He wasn't ready for it.
His face creased up in knotted lines again and the vacant blue eyes clouded over.
‘Huh?
But you said — you told us —’ the voice tail off and he shook his great head in puzzlement.
‘Forget it.’
I had made an interesting discovery.
If I shifted my weight on to the shoulder these mugs had been using as a football, the pain took away my thoughts from the throbbing ache in my head.
Sounds a little crazy, but it was quite a relief at the time to be able to switch my miseries around.
After a time there was a click as Rico cradled the receiver.
Battler looked at him eagerly as he came back into the room.
‘What did Joey say?’
Rico looked at me before replying.
‘Joey says it sounds O.K. He says to tell you, shamus, that he hopes you collect the reward.’
‘Thanks.
That's what I'm hoping myself.’
‘He also says, he hopes you're on the level.
Joey don't like people running him around.
Get what I mean?’
His voice was flat and without expression.
I said I got what he meant.
He turned to the one-time fighter.
‘C'mon,’ he said, ‘let's go.’
Battler rose as if to follow him, then stopped and looked round at me.
‘What about him?’ he asked.
‘Well, what about him?
He can't get in our hair.
If he wants to sit there, O.K. he sits there.
Let's get outta this.’
‘Rico.’
I was getting some strength back in my voice.
He heard me quite clearly from about six feet away.
‘Well?’
‘You forgot something.
How about the rod?’
I pointed to my gun which still hung loosely from the hand at his side.
He looked at it.
‘O.K. I guess so.
I'll leave it in the other room for you.
Just in case you got ideas.’
In the doorway Battler turned and gave me a final beam for good measure, then they were gone.
I heard the outer door shut.
It was a relief to see the last of them.
Guys like that, cheap punks, are easy enough to handle when you feel up to it.
Right then I wasn't feeling so good.
I might have held my end up in a brawl with a three year old kid, if the kid wasn't feeling  too good either.
I stayed right where I was on the floor telling myself I'd be fine in just a few minutes.
A half-hour went by before I finally decided I wasn't going to feel fine ever again.
In fact I considered if I was going to die it might as well be in my own quarters.
After a couple of false starts I managed to stand erect.
Erect is a slight exaggeration.
What I did was to teeter from side to side like a tall mast on a small ship in a heavy sea.
Some involved navigation got me across to the door and into the other room.
My gun lay on a small table.
I slipped it back into its proper place, noting that the suspicious-minded Rico had emptied out all the shells.
Before leaving I looked around at the disorder wondering what was so important that somebody would go to so much trouble to look for it.
Wondering too, whether they found it.
Then there was the matter of me getting hit on the head.
That was incidental of course, since I wasn't invited.
As it was, I was lucky to get away with a few bruises if the person who slugged me was the one who knocked off Mahoney.
I made it back to the car and drove very slowly back to my own apartment.
I have a pretty fancy lay-out up at Woodside.
It costs plenty, but I figure it's worth it.
The service is something special and I might as well spend my money that way as any other.
It was a relief to get inside and shut the door.
I poured myself a stiff drink and tossed it down.
Then I went into the bathroom and held my head under some cold water for a while.
When I ran out of breath I'd come up for another helping, then duck the head again.
The water was very cold, and after a while I wasn't feeling so bad.
I walked round the room wiping myself off and trying to get my thoughts straight.
I wondered what kind of progress Tim Wilson was making and how far he was behind Laura Channing.
Wilson is a simple man like most policemen, show him  a body and he wants to know whose it is, how it died and who's responsible.
Just like that.
No psychiatry nonsense, no mumbo jumbo about theories and the other paraphernalia of the fiction writer.
And it works too, most of the time.
Laura Channing was being blackmailed by Jack Mahoney.
Mahoney gets himself murdered and starts the police off on that painstaking system of theirs.
Pretty soon the law would know more about Mahoney than his own mother.
It might take them some time to find out about Laura, because the interesting part of the story took place some years earlier.
But they'd get to her in the end.
Half a dozen men right at that moment had started out on different paths, each of which was one side of Mahoney's life.
People occurred along the way and some would be talked to, questioned, while some were passed by with little more than a cursory glance.
Along one of those paths was the figure of Laura Channing, unable to move from the indeterminate point in time at which her life had first crossed that of Mahoney.
Waiting for the patient figure in the distance which was the law.
Nobody has a greater respect than I for the working of the law machine.
Particularly when Wilson is the engineer.
At that moment I did have some kind of advantage over him, because I knew a little more about some things than he did.
Not much, but a little.
Any edge that gave me would not last for long, and if I was going to protect my client, if she was my client, I'd better get on with it.
Yeah, but how?
Where did I go from here?
I sat around picking over the few facts I knew.
They didn't help a lot.
All they told me was that if I were on the public payroll I'd take a ride out to Westminster Drive and have a long talk with Mrs. Laura Channing.
There was one person I thought might come across with a few facts, Mahoney's girl, Connie Fraser.
She was  supposed to be suffering from a nervous breakdown, but that could be because the law didn't want anybody talking to her.
Or Bonanza could have figured she was better out of the way.
That's what I love about this business.
Plodding around in the dark hoping you might stumble over something, and knowing all the time that half a dozen people could throw the light-switch if they wanted to.
I called the Globe and asked for Connors.
‘Who wants him?’
The man at the other end was very brisk and business-like.
Probably some green kid fresh out of journalism school, anxious to impress.
‘Tell him it's the guy who buys all his cigarettes.’
After a while Connors came on.
‘Well, shamus, is it all buttoned up?’ he asked.
‘Sure.
The whole thing was a Commie frame-up.
I've put the finger on seven members of the ring since lunch, but the big guy is slippery.
I probably won't catch up with him for an hour or more, but when I do, people will be astounded to learn his identity.’
‘Fine.
An hour, you say?
We'll catch the late editions then.’
‘Yup.
Meantime there is something you can tell me.
Where do I find Connie Fraser?’
There was a pause.
Then he spoke quietly.
‘Look, this is not a good time for me to talk.
Could I call you back in fifteen minutes?’
’ Sure, I'm at home.
You know the number.’
We hung up and I lit a cigarette before switching on the radio.
I got some quiet music and sat down to listen for a minute.
At the end of the number there was a time signal followed by a commercial about a breakfast food.
I've always had a theory about this particular food.
If they changed the name of the product they could monopolise the glue business in six months.
But that's the trouble  with industry today, no imagination.
The announcer was reading a newsflash.
‘…and homicide Lieutenant Wilson stated a few minutes ago that the police are closing in.
The cold-blooded murder of a hospitalisation case has aroused great public indignation.
Questions are being asked by prominent citizens as to the extent of police laxity which permitted the perpetration of this vicious crime.
Mayor Francis T. Somerton has ordered a special enquiry into the circumstances.
Your reporter predicts with confidence that certain officials in the police department will find their ears burning before long.
In San Diego this morning…’
I stopped listening as he went on to describe a naval ceremony.
Poor Tim Wilson was probably having a bad time.
When anything like this happened, every office-holder in the community made speeches passing the buck on to the police department.
While I was thinking it over the ‘phone rang.
It was Connors.
‘I didn't want to talk about this from the office.
Too many guys down there with their ears all sharpened up.
What do you want with Connie Fraser?’
I told him about my visit to Mahoney's apartment.
‘Boy, you really fouled it up good.
Right there in the room with the killer, and all you can think of is to show him a good place to slug you.’
He wasn't very sympathetic.
‘Now that you've expressed your condolences what about the Fraser girl?’
‘She's in a sanatorium.
Dr. Hugo Zimmerman's place.
It's about thirty miles out.’
I knew the place.
An expensive resthouse for wealthy hypochondriacs.
‘But that comes pretty high.
How come she can afford it?’
‘Bonanza's paying.
He says nothing is too much  trouble until Mahoney's death is cleared up.’
‘I see.
Does Bonanza suggest how anybody is supposed to get the death cleared up when he takes an important witness thirty miles away?
Any visitors?’
‘No.
Strictly incommunicado.
Couple of our boys covered it today.
No admission, doctor's orders.
She needs plenty of rest and quiet.’
‘How about the police?
They'll want to see her for sure.’
‘Far as I can find out they've let it ride for the moment.
They probably figure the public wouldn't like them very much if they dragged a sick girl from her bed.
They're in plenty enough trouble as it is over this deal.’
‘Yeah, I just heard some of it on the radio.
Well, thanks for the information.’
‘What you gonna do?’
‘I don't know.
Maybe sleep on it.
My head is banging like a twenty year old car engine.’
‘Tut, tut.
Tough.
Better lock your door tonight.’
I answered him in a way which is probably better not repeated, and hung up.
Then I asked Service to send me up some food and a large pot of coffee.
I fooled around with a lamb chop for a while, but decided I wasn't really very hungry after all.
The coffee hit the spot, though, and I drank my way through the whole pot and threw in a couple of cigarettes for good measure.
It was then six thirty and I was beginning to feel a little more alive.
The immediate problem was to get to see Laura Channing.
She might have tried to reach me at the office during the afternoon.
I didn't want to 'phone the house because I wasn't sure of the setup there.
Maybe her husband was used to men calling her up, maybe not.
Maybe the 'phone was in the living room and she'd be unable to talk anyway.
I took a cold shower and changed my clothes.
I put on a dark grey suit with a fine stripe, a grey  woollen tie and a  soft white shirt.
Brushing my hair set my teeth on edge but I finally got most of it laying down, and at least you couldn't see my new bumps from the front.
With the gun under my arm I was all set for the evening.
At least that's what I thought.
3
I TOOK a ride out to see Walt and Sally Maxted.
They may know something about Laura Channing and on the other hand they may not.
Either way I was long overdue to call on them.
At the time they were living —‘pigging it’ was the term they used — in a large and lush apartment in the best residential section.
Walt was a scenario writer for a major studio, and Sally created gowns.
That was the description the studio insisted on, and was by no means her idea.
The public relations branch of the company they worked for had several fits when they discovered an entry in the city directory that read Maxted, Sally — Dressmaker.
She was by that time too valuable a property to be junked, so they settled for a short suspension and a revised entry in the book.
The Maxteds, for some reason I could never fathom, were ashamed of earning the money they did from the movies.
Artistic, in the best sense, they fretted because of the inflated sense of importance developed by the many people of inferior talent around the industry.
In Paris, Sally would insist, she'd starve, and Walt used to claim that he'd never be able to write anything good enough for acceptance by a commercial publisher.
So they took the money each month but refused to mix with other movie people in their spare time.
They'd been married about four years now, and while their apartment wasn't exactly a centre of domesticity, it was a  Mecca for all kinds of zany characters who had something interesting to offer.
Even if they were only private eyes.
The door of the apartment was ajar and, when nobody answered the buzzer I went inside.
Sally was standing on a table, with yards of black silk wound tightly round her from her neck down to the floor.
Though she was completely covered she might just as well have been wearing nothing at all.
Her rich tawny hair caught a reflection of the setting sun from a mirror.
She was holding some sheets of typed paper in her hand.
‘But there must have been some word,’ she said impatiently, ‘some message.’
‘Nothing O Queen.’
Walt was lying on the floor, dressed in a pair of blue shorts with pink stripes down the side.
‘You must search again,’ shouted Sally.
‘Go.’
As she said ‘Go’ she flung up her right hand in an imperious gesture.
There was a tearing sound and a large piece of the black silk winding detached itself from her back and flapped wide.
This was followed by a sliding of more material from the shoulder, and soon all the stuff was cascading off her.
It was no place for a gentleman.
I leaned against the wail listening to Sally's bad language and taking everything in.
I applauded lightly.
‘Bravo.’
She looked round quickly, yelped and leaped off the table, grabbing a wrap that lay over the arm of a chair.
So far Walt hadn't even looked round to see who it was.
He chuckled.
‘I told you it was too tight for this scene, Red.’
Sally snorted.
She'd finished tying the orange wrap now and turned to me.
‘You know you're not supposed to call when he's here.’
She jerked a thumb at her prostrate husband.
‘Don't mind me brother,’ he drawled.
‘I was thinking of going to the kitchen anyway.
Seems I recall some beer cans out there with frost on the top.’
‘That where I live friend,’ I told him.
‘Lead the way.’
We strolled out together leaving the indignant Sally to pick up her heaps of black silk.
‘Good thing you showed, Preston,’ said Walt, handing me a beer.
‘That was the forty-seventh time we'd done those few lines.’
By this time Sally was around too, pushing a pointed opener in the top of a can.
‘I tell you Cooper wouldn't bust out of it that way.
She's over an inch less where it counts for that dress.’
Sally has reason to be proud of the part where it counts.
It seemed that they were currently engaged on a Pharaoh picture with a modest budget.
Around one and a half million dollars.
They boasted that it was the worst they'd ever known, and could expect a million profit with confidence.
When they'd chattered for about ten minutes Walt said:
‘Anyhow, what you doing here this time of day?’
I put down the empty can.
Sally handed me another.
‘I was hoping you guys could help me out.
Do you know a couple named Channing, moved here over a year ago?
He works for the Ogden Textiles people.’
‘Would that be Arthur Channing?
Big, bluff looking guy.
Looks like a one-time football player?’
‘Could be.
His wife's name is Laura.’
‘Yes, that's the couple.’
Sally turned to her husband and smiled at him sweetly.
‘You remember Master, she was the one you followed round like a lapdog at that Press Party last month.’
‘Don't know what you're talking about.’
He shook his  head.
‘Wouldn't know her again if she walked in here right now.
I just seem to remember vaguely that she's about twenty-five or six, about five five, hundred and fifteen pounds all where they're supposed to be, hair that looks like somebody grabbed a handful of stardust and smoothed it over her head.
Man, she hardly registered with me at all.’
‘You see?’
Sally turned and kicked him neatly in the shin.
He yelped.
I held up my glass.
‘Peace.
I'd like to meet these people.
Casually.
You could introduce me maybe.
Can it be done?’
They regarded one another solemnly.
‘I seem to remember that Mick Saunders seemed very friendly with them.
We could try him,’ Maxted suggested.
Sally nodded.
‘I'll call Mick and see what gives.’
We all trooped back to the living room.
She crossed to the comer and began to throw paper all over the room.
Finally she located the telephone underneath and dialled a number.
‘Hullo Michael, is that you?’
Maxted sighed, and began to gather up his work from the floor, trying to put it back in some kind of sequence.
His wife chattered on to the party at the other end of the line.
‘Don't say that too loud Michael, my husband is here listening.’
Crackle at the other end.
‘Michael, I'm shocked.
Listen, Walt and I are busy working on a script.
We're stuck for some ideas about the workings of a textile mill in the story.
We thought about that friend of yours who's in textiles.
What was his name?
Carpenter, I think.’
Crackle.
‘Channing, yes that's it.
We'd like to talk to him.
Where can we find him?’
Crackle.
‘Certainly tonight.
We have a lot of work to do.
Can't  just leave it because we're stuck.
Do you know where we can find him?’
Fortunately, everybody who knows the Nortons knows also that they're crazy.
Sally's request would not be in the least out of character.
‘Are you sure?
That's fine.
Well, we'll take a run over there and see’—‘You might be there yourself, why that's great, Michael’—‘No I'm afraid he'll be with me.’
She gave a gurgly laugh to the unseen Michael's parting crack and hung up.
Triumphantly she pointed a finger at herself.
‘Leave it to old Hawkshaw Maxted.
We're in business.
The Channings are going to a wingding at Barton Keller's joint tonight.
Get your coat on Walter me boy.’
‘Barton Keller?
But I don't know him.
How do I get in?’
I protested.
Maxted looked up from a pile of papers he was struggling to sort out.
‘Don't be naïve, Johnny.
If all the people who didn't know Keller left his party the waiters would have to serve each other.’
He stood up, slipped on a jacket and announced that he was ready to go.
I pointed to the blue shorts.
He went off and came back soon, dressed more appropriately for the street.
‘Fine, I'll be one minute.’
Sally disappeared into the bedroom.
I finished my drink and helped myself to another.
That one was just a pleasant memory by the time she re-appeared.
I inspected her carefully.
‘Yeah’ I decided.
‘It was worth waiting for.
Any time you get tired of your wife Maxted, you know my number.’
‘By the time I get tired of her, nobody'll want her.
She'll be a hundred and ten years old,’ he replied.
She squeezed his arm and winked at me.
‘He's always nice to me when we go out, in case I start roving.’
Maxted's reply to that is best not repeated.
We used my car.
Both of them are rotten drivers and I'd had enough painful experiences for one day.
She sat next to me in the front while Walt occupied the back seat.
All the way out to Keller's house they kept up a ceaseless flow of questions about the Channings and the bruises on my head.
When they didn't get the answers they wanted, they made up theories of their own.
Some of the theories would have made Balzac blush, but they finally decided I'd been sleeping with Laura, her husband had beaten me up in a dark alley, and now I was on my way to kill him.
We finally arrived at the house.
All the lights were on and people seemed to be moving about in every room.
It was one of those large affairs sometimes known as colonial, with well-kept grounds stretching out in all directions.
Barton Keller was a well known local figure.
He'd made a lot of money out of hardware, sold out a chain of stores that covered three states and retired.
Nowadays, he spent all his time and a lot of his money entertaining.
Maybe it was kind of a reaction from the mundane business of hardware, but he seemed to prefer actors, musicians, artists, anybody who earned a living in the movies or theatre worlds.
Well, it was his dough.
I followed the Maxteds up on to the veranda and through some french doors into a large room.
The place was packed with people, all chattering at the tops of their voices.
A large blonde girl waved at me from across the room, spilling a large part of her drink down the back of another woman's dress at the same time.
I waved back, racking my brains to remember who she was.
Not that it mattered because the woman whose dress she'd soaked turned around and started shouting the place down.
‘Can you see the Channings?’
Sally whispered over her shoulder.
‘Not yet.
Kind of a hectic party isn't it?’
I returned.
‘Lord no.
They haven't set fire to the furniture yet.’
A waiter went by with a tray of drinks.
I took three.
Maxted did likewise and grinned.
‘Party like this, a man never knows where the next one's coming from,’ he said.
‘Hey, what about me?’ protested Sally.
He handed her one.
I drained one of the small glasses and set it down close to the wall on the floor.
‘You two don't want to worry about me,’ I said.
‘Go ahead and have a good time.
Let me know if you find the Channings.’
Sally began to protest, when a little ratty man with a bald head dashed up to her.
‘Red.
Red, where you been all these weeks?’
‘Charlie —‘
Her scream of delight told me this was a good time to move away.
Away in the far comer a three piece band was manfully trying to make itself heard above the din.
I edged my way over towards them.
They played well when you got near enough to hear.
I managed to get a spot with my back to the wall.
From there I could hear the music and keep a watch on most of the room.
I was hoping to see Laura Channing alone, or as near alone as we could get in that hullaballoo.
Maybe a crowd that size is the best possible place for a private conversation.
Everybody's so busy trying to talk louder than everybody else that a quiet voice is lost.
In the mob I could see Sally's tawny head bobbing up and down.
She must have been looking for me because a  few seconds later she spotted me and came over.
‘C'mon Shetlock.
We've arrested the guilty parties.’
As I tagged behind her holding on to her hand in case we got separated, I had mixed feelings about meeting Laura again.
Especially with her husband.
If she had a husband I didn't want to know him.
Silly feeling, but you know how these weird ideas come and go in your head sometimes.
I saw her through an open doorway.
She was standing with her back to me, talking with Walt and another guy.
The second man fitted the description I'd heard of her husband.
‘I found him.
Arthur and Laura Channing this is Johnny Preston.
He looks through keyholes for a living.
Ain't it awful?’
Sally peeped.
I shook hands with Channing.
His grip was firm.
He looked like a real nice guy.
Why shouldn't he be?
What the hell did I expect, an ogre with two heads?
I turned to Laura.
She held out her hand briefly.
There was no recognition in her eyes or her voice.
‘How do you do, Mr. Preston.
The Maxteds have been telling us a lot about you.’
There was that voice again.
I tried to answer naturally.
‘You must remember the Maxteds are artists.
They come from Hollywood, they have fertile imaginations.
You shouldn't take them too seriously.’
‘Artists.
Say that's right, so we are.’
Maxted beamed.
‘That's what brought us here.
Channing, we need your help.’
Arthur Channing's voice was light and pleasant.
‘I'll be glad to help if I can,’ he replied.
‘We're doing a movie about industry.
Now, we have a problem concerning production methods.’
Maxted took Channing by the arm.
Sally arranged herself on his other  side and they walked him away, throwing questions at him.
He seemed willing enough to listen.
Laura turned her smoky eyes on me.
‘We seem to be left to our own devices, Mr. Preston.’
‘So we do.
Can I get you a drink?’
‘I think not, thank you.
But it is getting warm in here.
Would you mind if we went out on the terrace for a moment.’
I didn't mind.
Not a bit.
Outside it was cool and dark.
Several people were on the terrace, some gathered in noisy, laughing groups, others, couples mostly, talking in whispers, if at all.
We walked further along till we came to a quiet part.
Laura leaned on the balcony and rested her hands one either side of her.
Over her shoulder the stars twinkled in the black sky.
It was hard to say where the stars finished and her hair took over.
The sounds of the party were faint here, and now and then a few bars of melody drifted toward us.
I was thinking a lot of things, none of them connected with the business which had brought me.
‘May I have a cigarette please?’
She could have had my right arm if it would have given her any pleasure.
I snapped my lighter and the evening breeze promptly blew it out.
She shielded the flame with a cool slim hand while the tobacco caught, then threw back her head and blew out a small stream of smoke.
‘Have you known Bart very long?’ she asked.
‘Bart?
Who's Bart?’
I don't like to answer a question with a question, but she caught me unawares.
She smiled lazily.
‘Barton Keller of course.
This is his house, you know.
And his party.
And his liquor you've undoubtedly been consuming.’
‘Oh, yes.
Him.
I came along with the Maxteds.
They  told me it would be O.K.
According to them, not a quarter of the people in that house have ever set eyes on Mr. Keller.’
She shrugged her shoulders.
‘Probably not.
Everyone imposes on him.
It's a shame.
He's quite a nice man.’
I didn't offer an opinion on that since I didn't have any, so I took up the time admiring the surroundings.
Laura Channing took up most of them.
After a while she spoke again.
‘I'm afraid I owe you an apology, Mr. Preston.
Pretty silly of me to give you a false name, but I haven't much experience of — of —‘
’— Of mixing with people like me?’
I finished it for her.
‘No, I didn't mean that and you know it.’
I laughed.
’ Sorry.
But don't worry about the attempt to hoodwink an innocent investigator.
People do it all the time.
Especially beautiful women.’
‘I was flustered, I guess.
This is so much my own trouble that I didn't want my husband's name to come into it.
He's done nothing wrong, nothing, and it doesn't seem right somehow.
He's a good man, Mr. Preston.
I don't feel at the moment that I even have the right to his name.’
She was getting agitated.
I didn't want a repetition of the scene in my office that morning.
I spoke to her sharply.
‘Now cut that out.
What's done is done.
This is nothing to do with your husband.
Everything happened long before you met him, and we'll keep him out of it.
I suppose what you told me was the whole truth?’
‘You're right, I'm sorry.
Yes, of course it was the whole truth.
Anyway, it doesn't matter any more does it?’
‘Why not?’
‘Because he's dead.
I heard it over the radio.’
‘Yes, he's dead enough.
Somebody made pretty sure of that.’
‘I'm glad.
I hope whoever did it gets away.’
‘I wouldn't hope that if I were you,’ I said.
She flashed me a look of astonishment.
Her eyes were filled with worry again.
‘What do you mean?
Surely it's over now as far as I'm concerned?’
‘Mrs. Channing,’ I started to say, then stopped.
‘Look let's go over and sit down.
I've got to talk to you before your husband comes looking for you.’
We found one of those trellis seats.
There was a good deal of shrubbery trailed up the sides and it would have been difficult to see us by a casual glance along the terrace.
I couldn't see her face very clearly now, but could sense how she'd withdrawn from me.
‘I think I understand.’
A cold, distant voice that could not possibly come from her spoke at my side.
‘When do you want the first payment?’
I lost my temper.
‘For Pete's sake woman, get a grip on yourself.
This is not a shakedown.
You came to me for help, remember?
I'm trying to give it, that's all.’
Now she was crying quietly.
Words popped out between the sobs.
’— sorry.
All mixed —.
— didn't mean —.
— helpless —‘
I passed over my handkerchief.
‘All right angel.
Cry it out, then we can get on with it.’
The sobs came less frequently, then finally stopped altogether.
She was breathing rather heavily, but eventually got that under control as well.
‘I — I don't know how to apologise.
I'm —‘
‘Forget it.’
I cut in.
‘The thing to do now is to explain  the situation as it affects you at present.
Ready?’
‘I'm listening.
Please go on.’
‘Right.
A man has been murdered.
That's bad enough by itself, but this particular man was murdered at the second attempt right under the noses of the police.
The pressure is on.
Newspapers, radio, every organisation with a letterhead, they're all pestering the police for action.’
‘Yes, it was all on the radio.’
‘O.K. Now make no mistake.
The police are efficient, very efficient, and they'll catch up with you sooner or later.
See what that means?’,
‘Oh, but they won't think I did it.
They know it was a man.
He was seen —‘
‘Yes, yes.
They know it was a man.
Now for them to find out there was a connection between you and Mahoney means they find out what sort of connection.
It wasn't the kind of situation a husband might relish for example.’
She caught her breath.
‘But Arthur couldn't possibly —.
He was at the mill all afternoon.
I spoke to him on the telephone.’
The anxiety died out of her voice.
‘Anyway, that's silly.
There'll be twenty people at least who could swear he was working at the time.
If you think a man could be missing from the job a couple of hours without anyone knowing it, you don't know Ogden Textiles, Mr. Preston.’
I sighed.
It was more difficult than I'd imagined.
‘Lady, I'm not suggesting your husband did it.
The police aren't likely to think so either.
But they'll check, because that's their job.
And your husband will want to know why they should be interested in his movements in connection with a man he never heard of.’
She got it then.
‘I see.
Yes, I see it now.
Even from the grave Mahoney will get back at me.
Everything's been in vain.’
She  fumbled with her purse and a few seconds later she held a lighter shakily to the end of a cigarette and puffed greedily.
‘And there's not a thing I can do, is there?’
‘Not a thing’ I agreed.
‘Have you got a dollar in your purse?’
‘Yes, I think so.
Why?’
‘Give it to me.’
She rustled around and finally came out with a crumpled bill which she put in my hand.
It had that mixed smell of face powder, lipstick and everything else that goes into a woman's purse.
I tucked it into my pocket.
‘That gives us an official relationship.
It's my retainer from you.
Now I am fully entitled under the laws of this state to regard your affairs as confidential.
Providing I know nothing incriminating against you, I don't have to tell the police a thing.’
‘I see.
It's a bit ridiculous isn't it?
I mean one dollar —‘
‘Mrs. Channing,’ I said seriously.
‘The law may seem a little ridiculous at times, but I respect it.
That's what keeps me in business.
Some of my methods may be a little unorthodox, but I don't cheat the law.’,
‘Of course not.
Well where do we go from here?
Can you find this man who shot Mahoney?’
‘I don't know.
I'm going to try.
There's a chance he may get in touch with you.’
‘With me?
But how could he possibly —?’
I told her about my visit to Mahoney's apartment.
When I got to the part about my head she tut-tutted.
‘Those men you spoke with.
What were they doing there?’
‘My guess is they came for some of Connie Fraser's clothes, found the place upside down and me on the floor, then when they reported to Bonanza he told 'em to forget about the clothes.’
‘Yes, that could be.
The man who hit you, what do you suppose he was looking for?’
‘I've no idea.
But there's a chance that while he was searching, he found some letters or a photograph or something that tied you in with Mahoney.
I hope he did, because if he tries to put the squeeze on you I've got him.’
‘So we can only hope he gets in touch with me?
Sounds pretty hopeless.’
Her voice was flat and tired.
I patted her on the hand.
‘Don't worry too much.
I've got a couple of other things to check.
Something'll turn up.
After all you've paid me a dollar you know.
I'll have to earn it.’
‘I've got a feeling Mr. Preston, that I'm going to be very grateful we ran into each other tonight.’
We got up from the seat and strolled along the terrace.
She took out a mirror and inspected her face carefully.
‘Before we find the others Mrs. Channing, I ought to tell you that we didn't run into each other by accident.
I knew you'd be here.’
She gasped.
‘You knew?
But you didn't know my name.
You didn't know one thing that would find me.’
I chuckled at the astonishment on her face.
‘Oh yes I did lady.
I knew all about you one hour after you left my office.’
I said it to give her a little confidence.
It certainly seemed to do the trick.
She smiled radiantly and slipped her arm into mine.
‘I suspect Mr. Preston, that I've just spent the most sensible dollar of my life.’
I didn't contradict her.
She went back into the house and I waited outside for a while enjoying the cool breeze.
I didn't want to leave the Maxteds behind because they had started out as my passengers, so  I went back in a few minutes later to see if they were ready to leave.
I found Sally clasped in the arms of some character with a loud taste in shoes.
A little crowd was encouraging them while they performed what somebody told me was a tango.
Sally was throwing herself all over the place and seemed to be enjoying it.
Her husband was having a heated argument with a short fat woman about television as an inducement to juvenile delinquency.
I barged in when they both paused for breath.
‘Speaking of delinquents,’ I said, ‘have you and Sally had enough of this shindig?’
‘Hell no, we just got here.
Don't worry about us.
We can get a lift easy enough when we want to go,’ Maxted assured me.
‘O.K. I think I'll go home and get some sleep.’
I went out to where I'd parked my car.
I'd had enough of the party and the noise and figured it might be a good idea to get some rest.
Leaving the brightness of the house behind it wasn't easy to get my eyes used to the darkness.
I stumbled around a while then finally located the car.
I started the motor and rolled out into the highway, and as I slipped the gear lever into position a round red glow appeared in the mirror over my head.
It might have been a tail light going the other way but it stayed the same size.
I'd got company in the back seat.
‘You going any place special friend, or do you just like rides?’
I spoke over my shoulder.
There was a man's deep rich laugh behind me.
‘What makes you think this isn't a stick-up, Preston?’
I wasn't sure, but the voice had a familiar ring, so I took a chance.
‘Everybody knows Joey Bonanza's too big a guy for that kind of a play.’
‘So you know who I am?
Well it may save a little time.
In case you get any ideas buster, that car behind is full of friends of mine.’
Another glance in the mirror showed me the twin head-lamps of a powerful car about the size of a small battleship.
It neither gained nor lost an inch, just stayed an even five yards behind my tail.
Comforting.
‘So?
You got no quarrel with me,’ I said.
‘That's right, I haven't.
Pull into the side a minute and let's talk.’
I eased the car over to the side of the road and switched off.
The tail car did the same.
A door opened and a guy got out and leaned on it.
‘All right, what gives?’
I asked.
Bonanza lounged back against the seat.
‘Couple of my boys tell me you're trying to earn a piece of that five grand I'm putting up.
That right?’
‘Yeah.
I can always use five grand.’
‘Uh.
You and the rest of the world.
You got any ideas about this trick?’
‘Not many.
None of 'em any good.’
‘Neither has the law.
Not yet anyhow.
Preston, I'm going to do you a favour.’
‘Why?’
His tone got edgy.
‘Don't talk back at me shamus.
I'm trying to be nice.
You might be talking yourself out of that five grand and into some trouble besides.
You gonna listen?’
‘I don't get any choice do I?’
‘You're a smart man.
That's what I was told before I came.
They tell me you're smart and on the level.
So I thought I'd do you a favour.
Suppose I tell you the name  of the guy who knocked off Mahoney.
What would you say?’
‘I'd say there was a smell somewhere.
Why should you give me the five thousand when you know the guy yourself?
Seems to me you could grab him and save the dough.’
‘I'll put it this way.
Some people in this town have been saying things about me.
Things I don't like.
Publicity is no good for my business, especially when its bad publicity.
So I figured I'd put up the five g's, get my name in the papers, maybe ease off the pressure a little.
And I want to pay off.
That kind of money might interest a little guy like you, but to me its just insurance money.
Get it?’
‘I think so.
Who was the guy?’
‘Lou Vecchi.
And he's lammed out some place.’
I thought about that before saying any more.
Vecchi was a small timer who earned some kind of living around the pool rooms.
He worked for Bonanza some of the time, but mostly you'd find him lounging around the green tables.
‘You sure about this?’
I asked.
‘I'm sure.
If I just wanted Lou out of the way for some other reason, I wouldn't waste five thousand green American dollars to do it.’
‘Sounds O.K. Tell me, why did you grab the girl?
She know something?’
‘Connie?
Well, I'll tell you.
She's kind of upset about Mahoney.
Being his girl and all she's gotten to know one or two things about my business.
You know how it is with dames.
They don't mean no harm, but when things like this happen they get all shot.
I don't want a lot of nosey coppers asking her questions till she feels better.
I got nothing against Connie.
In a couple of weeks I'll send her on a vacation.
Maybe Bermuda or some place like that.’
It sounded all right, and I said so.
‘How's for me talking to her?’
‘What for?
She knows nothing about this deal.
Anyhow, I told you it was Vecchi gunned Mahoney.’
‘That's great.
You told me.
So now I go out and shoot Lou full of holes and when the law wants to know what makes me so excitable I tell them Mr. Bonanza said Lou shot Mahoney.
That the way you got it figured?’
The cigar glowed steadily in the back seat.
Behind us the mug standing beside the tail car was yawning and looking at his watch.
I yawned too.
These late nights are no good for my health.
‘What would you talk to her about?’
Bonanza's voice was gentle.
It made me nervous.
‘About Mahoney.
What he did, where he went, how he spent his money.
Routine.
The coppers are going to be mad at me, as it is, if I get the jump on them with Vecchi.
At least I'll have to be able to give some reason why I suspected him.’
‘And you think the girl will tip you off it was him?’
‘No.
But then, if I've talked to her and they haven't, they can't argue can they?’
‘If I let you talk to her, how can I stop Wilson?’
‘Easy.
You don't let me in at all.
I get in by saying I'm from the telephone company or something like that.
When you find out about it you could have Dr. Zimmerman lodge a complaint if you want.’
Bonanza laughed again-.
‘You know Preston, you are kinda smart at that.
When do you want to see her?’
‘Sometime tomorrow.
Or rather this morning.
Its getting late.’
‘O.K. I'll leave word.’
There was a click as he pressed the button opening the rear door.
He moved out and then leaned back inside for a moment.
‘If you handle this right  you get five grand and a good name from me.
Take it easy shamus.’
The door slammed and he was gone.
I sat and watched the monkey in the other car straighten up and hold open the door for him.
The powerful motor roared into life and the car moved smoothly past me and headed for town.
Mr. Bonanza, the big wheel, the kingpin, the top rat.
Guys like him give me a pain.
They stand for everything that's rotten, and live off the fat while they're doing it.
One day he'd wake up with a hole in his head, but that wouldn't change anything.
just that the punk I'd been watching would hold open a car door for somebody else, the new top operator.
I sat there awhile smoking and thinking about things in general, and Bonanza in particular .
Suddenly, a motor cycle appeared beside me, and a state patrolman showed his head in the window.
‘What's up, mister?
Breakdown?’
He sounded suspicious.
‘No breakdown.
Also I'm not drunk, and I haven't got a girl in here.
Any law against me stopping for a quiet smoke?’
‘A wisenheimer.
Better get home buster, or I'll take you in just for laughs.’
Real tough.
A he-man, no-nonsense defender of the law.
I slipped gears and moved out.
It wasn't very smart of me to upset the guy in the first place.
Maybe I ought to see a doctor about my acid content or something.
When I parked the car at Woodside, I noticed the lights were on in the apartment next to mine.
According to my neighbour on the other side, this apartment contained something very unusual in the way of leggy redheads.
He could be right too, but I'd never laid eyes on her.
I wondered what she was doing, whether she was the eyeful I'd been told, and whether she'd appreciate a neighbourly call at two a.m.
I decided that the answers were none of my business, probably not, definitely not.
Regretfully I went into my own apartment.
I hadn't realised how tired I was till I saw that bed.
Fifteen minutes later I was dead to the world.
4
I PULLED out of it around nine in the morning.
The lump on my head had lost a lot of weight during the night and after five minutes under a tepid shower I wasn't feeling too bad.
I phoned down for some eggs, toast and a quart of coffee.
Frank, one of the day men brought it in on a trolley a few minutes later.
‘Morning Mr. Preston.
I brought the Herald for you to see.’
‘Thanks Frank.
What's the weather doing?’
‘Swell morning.
Say did that storm wake you last night?’
‘Storm?
No.’
‘Wish I could sleep like that.
That was one big storm.
Thunder, lightning, the works.’
‘Oh?
Well I was a little late home.
Guess I slept pretty heavily.’
‘Sure.’
When he'd gone, I got busy with the eggs and toast.
The coffee was the way I like it, hot and bitter.
I managed four cups.
The ‘phone rang.
‘Preston?
Say do you sleep all day or something?’
Connors.
It was too early for me to think up a brilliant reply.
‘No, just the mornings,’ I said.
‘What's new?’
‘Nothing's new.
How can anything happen if you lie in bed all the time.
You ought to be out beating people up and that kind of thing.
You sick?’
‘Look, don't ride me will you?
I was working till two o'clock this morning.’
‘What'd you find out?
Have you nailed the killer?’
‘For Pete's sake, what do you want, my blood?
Do you realise the entire police force is working on this?
If they haven't dug anything out, what do you think I can do by myself in these few hours?’
‘Now, now Sherlock, don't lose your wig.
Tim Wilson wants to see you.’
‘What about?’
‘Oh, he's heard you're chasing the five grand and wants to make sure you don't know something he doesn't.’
‘Well he knows where to find me.’
‘Yeah.’
I suddenly remembered I'd been intending to call Connors in any case.
‘Say, will you do something?
Something connected with your fifteen hundred,’ I added.
‘Anything.
You want me to blow up a railroad station?’
‘Ha, ha.
Well now, I want to talk to a guy.
He's missing but I want to find him without the law knowing I'm interested.’
‘Can do.
Who is the guy?’
‘Lou Vecchi.’
He was disappointed.
‘Vecchi.
That two-bit jerk.
What do you want with him?’
‘Never mind.
Let me know if you find him.’
‘O.K. I'll call you.’
When he'd hung up I got dressed.
I have to be a little careful about it, because Miss Hinkle will disapprove if  she doesn't like the way I look.
With her, disapproval is not just a state of mind.
It's a vigorous campaign and I've suffered from it before.
I was about ready to leave when somebody leaned on the doorbell.
It was Wilson.
‘Come on in, Tim,’ I said.
He was already inside and sitting himself down by the time I spoke.
‘I hear you're all set to pick up Bonanza's five grand,’ was his greeting.
I grinned.
‘Naturally.
The entire city police force is baffled, but J. Preston the super sleuth solves mystery.
That the way it reads?’
‘Something like that.
What do you know that I don't know, and who told you?’
Wilson stared at me with those piercing eyes.
‘Look, you've got this wrong.
Somebody puts up a reward, every shamus in town is gonna try to pick it up.
I'm just groping around like the rest.
Why look me up particularly?’
He dived into his vest pocket and pulled out one of those cheap black cheroots.
No normal man would have lived to Wilson's age on a steady diet of those things.
Ignoring me, he chewed the end off and parked it in an ashtray.
Then he started to foul up the air with stinging yellow smoke.
There was every appearance that he actually enjoyed it.
‘I've been a copper all my life.
It has an effect on a man.
You get so you think like one the whole time.
Some of the things you think ain't so nice, but that's the way it is.’
I couldn't see where he was heading.
‘And —?’
I said.
He took the cheroot from between his teeth and looked at me gravely.
‘We had a swell time this week-end.
Pretty nice.
While I'm standing up to my thighs in water trying to kill a lot of fish that never did me any harm, somebody in this town takes it into his head to rub out Jack Mahoney.’
’ So what?
At least you're sure it wasn't me, I was knocking off a few fish at the same time, remember?’
‘Sure.
But could be you had of an idea about Mahoney.
I seem to recall it was your suggestion we went up to my place.’
‘Oh, for chrissakes, Tim, get a-hold of yourself.
You've known me too long to think a dumb thing like that.
But since you do bring it up, you're wrong.
I knew nothing, but nothing about it.’
I was pretty mad and must have sounded that way.
‘That's on the level?’
‘That's on the level.’
He sighed.
‘Man has a lot of trouble keeping his friends in this business.
Tell you the truth, Johnny, this deal is getting me down.
Everybody's on my neck, the commissioner, the D.A., everybody.
Last night I was in bed just three hours.’
He certainly looked tired enough.
When anything like this happens in Waldron City everybody starts shouting for action, and as they haven't much idea just what kind of action they expect they take it out on the administration, and that means Wilson.
‘Forget it.
Cup of coffee?’
‘I could use one.’
I poured out what was left and handed it to him.
Then I tried a question.
‘No leads, uh?’
‘Nothing.
I'm supposed to find a guy in a white coat who could pass for a hospital attendant.
I've tried to explain that anybody in a white coat looks like a hospital  attendant, but they keep demanding results.’
‘How about the slugs?’
‘Not much there.
Standard .38's.
They don't match with anything on the files.
Ballistics have had every man going through the records.’
I took out my cigarettes and lit one.
‘From what I hear Mahoney was shot twice.
Same gun?’
He took a sip of the coffee before answering.
‘No.
I forgot you're a day late with your information.
No, the first two came from a.32.
No record on those either.’
He finished off the coffee and stood up.
‘Boys at the department think you may be on to something.
Any truth in that?’
‘Well I'm doing what you're doing.
Asking a few questions here and there.
Nothing so far.’
‘I see.
Well if I were you I'd get in touch with me if anything turned up.
I'm not in a mood to fool around over this one, Johnny.’
I didn't answer him as we walked together to the door.
‘Give you a lift some place?’ he offered.
‘No thanks.
I'll have to take my own car.’
Nothing more was said as we rode down in the elevator.
At the front of the building he gave me a nod and walked over to where a police sedan with a uniformed driver was waiting.
I drove slowly down to my office.
Traffic was heavy and this was no day for me to pick up a ticket.
Anyway I was going over a few things in my mind.
Wilson was a worried man, and I didn't care for him being stretched over a barrel.
I was hoping that Vecchi would show up in the near future and save everybody a lot of headaches.
Miss Hinkle raised her eyebrows when I walked in.
‘Morning.
Any calls?’
I asked.
‘Only one.
From your lady friend, Mrs. Channing.’
‘Oh, what did she want?’
‘She wouldn't tell me, but was very insistent that I call her the minute you got in.’
The whole room was stuff with the Hinkle reproach.
‘O.K. Get her for me will you?’
I went into my own office and sat down, doodling around on the blotter.
I have a theory that one day I'll just be sitting there moving the pencil around and I'll hit on a brand new character for a strip.
One of the big syndicates will give it full coverage, and I'll never have to work again.
That's the theory at least.
As usual the day-dream was interrupted by the ‘phone.
‘Is that you, Mr. Preston?’
The voice sounded like somebody rubbing a piece of velvet around inside your head.
Laura Channing.
I swung my feet up on the desk and lay back in the chair.
‘Morning, Mrs. Channing.
What's new today?’
‘I think it's good news, but I can't talk about it on the telephone.
Can I come and see you?’
Any news that gave me a chance to see her again was good news.
‘Well I have to go out this morning.
Can it wait till lunch?’
‘Yes.
Where shall I meet you?’
‘Do you know the Florabelle?
It's about four miles out of town on the Beach Road.’
‘I can find it.
One o'clock?’
‘Fine.
I'll see you then.’
After replacing the 'phone I waited for the tingling to stop then looked at my watch.
If I was going to see Connie Fraser I'd have to get on with it.
It was a pleasant thirty-two miles out to the private sanatorium operated by Dr. Hugo Zimmerman, and I had  plenty of time to think about him.
As far as I knew he'd always been on the level, and certainly there was no harm in his treating the Fraser girl after the shock she'd presumably had.
I don't care for his type of medical treatment myself.
Most of his patients are old people with lots of money who just want a little fuss made of them.
I guess everybody has to make a living the best way he knows but Zimmerman's way left a taste in my mouth.
When I got a look at the place, I had to admit that the doctor was probably not very concerned about my opinion.
Whatever I thought didn't prevent him maintaining a huge Spanish style mansion in several acres of ground.
As you passed through the iron gates you could feel at once that it would cost real money to have your temperature checked.
Here and there in the grounds I could see people dotted about.
Some were wheeling about in chairs, others reading beside some shady tree.
The staff, easily recognizable by their distinctive light green uniforms were well in evidence.
The patients here were obviously not allowed to feel that nobody cared about them.
I left the car out front and climbed the wide marble steps to the entrance hall.
Inside it was cool, a pleasant breeze seemed to be picking its way delicately along the corridors, ensuring no discomfort from the outside sun for the inside rich.
‘Good morning.
Can I help you?’
I turned towards the voice to see a small dark number with gleaming black hair and flashing eyes to match.
She looked as Spanish as the building with her quick smile and very red lips.
At another time and place she could have helped me in no uncertain manner.
‘I'd like to see Dr. Zimmerman please.
Tell him I'm from the telephone company.’
She was puzzled.
‘Telephone company?
But there's nothing wrong with  the ‘phones here.
Are you sure you haven't made a mistake?’
‘Quite sure.
It's just a routine call.
You'll find Dr. Zimmerman knows all about it.’
‘I see.
Well, if you will please wait here a moment I won't keep you very long.’
She disappeared down the hall, very trim as the green overalls hugged her tightly.
At the end she turned off to the right and there was I with nothing to look at.
The floor was covered by a large mosaic and I was really getting interested in some of the antics of the guys with beards who were scattered all over it, when I heard the tap-tap of her feet in the distance together with a heavier, more measured tread.
Soon she came into view followed by a very large young man who looked even larger striding at the side of the diminutive receptionist.
He grinned at me as he approached.
‘I'm Dr. Green.
I'm afraid Dr. Zimmerman isn't here just now, but he left me a message that someone from the telephone company might call in.
Will you come this way please?’
‘Fine.’
I turned to give the small lady an outsize in winks, as though the whole thing was a conspiracy, which it was, and she wasn't included, which she wasn't.
She tossed her head and flounced briskly away.
I followed Green round corners till finally he stopped outside a green painted door.
‘In there,’ he said.
‘But please don't talk to the Patient.
She's a Miss Fraser and has to be kept very quiet.’
‘Sure,’ I said.
‘Thanks doc.’
I tapped softly on the door and a quiet voice from the other side said to come in.
I stepped into a cool, dark room, where heavy wooden shutters kept out most of the daylight.
There was a girl parked on one of those long seats.
You know the kind of thing where you're neither sitting up nor laying down.
‘Miss Fraser?’,
‘Yes.
You're Mr. Preston aren't you?
Mr. Bonanza sent word you might come here.’
She was a pale girl.
Fair hair pulled tight towards the back of her head, and the moment she looked all tired out.
Not that anybody would have looked too good in that gloom.
The voice was not what I'd have expected from a girl who'd been playing house with a mug like Mahoney.
It was gentle, with none of the strident accent which would have been more in keeping with the circumstances.
Still as I've often remarked dames is peculiar people when it comes to mating time.
‘Miss Fraser, I'd like to ask you a few questions if I may.’
She was nervous at first, but gradually she came out of it.
There wasn't much of a story.
just an ordinary girl with an ordinary job until she met Mahoney.
First of all he persuaded her to work in Bonanza's joint, and it wasn't long before he persuaded her in other directions.
Nice guy, Mahoney.
I began to wish Lou Vecchi had had the brains to get out of the country.
‘What do you plan to do now, Miss Fraser?’
‘I don't care.
Now that— that Jack's —’ she broke off and cried quietly.
I sat there and twiddled my thumbs.
How these nice girls get mixed up with punks I'll never understand.
She sniffled.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘Mr. Bonanza did say something about a vacation when I feel better.’
‘Yeah.
Tell me why is he keeping you here?’
‘Oh he's not keeping me.
I can walk out any time.
There are no bars on the window you know.’
She was right about that.
Then she spoke again.
‘He's been very kind to me.
I've been upset and I'm quite alone in Waldron City.
He told me that if the police started questioning me they'd keep on and on until I said something I shouldn't.
Naturally I wouldn't want to get him in any trouble.’
‘Why, naturally?
The man's a crook, isn't he?’
She sat up very straight on the chair thing.
‘Mr. Preston, my life hasn't been everything I would have liked since I came here.
I know Jack was no good, knew it all along, but I didn't care.
I accepted him as he was.
And his friends accepted me.
They all treated me well in their own fashion.
I may not have liked some of the things I saw and heard, but remember I was present from choice.
Now that he's — he's gone I don't propose to betray his friends.’
‘I see.’
Poor kid, I thought.
All those small town notions of honour and decency wasted on Bonanza's crew.
Any one of them would shove an ice-pick in her back, sunny side up, if there was the slightest chance of her saying a word.
I got up to leave.
‘Tell me, is there any news of the man who did it, have they caught him yet?’
‘No, not yet.
I was hoping you may have had some ideas about that.’
‘Oh I wish I had.
I've told them everything I could think of that might help, but so far it doesn't seem to have been of any use.’
‘Told who?’
I asked.
‘Why, Mr. Bonanza, and Rico, and the one they call Lou.’
‘Lou Vecchi?’
‘Yes, I'm sure that's his other name.’
‘When was all this?’
‘Why, yesterday.
Mr. Bonanza and the man Rico left early in the morning, and then this Lou came soon afterwards.’
I was getting warmer.
‘Did Bonzanna send him?’
‘Oh yes.
I've seen him at the club many times.
He often works for Mr. Bonanza.’
Little tumblers were beginning to click inside my tired old head.
As of right then I had a start on the police.
Maybe as much as five minutes, with a man of Wilson's ability.
‘Connie, I may not see you again.
Do you mind if I leave a little advice lying around here?’
She shook her head.
‘You've had a bad deal.
You've gone a little astray and a lot of it's no doubt been your own fault.
Now, I've been around for a lot of years and I know a bad girl when I see one.
I don't see one in this room.’
Walking over to her I took her hand.
‘Be a smart girl Connie.
When Bonanza talks about vacations take the money and beat it.
Shake this town.
You've got no police record and there's no reason you shouldn't go back and live with ordinary people.
Everybody makes a mistake once in a while.’
She pressed my hand, and when she replied there were tears in her voice.
‘So you don't think it's too late?
You don't think I'm all bad?’
‘Anybody with half an eye could tell that.’
‘Bless you, Mr. Preston.’
Well, well.
I thought as I closed the door behind me.
Old Dr. Preston taking to saving people.
Not that I'd done a lot towards it even if she listened to me.
The hard part was in the years to come.
Connie Fraser would have to work it out alone, and I hoped she'd make it.
After several false tries I found the front hall again.
I  looked all around for the fandango dancer to appear but she kept well clear.
Outside, Green was standing at the top of the steps smoking a cigarette.
‘Have a nice visit?’ he said.
‘Thanks, yes.
Tell me doc, what do you think of the Fraser girl?’
‘She's not really my patient you know,’ he answered.
‘I didn't mean in the medical sense.
What do you think of her personally?’
I persisted.
‘Oh.
Well I'll put it like this.
I've read about her in the papers of course.
Where she worked, her relationship with this man who was murdered, and so forth, and you know it's a funny thing.
Our patient is either the greatest actress since Bernhardt, or we've got the wrong girl in there.’
I clapped him on the back.
‘That's about the way I had it figured too.
You've had a little longer to form an opinion than I have.
Just thought I'd check.
So long, doc.’
‘So long.’
He waited till I reached my car, then hollered,
‘Hey.
How did you find the ‘phone?’
‘Oh fine.
You'll be receiving a report in a day or so.’
I waved back at him as I cruised down the drive.
It was a little before twelve noon, and the boys and girls in the green uniforms were circulating with tall glasses among the shade-seeking patients.
Most of the glasses probably contained hot milk or even worse, but they certainly gave me a thirst.
I know plenty of good places to take a thirst and was reviewing the list mentally as I rolled through the great iron gates.
I kept the needle around fifty on my way to the Florabelle.
In my small way I felt that a little daylight  was filtering through.
Most of the people in Bonanza's outfit had been aware that Mahoney was up to some kind of private business that kept him in the bucks more than whatever he earned from Bonanza.
One or two might even have tried to find out what it was, without getting far.
Vecchi had been an interested party.
When he heard about Bonanza parking the Fraser girl on ice out in the country he must have figured it was his chance for the big killing.
All these punks are the same.
One day they'll make a big killing, quit the rackets and settle down to a respectable life in a new town.
They think.
So Vecchi hi-tails it out to the sanatorium, hangs around until the great man and Rico leave then gives it a few more minutes before walking in and giving Connie another grilling.
She knew he'd worked for Bonanza, and the chances were that in her nervous condition she wouldn't question his appearance.
just wanting to check a few angles.
Sure Mr. Bonanza had heard it all already, but any small thing might give him a lead to whoever shot poor, poor Jack.
And that would be all she'd need to hear.
He'd get the whole yarn about the blackmail, perhaps even Laura Channing's name or telephone number.
Then he was in business.
But Jack wasn't dead yet.
He may come round, or worse still, spill some of the facts in his sleep or something like that.
And in any case, if he recovered he'd spend his life looking for Vecchi, if that party had muscled in on the black.
So he took a stroll down to the City Hospital, dressed up in a white overall, walked into the room and finished off Mahoney.
No wait.
I swerved nearly into the embankment at the side of the road as a thought struck me.
If Vecchi killed Mahoney, as seemed fairly certain, he'd already got hold of whatever was necessary to keep up the blackmail of Laura Channing.
He wouldn't just kill the guy until he was sure of his next move.
It wouldn't make any sense.
No, he'd gone to the apartment where Mahoney and Connie lived, found whatever it was, and then paid his visit to the hospital.
That was better.
That was very much better.
But it left a question.
If Vecchi had been to the apartment and got what he wanted before killing Mahoney, there was no need for him to return for another look round.
But somebody had been there much later, there was no doubt about that, and I had a sore spot on my head to prove it.
So somebody else knew this package or whatever it was existed.
I went back to the beginning and started over, but hadn't come to any conclusion when I reached the sign telling me that the Florabelle served the thickest steak in five counties.
I left the car in the park and strolled across to the cool of the veranda bar, which was decorated rancho  style and was well supplied with electric fans at strategic points.
I sat up at the counter and ordered Scotch on the rocks.
It tasted good, and before I quite realised it the glass was empty.
The bartender showed me his even white teeth.
‘A thirsty morning, Mr. Preston.
Will you take the same again?’
I told him I would take the same again.
His face seemed familiar somehow, and yet I couldn't recall seeing him in this place before.
You know the way it is with a thing like that.
just when you ought to be thinking about something else your pride insists on your memory producing some unimportant thing or other.
Like where I'd seen the bartender before.
Got it.
‘How're things Chuck?’
I said casually.
He smiled wider than the last time.
’ So you remember me, Mr. Preston?
I haven't forgotten what you did for me, those years back.’
‘Forget it.
That was a long time ago,’ I replied.
‘Yes, it was.
But I don't forget it.
I got a nice home, a  family.
Also I got no police record.
You did that for me.
No, I don't forget it.’
I tried another topic.
‘Well how's it been working out?’
‘It's working out fine.
The coppers used to come around at first every time somebody stole a dame's purse but finally they gave it up.
No —’ I was pushing a five-dollar bill across for the drinks, ‘These are on the house.’
An elderly man and his wife appeared at the other end of the bar.
‘Excuse me, Mr. Preston.’
‘Sure.’
I watched him attending to the new arrivals and tried to recall the details about him.
He'd been at the wrong end when a small company went bust in the city.
The promoter had bolted, and the accountant, taking the dividends and leaving — Chuck Riley.
He'd got away with it as a result of a little snooping I did on behalf of the concerned insurance company.
I hadn't much more time to think about him at that moment, because a large black car swept past the open windows with Laura at the wheel.
I caught myself taking a quick peek in the mirror behind the bar to see if my tie was straight.
At my age.
About ten years later, although the clock said differently, she appeared, eyes trying to adjust themselves from the strong sunlight to the shady cool of the bar.
She was wearing a red sundress, bare at the shoulders, white shoes, and a light golden tan, and when she stepped inside some of the sunlight seemed to come with her.
Hand outstretched she came up to where I was sitting.
The hand was soft, and I guess I hung on longer than the rules allowed.
‘Am I late?’
This, as she disengaged herself gently from my grip.
‘No.
Oh no, right on time.
What'll it be?’
‘I'd like some gin please.’,
Chuck had moved up close and was polishing glasses with enthusiasm.
I ordered the drinks.
‘Would you care to sit outside?
There's a good spot in the shade where we could talk.’
‘M'm.’
She nodded her head and led the way.
I trailed along in back of her with the glasses.
They felt agreeably cold in my hands.
We got settled down in a couple of cane chairs, and I gave her a cigarette.
Leaning back her head she blew out a small cloud of smoke which hung in the still air above her.
‘I always seem to be sitting around on verandas with you, Johnny.
You don't mind if I call you Johnny?’
She smiled.
Mind?
I didn't care if she called me the son of Frankenstein.
I smiled back in a half-witted way that would have terrified a woman of less spirit.
A spot of the iced liquid seemed to have a calming effect on my larynx.
‘What was this good news you had to tell me?’
The voice sounded casual, relaxed.
It must have been mine, I could feel my tongue moving up and down.
‘I've had a telephone call.
A man demanding money.’
‘For the same reason as Mahoney?’
She nodded.
‘He says he has proof, photographs and letters.’
‘I see.
Good.
That's fine.
So we've got him.
What are the instructions?’
‘I'm to take him ten thousand dollars.’
‘When?’
‘Well, he wanted it tonight but I managed to convince him I couldn't possibly get that much money together before tomorrow night.’
‘Uh huh.
Where do you meet him?’
‘That was an odd part.
I'm to walk along Crane Street from the city end, turn right at the first corner, right again at the first comer and just keep on like that.’
I thought about the district.
If I was thinking straight she'd be simply walking round the block.
‘Then what?’
‘He said if I'd done exactly what he told me, and there were no tricks, he'd contact me and hand over his evidence, and he wouldn't bother me any more.’
‘And that was all?’,
‘Yes, I believe so.
What do you think about it?’
I pulled on my cigarette, wondering what I did think about it.
On the whole I liked it.
It fitted in with what I had been working out already.
And that was the only part I didn't care for, because if I'd been arriving at a lot of conclusions that were wrong, then I could be wrong about this too.
Not only could be, but would be, and the whole thing would blow up in my face.
Worse, maybe Laura's face.
But a man could go nuts sitting around wondering about what might happen.
For one thing he wouldn't even cross the street.
‘It sounds O.K.’ I said finally.
‘If this were any other case of blackmail I'd say it stinks, but as it is, it's O.K.’
‘You know I can't produce the ten thousand, don't you?
I mean — if anything goes wrong —‘
‘Nothing will go wrong, angel.
I'm glad you told him it would be the way he said.’
She turned her full face towards me.
‘I wasn't able to contact anyone.
The best thing seemed to be to agree with him.
I was sure you'd know what to do.’
With me, that went over big.
‘Sure I'll know what to do.
I'd better bring you up to date on what's been happening since I saw you.’
I told her about the ride home with Joey Bonanza.
‘Isn't he the gangster who's offered a reward for information about the murder?’ she interrupted.
‘The same, although I don't know that he'd care for the description.’
I went on to tell her about Wilson, Connie Fraser and Vecchi, or most of it.
When I got through she made a kind of whistling noise through her teeth.
‘You live in a strange world.
I would have sworn there hadn't been time for you to make any kind of progress since last night.
Why it's not much more than twelve hours since I saw you.’
‘Lot can happen in that time, Laura.
The way I see it, Vecchi must have called your house yesterday and you were out.
He's not very worried about the law yet, because there's no reason they should get on to him for a while.
But he knows Bonanza will have done some arithmetic, and will be wanting to ask a few questions.
Such as, why did Vecchi go and cross-examine the Fraser girl.
No, he's a pretty worried guy.
He knows he's got to grab what he can and get out of this town fast.
You must have given him a pretty sleepless night through not answering the telephone.’
She chuckled.
It made her golden shoulders quiver.
I liked that.
‘It's a funny thing.
He doesn't frighten me a bit.
He knows or can guess, just as much about me as Mahoney, and yet I'm not frightened.
You've done that.
Given me back my confidence, I mean.’
‘No, you've had a bad time, and now you're snapping out of it, that's all.
As for Vecchi, there's no need to be afraid.
He considers you a safe proposition.
You never told your husband or the police about Mahoney, so there's little risk of your trying it with him.
And you didn't get  tough with Mahoney, because Vecchi killed him himself, so he knows that.
You're just a frightened dame who's going to buy him an airplane ticket out and give him a stake for good measure.
That suits our book.’
‘Good.’
She looked at her watch.
‘Hey, did you say something about buying me some lunch, or is that just an approach to win a girl's confidence?’
‘No, ma'am, I swear.
Lunch coming right up.’
We ate in the little restaurant at the back of the place.
In the far distance the sun sparkled on the sea, just visible through the window at our table.
Nice.
Laura drank her coffee black, like my own, but refused any more to drink.
‘I've read about men like you.
Private eyes.
Always wanting to pump liquor into some unsuspecting female, for nefarious purposes.’
‘Lady, most of the females I pump liquor into wouldn't know a nefarious purpose if they saw one.’
We chatted on like that and life seemed pretty nice.
It wouldn't have done for Laura to have suspected it, but I was pretty worried about her.
She'd soon be taking a stroll through the harbour district which is no place for any girl at night, especially a girl with what was supposed to be ten thousand dollars in her purse, and an appointment with a killer.
I brought the conversation back to business after a while.
‘What time are you due in Crane Street?’
I asked.
‘Eleven o'clock.
What do I do about the money?’
‘You'll have to carry something that could be the money.
I'll think about that.
Can you get out of the house without your husband wanting to know where you're going?’
‘I'll have to go out much earlier than that.
I can say I'm visiting a friend.’
‘Just so he doesn't find that's a lie, how about making it my secretary, Miss Hinkle?’
‘If you'd like.
Won't she mind?’
‘Compared to some of the things that woman's done for me, this is a small enough thing.
I'll arrange it, and she can fix up some stage money or something in a bag.
You can collect it from her apartment on your way to the harbour.’
She nodded.
Then there was a commotion somewhere outside and a car door slammed, followed by a motor being raced into life.
We didn't pay any attention, but a minute later one of the waiters came up to the table in a hurry.
‘Excuse me sir, but are you Mr. Preston?’
‘What is it?’
‘If you would come with me sir, someone would like to see you.
It's rather important.’
Something about the look on his face told me not to waste time asking questions.
I got up, saying to Laura, ‘I'll be back as soon as I can.
It'd be best if you'd wait here.’
She didn't argue and I left quickly.
Outside, the waiter turned to me.
‘I didn't want to alarm the lady and the other customers, but one of our staff had been attacked.’
‘Oh.’
I followed him into a small room beside the kitchen.
Stretched out on a bed was Chuck Riley, with a girl dabbing at a nasty bruise on his forehead.
‘What's this about, Chuck?’
He tried a grin, but winced as it hurt him.
‘There was a man watching you and the lady.
I asked him what he wanted and he hit me with a gin.’
‘Could you describe him?’
‘Not worth a damn, no.
He had a hat on and dark glasses.’
Great.
‘You're sure he was watching me?’
‘No doubt about it.
I first saw him when you were sitting out on the veranda; but I didn't pay any attention to him.
Then I saw him looking in one of the restaurant windows, keeping himself kind of flattened up against the wall.’
‘Then what?’
‘Like I said, I walked up to him and asked –in what the idea was.
He didn't argue with me, didn't say anything at all.
Just swung this gun at my head.
Guess I kind of fouled it up.’
He looked sheepish.
‘You did fine, just fine Chuck, and thanks.
Take care of that head boy.’
I tucked a ten-dollar bill into the pocket of his jacket, while he tried to wave my arm away, then clapped him on the shoulder.
I turned to the waiter who'd brought me.
‘Have a doctor look at that head, will you?
Chuck gets anything he needs.
Tell the doctor to send his bill to me.’
I handed over my card, and went slowly back to Laura.
‘You look as if you'd seen a ghost,’ was her greeting.
I told her what had happened outside.
‘Who do you think it could have been?’ she said.
‘Anybody.
Anybody but Santa Claus that is.
Maybe one of Bonanza's men keeping an eye on me.
All I am hoping is that it wasn't the boy friend you're meeting tomorrow evening.’
‘Vecchi?’
‘Yeah.
But I don't see how it could be.
I don't think he'd dare come out on the highway in daylight.
Bonanza has too many friends who'd be interested to see him.
On the whole I think we could say it was one of Joey's bright young men.’
‘But why would he be interested in your movements?’
I scratched my ear and wished I knew the answer to that one.
‘Bonanza's a very tricky character.
He likes to know everything that goes on.
just taking out insurance I guess.’
It had made her nervous, though.
The party was over.
We left the place and strolled out to the cars.
On the way one of the waiters told me Chuck was asleep, and the doctor had been sent for.
I said to Laura ‘Call Miss Hinkle around four o'clock tomorrow, will you?
That'll give me time to fix things.’
‘Right.’
She slipped the ignition key from her purse and started the motor.
I leaned on the window.
‘What time shall I see you tomorrow night, Johnny?’
‘Do what the man told you.
Eleven o'clock sharp.
I'll be around, but you won't see me.
You'll just have to trust me on this one, baby.’
She put her hand over mine and pressed.
‘I trust you, Mr. Preston.
After all, you've already made a dollar out of me, and you didn't abscond with that.’
Spirit.
Lots of good old-fashioned guts.
I wondered whether Arthur Channing appreciated his wife.
But then, he didn't know what she'd done for him and was going to do.
That was the whole idea.
I watched her drive out on to the highway, thinking many things which are better kept to myself.
Giving her a fifteen-minute start, I headed back to Waldron City and the office.
5
GRACE said Good afternoon, Mr. Preston’, in that special sniffy tone of hers, which really meant ‘The hours some folk keep’.
‘Come on inside, Miss Hinkle.
We have work.’
I made a mental note that I mustn't say anything to annoy my prim secretary, at least until after she'd agreed to help with the business the next evening.
She followed into my office and arranged herself neatly in a straight-backed chair, notebook open and sharp pencil ready poised for an attack on the clean white pages.
‘We won't need the book,’ I told her, ‘not yet.’
Without a word she folded it shut and laid the pencil flat beside it.
It was a grey wool dress to-day, well cut, correct, but severe.
It needed something, maybe a touch of colour somewhere.
She coughed slightly.
‘Oh, yes, I want to talk to you about our client.’
‘Have we a client, Mr. Preston?’
‘Aw now, come on.
You must remember clear back to yesterday.’
‘If you are referring to Mrs. Channing, you've given me no instructions to regard her as a client.’
She was right at that.
She always is.
‘You win.’
I smiled, engagingly I thought.
Her face said I'd scored no points.
‘Anyway, there's that expense we've incurred.
The tail job Thompson did.’
I hoped I might turn the trick with that one.
Grace Hinkle loves to see me making like an executive and remembering to charge up all expenses.
If I happen to remember such details when there's a beautiful doll on the paying end, Hinkle is right in there rooting for the firm.
She thawed out sufficiently to allow a wintry suggestion of a smile to appear.
‘You wish me to open an expense sheet in the matter of Mrs. Channing?’
‘Right.
And put down three telephone calls, please.
Then there's the car.
I've rung up about ninety miles so far.’
The notebook was open again and the pencil made satisfied scratching noises as the Hinkle happily noted the charges which Laura would eventually be asked to pay.
‘I want to bring you up to date on this, Miss Hinkle.’
I told her the story.
Or perhaps I should say, a story.
It was a nice yarn of respectable girl from despicable family, married to a stuffed shirt who would cast her out into the snow if a breath of suspicion fell on his name.
The villain was a worthless character from the old home neighbourhood who was blackmailing the innocent but helpless wife.
Worthless character had now run foul of the law and was willing to take one final payment, enough to get him out of the State, and out of her life for ever.
‘And this is where I was hoping you might help.’
I let it hang in the air, like a question.
‘Well, of course, anything I can do for the poor girl —’ she began.
‘I knew we could count on you.
Mrs. Channing has an appointment to meet this man to-morrow night, at eleven.
Obviously a married woman can't just get up from her chair at that time of the evening and announce that she's going out.
Even a good-natured man might wonder just  what she was up to, and Mr. Channing is not a good-natured man.’
She nodded.
‘So she ought to go out and visit a friend.
Much earlier than eleven, say around eight-thirty.
Mrs. Channing will be in no frame of mind for chatter with any of the people she knows, and can't afford to be questioned about her state of mind.
She'll be nervous, of course.’
‘Of course.’
’ So I wondered whether it would put you out too much to let her visit with you for a couple of hours.’
‘To-morrow night?
Why, certainly.
I haven't made any particular plans for to-morrow.
I'll do it with pleasure, Mr. Preston.’
‘Thank you.’
I meant it.
‘I'll have Mrs. Channing call you, and you can fix things up between you.’
‘Do I understand you won't be coming along yourself?’ she asked hesitantly.
‘You do.
I'll be casing the area where she's supposed to meet this guy.
He has a rule about her coming alone on these expeditions, but we have one or two ideas about changing the rules this time.’
‘I understand.
Is that all you wanted, for the present?’
‘For the present, yes.
And thanks again.’
I got a further half-smile before the door closed.
Smiles from that quarter are not so plentiful that I can afford to disregard them, but I wasn't in the mood to appreciate one right at that moment.
I was worried, more worried than I'd have admitted.
Every trail on this particular prairie led to Vecchi.
Bonanza tips me off that Vecchi killed Mahoney.
Connie Fraser tells me Vecchi's been grilling her.
Laura Channing was about to be blackmailed, and my money said Vecchi was the would-be collector on that deal, too.
Vecchi was certainly the key to this whole set-up, and I'd have given plenty for half-an-hour's peaceful talk with him.
Say in a locked room with no witnesses.
But that wasn't all I was worried about.
From the point of view of a lot of people, Vecchi didn't only have to get himself caught.
He had to get dead, too.
Take Laura, now.
If she thought her troubles would be over when and if I caught up with the blackmailer, she was way off.
There was nothing to stop the guy carrying out his threat to put the husband wise about Laura's past.
He'd no longer have anything to lose, and a rat like that is very liable to drag down as many people as he can once he knows he has to go.
There was no telling what reaction he'd get from Channing, of course.
I'd met Laura's husband only for a minute or two, but he seemed like a regular guy.
Even so, a man paints his own portrait of a woman, particularly a special woman, and Laura was a special woman.
Her husband probably would not like ugly scarlet splashes added to his careful colouring.
He was the one I felt most sorry for in this caper to date.
Connie Fraser, too.
She wasn't having things all her own way, now or for some little time to come.
Mr. Joseph Bonanza, that respected community figure, might be going to look after her and he might not.
I decided to mention it to him when I got the chance.
Thinking of Bonanza got me on trying to figure his reaction if Vecchi got hooked for the Mahoney killing.
Vecchi, in the ordinary way, would sooner cut off his arm than offend Bonanza, like most people in his line of business.
But this would not be the ordinary way.
If Vecchi was the imitation hospital attendant, then he was booked for some free electricity at the State's expense.
Whoever gunned Mahoney while he lay in a hospital bed need have no pipe dreams about Murder Two or other lesser charge.
Public feeling was too strong.
So he would be practically a dead man, once  arrested.
And that being so, he could probably even up the score a little with the man who posted five coarse G notes for his capture.
Bonanza wouldn't be wanting that at all.
Bonanza wanted him dead.
I was beginning to think I'd put myself in kind of a spot with all this.
I wanted to get to Vecchi before Wilson did.
I wanted to satisfy my client, and if possible pick up the five G's on the way.
I don't have fancy feelings about where money comes from, so long as I earn it in ways which fit in with my flexible principles.
Said principles, however, are not so flexible that they'd allow for my killing Vecchi out of hand, nor standing by while one of Bonanza's torpedoes did for me.
So I sat there thinking up this and that, asking myself questions and not liking the answers.
I was worried.
The ash tray was getting crowded when I decided there was no percentage in doing any more worrying for a while.
I usually find that when the puzzle is too complicated to think about any more, the best thing to do is act.
It relieves the mind if you have something definite to do.
I decided that further thinking would get me nowhere.
None of the combinations of possible future events meant anything at all, nor could mean anything until somebody caught up with Vecchi.
So the least I could do was to get out and around looking for the guy.
Late that evening I was still looking.
I hadn't had a lot of luck finding the man I wanted, but at least I'd been getting up to date on my social exercises, like who was drinking with who, and in what bars.
That kind of information is always useful in my business.
So far as Vecchi was concerned, the guy must have climbed into a hole in the ground and pulled the lid over his head.
I'd noticed a couple of characters in different bars who also seemed more interested in the people than the liquor, and it didn't need any Sherlock Holmes to know who was paying  for their drinks.
Bonanza might be hoping I'd produce a rabbit for him, but he wasn't asleep while he waited.
Finally, I thought I'd call Connors and then catch up on some sack.
‘Where you been?’
Connors was excited.
‘I searched the whole town for you.’
‘Been doing a little searching on my own account,’ I told him.
‘You got anything I want to hear?’
‘That's what I'm trying to tell you,’ he shouted.
‘I've found the guy.’
I was listening suddenly.
‘Where are you, shamus?’
‘I'm at a place on Twelfth and Brook Street.
Selmo's Bar and Grill; you know it?’
‘Buy yourself a drink,’ he replied.
‘Be with you in ten minutes.
Get one for me, too.’
I hung up and dug around in my pockets for a smoke.
Nothing.
Then I went back to the bar, bought two drinks and a pack of Old Favourites and carried the lot to a booth table.
It was a comer seat, at an angle, nothing either side.
If Connors really had got something, and he seemed to think so, we weren't going to hold any open meetings.
A tired girl with brown hair above a white dress looked across the room from another booth with a question.
I shook my head, pointing to the second drink on my table.
She shrugged and resumed her morose study of the green glass which stood in front of her.
That drink had to last until somebody brought another one.
It wasn't going to be me.
Connors walked in and peered around, saw the girl first, then me.
Sitting down opposite without a word he picked up the glass and emptied the contents down his throat.
While he was lighting one of my cigarettes, I said:
‘Well?’
He snapped out the cigarette lighter and leaned confidentially across the table.
‘I think this lead sounds good.
We got to see a man.’
‘What man?’
‘Name of Vincent Kress.
Runs a diner down on Eighteenth Street.
The Globe's had information from him before.
Reliable, as a rule.’
I nodded.
‘So what's he got on our boy?’
If Connors had spoken quietly before, he was hardly uttering at all now.
I had to strain over the table to pick up the words.
‘This Kress has a nephew.
Smart kid, runs errands for local storekeepers, that kind of thing.
This kid always reports anything unusual to Uncle Vincent.’
‘And?’
‘Last coupla days there's been a couple having grub and stuff delivered to a room in the Regal Arms.
You know the Regal Arms?’
I nodded again.
‘Sure.
A fleabag.
Last entry in the register was by a passing stranger during the Wall Street crash.’
‘Right.
They get all kinds there.
just pay, and nobody asks any questions.’
Connors flicked at the ash on his cigarette.
‘Now the nephew always watches the Regal Arms very specially close.
Once or twice he's spotted guys who were news at the time.
This time he thinks the man there could be Vecchi.’
I thought about that.
‘What's the rest of it?’
I asked.
Connors raised his eyes in despair.
‘Tell me,’ he complained, ‘what would be your reaction if I told you the moon just fell out of the sky?’
‘Don't be excitable,’ I told him.
‘All you've said so  far is that some kid thinks he's seen the man we want.
Has the kid ever seen him before?’
He was calm again.
‘All right, we'll do it your way.
There's a man and a girl in the apartment.
The kid's never seen the girl.
When he has to deliver anything the man opens the door maybe half an inch.
The kid's not been able to see inside the place.’
‘Could be the guy's of a jealous disposition.’
Connors snorted.
‘Anyway, the girl is a mystery.
When Kress questioned the nephew about the man's appearance, he decided it could just be our friend.
He figured it was worth a nickel to call me at the Globe, and he's not a wasteful man.’
I removed my cigarettes as he stretched his hand toward the pack, stuck one in my face and lit it.
‘Let's assume the kid has something.
Maybe everything isn't the way it should be at the Regal Arms.
If it's true, you know what I'd put my money on?’
He shook his head.
‘A snatch with the odds on.
Even money, I'd go for a nice simple runaway wife or daughter.’
Connors was a study in dejection.
‘You don't even want to take a look?’
‘Oh, sure.
I got nothing else to do, and at least we'll be able to feel we're trying.’
He was cheerful again.
‘Brother, you had me worried there.’
I didn't think there was much in Connors' tale.
The girl in the apartment, whoever she was, would be an unnecessary complication in the life of Mr. Lou Vecchi.
The game he was playing called for a man who was able to move fast and travel light.
He'd never had a name as a chaser and I couldn't imagine him picking a time like this to  start.
But I was feeling the need for some kind of action.
We took my car and headed out.
Soon the neat stores were replaced by faded brownstones and tumbledown colonial houses.
This end of Waldron had been quite a town once, the big-money boys setting up in mansions of twenty and more rooms.
Gradually the sprawling city caught up with the quiet avenues.
The trees came down and the housing developments went up.
Fashion moved out, and the big houses became rooming joints.
Nob Town became Dingy Town and the whole area gradually settled into a faded seediness where a new paint job stuck out like a sore thumb.
Most of this was hidden at night, the garish neon signs dominating everything with their flashing instructions to smoke this, eat that, wear those.
I pulled the car in beside a late-business liquor store.
Connors complained.
‘Can't you wait till you get home?’
‘This is for a sick relative,’ I told him.
Inside the store an old man sat reading the results.
I took a look at the display.
‘What can I do for you?’
His voice was querulous.
‘Don't think you can help me, pop.
I wanted a fifth of Scotch, but…’
I waved a hand toward the shelves, ‘It's for drinking, not cleaning the car.’
He looked at me for a moment then sighed and got up from the chair.
Reaching down under the counter he pulled out a flat bottle and showed me the label.
‘Think this'll do it?’
‘That'll do it.’
With the fifth in my pocket, I went back outside, climbed behind the wheel and rolled away from the kerb.
Connors clucked with impatience.
Kress's Diner was a double-fronted place with a  prominent sign telling everybody that the premises were protected by the J. B. Storekeepers' Mutual Aid Company.
That didn't make me feel any happier.
The J. B., etc. was one of Mr. Bonanza's little subsidiary concerns.
The storekeepers paid Mr. B. a fin a week, and he refrained from smashing up their equipment.
Multiply that up by two or three hundred stores, and you will see he was on to a good thing.
There were no diners right now.
A big hairy man in a dirty undershirt was sitting at one of the tables, a short cigar clamped in his face.
He hadn't shaved recently, and a little soap might have been a good idea.
Connors grabbed a chair at the same table and I followed suit.
The fat man looked at us without enthusiasm.
‘From the Globe, ain't you?’
Connors nodded.
‘We just wanted to check whether there was anything new before we went over there.’
‘Took your time.
Over two hours since I put this in your lap.’
‘Yeah, I know.
My partner here,’ jerking his thumb in my direction, ‘he was out on another call.’
Very deliberately Kress removed the tattered cigar butt from between stained teeth.
‘If you boys miss anything, like if the guy's lammed out, I figure to get paid just the same.
No fault of mine if you can't hurry yourselves.’
‘We'll talk about that after we've made our call.
Where's this nephew you mentioned?’
‘In bed, where else?
You know what time it is?’
I tapped Connors on the arm.
‘Let's go.
This guy's got nothing to tell us.’
Back in the car I said:
‘For a man who tries to earn a few bucks selling information  to the Press, you friend plays 'em close to the chest.’
‘Can't figure it.
Maybe it's the smell of that frying grease all day.
Only opens his mouth when essential.’
We parked on the opposite side of the street from the Regal Arms.
A dim lamp swung over the entrance where three steps led up into the foyer.
Inside two straight lines of chairs surveyed each other gloomily.
They were covered with some faded brown material, bits of padding pushing their way through cracks in the armrests and backs.
There were holes in the filthy carpeting.
Between us and the stairs was the desk, and behind it sat a fiftyish thin man with a lined but peaceful face.
He watched us without too much interest, his right hand resting casually near a push-buzzer.
‘Will it be a room, friends?’
He had a sing-song voice that suggested he was thing of more important matters.
‘No thanks.
We're just calling on someone,’ I told him.
‘I'm afraid that's against the house rules after eleven p.m.
I'll take a message if you wish.’
He could tell we wouldn't wish, but he was the night clerk.
Nothing was going to save him working through till seven in the morning.
Any chance of conversation was not to be missed.
‘This friend is in room sixty-one.
It's very important,’ said Connors, one eye on the buzzer.
‘Sixty-one?
Why, I think there's some mistake.
That room is occupied by two people.’
I turned excitedly to Connors.
‘You see, it's them all right.’
Turning back to the clerk I said, ‘It's my sister.
This man has got hold of her, and the family's been looking everywhere.
I don't want to break any rules, but you see how it is.’
He liked it, you could tell.
I slipped the fifth from my pocket and stood it in front of him.
‘Let's have a little drink and talk it over.’
He reached out and turned the bottle, looking at the label.
A nervous tongue ran over the thin lips.
‘Well, if it's your sister, I don't see no harm.’
‘Thanks.’
We headed for the stairs.
The Regal Arms boasts no elevator.
Sixty-one was on the third floor.
It lay a third of the way down a dim hallway.
I slid the thirty-eight from under my shoulder and held it in front of me.
Connors looked hard at the gun, but said nothing.
We listened at the door.
I thought the noise my pulse was making would wake the dead.
All around the silence hung thick in the air.
Gently I took hold of the door handle and moved it.
The door was not locked.
I eased it open.
The room was dark.
We went in, Connors flicking down the light switch.
Nothing.
No Vecchi, no girl, nothing.
We took a look around.
I was poking in the drawer of a table when Connors said in a hushed voice:
‘Look at this.’
He was kneeling down by the wall holding out his hand to me.
The fingers were tacky with something dark.
I got down beside him.
There was a patch of sticky fluid on the carpet, dry and black at the edges, deep red in the middle.
Connors' face was chalky.
He said hoarsely:
‘Tell me it's ketchup.’
I shook my head.
Somebody had done a lot of bleeding in that comer.
Somebody who was probably dead by now.
What puzzled me was, where was the body?
Even in the Regal Arms they were liable to think it unusual if anybody carried a body or a badly wounded man down the stairs and out through the front door.
The room told me nothing.
just a bare, impersonal space in a cheap, dingy hotel.
Or  practically nothing.
There was a pillow with burn marks.
The kind of marks you'd make if you wrapped a pillow round a gun so it didn't make any noise when it went off.
‘Let's go.’
Connors was more than ready to oblige.
Outside I turned my back on the stairs and walked on down the passage.
Connors followed, frowning.
Either side were other rooms with numbers on the doors.
Last on the right was a bathroom and a quick look inside the door revealed nothing new.
There was one more door straight ahead.
It wasn't locked and a musty smell floated into the passage.
I felt around for a switch and threw it down to reveal a stone staircase with iron handrail.
The stairs went both ways, up and down and were thickly coated with dust.
The dust was smooth on the up-flight, scuffed around and disturbed inside the door and on down.
Connors sucked in his breath.
‘Well, well,’ he said softly.
‘Who'd have thought it?’
I didn't answer.
I was chewing things over.
‘Come to think of it, you did,’ he followed.
‘You thought of it.
How?’
‘Just by brilliant detective work,’ I growled.
‘This place was used by some very prominent citizens in the old days.
Speakeasy on the ground floor, cathouse up here.
There had to be a rear entrance.’
We started slowly down the stairs.
There was a clear path through the dust in the centre.
I would have said it was caused by someone dragging something heavy.
At the bottom was a heavy iron door, with bolts top and bottom.
They were drawn.
There was the whirr of a motor on the other side.
I pulled the door part-way open.
A huge roadster stood about twenty yards away.
It was too dark to see much.
Then there was a yellow flame.
I threw myself back  through the door, falling to the ground.
The stutter-gun kicked and roared, lead punching against the metal of the door.
Connors was cursing bitterly and there were icicles clawing at my stomach.
It was soon over.
The motor throttled up and the car screamed away.
The silence was total.
I realised my elbow was throbbing painfully where I'd hit the stone floor.
‘We'd better get outa here,’ said Connors.
His voice was shaky.
We moved fast back up the stairs, along the passage and back down into the lobby of the Regal Arms, trying not to run.
The night clerk was not on view this time.
Chances were that the shooting hadn't even been heard this side of the block.
We made it to the car.
I lit a cigarette.
It must have turned very cold.
My hand was shaking.
‘A chopper.
A goddam chopper, the murdering bastards.’
Connors brought me up to date on his opinion of the guys in the car as I rolled the heap round the first intersection.
‘There had to be two.
One at the wheel, one at the artillery,’ I said.
‘Someone else is taking a hand in this game.’
‘It figures.
Vecchi and who?
He never had a friend in his life.’
‘I don't think it was Vecchi.
Don't forget somebody got dead in that room.
That could have been him.’
He thought about it.
‘The girl?
You think the girl knocked him off, and then hired some help to get him out of there?’
‘No.
Why would she do that?
Way I hear it, nobody got to see her while they stayed there.
She could have just locked the door, walked down the back stairs and become a memory.’
I drove in silence for a while.
‘Eighteenth Street?
What are we doing here?’ queried Connors.
‘We're gonna make a call on a friend of yours.
See if he feels more like talking than last time.’
‘Kress?’
Connors flapped a hand deprecatingly.
‘You're losing your buttons.
Kress wouldn't be mixed up in— a trick like this.’
‘Maybe.
Kind of like to ask him a couple of little things.’
The diner was in darkness now.
It was close to one-fifteen a.m.
I punched a night bell at the side of the glass doors.
Nothing happened.
I rested my elbow on the bell-push and just kept right on resting.
After about five minutes a light went on in back.
A faint yellow gleam outlined a door.
Soon this was open, and a pale shaft of light filtered across the equipment on the counter.
The huge bulk of Kress appeared framed in the doorway peering through the gloom of the restaurant in an attempt to see who was calling.
Finally he shuffled across and peered through at us.
‘You guys again.
What in hell is this?
A man has to get —‘
‘Open it up, Kress,’ I told him.
‘Like hell!
You get outa here.’
He stood scowling out, fat fingers scratching idly at the blue stubble on his chin.
He turned as if to move away.
I tapped hard on the glass.
‘Get it open or I'll kick it down.’
‘You go to —‘
Kress stopped as he looked at the blued muzzle of the .38.
I was holding it lightly against the glass of the door at an angle where the steel-jacketed slugs would plough straight into the fat of his abdomen.
Quickly he reached out and turned off the night lock.
I pushed inside, Connors  following without being quite sure of what we were doing there.
‘Listen, what is this…?’ spluttered the fat man.
‘Shut up.’
I pressed the door shut, and pressed him back into the lighted room at the rear of the store.
‘Your friends didn't have the luck.
We're still alive,’ I said.
‘Friends?
What friends?
I don't get it.’
‘The mugs who were ahead of us at the hotel, Fatso.
They didn't like us.
They used a machine gun to tell us so.’
There was a quick dart of fear in the sunken eyes.
‘I don't know what you're talking about,’ he muttered.
‘Sure you don't.’
Lightly I brought the .38 down on the knuckles of his hand as it rested on a table.
He whimpered with the pain of it, and caressed the fingers lovingly with his good hand.
‘Talk it up.
Who were your friends?’
He looked imploringly at Connors, but it's no use pleading with a man who just had a machine gun go off in his face.
Connors stood there in stony silence.
‘Honestly —’ Kress began.
I hit him again in the same place, a little harder.
Sweat broke out on his face and ran in little rivulets down into the blue stubble.
‘For Chrissakes, listen to me.
I don't know a thing about it.
That's the truth.
I'm just a guy who ‘phones bits of information to the newspapers.
That's all.
I don't know nothing about guys with machine guns.’
‘You're a liar,’ I told him.
‘What time did you ‘phone the Globe?’
He thought about it, eying the .38 nervously and licking his lips.
‘Ten, maybe ten-fifteen.’
‘That's about right,’ Connors butted in.
‘What made you call in?
How'd you know Connors was interested in finding Lou Vecchi?’
‘I'd had word about it.
I often get tipped off about things like that.’
He looked as if he hoped Connors might come to his aid again, but there was nothing from that quarter.
‘So Connors was interested.
Who else?’
‘Who else?’
He repeated it wonderingly as though the thought had never crossed his mind.
I raised the .38.
‘No, no, don't hit me again.
Please don't hit me again.’
‘Talk it up.
Who else?’
He drew in a deep breath.
‘There'd been — other people.
Other people had been asking about Vecchi, too.
I didn't pay them no heed at the time, because in this town somebody is always looking for somebody.
A good way to stay out of trouble is never to see nobody.’
I ignored all the kerbside philosophy.
‘Get to it.
What other people?’
‘There were two of them.
Said they were talking for somebody big.
They wanted to find Vecchi.
There'd be money in it.
I didn't take no notice at the time.
Then when the Globe was after the same guy, I got to figuring.’
‘Figuring what?’
He licked at his damaged hand with his enormous soft pink tongue, just like a dog washing itself.
The piggy eyes remained glued on the automatic in my hand.
‘The Globe always sees me O.K. when I give 'em anything.
But just in case Vecchi tied in with the five thousand reward Mr. Bonanza was posting, I didn't see why I should settle for the usual sawbuck.’
‘So what did you do?’
‘After I talked to Mr. Connors here, I sat around and thought it all over.
I didn't see no harm in getting paid twice for my trouble, so I called the other number.’
‘What number?’
‘The number these guys left here.’
I held out my free hand.
‘Give.’
He hesitated, then turned and rummaged around on a shelf against the wall.
Finally he came up with what had started life as a white envelope.
There was something written in pencil on the back.
He held it out to me.
It was a number on the Beach Exchange, and that meant a comfortable address in the right part of town.
‘All right,’ I said wearily, ‘let's have the rest of it.’
‘Like I said, I called the number.
It turned out to be Manning Jackson's home.’
Kress was all information now, wanted to talk.
He figured all the time he was talking he'd be keeping me from smashing up his hand with the gun-butt.
He was right.
Manny Jackson was the smooth-talking lawyer who kept Bonanza's business enterprises one step in front of the law.
I'd been wondering when he'd pick up cards in this game.
‘What did Jackson say?’
I asked.
‘Well, he made like he wanted no part of me at all.
Said I'd got his number by mistake.
He'd never heard of Vecchi and wasn't interested in finding anybody by that name.
Naturally.
‘What time was this?’
‘Oh, between eleven and eleven-thirty, I guess.
So I told him I must have got the wrong number.
But later these two guys showed.
The two who came in the first place.
Said they were just checking on their contacts.’
‘So you told 'em about the Regal Arms.’,
Connors  wasn't asking a question, merely making a statement.
‘Well, I didn't see no harm.
I figured me for a piece of the five G's.’
‘And was that all?’
‘Yeah.
So help me, I never knew those guys were gonna make no trouble.’
‘Sure.
You thought they'd ask Vecchi over for a tea party.’
I didn't like him.
A fat slob of a man, peddling information to guys who carried machine guns for company.
I wouldn't be able to break the story, and neither would the cops if they dug him out.
He hadn't done anything illegal, just tipped off some killers where their prey was, and there's no law against that.
Kress made me sick.
‘These two guys, what were their names?’
I asked gently.
‘I wouldn't know that, they were strangers to me.’
‘Yeah.
All right, what were they like?
I'd hate to start on the other hand,’ I said as he hesitated.
The words came out in a rush.
‘One was a big, heavy man.
Big as me, only hard.
The other was shorter, fattish.
He was the leader.’
Bells rang.
‘The little one, did he have a mouthful of gold teeth?’
‘Why, yeah; yeah he did.
I noticed that special, because some of the other guy's front teeth were missing.’
Rico and the Battler.
For what good it was going to do me, I was fairly sure that these two were on the other end of the lead poisoning Connors and I had nearly contracted.
Connors had kept very quiet for Connors, while Kress and I were having our little friendly talk.
Now he stepped in front of me.
‘Kress, I just wanted to thank you for what you did to-night.
Thank you very much.’
His right fist went into the fat stomach hallway to the elbow.
There was a wooshing sound as the fat man sagged.
Connors hit him on the side of the face with two sharp jabbing lefts.
A cut appeared over the cheekbone and blood flowed warmly down the side of his face.
Connors stepped away and smiled pleasantly.
Very nice,’ he said, ‘I enjoyed that.’
Then he swung his right again, hard into the loose mouth.
Kress fell to the ground, spitting blood from a badly split lip.
I didn't try to stop Connors.
It was none of my business, and I knew he could still feel the cold stone of that floor at the hotel while death hammered insistently just above his head.
‘So long, Kress,’ I said softly.
‘You're a dead man.
Joey Bonanza doesn't like loose ends.
When those two guys tell him how they caught up with Vecchi, he'll send 'em round to see you again.
This time they'll bring the chopper with them.
For a few seconds before you die, you'll know what it was made us get rough with you.’
We left him there, a bloody, pulpy mess on the floor.
Outside Connors said:
‘What made you think of Kress, anyhow?’
‘He did,’ I replied.
‘The guy is too greedy.
Remember what he said when we called the first time?
Something about getting his money whether Vecchi was still there or not?
Remember?’
Connors wrinkled his brow.
‘Yeah.
Yeah, he did say something like that.’
‘I paid no heed at the time, but when things broke the way they did, I thought about it again.
It had to be Kress.’
We drove back to Woodside.
Before he went, Connors promised to get me a rundown on the police activity in the Fourth Precinct following the incident at the back of the Regal Arms.
Even the boys at Fourth don't like people  shooting off the heavy stuff, although they take most things in their stride.
Upstairs in my apartment I bought myself a drink.
It was good, just what I needed.
Then I made another, sat down by the telephone, and took from my pocket the dirty envelope Kress had given me.
The number was Beach 00–5169.
It wasn't long before the burring at the other end was cut off by somebody lifting the receiver.
‘Let me talk to Bonanza,’ I said.
The voice was soft and sort of furry.
‘You have the wrong number.
There's no one here by that name.’
‘Tell him it's Preston.
He'll talk to me.’
Short pause while the character on the listening end thought about what he was going to say.
You don't get to the tax bracket Manny Jackson was in by shouting out the first thing that comes into your head.
‘Would that be John Preston?
The John Preston Mr. Bonanza talked with recently?’
‘It would.’
Another brief wait, then —
‘I'm sorry, Preston, Mr. Bonanza is not here.
This is my home you're calling.
The name is Manning Jackson.’
‘I know that.
I just been talking to a coupla friends of yours.’
‘Friends?
Who would that be?’
He sounded cagey.
‘A couple of characters with a Thompson.
They didn't give their names.’
‘You're talking over my head, Mr. Preston.
Good-night.’
‘Wait a minute,’ I shouted, before he could replace the receiver.
‘I only said they didn't give their names.
That isn't the same as saying I don't know who they were.
I do.’
If he'd been going to hang up on me, something made  him change his mind and could be it was something I said.
‘Look, I don't know what you're talking about, and it's very late.
Why not come to my office in the morning?’
The softness was still there, but the fur was maybe a little ruffled.
‘Uh, uh.
I want to get this said now.
Things been happening too fast lately.
Where do I find Bonanza?’
‘I can't help you there.
Not to-night anyway.
Look, Preston, if I understand my client correctly, you are the man he permitted to visit with a Miss Fraser?’
‘You understand him just fine,’ I replied.
He ignored that.
‘Mr. Bonanza says that you are a man to be trusted.
I will take a chance and tell you something.
In confidence, of course.’
I didn't laugh into the receiver, but the idea of Manning Jackson taking a chance was something new.
The idea of him telling a stranger anything in confidence would also be good for a chuckle any time but now.
I waited for the bedtime story.
Jackson was using his chummy tone.
‘Mr. Bonanza didn't feel that Miss Fraser should be exposed to a lot of publicity in her physical condition.
The strain of prolonged interviews might have been too much for her.’
A very cold lump formed at the back of my spine while I waited for the rest of it.
‘Mr. Bonanza thought it would be better for the young lady to be taken somewhere away from here, where she could rest and get well.’
‘He's taken her away?’
The coldness was turning to ice.
‘Where?’
‘I am not in his confidence on that point,’ came the reply.
‘Naturally.’
I was thinking about Conrie Fraser and wondering where she was at that moment.
Thinking of the frail figure sitting in the gloomy room at the sanatorium, trusting the great Bonanza.
Maybe she was lying out in the desert right now with her prettiness all ruined by bloody holes.
Maybe — I cut off that line of thinking.
It wasn't doing any good, and the way to get results in this business is to remember when you're dealing with smart people you got to be smart too.
I got a grip on myself and spoke very slowly.
‘Now you get this, Mr. Manning Jackson.
And get it good, because it's important to you.
If anything happens to that kid, understand one thing.
I shall want to know about it.
All about it.
I shall want to know how she died, and who was responsible, and if I don't like the answers, I shall get rough.
You understand that, Mr. Jackson?’
I was trying to talk quietly.
What I wanted to do was shout into the telephone, and curse, and maybe cry a little.
Connie Fraser rated a better deal than this.
‘I understand you very well, Preston.
You're on the wrong horse.
No one is going to hurt the girl.
Mr. Bonanza simply feels…’
‘You already told me what Mr. Bonanza simply feels.
Now I've told you what I feel.
If Connie Fraser dies, I'll be seeing you.’
I put the instrument back in its cradle.
Then I started to curse.
Slowly at first, then faster and louder.
It was foolish.
For a moment I thought of driving out to the Jackson house, and beating out of the lawyer whatever information he had.
That was foolish, too.
If Bonanza had set Connie Fraser up for the chill, there wouldn't be anything I could do to stop it.
In fact, there wasn't anything else at all I could do that night except go to bed.
I set up the bottle on the bedside table and a fresh pack  of cigarettes.
Both had taken quite a beating by the time the first grey flickers of dawn filtered in.
A few birds began to make with the auditions.
It was five-thirty in the morning, and when I finally got to sleep I was hating those birds.
6
I LET the 'phone ring for about ten minutes before doing anything about it.
The room was thick with stale cigarette smoke and strong sunlight pierced through every gap in the curtained windows.
My strap-watch said it was ten minutes off seven and that didn't make me feel any better.
I said thickly:
‘Well?’
‘Mr. John Preston?’
A girl's voice, soft and guarded, but touching a familiar chord in my befogged mind.
‘Who is this?’
‘Someone you know.
We talked yesterday morning.
Remember?’
I remembered in a hurry.
‘Connie.
Where are you?’
‘I'm in Hollywood.
I have to see you right away.
Could you come?
Please.’
There was an urgent pleading in the way she spoke.
Not that it was necessary.
A tank unit wouldn't have kept me away.
‘Sure.’
I checked the time again.
At this hour I ought to make the movie capital in about one-and-a-half-hours.
‘I'll be there around eight-thirty.
Where do I find you?’
‘I'm at the Alcade Apartments.
That's a white stone  block on San Vincente Avenue.
It's just off Wilshire —‘
‘I know the place,’ I cut in.
‘What number?’
‘Twenty-eight A. Please hurry, and please…’ there was anxiety now, ‘…please don't tell anyone you're coming.’
‘I'm not that crazy.
See you at eight-thirty.’
I wasn't tired at all.
I felt great.
Connie Fraser wasn't really any of my business, but I'd liked the way she was taking this whole bit.
Maybe I'd been wrong about Bonanza after all.
He hadn't hurt her yet, and that was a good sign.
There wasn't any reason why he'd want her out of the way, but when you get to be big in his business, the only exit is usually from a prone position, and guys like him develop a tendency to think the same way about people playing the smaller parts.
I shaved and showered, clipping two seconds off the record, and was soon out on the highway heading for Faketown.
That's what people from my territory call Hollywood.
Mecca for the grifters and drifters, the phonies and gold-brick men.
The Land of the Fast Buck, as someone once said.
Also the fast take.
Simple-minded people sometimes think that everything's been said about Hollywood.
Smarter people know that nobody would believe any yarn that came anywhere near the truth.
I once knew a guy who decided to write one of these thousand-page Marathons about Faketown.
He told me he was going to shoot the whole works, no holds barred.
Could have done it, too, only when he was about a third of the way through, he was killed in an automobile accident.
A typical drunk-driving misdemeanour, it said in my paper.
Only the guy was teetotal from way back.
The needle was flickering around the eighty mark most of the way.
Once I passed a motor-cycle cop, sheltering a concealed turning off to the left.
He waved and grinned.
So did I. He had me figured for a working stiff out to do the day's chores, and he wasn't going to bother an upright member of the community.
It was eight-twenty when I hit Wilshire and a mile or so further on I turned into the Avenida San Vincente.
The giant palms lining the road inspected me disinterestedly as I coasted along trying to find the Alcade Apartments.
One of the troubles about Hollywood, everybody's so busy being exclusive and hiding their homes behind mountains of greenstuff, they forget about the unfortunate people who have to locate the said homes sometimes.
Then I found it, a narrow split in the forest with a white-painted signboard, partly covered by an overhanging bush.
Alcade Apartments.
I eased the heap into the opening and pushed on.
After a couple of hundred yards the jungle thinned, and I could make out the towering white cliffs of the apartments building.
I wondered what Connie Fraser thought about living in a place like that, and whether she was watching me from one of the dozens of balcony windows that faced the front.
There were a few people around, polishing and sweeping, and maybe spreading incense for all I knew.
They didn't take a lot of notice of me, and I returned the compliment.
I judged from the area occupied by this edifice that the apartment I wanted would be on the second floor.
A fleet of elevators stood neatly in a row inside the swing doors.
I don't like to use an elevator to make one storey, but the way things are in Hollywood, I knew there likely wouldn't be any stairs.
I pushed the button marked ‘Two’ and watched the gold-painted doors swing noiselessly together.
Five seconds later they opened again, and I was in a wide corridor which appeared to lead right to the rear of the building.
The first door off was 26.
I moved along to 27 then 28.
The next number was 29.
I tried the other side of the  corridor and back-tracked.
There it was, 28A.
I leaned on the buzzer, noting the absence of the little name-plate outside the door.
Somebody moved around inside, then I could feel there was another person on the other side of the door, listening.
‘Who is it?’
The voice was low and nervous.
‘It's me, Preston.’
There was a gasp of relief, and the door opened.
I moved inside and shut it behind me.
Connie Fraser stood there, smiling tremulously.
She seemed to have made a rapid improvement in health since I last saw her.
Then I'd had the impression of a pleasant face, but no crowd-raiser.
To-day she was a knockout.
Finely-chiselled features with high cheekbones and a generous mouth, all set off by a cascading mass of beautiful golden hair.
She was wearing a black and white sharkskin dress that didn't make you wonder whether she was the same shape the whole way down.
There were variations here and there, considerable variations.
She must have caught my inspection.
She smiled ruefully and said:
‘Surprised?’
‘Well, not exactly surprised,’ I said hesitatingly.
Then seeing her grin, ‘O.K., I'm surprised.’
‘Come on in.
I've made some coffee.’
Apartment 28A in the Alcade Apartments was about what I would have expected.
Large, lush, and maybe a little loud.
Connie parked herself on a white divan and poured out some black steaming liquid.
I needed it, I hadn't realised how much.
With a second cup in my hand, I sat down in an upright chair opposite my hostess.
‘Well, Connie, what gives?’
She sat with her arms folded, hands clasped around the  smooth flesh above the elbows, as though she was cold or scared.
‘I want you to believe what I'm going to tell you, Mr. Preston.’
Her eyes were level as she studied my face.
‘I called you because I'm frightened, honest-to-God scared for my life.
You're the only person mixed up in this business whom I believe to be on the level.
If you sell me out, I don't suppose I'll be any worse off than I am right now.’
‘Well now,’ I said slowly, ‘I think you might fairly say that I'm as much on the level as most people.
And selling out is not my line of business.’
She nodded.
‘I guessed that from the way you treated me yesterday.
And I know Bonanza thinks you're pretty smart.
He told me to be extra careful what I said to you.’
I raised an eyebrow.
‘So he had a talk with you before I showed?’
My opinion of Joey B. went up a point or two.
Most people take it for granted they can out-smart a peeper like me without too much trouble.
Mr. B. undoubtedly thought that way too, but he tied up his loose ends just the same.
Tidy.
‘We ran through the whole scene, dialogue included,’ she said bitterly.
‘I see.’
She got up and walked around nervously, fetching up at a cabinet with a heavy silver box on top.
The box was full of cigarettes.
I got one, too.
When we'd lit them she suddenly said:
‘I'm not Connie Fraser.
I'm an actress.
The name is Lucille Walker.’
I managed to absorb it without falling off the chair.
It wasn't easy.
‘All right, Lucille, let's have the rest.’
‘I didn't know what I was getting into, it sounded all right.
I mean…’
She stopped as I held up a finger.
‘Look, honey, you want me to help you some way or other.
I don't yet know whether or not I'm going to do that.
But I have to hear the whole tale.
Now take it from the top.
And slowly.’
‘Yes, yes, of course.
It started a few days ago.
My agent said he had some private work for me, and I was to contact the party myself.’
‘Is that normal?’
I butted in.
She made a bitter grin.
‘Oh, that's quite normal around this little town.
Private work usually means what you think it means.
And private work is the only kind there is ten months of the year.
We don't have call-girl service in Hollywood.
We have agents.’
‘I imagine it's up to you whether you take the work or not?’
‘Oh, sure.
It's up to me whether I eat or not, too, but I just can't see myself on that diet of nothing.’
I shrugged.
‘Go on.’
‘I got in touch with this man, Joel Middleton is his name.
He's an actor of sorts, mostly resting like me.
He said he had a few days’ work for me, five hundred and expenses.
All I had to do was make like a patient in a sanatorium.
He would be the doctor attending me, and that was all there was to it.
In a week at most I'd be back here in Hollywood with a clear profit of five C's.
And no tax to pay.’
‘Didn't you wonder what it was all about?’
I enquired.
Her eyes flashed.
‘Look, Mr. Preston, I'm trying to tell you this whole  thing the way it happened.
Why don't you save the questions for later?’
It was fair comment.
I threw up my hands and inclined my head.
‘I've been hired for some zany roles in this metropolis, and a few of them leaned towards the crooked.
That's none of my business so long as I don't have to break any laws.
This one seemed to drop that side of the table, too.
I told Joel I'd have to know more about it.
He took me to see a man who had the whole story.
just for the visit I would get a fifty.
If I turned the job down, I was to keep my mouth shut.’
She stubbed the cigarette out in an ashtray that had an enlightened statuette attached.
The most respectable description of the bronze figure would be that it appeared to represent the Goddess of Fertility.
‘The man was Joe Bonanza.
I'd seen him around at one or two private parties given by wire service operators and gamblers.
I knew he was a wheel in his own town, though I didn't know then the town was Waldron City.
These parties I'm talking about only a very dumb blonde would ask questions.
I'm just blond.’
I nodded.
Lucille Walker was beginning to interest me.
She had a nice directness, and plenty else that was nice besides.
‘Bonanza was very friendly.
He told me it was important for me to understand he was a very big name in his own town.
I told him I'd heard that, and he seemed pleased.
Then he said one of his friends had been attacked, shot down in the street.
The man was in hospital and may not recover.
This man, Mahoney, was living with a girl named Connie Fraser.
She may have shot Mahoney herself.
Bonanza wasn't sure about that.
What he was sure of was that she'd disappeared, and that was inconvenient  to him.
The police would want to talk to her.
While they were looking for her, they'd turn the town upside down.
There was some public outcry about the shooting, and the police would probably interfere with a lot of his business interests while looking for Connie Fraser.
Then, when they found her, he'd have even more to worry about.
She'd been living with one of his men, a guy who knew a lot about his affairs, and Connie couldn't help knowing plenty of things that Bonanza would not want advertised on the radio.’
It was beginning to add up.
All the time Lucille was talking, my mind was covering the side roads, and I could see a glimmering in the distance that might be the approach of daylight.
‘The Fraser girl was not like one of his strippers at a stag drinking joint.
She wasn't tough or hardboiled at all.
Expert police questioning would get enough out of her to cost Bonanza a lot of profits, if it didn't put him out of business altogether.
He was quite frank with me about all this.
After all, why not?
I guess Joel had told him what kind I was.’
She paused, as though hoping for some kind of contradiction.
I just sat there looking at her and waiting.
‘Then he gave me the pitch.
I was to be Connie Fraser, Joel the doctor attending me.
I looked enough like her in a general way, same colouring, same height.
There were no photographs of her.
The apartment had been cleared by his men, and she hadn't any family in town.
Anyway, nobody would be particularly interested in Connie after the first day.
She'd simply be a material witness of some kind who wasn't well enough to be interviewed.
I would move into Dr. Zimmerman's sanatorium, and Joel would be Dr. Green, an out-of-town doctor specially brought in at Bonanza's expense.
I could see nobody.
The police  wouldn't press too hard for a day or two.
They knew where I was, and it left them free to follow up other leads and so on.
Bonanza boasted to me that with his organisation he'd be sure and locate Connie himself within that time.
Then Connie would move into the sanatorium along with a lot of legal talent he had lined up to look after his interests —and Connie's, too, of course— and I'd head for home with my five hundred.’
It wasn't bad.
It wasn't bad at all.
I sat there smoking and thinking about it.
Set up Connie Fraser where all the world could see her, but not talk to her.
Then quietly comb the town for Connie Fraser.
It had Bonanza written all over it.
‘So you took the job and moved in?’
I said flatly.
She jerked her head.
‘Why not?
Not every day I get a chance to pick up that kind of money for doing practically nothing.’
‘Sure.
So there you were sitting around in luxury at Zimmerman's when somebody walked into the hospital and finished off the job on Jack Mahoney.’
‘Yes.
That really started the excitement.
Reporters and photographers were swarming all over the sanatorium that day.
Mr. Big came out that evening.
He was very angry about the shooting and kept on shouting threats about what he'd do to Lou Vecchi when he caught up with him.
That was the man who did the shooting, he said.
He told me he'd put up five thousand dollars’ reward for the killer, and he'd be very happy to pay every cent.
Then he got talking about you, asked me if I'd ever heard of you.’
‘Really?
And had you?’
She wagged her head from side to side.
‘No.
He told me who you were, and a little bit about you.
I must say he made you sound very interesting.’
I bowed.
‘Why did he mention me at all?’
‘He told me you were the kind of man who might be able to catch up with Vecchi.
Obviously he couldn't talk to the police, and it would suit his book better if Vecchi was caught by someone outside his own organisation.
He wanted it to be you, and if he found Vecchi first, he'd make sure you got the tip straight away.
The way he told it, you were a hell of a man.’
She was looking at me with a special kind of interest now.
Unfortunately this was not the time for it.
‘You haven't said why he mentioned me?’
‘Oh, no.
Well, he said when he left me he was going to have a talk with you.
He was going to let you come to the sanatorium to see me.
While he was with you, he was going to let you know that Vecchi was the killer, but he didn't think you'd go for it, coming from him.
So we arranged that I would let the name drop and you'd work it out from there.’
‘Damn you all to hell,’ I said slowly.
‘No need to be rude,’ she retorted.
‘Rude!’
I shouted.
‘How do you expect me to be?
I'm not really living at all.
I'm just a puppet moving around in prescribed circles.
Bonanza jerks a string and I bow.
Then you pull another, and off I go on the straight line Joey Bonanza's drawn for me.
Rude?
Lady, you're lucky you can't read my mind.’
I sat there fuming.
Lucille watched me anxiously.
I think she had a feeling I might suddenly leap up and start slapping her around.
I wanted to, at that.
After a few minutes, I took a deep breath.
‘Well, it worked out fine, didn't it?
Everything the way Mr. Bonanza said.
Now you're back in Hollywood, presumably with the five C's?’,
She nodded.
‘You brought me here,’ I went on.
‘Tell me the next scene.
What does Mr. Bonanza have in mind for me today?
Long-focus shots of me groping in the dark, or will it be more close-ups of my stupidity?’
‘I — I guess I can't blame you for being sore.
Remember, I didn't have to tell you all this.’
That was true.
Lucille Walker hadn't brought me clear over to Hollywood just to tell me I'd been played for a sucker.
‘All right, angel.
Now we've got through with the part that tells the audience all about Simple John Preston, let's have your reasons.
Why are you telling me?’
‘Last night there was a telephone call to Joel at the sanatorium.
It was just after two a.m.
He was to get me out of there fast, and be sure nobody saw me leave.
Plans had been changed, he was told.
We were to go home and forget the whole thing.’
‘No reason given?’
‘No.
It must have been around two-forty-five by the time I'd packed up my stuff.
We came straight back to Hollywood.’
‘How'd you get paid?’
I asked.
‘Oh, Joel had had the money right along.
There was always better than an even chance of something like this happening.
Bonanza didn't want to waste time arguing about payment in an emergency.’
‘So you got paid.
A few hours later you're singing like a bird.
Why?’
She made a face.
‘You don't understand.
I'm scared.
When I first got into this thing I didn't ask too many questions.
I needed the money and it sounded O.K. But sitting around for hours at a stretch without a word from anybody I was  able to do a lot of thinking.’
She shivered slightly.
‘Too much thinking.
I finally worked it down to two alternatives.
Bonanza said he wanted me there so the police would know where I was.
Supposing he just wanted the killer to know where to find me?’
‘Why should the killer be interested in you?’
I interjected.
She was impatient with that.
‘Not with me as a person.
But with me as Connie Fraser.
Why had Connie gone missing?
Maybe because she saw the killing and could identify the man who did it.
Maybe if he killed me, he'd be satisfied.
Or get caught doing it.
Then Connie could come out of her hole.’
I shook my head decisively.
‘Too complicated.
Bonanza wouldn't have gone to all that trouble to set up a deal like you're imagining.’,
‘It's all very fine sitting around on a sunny morning sounding confident.
It wasn't so easy in that awful room after about four hours without a word from anybody.’
She was choked up remembering it.
Then she said:
‘Try it another way.
Bonanza said he didn't want the police looking for Connie, because he was afraid of interference with his business.
Suppose he really meant to find her first, because he wanted her out of the way.
That would make me some kind of accessory after the fact, wouldn't it?’
‘It could,’ I said dubiously.
‘I guess it could.’
‘Or worse still, if he was going to have her killed, it would be a nice tidy thing to give me the same treatment, and Joel too.
That way there'd be nobody around to do him any harm.’
‘But you're here.
Nobody hurt you.
You got paid off.’
I didn't get it.
‘Anyway, that's the way my mind's been working.
So  after I got home I was worried about the two a.m. ‘phone call.
What happened so suddenly?
I thought I'd wait up for the early morning newscast on the radio.’
‘Anything?’
She nodded.
‘Plenty.
After I heard it I went out and found an early news-stand.’
Getting up from her seat she walked over to the radio cabinet.
The top was piled with pulp magazines and such.
She lifted off a heavy daily and brought it to me.
‘You won't have to look far.
It's on the front page.’
Slowly I unfolded the thick paper and spread it flat in front of me.
Right at the top was the screaming two-inch banner:
MOBSTERS KILLED IN CHASE
‘Machine-gun carrying hoodlums were shot and killed early this morning in a car chase gunfight with police.
The body of a girl was found in the gang car.
She had died earlier.
Later identified as Eduardo (Gold plate) Rico (37) and James Kilroy (41) known as the Battler, the two men opened fire on Police Car 24 when challenged.
Officers Muldoon and Cabrillo…’
There was a lot more.
The boys in the prowl-car had been sent to investigate what was believed to be a burst of machine-gun fire — I could confirm that it was — and had called on Rico and the Battler to pull up.
Battler opened up with the violin and it was all over in a few minutes.
That was the end of the facts.
The rest was a lot of fill-up about memories of the ‘30's and other tired yellow-sheet tricks.
When I'd read it right through, I said:
‘Nice tale.
What has it to do with you?’
‘Look in the late news.’
I turned the page sideways to catch the blurred blue print headed ‘4 a.m. special’—
DEAD GIRL IN GUN CAR
Identified as Constance Fraser (23) police witness in recent shooting of Jack Roy Mahoney.
I whistled a soundless tune.
So Connie Fraser had turned up after all.
Funny thing, I felt close to Connie, yet I'd never laid eyes on her.
I was mad about her being killed, mad at whoever killed her.
Lucille was watching me to see if I'd produce some reaction.
‘All right, Lucille, so somebody killed Connie.
Where does that get us?’
‘I don't know.
But I'm scared.
I know something about this deal.
I know a lot about it.
This is murder, Mr. Preston, or hadn't you noticed?
I haven't been around this long without learning that funny things happen to people who know too much about mob business.’
And of course Lucille was right on the button.
The way this thing added together at the moment, the five centuries Lucille had earned could get all swallowed up in funeral expenses.
‘Tell me one thing, baby.
All this talking you've been doing.
Is that on the level, or is it just Act Three in Mr. Bonanza's little play?’
Miserably she shook her head.
‘I wish it was.
Can't you see I'm on the level?
Can't you tell when somebody's scared half to death?’
I could tell, but I wasn't letting her down too light in case there was anything else she knew that hadn't come out yet.
‘You're an actress.
You fooled me once.’
She came over to me and rested her hands on my shoulders.
She was very close.
‘Get me off the hook, Preston.
Get me out of this, and there's nothing I won't do for you.
And I could do plenty.’
That I could believe.
Her nearness wasn't helping me to do my thinking straight.
I pulled her face down and kissed her gently on the lips.
At least it started that way, then the sharkskin dress was rubbing against me and other things began to seem far away.
Regretfully I pushed her clear.
‘We'll take that up later, baby.
Business first.’
She smiled, showing the even whiteness of her teeth.
They were sharp teeth as my tongue could testify.
‘You always tend to business first?’
‘Always.
That's why I'm still walking around, instead of resting under a shady tree waiting for Connie Fraser to join me.’
She shuddered.
‘Please don't make jokes like that.
Not to-day.’
‘You're right.
Do you have any folks, Lucille?’
‘Yes.
In Wisconsin.
Why do you ask?’
‘Wisconsin.
That's quite a bicycle ride.
Anybody nearer than that?
Friends maybe?’
‘Yes, I have some friends in Pasadena.’
‘Go visit ‘em.
Soon as you can pack a bag,’ I told her.
‘What?
Why, I can't just arrive on people that way.
I mean, they won't be expecting me or anything —‘
‘Look, angel.
I'll tell you what I think.
I think four people are dead already.
We don't know what it's all about, but we do know you have something the law would like to hear.
We do know Bonanza can get rough if he has to, and he knows where to find you.
There may be nothing  else in this trick for you, but you could get dead finding out.’
It acted like a bucket of cold water thrown in her face.
‘Do you go to Pasadena?’
She nodded dumbly.
‘What about Joel Middleton?
I ought to warn him too.’
She started for the telephone.
‘Nix on that,’ I said sharply.
‘He may be on the other team.
If he is, that telephone could turn out to be a time-bomb with a short fuse.’
‘That's nonsense,’ she retorted.
‘Why, Joel —‘
‘Will save his own neck if he has to choose,’ I cut in.
‘Send him a wire as you leave town.
He'll get that in time to move out himself if he's on the level, too late to do you any harm if he's not.’
She smiled.
‘I'm glad you're here.
You –ve me confidence.’
‘Uh huh.’
I stayed around giving everybody confidence while she got a bag packed.
Downstairs she turned to me and said:
‘I ought to let you know where to find me.’
‘No.
Here,’ I gave her a printed business card, the one with my home telephone number on it.
‘Call me to-night at seven.
If I'm not there, leave it till eleven and try again.
Same thing to-morrow night.
Seven and eleven.
O.K.?’
‘O.K., Mr. Preston.
I'm not going to thank you now.
When this is all over, I'll be back.
I'll thank you then, when I can take plenty of time over it.’
‘I'll settle for that,’ I told her.
‘Anyway, we're about even.
What you told me helps me to walk out of Mr. B's cast.
Now I'm putting on my own production.’
She ‘phoned down for somebody to bring her car out front.
He smiled at Lucille and looked at me knowingly.
She had a little white sedan with plenty of what it takes under the hood.
I followed her down as far as Wilshire Boulevard.
Then with a wave she forked left and was gone.
I was thoughtful as I headed off in the opposite direction.
7
I PULLED in to a diner about five miles short of Waldron and took aboard some fried ham and a couple of eggs sunny side up.
The food filled a hole and that was as much as anyone could say for it, or maybe anything would have tasted like sawdust right then.
I'd been up practically the whole night, and all that driving with the sun dancing on the baked roads hadn't helped.
My head ached dully and altogether I wasn't at my best.
What I wanted was to go home and take a nice long rest.
That's what I wanted.
What I was going to get was another matter again.
When I finally decided I couldn't dawdle over my coffee any longer, a decision arrived at long before by the hard-eyed blonde in charge of the cash register, I climbed back in the heap and headed home.
Inside the city limits a prowl car was parked.
I knew the boys slightly, waved a hand.
One of them waved back.
The other began to talk rapidly into the hand mike of the car radio.
That meant no good for somebody, and the somebody was me.
Randall, Tim Wilson's side-kick, was waiting outside my apartment when I hit Woodside.
‘Morning,’ I told him.
He grunted and followed me into the apartment.
Randall is one of those big beefy characters who look as if all brains are in their knuckles.
Only it wasn't so in his case.
He was plenty smart copper.
‘You been out for a joyride, Preston?’ he had a deep, lazy voice.
‘You might call it that,’ I returned.
The trouble with trying to fool policemen is that you never know how much they know, which is always more than they admit.
‘Big deal last night.
Real prohibition stuff,’ he said.
‘I read that, too.
Were you mixed up in that party?’
‘Not me.
I was home in bed.’
He let that rest a while, then, ‘Where were you?’
‘Now look, Gil.
I'm an easy-going sort of fellow, but if you're here on business, let's have it all official.
You're in my apartment.
You've got your big feet on one of my best chairs.’
He swung the feet down hastily.
‘Thanks.
You got a warrant to bust in here?’
I demanded.
‘Easy on, feller.
Nobody bust in anywhere.
You walked in and I just followed you.’
He spread his hands wide.
‘All very friendly, no?’
‘Sure.
Then in your friendly way you start a cross-examination.
Answer the question.
Have you got a warrant?’
‘I confess, no warrant.
Still if you don't want to co-operate with the department, I guess I can rake one up fast enough.’
He began to heave himself up.
‘All right, Gil.
We've both said our piece.
Sit down.
I don't mind helping if I can, you know that.
Let's try it again.’
‘O.K.’ He settled back again.
‘Got a cigarette?’
I threw him the pack.
‘What's the pitch about last night?
Way I read it, Rico and the Battler got excited and started their own war.
Your boys took care of them, and somehow Connie Fraser got killed, too.
Probably a stray bullet, I guess.
That about right?’
He nodded  non-committally .
‘Could be.
If they hadn't been so excitable, they'd have been as free as birds right now.
It was when they got excited earlier that our boys took a hand.’
‘Earlier?’
I sounded puzzled.
‘Yeah.
Stop me if you've heard this, but one of those gunsels opened up on somebody at the rear entrance of the Regal Arms Hotel.’
‘No kidding?
Why wasn't this other killing in the paper?’
He sighed wearily.
‘It wasn't a killing, John.
It was just an attempt.
They missed you.’
His eyes didn't leave my face for a second.
I tried a puzzled grin, honest-joe style.
‘Missed me?
I don't quite follow.’
‘Sure you don't.
You don't understand a word I've said, do you?’
‘No.’
‘You don't know anything about the card game in Room 42 at the Regal Arms, do you?’
I didn't have to fake it any more.
‘Card game?’
‘Aw, can it!’
He looked disgusted.
‘The department ain't what it was.
In five years we've had a record of seven per cent success in any enquiry involving the Regal Arms.
Some day I'm gonna set fire to the joint personal.’
I looked him square in the face.
‘I think my standing around this town is pretty average, Gil.
I'm giving you my solemn word I don't know what you're talking about with all this stuff about card games in  Room what's it at the Regal Arms.’
‘Your solemn word?’
I nodded.
‘I was afraid of it.
No harm in telling you the story, I guess.
There was this shooting in back of the hotel.
Somebody hollers law, and the boys go take a look-see.
They see a car coming from the direction they've been told, and remember, it's after one in the morning.
So they flag the driver, and next thing all hell breaks out.
Well, Muldoon and Cabrillo they're cool characters.
They shoot back nice and slow but straight.
Then we have three stiffs on our hands.’
‘Pity about Connie Fraser, though,’ I pointed out.
‘Yeah.
That upset the prowl-boys at first.
Anyway, pretty soon half the law in town are crawling all over the street.
Somebody went along to investigate the original shooting.
It seems that the Battler and Rico let fly at somebody who was coming out of the back door of the Regal Arms.
So we give the place a working over.
There's a night clerk supposed to be on duty.
We pumped enough of the stuff out of him to open our own bar.
When he could talk, he could only remember one stranger that night.
A little fat guy came in and said he was for the card game in Room 42.
The clerk tried to stop him going up, but according to his tale, he'd had too much to drink.
He couldn't even swear that the fat man had left the hotel.’
I'd have to remember the desk clerk.
Next time I'd take him his own barrel.
‘There was no game in 42.
We checked it, naturally.’
‘So your next natural thought was that the only short fat man who could be mixed up in this shooting was me?
I guess I could pass for short and fat if you looked at me through the end of a glass of liquor.’
I tried to sound bitter.
‘This ties in with the Mahoney trick.’
Randall wasn't  even slightly ruffled.
‘There's folks around the department think that anything connected with that connects with you.’
‘You mean Wilson thinks so.
Why don't you guys get off my back?
Sure I'm trying to earn the five grand, no harm in that, is there?’
‘Not so long as you keep within the law.’
I thought back to something he'd said earlier.
‘Would you mind explaining something you said a while back?’
‘Try me.’
‘When I said it was a pity Connie died, you said something about it upsetting Muldoon and Cabrillo at first.
What did that mean?’
‘No harm in telling it, I guess.
It'll be in the evening editions anyhow.
Connie didn't die in the fight.
She was dead already, had been for not less than twelve hours according to the doc.’
I whistled softly.
This was one for the book.
‘So the hoods were on their way to get rid of her.
That how it figures?’
Randall shrugged his great shoulders.
‘Could be.
They were headed for the bay.’
‘But why would they want to kill Connie?’
Again the shrug.
‘Why would anybody want to kill anybody?
You tell me.
Anyway, if it was one of those guys, he also finished off Mahoney.
Connie was shot four times with the same gun.
It's a .38; by the way, you have a .38, don't you, John?’
I handed it to him.
‘Nice balance.
I like to see a man look after his equipment.’
Randall held it carefully, sniffing at the snout and generally examining the weapon.
‘The markings of my gun are on file at headquarters,’ I reminded him gently.
‘When I'm going to knock anybody off, I always borrow another gun from the guy next door.
His can't be traced because he doesn't have a licence for it.’
‘You're right, John.
I'm getting so I ask my wife to account for her movements during the time the butler was killed.’
‘It's O.K. You got to ask questions if you want answers.’
‘Sure.
No kidding though, would you like to tell me where you were last night?’
He never stopped worrying it once he had a bone.
‘If you must know I was with somebody,’ I said reluctantly.
‘A dame?’
‘A lady,’ I corrected.
‘All right, a lady.
Does she have a name?’
‘Not if some big flatfoot is just going to barge in on her and say I'm shouting it all over town I was with her last night.’
‘According to the radio-car you were coming in from Hollywood direction.’
It was a question.
‘Right.
I caught an early edition, read about the ruckus, and thought I'd better come home and see what was happening about the five grand.’
‘Tell me the name, John.
We won't bother her if it isn't necessary.’
I told him Lucille's name and where she lived.
He'd check it and find that she'd left.
He'd also check her car, and find that gone, too.
The guy who brought it from the garage would remember very well.
Men wouldn't forget easily when they'd seen Lucille.
He'd remember me, too, because he would have wondered what percentage I had on him that entitled me to come down from her apartment in the early morning.
I wasn't worried about her reputation.
I wouldn't have been the first guy he'd ever seen at that hour.
Randall stayed around chewing the fat for a while.
Then he left.
Forty minutes later I parked outside a slate-grey office block in the business centre.
The suite of offices in the name of Manning Jackson, Attorney-at-Law, was on the fourth floor.
I walked through the outer office where five or six guys were crouched over stacks of official-looking paper.
There was a noise that might have been somebody asking what I wanted.
I took no notice and passed through the door at the far end of the room.
I had to stop then.
This was a smaller room, again with a door on the opposite wall.
Around the door an oak railing had been built.
Inside the railing was an expensive desk and behind that was an expensive brunette.
She must have weighed in around one thirty-five, was twenty-five-six years old.
Her skin had that smooth all-the-year-round dark tan you sometimes run into in California.
Somewhere way back her ancestors had spoken Spanish.
Not Mex-Spanish, but the musical kind that came from old Spain.
She wore a plain red dress, that did little to contain the thrusting fullness of her bosom.
If she did any work around the place, there was no evidence of it on the desk.
Her hands rested on it as she surveyed me with calm enquiry.
‘Good afternoon.’
The voice was warm, too, as if it had soaked up a lot of sunshine.
‘Good afternoon, señorita.’
The dark eyes flashed for a second, then she saw by my face that it wasn't a crack.
Her rich lips smiled, and the whiteness of her teeth would have satisfied any toothpaste commercial.
‘But I'm third generation,’ she said.
‘Only my mother can speak the old tongue with any fluency.’
‘It's a pity,’ I replied.
‘Already there are too many debased variations being spoken, especially around these parts.’
‘How nice to meet someone who is even aware of that.
Why are you here?’
I nodded towards the door behind the fence.
‘Wanta see Jackson.
Is he in?’
‘Yes, but I'm afraid it won't be possible.
He has to leave for an important luncheon party in a few minutes.’
She smiled regretfully.
‘He'll see me.
The name is Preston.
John Preston.’
After a second's hesitation, she picked up the ivory telephone and talked into it.
Carefully the receiver was replaced on the rest.
‘Twice you have surprised me within a few minutes, Mr. Preston.
You may go in.’
‘Thanks.’
I pushed open the little gate and walked to the desk.
When I leaned over I could smell the fragrance of the shiny black hair.
‘Do you prefer American or Spanish food?’
I asked.
‘I am extremely fond of all good food.
I find that my knife and fork have no tendencies to discriminate in the matter of nationality.’
‘I know a place where the food is first class.
How about coming there for dinner with me to-morrow?’
‘I'm not sure whether I can.
May I hold the offer over until to-morrow morning?’
‘Sure.
I'll 'phone about ten-thirty.
I don't know your name, by the way.’
She smiled again.
‘If I decide to go with you to dinner, I'll tell you my  name when you telephone.
Otherwise there is no point in your knowing it.’
I liked that, too.
I grinned at her and pushed open the door.
Manning Jackson was forty-five years old, and was good-looking in a heavy, sporting way.
Of medium height, he was known as a dresser and had been tipped a couple of times for those best-dressed men lists.
The dark hair was greying at the sides, but these days some guys do it with a brush.
He was leaning back in his chair smoking a long, fat cigarette in a stubby black holder.
Mr. Manning Jackson was the complete successful attorney, and very much at ease in his luxurious surroundings.
‘I'm glad to meet you, Preston.
Unfortunately, I haven't very much time to spare.
There's a luncheon…’
‘Yeah, your secretary told me that.’
‘Well,’ he spread his hands and looked at me with his well-known youthful enquiry, ‘what can I do for you?’
‘Not a thing,’ I replied.
I tested one of the vacant chairs.
It was too soft, so I tried another, liked it, sat down.
‘I don't believe you can do anything for me.
But,’ I jumped in as he was about to interrupt, ‘I think I can do something for you.’
‘Really?’
He wasn't remotely interested.
‘Please make it as brief as possible.’
He looked pointedly at his gold strap-watch.
‘Briefly, counsellor, I am here to keep you in business.’
I pointed at him.
‘Do you realise how close you are, right this minute, to the bread line?’
He snorted impatiently.
‘Look, if this is a joke of some kind —‘
‘No joke.
I had less than two hours’ sleep last night.
I don't feel like jokes.’
I got out a pack of Old Favourites, lit one and fanned smoke through my nostrils.
‘Over the  past years, Mr. Attorney, you have let more and more of your other work go to outside firms, so that you could concentrate on one particular client.’
He was listening now.
‘The ordinary public wouldn't be interested, but some people, people like me, for instance, have to know what's going on in town.
And I know that ninety per cent of your business interests are now tied in with Joey Bonanza's empire.’
‘Nothing of the kind,’ he expostulated.
‘A good deal of my time is naturally devoted to such a big client —‘
‘Ninety per cent, Jackson.
It's well known.’
‘There's no point in arguing about that.
What are you driving at?’
‘Bonanza's in trouble.
Could be bad trouble.
There's been some mismanagement of the Mahoney deal right along.
Now these killings last night.
Somebody hasn't been figuring too well, Jackson.
It isn't you, is it?’
‘Look, Preston, I can't listen to any more.
You burst into my office talking about killings.
If you think I have any personal knowledge of matters of that kind, you must be crazy.’
‘I'll tell you how crazy I am.’
I flicked ash on the silver-grey carpet.
‘Bonanza's climbed into a hole in the ground.
I've telephoned every address that he could possibly be.
Nobody knows where he is.
He's hiding out from police questioning until he's sure where he stands.
And I can tell you this.
Where he stands is right behind that number eight ball.’
‘In what way?’
Jackson was so interested in what I was saying that he forgot to deny he knew what I was talking about.
We were making progress.
‘Connie Fraser's death.
That looks bad for our pal, Joey.
Wasn't he supposed to be looking after her in a sanatorium?’
The lawyer looked relieved.
‘Oh, if that's all you've got, I can tell you exactly what happened there.
There's a system of checking the patients during the night at Dr. Zimmerman's.
Now Miss Fraser was last seen at 8 p.m., when the night nurse took her a glass of hot milk before she retired.
The next visit was at two in the morning, just to see that everything was in order.
The room was empty.
The night nurse gave the alarm and as soon as I was notified, I called the police.
That would have been around two-thirty in the morning.’
I hadn't heard it before, but I'd already guessed that the tale would sound something like that.
‘Well that's a pretty tale.
Very nice.
You're not forgetting that I called you before that time myself, and you told me Bonanza had taken the girl away somewhere?’
He was the smooth professional again now.
‘Ah, yes.
That was a misunderstanding.
Mr. Bonanza had told me earlier that day of his intention to get the girl away that night, but unfortunately he had a stomach disorder which caused him to postpone the trip twenty-four hours.
He had no reason to tell me that, naturally.
What I told you, I said in all good faith.’
He dropped his voice one-and-a-half tones.
‘It's rather a sobering thought, you know, Preston.
If Mr. Bonanza hadn't had to change his plans that poor girl would be alive right now.’
‘The police have checked your tale about the time Connie disappeared?’
‘Of course, the staff have been questioned.
We have all done our best to give every co-operation —‘
‘Sure.
But they got the bit about the eight o'clock milk?’
‘Oh, yes.
No possibility of a mistake there.’
I thought about it.
Jackson sat there like an important man who was being kept from an engagement by a nuisance.
‘You sewed it up real tight,’ I muttered.
‘All Bonanza has to do now is stay out of sight until a good tale is dreamed up to account for two of his boys getting mixed up in this thing last night, and a few unimpeachable witnesses to make the tale stick, and we all go back where we started.’
Jackson smiled pleasantly.
‘I've no idea what Mr. Bonanza's movements are, I'm afraid.
And now you really must excuse me —‘
‘Sit down, counsellor.
Enjoy the office while you still have it.’
Something in my tone must have carried more weight than the words themselves.
Slowly he subsided into the chair again, pulling open a drawer by his right hand at the same time.
‘Put it away,’ I said wearily.
‘I'm not causing any trouble.
You cut your own throat already when you wrote the script for Connie's disappearance.’
His mouth was tight now.
‘Go on.’
‘Connie was killed around noon yesterday.’
‘That's a lie.’
‘So it's a lie.
But the whole police department is in on it.
So's the medic.
who examined the body when they brought her in.’
He wasn't quite so good-looking any more.
His face was ashen, and the flesh around his mouth drooped into grey folds.
I walked across to what looked like a liquor cabinet.
It was a liquor cabinet.
After a careful examination of the bottles, I sorted one out, and poured the amber fluid into an expensive glass.
Nobody tried to stop me.
I  took the glass over and placed it beside Jackson's hand.
He raised it to his lips and tipped half of it down his throat.
Then he passed his free hand over his eyes.
His voice was not much above a whisper.
‘Why did you come here to tell me this?’
‘Rico and the Battle were getting rid of Connie's body.
By inventing this yarn about the time Connie left the sanatorium, you've tied yourself right in this thing.
I'm not a legal man myself, but there has to be some charge the law can bring.
It could be accessory after the fact of murder, or it could be some little thing like obstructing justice in the course of a homicide enquiry.
I wouldn't know, but you would.
Whichever way they fall, you're through, Jackson.
Unless —’ I let it hang there.
‘Unless?’
He raised his head and turned towards me with clouded eyes.
‘Unless what?’
‘I have kind of an idea that gets everybody off the hook.
You, Bonanza, everybody.
If it works.’
He managed a weak smile.
‘For which you will require a very considerable payment.’
‘We could discuss that later.
First we got to see Joey B. Where is he?’
‘He has a house out on Almirante Boulevard.’
‘Let's go.’
He stood up like a man in a dream.
I could see the dull glint of the gun in the open drawer.
He made as if to shut the drawer, saw the gun and hesitated.
I said softly:
‘No need for the artillery, counsellor.
You and Joey are supposed to be on the same team.
And if it comes to facing the music, you're not thinking of shooting it out with the police, I hope?
You're not the type.’
He pushed the drawer home decisively.
‘I guess you're right.’
He emptied the glass, and made an effort to pull himself together.
Outside he said to the beautiful brunette:
‘I have to go out.
I've no idea when I shall return.’
Then he walked off.
Beautiful said in a puzzled voice:
‘But the luncheon —‘
‘Cancel it, gorgeous,’ I told her.
‘Anyway, lunch is not a meal.
A girl like you needs a good dinner.’
When I turned to close the door behind me she was watching me with a faint smile.
We took my car.
I headed north out of town.
Almirante Boulevard is a main artery out of Waldron, hugging the coastline all the way.
We could look down towards the sea, where the blue water seemed to scatter into a harmless white spray against the shore.
That was the way it looked four hundred feet up.
At sea level we would have got a different picture as the man-eating breakers punched against the rocky coast.
The sun beat into the sedan, and not for the first time I questioned the desirability of our climate as applied to automobile drivers.
It was one-thirty when Jackson tapped my shoulder.
‘That's the place.’
It was the first thing he'd said the whole twenty miles.
The house stood by itself.
The ground dipped between two minor cliffs, and the architect must have figured they would make swell windbreaks.
It was a Spanish-style place, not overbig, except as to price-range.
There were two cars out front, a new Cad. and a foreign sports model which I made Italian.
We climbed out.
A man was sitting at an open window where he could watch the road.
He turned around and spoke into the room behind him, then moved out of sight.
We walked up the wide stone steps.
The heavy wooden door had been made to stand the occasional arrow from a dissatisfied Indian.
At the moment it was half open, the dim light in the hall looking cool and  restful after the outside glare.
Jackson led the way.
I hadn't got three feet inside the door when there was a soft movement behind, and something hard was pushed into my kidneys.
It might have been a finger, but I wasn't going to do anything hasty to find out.
‘Hold it, amigo.’
The voice was like the soft hissing of a rattlesnake.
I held it while a hand moved over me checking for the hardware.
‘It's in a holster under my left arm,’ I volunteered.
There was a chuckle, and the voice said:
‘That's just fine.
Drop it on the floor.’,
He moved to the side where he could watch the operation.
He was tall and slim with a black pencil moustache.
His suit was white, the shoes soft brown leather with white toe-caps.
The rainbow tie showed up well against the midnight blue of the shirt.
This guy was from stereoscopic vision.
I made him close to forty years old and that meant the stubby Mauser he was holding was in good hands.
In his line of business you don't get to be forty unless you have something on the ball.
I let him see I was being very careful not to make any mistake with the .38.
When it dropped to the floor, he nodded with approval.
‘We'll get along, you and me.’
I doubted that, but it was no time for me to talk out of turn.
Jackson stood nearby watching the pantomime with evident distaste.
The world, my world anyhow, is full of guys like him.
They take the money all right, both hands held out straight and gimme.
What they don't care for is to be reminded where the money comes from.
They give me a pain.
On balance I prefer the Bonanzas of this life.
We all  trooped into a rancho-style room.
Big fireplace, plenty of heavy wooden furniture, bright-coloured rugs scattered around.
A guy in a blue suit sat by a window.
He  gave us a cursory glance, then resumed his watch on the highway.
Bonanza sat in a huge oak chair.
I thought he didn't look so good.
He ignored me.
‘What's this, counsellor?
You gone crazy?’
‘Something's come up.’
Jackson looked nervously from Bonanza to me.
I just stared at the wall.
‘It better be good.’
There was no menace in Bonanza's tone.
There didn't have to be.
When you get to be the top man, you don't need to go around proving how tough you are all the rime.
In the present set-up I was comforted to know I held good cards.
‘That is precisely the point.
It isn't good at all.
It's very bad.’
Jackson swallowed hard and said: ‘The Fraser girl was killed around noon yesterday.
That means —’
‘I'm not that dumb.
I can work out what it means.’,
Joey B. sat quite still, digesting the lawyer's information.
Then:
‘What about him?
What's he doing here?’
He jerked his head in my direction.
I was glad he did that.
I'd been wondering whether anybody had noticed my presence at all.
Jackson said:
‘Preston thinks he has an idea to set things straight.’
Bonanza favoured me with a full-face view of him now.
He didn't seem very impressed.
‘Why, peeper?
Why would you want to do anything for me?’
‘I want Vecchi.
This other stuff is none of my business.
First I want Lou Vecchi, then that five grand you've been advertising.
If you're in some kind of jam with the law, I might not get paid.
I wouldn't like that.’
He nodded thoughtfully.
It was the kind of reasoning he liked, and could understand.
Money spins the wheel from where the Bonanzas sit, and nobody lifts a finger to do  anything without figuring the percentage angle.
‘I might listen.
What you got?’
‘Anybody mind if I sit down?’
I was careful to select a chair that was smaller than the one Bonanza was occupying.
Then I helped myself to a cigarette.
Rainbow-Tie watched my hand movements closely.
He knew I was clean, because he'd run over me himself, but just the same, he watched closely.
It was that kind of care that had kept him alive so long.
‘I'd like to tell you a story.
There's plenty you know that I don't.
But there's an angle to all this I don't believe you know anything about.
Want to hear it?’
‘Stories,’ snorted the man at the window.
It was the first time he'd spoken.
‘Shut up, Ed,’ said Joey dispassionately, ‘I like to hear a good story.
Tell it, shamus.’
‘Jack Mahoney was blackmailing somebody in this town.
This person came to see me.
Could I get Mahoney to drop the black?
Before I could get to talk with him about it, somebody else shot him.
It wasn't very good shooting, but the second time he made it stick.
Now the murderer has his hands on the information my client doesn't want made public, and he has put the bite on, too.
So my client and I are back where we started.
O.K. so far?’
I didn't mention that my facts were slightly out of their proper order.
Bonanza took a heavy silver cigar-case from his pocket and removed a fat Havana.
‘If I'd known this a few days ago, it woulda saved a lotta trouble.
Your boy could have taken the dive for the Mahoney kill.
Nobody ever takes it too hard if a blackmail victim gets nasty.
They'd have probably given him ninety days if he had the right advice.’
I shrugged.
‘From here on some of it is guess-work.
If I'm guessing good you'll be the one to know it.
Now, going back to the first time Mahoney was shot.
That was a direct insult to you.
Mahoney was one of your boys, and nobody in his right mind would go gunning for him, unless there was a big pay-off.
It would be risky, even then, but with a fair-sized stake, a guy might take the chance of being able to blow town.’
‘It begins to figure,’ Bonanza interrupted.
‘Vecchi. knew about Jack's deal with your client.
He thought he'd blow Jack's head off, collect from your client and grab a banana-boat.’
I knew that Vecchi's reason for shooting Mahoney was something that must have been worrying Mr. Bonanza.
It was going to help me, with what I had in mind, the fact that I'd been able to wise him up on that.
‘Exactly,’ I nodded.
‘Anyway, with Mahoney in hospital, you got busy.
You put out the word and it wouldn't have been long before you knew Vecchi was out of sight.
At the same time, you wanted to grab Connie Fraser, and send her out in the country with a medical man to say she couldn't talk to the law.
But you couldn't find Connie either.’
There was quite some ash on the end of the Havana.
None of it spilled as Bonanza removed the cigar from his soft lips.
‘I got nothing against you, peeper, not yet.
I hope you're gonna be careful what you say.’,
‘If the law knew Connie was missing, they'd start looking for her.
Places you wouldn't want people with badges.
Your places.
Besides, if they found her, there was no telling what they might squeeze out of her before Jackson could get in with his writ.
So you got your own Connie.
A movie actress from Hollywood and an actor to wear the white  coat.
These two moved in with Zimmerman, and you got busy looking for two people instead of just one.
Now here's a guess.
I think, after the first shooting, Vecchi went to Connie right away and told her Mahoney had been shot on your instructions.’
Rainbow-Tie hitched at his pants with his free hand.
The other still held the wicked-looking Mauser which rested casually beside him, half pointing at me.
I tried to act unconcerned.
‘Connie wasn't a big-town girl.
She'd be worried and maybe scared.
Scared enough to go for Vecchi's pitch that she'd be better off hiding out some place.
He took her to the Regal Arms Hotel.
In a dump like that nobody asks questions.
Vecchi was in for keeps now.
He knew he could never talk himself straight with you.
He obviously knew something about Mahoney's blackmail racket, and figured the girl would be in on it.
He probably heard on the radio that Mahoney had a chance, so he took a stroll round to the hospital and finished him off.
The hospital attendant bit was good.
In a hospital you never really see the face of anybody in a uniform, just the uniform.
First chance he got he went to Mahoney's apartment to see if there was anything there to give him a lead on the blackmail.
I took a walk round there myself about that time, and Vecchi slugged me.
Two of your boys found me there.’
Bonanza nodded.
‘You were lucky that time.
If you hadn't mentioned my name, Rico would likely have  freezed you out just for laughs.’
‘I told him I was after the five G's.
It was true.
No harm in picking up the extra dough, so long as I was doing my client's work at the same time.’
Manning Jackson had been fretting for several minutes.
‘I don't see…’ he began.
‘Shut up.
This is a private conversation.
Go ahead, Preston.’
The attorney collapsed back into his chair.
‘The next important thing happened last night.
This is another guess.
Somebody told you that Vecchi and the girl were at the Regal Arms.
You gave instructions that I would be the one to blow the lid off.
It would have been no secret to you that Connors of the Globe would tip me off if he found out a thing like that.
I would guarantee him an exclusive, pictures and all, which is something he'd never get from the police department.
So a man named Kress ‘phoned Connors with some yarn, and Connors went looking for me.
‘That's where it started to go sour.
You gave Connors and me an hour's jump, then sent Rico and the Battler to the hotel to find out how it worked out.
But Connors hadn't been able to raise me.
Your boys found Connie Fraser dead in the hotel room, and no Vecchi.
They ‘phoned you, and you were in a spot.
You couldn't afford a dead Connie at the Regal Arms while there was still a live Connie at Zimmerman's Sanatorium.
You told them to dump the body in the bay, where it wouldn't be found for a while.
Long enough for you to get the actress and the phoney doctor away from the sanatorium.’
Bonanza rested the Havana in a nearby ashtray.
His calm was something to see.
You'd have imagined from all the interest on his face that I was trying to sell him my butterfly collection.
‘You're taking a long chance, sitting there and making with all this stuff.
Some people might think you were too smart for your own health.’
‘I already told you.
I came here to talk deal.
You're not gonna make any deal with a guy who's got nothing to sell.’
‘All right.
Talk it up.
And — er — better make it good.’
Jackson got up abruptly and went across to where the bottles were.
His hand was shaking so much that the bottle he was holding rattled against his glass like a window in a thunderstorm.
Bonanza smiled contemptuously at his lawyer's back.
‘Connors and I got to the hotel just as your boys were leaving,’ I continued.
‘One of them opened up with a chopper.
We got out of the way damn fast.
Then the law heard the noise, and you know the rest.’
‘Yeah, I know the rest.
I shoulda known better than to send two dumb clucks like that.’
‘In the meantime you'd notified the police of Connie Fraser's disappearance, and given a nice time check, all verified by the hospital staff.’
For the first time Bonanza showed some emotion.
‘You,’ he jabbed a fat finger at Manning Jackson, ‘you, Mr. Bright Boy, Mr. College Education Jackson.
You were the one who said it ought to be eight o'clock.
You got me into this mess.
Whadda ya say, counsellor?’
‘I — I don't know, Joey.
It's beyond me.’
Jackson turned to me with pleading in his voice.
I felt revulsion.
‘I asked Rico, when he telephoned, how long he thought she'd been dead.
He said he couldn't tell, but the body was still warm.
In all my experience of homicide in the courts…’
‘Your experience?
In the courts?
That's a hot one.
Well this wasn't in the courts, counsellor.
This wasn't a nice court room, with attorneys in their best suits reading off nice white paper.
This was a dame who bled to death in a dirty room in a flophouse on the wrong side of town.
A dame I didn't even know.
And she's gonna put me in a mess of trouble.
You did that, Mr. Jackson, and I'll remember it.
I'll remember it good.’
Bonanza banged his heavy fist on the table.
The guard at the window looked round and back again quickly.
Rainbow-Tie didn't move a muscle.
Jackson shrank back against the wall, terror on his face.
His jaw worked loosely, and perspiration stood out all over his forehead, rivulets running down the side of his neck and soaking into the white collar.
I said:
‘Hold on.
I've remembered something.
I know where the body was lying, because we found bloodstains.
She was next to a radiator.
That would have kept her warm for quite a spell.’
The gratitude on Jackson's face would have been pathetic if it wasn't repellent.
‘That don't change anything,’ said Bonanza, but he didn't sound so convincing as he had a moment before.
‘The way I see it, the law won't bear down too hard on this Regal Arms’ deal.
What have they got?
Two guys carting a stiff.
They shoot at a prowl-car, and the prowl boys shoot straighter.
Two dead gunsels.
No police widows, no innocent bystanders hurt.
All round, the department shows up pretty good in the deal.’
I paused, to see if it was having any effect.
Bonanza was thoughtful.
‘Go on,’ he said.
‘There's the body in the car.
Connie Fraser.
They know that whoever killed her, killed Mahoney.
We know that was Vecchi, or so I'm told.’
‘That was straight talk I gave you that time, shamus.
It's Vecchi all right.’
Bonanza was slightly impatient.
‘I'm seeing Vecchi to-night.
My client is supposed to pay up the black money then.’
‘Ah.’
A flicker of light showed in the heavy-lidded eyes.
‘So we've got him,’ he said.
‘Uh, uh,’ I wagged my head from side to side.
‘I've  got him.
Afterwards I collect from you.
Right?’
‘I can see the way you figure.
When Lou's dead, the law will work it out he made some deal with Rico and the Battler to unload the girl.
The law calls it even, and everybody's happy.’
‘Yeah,’ Bonanza pulled slowly at the lobe of his left ear.
Yeah, it sounds rice.
It sounds very nice.
This could be the answer.’
He laughed suddenly, a deep, rich sound.
‘All the money I spend keeping guys in luxury, guys who are supposed to have brains.
And it takes a crummy gumshoe to get me out of trouble.’
‘There's a snag,’ I went on.
‘Lou may not be dead.
In that case he'll tell a different tale.’
‘But you're seeing him to-night,’ Bonanza was genuinely puzzled.
It wouldn't enter his head that I might not just kill Vecchi out of hand.
‘Sure.
But it may not be necessary to kill him.
Now listen,’ I held up a hand as he was about to burst into song again, ‘you got a friend at the Regal Arms?’
‘Safranski?
Sure, he owns the joint.
Small-timer, strictly no-account.’
‘Will he take a dive if the money's right?’
‘Huh?’
‘Put it this way.
Safranski found this dead girl.
He didn't want his joint to get a bad name, so he hired Rico and the Battler to shift the body somewhere else.
They'll grab him for concealment of a felony or something.’
‘Well, counsellor, earn your corn.’
Bonanza didn't even bother to look at Jackson.
‘What would a rap like that be worth?’
Jackson tried to make himself look like a man again.
It didn't fool anybody.
‘Everything would hinge on Vecchi being caught,’ he 
‘How long would they give Safranski?’ snarled Bonanza.
‘With the murderer caught, and a good attorney, I'd say one to three.
Yes, one to three.’
‘So in about ten months we'd have him out and around, or else what am I paying you for?’
‘Yes, I think that's a fair estimate.’
‘O.K.’ Bonanza got back to me.
‘It's a deal.
Safranski takes the rap.’
I didn't bother to ask whether Safranski ought to be consulted.
If Mr. Bonanza said he'd go to jail, he'd go to jail.
Jackson, anxious to show everybody what an agile mind he had, spoke to me.
‘You've overlooked something, Preston.
How do we get around the affidavits from the hospital about the hour at which Miss Fraser was last seen?’
This was the part I wasn't so sure about.
‘Publicity stunt,’ I said.
‘Movie actress trying to grab a lot of news space.’
‘It stinks,’ said Bonanza.
‘I don't think so.
She happened to be in Waldron at the time of the shooting, came to you and said she was Connie Fraser.
Of course, when the real Connie showed, she would have to admit she was a phoney.
The law couldn't do much to her, and she'd probably get a few columns.
What she didn't bargain on was you whisking her off to the country and locking all the doors.
She tried to bolt out several times and she finally made it.
Now she comes forward, gets her publicity, tells the whole world about the swell way you treated her, thinking she was the girl friend of a dead pal, everybody likes her, everybody likes you.’
Bonanza inspected the polished nails at the end of his thick, spatulate fingers.
‘When she came to me, why didn't I get somebody to identify her?’
‘Why should you?
Who'd want to pretend they were Connie Fraser?
It wouldn't make any sense.
Nobody could expect you to think up anything as stupid as a dumb movie actress aiming at the front page.’
‘And what's to stop this dame tanking up the deal later?
Say in a year from now?’
‘She'll get paid for her trouble.
Money from you, publicity from the rags.
She'd have nothing to gain.’
‘Maybe it ain't as bad as I thought.
One thing though,’ Bonanza looked up from his finger-nails and stared at my face.
Then he said, quite slowly, ‘The dame gets nothing.
She has an accident or something.
I see her picture in the paper, then I holler copper and tell them this is the dame from the sanatorium.
She just took me in, and I can't explain it.’
This wasn't exactly an unexpected development.
When you've been around guys like Mr. B. awhile, you get to thinking the way they think.
I stared back at him, and said:
‘No.’
He laughed shortly.
‘I'm not asking what you think, peeper.
I'm just telling you what's gonna happen.’,
‘No.
It'll be the way I laid it out.
And nothing's going to happen to Lucille Walker —’ he looked surprised at the name,’— because I'm the only one who knows where she is.’
‘Zat so?
You,’ he indicated Jackson, ‘go check.’
Jackson left the room.
I could hear the noise of a telephone being picked up, the low murmuring of the lawyer's voice.
Nobody in the room said anything.
Finally he came back inside, nodded to his boss.
‘It's true.
She left her apartment early this morning, took her car, and hasn't been seen since.’
‘So you had another card?’ said Bonanza to me.
I didn't make any answer, so he said to the attorney:
‘What you think?’
‘I think Preston's idea might work.
I've been thinking about it, and nothing better suggests itself.
It's worth a try.’
‘Tell you something, shamus.
You been right this far, and you need the five grand, so you're gonna be trying real hard.
I'll take a chance your way.’
Bonanza ground about three inches of cigar into a shapeless heap of shredded tobacco.
Deal.
We sat around chewing on it for another thirty minutes or so.
Then I got back my artillery, and the subdued Jackson drove me back to town.
At the office I put in a call to Connors that produced nothing.
I'd been half-hoping Vecchi might show before I sent Laura Channing out to what might develop into target-practice.
Connors said the guy must have curled up into a ball and hidden in a waste-basket.
I thought about telling him the arrangement Laura and I had for that night, then decided against it.
When we'd hung up, I sent Miss Hinkle out to do a little marketing.
One small case and a hundred dollars from the bank in ten-dollar bills, used notes.
I fooled around cutting up newspapers into the appropriate size.
When she got back, the case was exactly right for the job.
I laid the cut-up newspapers inside and got busy arranging the genuine notes on top of each pile.
Then I snapped rubber bands around, and there we were.
It looked real enough at a quick glance, and the Crane Street area is not the most brilliantly lighted neighbourhood in town.
A rubber band round each bundle and the job was done.
Miss Hinkle watched with disapproval as I snapped the case shut.
‘And you're going to send that girl down to the harbour with this thing?’
‘I've got no choice.
Time is important with this trick.’
‘Some day you're going to be sorry about one of these chances you take.
Still if you mind's made up, I know better than to argue with you.’
‘Thank you very much, Miss Hinkle.
Will you please take this home with you this evening, and hand it to Laura when she calls?’
‘Laura?
Is that Mrs. Cooper's name?’
‘Mrs. Channing.
I thought you might just have remembered that, seeing that you typing it out for me only yesterday.’
She snorted, grabbed the case and swept out.
I chuckled.
I don't very often get the better of Hinkle, but her memory is one thing she prides herself on.
By trying one of her rare jokes on me, she dropped her guard.