

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this text is to help students of hotel and catering management and people working within the catering professions towards a better understanding of those principles of English law which closely affect them in their day-to-day work in the hotel and catering industry.
The hotelier or catering manager will in the course of his or her work enter into many different legal relationships with other parties.
The catering manager, for example, enters into a contract of employment with his or her employer.
The catering business by which that person is employed enters into many different contracts, both with suppliers for equipment and stores, etc., and with customers for the provision of food, drink and accommodation.
The catering business itself is regulated by various Acts of Parliament which impose duties and standards of conduct that must be observed.
It is vital that the caterer, hotelier or restaurateur and his or her staff work at all times within the boundaries of the law.
It is therefore of the utmost importance that these people understand the law and how it affects their work and the conduct of the catering business.
Figure A illustrates the various legal relationships in which professional caterers might find themselves.
Each line in the diagram represents a relationship.
These are just some of the most common forms of legal relationship which the caterer will undertake.
A sound knowledge of law is as essential to the professional caterer as is a knowledge of business management and the fundamental skills of the profession.
Law affects the caterer in so many ways that he or she cannot afford to ignore it.
The ways in which the caterer is affected by the law are too numerous to mention.
However, two everyday situations may serve to illustrate how important it is to have a practical, working knowledge of the law.
Example A. Mr Pasta, the proprietor of ‘Mamma's Pizza Restaurant’, has employed Manuel as a waiter for some four years.
One evening, whilst serving in the restaurant, Manuel is rude to a customer.
Mr Pasta dismisses Manuel then and there and without notice.
This simple factual situation raises a number of legal questions:
(a)
Has Mr Pasta the right to dismiss Manuel summarily and without notice?
(b)
Has Manuel a contractual claim to any wages instead of working his notice period?
(c)
Has Manuel a claim for unfair dismissal?
(d)
Has Mr Pasta any possible defence to a claim by Manuel for either wages which may be owing to him or unfair dismissal?
(e)
What remedy might Manuel obtain if he succeeds in either of these actions against Mr Pasta?
Can he claim his job back?
Example B. Mr Careless, the proprietor of The Barmy Towers Hotel, overbooks the rooms in his hotel, in the expectation that some guests may cancel and he will still have a full hotel.
Mr Careless also states in his brochure that ‘the hotel's restaurant provides internationally acclaimed cuisine and top-name cabaret entertainment.
All rooms have sea views’.
Mr Hapless books for a fortnight's holiday for himself, his wife and two children.
On arrival he finds that the room which Mr Careless had confirmed would be reserved for the family has been double-booked.
The Hapless family were placed in a room which was staff accommodation, overlooking the kitchens.
The hotel's restaurant provided only poor-quality food and the top-name cabaret entertainment consisted of a local group of amateur singers.
(a)
Is Mr Careless criminally liable for overbooking the hotel?
(b)
Is Mr Careless criminally liable for the representations which he made in the brochure?
(c)
Which form or forms of civil action might Mr Hapless bring against Mr Careless?
(d)
Can Mr Hapless recover damages for his own disappointment and that of his wife and children, at the loss of their holiday?
A primary function of this book is to consider the principles of law which relate to the hotel and catering industry in the context in which they arise.
This is in the hope that they will become clearer to those who work within the industry, and that they may be recognized as a distinct discipline by academic and practising lawyers alike.
The text deals explicitly with the important cases and statutes as they arise within the framework of the book.
It is the hope of the author that this book will be of use both as an explanation of relevant legal principles and as a point of reference for dealing with legal problems as they arise in the context of the reader's work in the catering industry.
Law and the legal system
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the basic principles which form the foundations of the English legal system.
We shall consider the respective roles of Parliament and the courts, and in particular we shall examine the jurisdiction and functions of those courts and tribunals with which the caterer is likely to come into contact in the exercise of his or her profession.
Before examining the institutions in which English law is rooted it is important to consider three fundamental classifications of law.
There are a number of other different ways of classifying law, but the three classifications set out below are essential to a basic understanding of English law and the legal system within which it operates.
Civil and criminal law
Civil laws cover contract and liability in tort.
These are matters of private arrangement between individuals; the state is not normally involved.
Contract covers such things as the booking of a hotel room, the provision of a meal in a restaurant and the employment of staff.
Tort considers such things as the caterer's liability for negligently prepared food which causes injury to the customer.
Criminal law on the other hand deals with matters involving the state and the enforcement of penal laws.
In general, we think of the criminal law as the means by which individuals are prosecuted, tried and punished for the offences (e.g. theft, assault, etc.) which they have committed.
The criminal law as it relates to the catering industry is more a means of regulating the standards of business practice.
The Food Safety Act 1990 regulates the quality of food which is produced and served to the public, and it renders businesses which do not meet the standards required liable for prosecution and punishment.
Breach of a civil law, in contrast to a breach of a criminal law, normally renders the person who has broken it liable to pay damages to the victim of the breach.
It does not involve a prosecution or state intervention.
Damages are designed not to punish the person in breach but to compensate for the loss sustained by the plaintiff.
In certain situations a single set of facts and circumstances may give rise to both a civil claim and a criminal prosecution.
An example of such a situation is where hoteliers overbook their accommodation.
This may give rise to a civil claim for breach of contract on the part of the guest who is double-booked, and may possibly lead to the prosecution of the hoteliers for an offence under section 14 of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968.
Common law and equity
The Judicature Acts of 1873–75 created a single Supreme Court of Judicature, comprising courts of both law and equity and thereby fusing what had previously been two separate systems.
The Court of Chancery, which had administered equity, had grown around the position of Chancellor.
The Chancellor could grant a remedy to an individual where the common law did not provide a remedy, the aim being to attain justice in each case.
The essence of equity, therefore, was to correct the rigour of the common law.
The Court of Chancery grew and developed equitable principles and maxims.
With the passing of the Judicature Acts a single court was formed, administering both law and equity.
Where matters of law and equity conflict, the principle of equity applicable prevails over the legal principle in the case.
The significance of equity today arises from the creation of the Supreme Court of Judicature under the 1873–75 Acts, and the administration by this one-court system of principles of both law and equity.
This has meant that common law and equity have developed alongside one another and equitable principles have helped to extend the bounds of remedies available.
Common law and statute law
Laws may be classified according to their source.
Those laws which are enacted by Parliament are known as statutory laws or legislation.
Laws which are derived from cases, by the process known as judicial precedent, form the common law.
Many civil laws are derived from the common law, e.g. tort of negligence, whilst in the area of hotel and catering law the majority of criminal offences which may be committed are statutory, e.g. involving the Food Safety Act 1990 and the Trade Descriptions Act 1968.
We shall now examine the major sources of English law, namely legislation and the common law.
1.2 LEGISLATION
Within the English legal system, which covers both Wales and Northern Ireland, but not Scotland, which has a separate and distinct legal structure, there are two principal sources of law: legislation and the common law.
Legislation refers both to Acts of Parliament (primary legislation) and to delegated legislation, otherwise known as secondary legislation, which is created under the  authority of an Act of Parliament.
The fundamental purpose of legislation is to create, amend or repeal law, thereby giving effect to the intentions of Parliament.
Legislation may be required for any one of a number of reasons:
(1)
To create new rights, an example of which is the Equal Pay Act 1970.
(2)
To reform an unconscionable decision of the courts which is unworkable in practice; Parliament may pass an Act which has the effect of overruling the courts' decision.
(3)
To raise revenue; the annual Finance Acts are passed to give legislative authority to the Chancellor's Budget.
(4)
To put into practice political policies, for example the Race Relations Act 1976.
(5)
Codification of case law; Parliament may pass legislation in order to give legislative effect to judicial decisions in one statute.
(6)
Consolidation of previous legislation, for example the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978.
(7)
To cope with an emergency, for example the Drought Act 1976.
Primary and secondary legislation
Primary legislation
This form of legislation comprises Acts of Parliament.
Parliament has unlimited legislative power.
This stems from the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, which is a fundamental principle of English law.
This doctrine means that a person cannot question the validity of a piece of legislation through the courts.
The function of the courts is to interpret and apply legislation and not to question its existence; hence no court can override an Act of Parliament.
This is clearly seen by the House of Lords' decision in British Railways Board v. Pickin [1974]AC 765.
A bill is normally sponsored by the cabinet and introduced into Parliament by a cabinet minister.
Not all bills are introduced in this way; any Member of Parliament may, of course, personally introduce a bill.
Bills are normally drafted by Parliamentary Counsel.
A bill may be introduced into either House, though non-controversial bills are usually commenced in the Lords, allowing more time in the Commons for controversial bills to be introduced.
Money bills (e.g. taxation) are always introduced in the Commons.
The first step in Parliamentary procedure is the introduction and first reading of the bill.
The bill is thereafter debated in Parliament at the time of its second reading.
It then enters the committee stage, when standing committees within the House scrutinize the bill.
Later it enters the report stage, when any amendments made during the committee stage are reported to the House.
The bill will receive a third reading, and once passed by the Commons will be debated by the Lords in much the same way.
The bill, after being passed by the Lords, receives the royal assent, a mere formality, whereby the monarch accedes to the bill.
Thereafter, the bill becomes an Act, and will have effect from the date of its publication, or any date thereafter stated in the Act itself.
Secondary legislation
Secondary legislation is the name given to the vast body of rules, orders, regulations and by-laws created by subordinate bodies under specific powers delegated to those bodies  by Parliament.
It is otherwise known as delegated legislation.
The enabling Act which grants the power to make secondary legislation will set out the procedures to be followed when the secondary legislation is created.
If the scope of the enabling Act is exceeded or the procedures set out in it are not followed, the secondary legislation thereby created is said to be ultra vires(i.e. beyond the power given).
If the secondary legislation thus created is found by the courts to be ultra vires it will be deemed to be of no effect.
Statutory construction and interpretation
Not all the terms of a statute may be clear and unambiguous; hence they will need interpretation or construction.
‘Interpretation’ is simply the process whereby a meaning is assigned to the words of the statute, whilst ‘construction’is the process whereby uncertainties or ambiguities in a statute are resolved.
Ambiguity arises where, through an error in drafting, the words used in the statute are found to be capable of bearing two or more meanings.
Uncertainty occurs where the court is not sure whether the statute was designed to cover the factual situation which is before it for decision.
The basic task of the judge when construing legislation is to ascertain Parliament's intention when passing the Act.
There are three rules of construction which the courts might employ when construing a statute.
The rules of construction
The literal rule.
Parliament's intention must be found in the ordinary and natural (i.e. literal) meaning of the words used in the statute.
Where the literal rule may produce a perverse result, one of the other rules should be used in construing the statute.
The golden rule.
In applying this rule the words of the statute will be interpreted according to their natural, ordinary and grammatical meaning, but where such an interpretation produces a manifestly absurd result, the words will be interpreted so as to avoid the absurdity.
The mischief rule.
In Heydon's case (1584) the court required that four questions should be considered when giving a meaning to a statutory provision:
(a)
What was the common law before the Act?
(b)
What was the mischief and defect for which the common law did not provide?
(c)
What remedy had Parliament resolved to cure this defect?
(d)
What was the true reason for that remedy?
Applying each question in turn to the words of the statute the court seeks to find the meaning of the words in the statute.
This is also known as the purposive approach, since the courts are looking at the purpose for which the Act was passed.
European Community legislation
The various forms of European Communities legislation are provided for by Article 189 of the European Community Treaty.
The Treaty forms the ‘primary legislation’ of the EC.
Under the Treaty the Council and the Commission of the EC are empowered to make:
1
Regulations.
2
Directives.
3
Decisions.
4
Recommendations.
Regulations.
These are generally applicable and binding in their entirety, and have direct effect upon all member states.
Hence, regulations confer individual rights and duties which must be respected by the courts of the member states.
An EC regulation in the United Kingdom does not require further legislation in Parliament for it to be enforceable.
Furthermore, Parliament is limited in its actions, since it should not pass legislation which conflicts with the regulation.
EC regulations are of some importance to the caterer, since they cover matters such as wine labelling, egg labelling, vegetable grading and Euro sizing.
Directives.
These, unlike regulations, do not necessarily have immediate binding force.
A directive is addressed to member states within the EC but it is left to each individual government to decide whether or not to implement the directive.
When a directive is implemented in the United Kingdom it is normally done by means of delegated legislation.
A directive was, however, considered by the European Court to have direct effect, such as to confer rights upon the plaintiff in Van Duyn v. Home Office (No. 2)[1975]3 All ER 190, although the United Kingdom Parliament had not implemented the directive by means of delegated legislation.
An important example of how an EC directive can affect UK law is to be found in the Product Liability Directive (1985), which brought about the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (see below).
See also the EC Directive on Package Travel, Package Holidays and Package Tours (90/314/EEC).
Decisions.
Decisions of either the Council of Ministers or the European Commission are merely a means of enunciating policies or initiating actions.
A decision is binding upon those to whom it is addressed, and may operate to create individual rights which must be protected by the courts of the member states.
Recommendations.
These do not have binding effect upon member states.
Whilst these various secondary forms of legislation.
are open to review by the European Court, and by the courts of the member states, the Treaties which form the primary legislation of the EEC are not.
The Treaties are, however, the subject of interpretation.
The European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986
This short Act amounts to the United Kingdom's formal approval of the agreement concluded by the heads of government of the Community countries in 1986 and known as the Single European Act, which makes important changes to the Treaty of Rome.
The Act formalizes certain procedures not expressly provided for in the Treaty of Rome.
The European Council, a twice-yearly meeting of the heads of government, is now formally recognized.
The European Parliament is given a formal role in the process of making Community law along with the Commission and Council of Ministers.
Of the greatest significance is the establishment in Luxembourg of a Community court of first instance to relieve the pressure on the Court of Justice.
This new  procedure came into effect in September 1989.
Interpretation of European Community legislation
The European Communities Act 1972 joined the United Kingdom to the European Economic Community (EEC) as a member state, thus introducing a new and higher level of authority into the English legal system.
Section 2(1) of the European Communities Act 1972 provides:
All such rights, powers, liabilities, obligations and restrictions from time to time created or arising by or under the Treaties, and all such remedies and procedures from time to time provided for by or under the Treaties, as in accordance with the Treaties are without further enactment to be given legal effect or used in the United Kingdom shall be recognised and available in law, and be enforced, allowed and followed accordingly: and the expression ‘enforceable Community right’ and similar expressions shall be read as referring to one to which this subsection applies.
By section 3(1) of the same Act the European Court is recognized as being the ultimate determinant of the principles of law laid down by the Treaties and subsequent EEC legislation.
Furthermore s. 2(4) European Communities Act 1972 provides that any Act of the Westminster Parliament shall be presumed not to conflict with EEC legislation, and will be given effect only so far as it does not conflict with the EEC legislation.
We can see therefore that the English courts are bound to apply Community law.
Community law constitutes a distinct body of law interwoven with the national laws of member states.
As can be seen from the case of Costa v. ENEL [1964]ECR (EC), within the Community's legal system Community law prevails over national laws of member states.
Lord Denning remarked in Application des Gas SA v. Falks Veritas [1974]Ch. 381 (CA): the Treaty is part of our law.
It is equal in force to any statute.
It must be applied in our courts.
The effect of the Treaties and any given regulation or directive is ultimately a question of interpretation for the European Court.
It may seem that Community law is somewhat remote from us as individuals and is irrelevant to our daily lives.
This is a serious misconception.
Since the Articles of the EC Treaty have direct effect, they are capable of enforcement by individuals within member countries, just as if they were the laws of that country.
Hence, where a particular company, individual or government is not observing Community law, the person who is adversely affected by this failure may commence an action to enforce his or her rights under Community law; this may have profound effects.
DEFRENNE v. SABENA AIRWAYS [1976]ICR 547 (EC)
A Belgian air stewardess, Ms Defrenne, claimed pay equal to that of male air stewards.
Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome provides that ‘Each Member State shall ensure that…men and women shall receive equal pay for equal work’.
Belgium, as a member state of the EEC, had not legislated for equal pay.
The European Court held that although Belgium had not legislated to give effect to Article 119, Ms Defrenne was entitled to pay equal to that of male cabin stewards.
Article 119 took direct effect and was enforceable through the courts of a member state.
GARLAND v. BRITISH RAIL ENGINEERING LTD [1982]2 WLR 918 (EC)
The employers permitted all their employees to have certain travel concessions for themselves and their families.
Male employees retained these rights after retirement.
A female employee's husband and her family could not benefit from the scheme after she had retired.
When the case came before the House of Lords a reference to the European Court was made to determine whether the facts disclosed discrimination under Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome.
The European Court held that Article 119 covered pay and also included other forms of consideration, whether payable immediately or in the future, provided the worker received it in respect of his or her employment.
The provision of special travel facilities therefore was covered by Article 119.
Since the travel facilities were provided on a more beneficial basis to male employees, this constituted a breach of Article 119, it being the duty of the English courts to apply Article 119, which overrode the English law.
The Court of Appeal had held that s. 6(4) of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, permitting discrimination in relation to retirement, operated, and the provision of travel facilities in this way did not amount to unlawful discrimination (see [19791 I WLR 754).
MARSHALL v. SOUTHAMPTON AREA HEALTH AUTHORITY [1986]2 WLR 780 (EC)
This case concerned the effect of the Equal Treatment Directive (76/207/EEC).
The applicant was employed by the area health authority.
It was the authority–s policy, and an implied term of the applicant's contract of employment, that employees retired at the age when they became entitled to draw the state retirement pension, this being aged 65 for a man and 60 for a woman.
The applicant did not wish to retire when she reached the age of 60 and that requirement was waived by the authority until shortly after her sixty-second birthday, when she was dismissed.
She claimed that she had been discriminated against on the grounds of sex contrary to the Sex Discrimination Act 1975.
The industrial tribunal dismissed the complaint on the grounds that s. 6(4) of the Act of 1975 permitted discrimination arising out of –provision in relation to…retirement'.
When her appeal to the appeal tribunal was dismissed, the applicant appealed to the Court of Appeal.
The court found that the authority was an emanation of the state and referred to the European Court of Justice the questions of whether the dismissal of the applicant after reaching normal retirement age for a woman constituted discrimination prohibited by Council Directive (76/207/EEC) and whether the applicant could rely on the directive in national courts notwithstanding any inconsistency between it and s. 6(4) of the Act of 1975.
Held:
1.
Article 5(1) of Council Directive (76/207/EEC) provided that the application of the principle of equal treatment with regard to working conditions, including the conditions relating to dismissal, meant that men and women were guaranteed the same conditions without discrimination on grounds of sex, and the term –dismissal' in that context included retirement in accordance with an employer's policy.
Accordingly, the policy of dismissing a woman employee solely because she had attained the qualifying age for a state pension which was lower than that for a man constituted discrimination contrary to the Council Directive.
2
.
Since the forms of the Council Directive were unconditional and sufficiently precise, they could be relied upon by an individual in an action against the state, but not against another individual.
Accordingly the Council Directive could be relied upon by the applicant against the health authority.
This case is an important illustration of the direct applicability of European Community law in member countries.
The issue of direct application of Directive 76/207 has more recently been debated in the European Court in the case of Foster v. British Gas [1991]2 WLR 258, where it  was held that provisions of a Directive which were capable of having direct effect could be relied upon by bodies made responsible by the state for providing a public service under state control where such bodies held –special powers' in relation to such a function.
The Marshall case also serves to show how a case decided in the European Court may become a force to bring about change in national law within member states.
Parliament enacted, in the Sex Discrimination Act 1986, provisions which have the effect of bringing UK national law into line with the Council Directive on which Ms Marshall based her case.
Section 2 of the Sex Discrimination Act 1986 amends s. 6(4) of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 so as to provide that it is unlawful for a person to discriminate against a woman:
(a)
in such of the terms on which she is offered employment as make provision in relation to the way in which she will be afforded access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or as provide for her dismissal or demotion; or
(b)
in the way she is afforded access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or by refusing or deliberately omitting to afford her access to any such opportunities; or
(c)
by dismissing her or subjecting her to any detriment which results in her dismissal or consists in or involves her demotion.
The Sex Discrimination Act 1986 is fully discussed in Chapter 9.
Lastly, the effect of EC legislation has been considered in the battle over Sunday trading.
In Torfaen Borough Council v. B&Q; PLC [1990]2 WLR 1330 the European Court of Justice held that the validity of English Sunday trading laws depended upon replies to the following points:
Did the Sunday trading laws pursue an aim which was justified with regard to Community law?
Did the effect of the law exceed what was necessary to achieve that aim — did its effects on the free movement of goods exceed what was necessary to achieve that aim?
The European Court noted that:
(a)
The provisions of the Shops Act 1950 prohibiting Sunday trading were designed to protect shop workers from having to work on Sundays — this was an aspect of economic and social policy within the jurisdiction of the member state's government.
(b)
As to the effects of the prohibitions contained in the 1950 Act, the European Court held that this turned on the issue of –proportionality' — i.e. if the aim of the Sunday trading prohibition could be achieved by other means which would have a less serious effect on the free flow of goods, then the law would contravene Article 30 of the Treaty of Rome.
Following the European Court judgment, the Cwmbran magistrates convicted B&Q; of breaches of the 1950 Act, holding that the Sunday trading laws did not contravene Article 30.
In Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B&Q; PLC and Norwich City Council v. B&Q; PLC [1991]2 WLR 42 the High Court granted injunctions to the two plaintiff councils restraining B&Q; PLC from trading on a Sunday.
However, only one month earlier the High Court had reached a decision in W. H. Smith Do It All Ltd and Payless DIY Ltd v. Peterborough City Council [1990]2 CMLR 577, which gave exactly the opposite result.
Reference should also be made to the recent House of Lords decision in Kirklees MBC v. Wickes Building Supplies Ltd [1992]NLJ 967.
The issue of the validity or otherwise of member state legislation restricting Sunday trading will receive further review when the European Court provides guidance following another reference to it.
Currently the English, French and Belgian courts all conflict in their interpretations of the impact of legislation restricting Sunday trading.
Clear legislative reform is needed to overcome the inadequacies of the current position.
In 1986 the Shops bill, which sought to remove the prohibition, failed to be enacted.
1.3 THE COMMON LAW
The basic tenet upon which a common law system is founded is known as the doctrine of precedent.
Precedent here refers to judicial precedent, derived from cases decided within the hierarchy of the court structure.
There are said to be three preconditions of a common-law system based upon judicial precedent:
Reliable system of law reporting.
The doctrine of precedent is bound up with the need for a reliable system of law reporting.
Law reporting is required because those who wish to rely upon a previous decision of the court to further their own case must have a clear and reliable record of the decision and the reason for the decision in the earlier case.
The rule is that any decision may be cited to a court provided that it is reported by a member of the Bar who was present when judgment was delivered.
The member of the Bar present will report the case, and the report may be published in one of the official series of law reports (e.g. All England or Weekly Law Reports); such reports are considered a true record of the case.
Hierarchy of courts.
A hierarchical court structure is essential to give to a particular case a level of authority; this will determine whether or not the case can be overruled by a decision of the same or a higher court, and which courts, if any, are bound by its decision.
The English legal system has a rigid hierarchical structure.
An effective system of appeal.
There must be a system of appeal throughout the court structure which leads to a ‘court of last resort’ beyond which there is no further appeal.
The ‘court of last resort’ in the English legal system is the House of Lords.
Where the matter is one of European Community law the ultimate court to which an appeal may be made is the European Court.
In addition to the existence of these three preconditions, the English legal system requires two further rules in order to function.
1
Superior courts in the hierarchy have the power to overrule decisions of inferior courts and in certain cases to overrule their own decisions.
A superior court is one with unlimited jurisdiction such as the High Court, Court of Appeal or House of Lords.
An inferior court is one which has limited jurisdiction, such as the County or Magistrates' Court.
2
Any common-law rule established by judicial precedent may be amended or removed by a statute passed by Parliament.
This rule emphasizes the doctrine of ‘parliamentary sovereignty’.
Parliament is all-powerful, the supreme authority within the legal system.
The role of the courts is to apply the common law and interpret statutes; the function of Parliament is to legislate and create law.
The English legal system is a composite of legislation and judicial precedent.
These work hand in hand to provide the principles of English law which are applied in the courts.
Neither precedent nor legislation is sufficient in its own right; common-law principles may need codifying in a statute, and a statute will need judicial interpretation to determine the scope of its operation.
Ratio decidendi and obiter dictum 
Ratio decidendi
This amounts in plain terms to the principle of law contained in the decision of –he court.
In any given case the decision of the court will be made up of the following elements:
1
Findings by the court of material facts.
2
Statements of the principles of law applicable to the problem disclosed by the facts of the case.
3 A judgment by the court based upon 1 and 2 above (e.g. in a civil case an award of damages).
It is 2 which amounts to the ratio decidendi of the case.
Hence, the ratio decidendi of a case may be defined as the statement of law applied to the legal problems raised by the facts as found, upon which the decision is based.
Not every statement made in the course of a judgment is binding as part of the ratio decidendi of the case.
Only that part of the judgment which is based upon the facts as found and upon which the court bases its decision forms part of the ratio.
Other statements are discarded as obiter dicta.
It is not always easy to identify the ratio decidendi of a given case.
The problem is increased when considering the rationes of a Court of Appeal decision where three (or possibly five) judgments are given; in the House of Lords five (or possibly seven) speeches are given.
The ratio of a given case is found (if the opinions of the judges are not unanimous) by identifying the majority viewpoint.
This may not always be straightforward since, although there may be a majority decision, the reasoning used by each member of the majority may differ.
The role of the lawyer when analysing a case is therefore to extract the principle(s) of law from the decision of the court.
Obiter dictum A statement may be classified as an obiter dictum if it falls into any of three categories:
1
A statement of law based upon facts which either were not found to exist in the case or were found not to be material to the decision.
2
A statement of law which, although based on facts found to be relevant by the court, does not form the basis of the court's decision, e.g. a dissenting speech in the Court of Appeal or House of Lords.
3
A statement which forms the basis of a decision of the court but which, although it would otherwise be considered as binding, is made in a court which is outside the hierarchy of the courts.
Hence a decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (which is the ultimate court of appeal for decisions reached in Commonwealth courts) will not be binding as ratio decidendi; it falls into the category of obiter dictum.
Judicial precedent and the hierarchy of the courts
The authority given to a particular case depends upon the court in which the decision was made.
According to the position of the court in the hierarchy other courts may be bound by the ratio of the case or may be in a position to overrule or amend it.
Figure 1.1 represents the civil court structure and Figure 1.2 represents the criminal court structure.
The dotted line in each diagram separates the superior courts from the inferior courts.
Figures 1.3 and 1.4 illustrate the appeal structure in the English legal system.
Figure 1.3 represents the appeal structure for civil cases, Figure 1.4 the appeal structure in criminal cases.
A traditional classification of the English courts is a division into ‘superior’ and ‘inferior’courts.
The superior courts are those within the structure of the Supreme Court of Judicature as constituted by the Judicature Acts 1873–5.
This incorporates the High Court, the Queen's Bench Divisional Court, the Crown Court and the Court of Appeal (Criminal and Civil Divisions).
The House of Lords is of course a superior court although it does not form part of the Supreme Court of Judicature.
A feature which distinguishes superior from inferior courts is that superior courts are not limited in their jurisdiction, whereas inferior courts are limited both geographically and as to the subject matter of the dispute.
We must now consider the function and position of each court within the English legal system.
The House of Lords is the supreme English court.
Decisions of the House of Lords are binding upon all other courts trying civil or criminal cases.
Since the Lord Chancellor's Practice Statement [1966]3 All ER 77 the House of Lords has considered itself at liberty to depart from its own previous decisions when it appears right to do so.
This replaced the previous rule in London Street Tramways Co. v. LCC [1898]AC 375 (HL), which held the House of Lords to be bound by its own previous decisions.
The House has, however, departed from its own previous decisions in very few cases.
The judicial attitude of the House of Lords may best be illustrated by this dictum of Lord Reid in British Railways Board v.
Herrington [1972]1 All ER 749(HL), where he observed:
Our change of practice in no longer regarding previous decisions of this House as absolutely binding does not mean that whenever we think a previous decision was wrong we should reverse it.
In the general interest of certainty in the law we must be sure that there is some very good reason before we so act.
In recent years the House of Lords has more readily applied the Practice Statement of   1966.
A classic example of this is the decision in R. v. Shivpuri [1986]2 All ER 334, in which their Lordships reversed their previous decision in Anderton v. Ryan [1985]2 All ER 355, reached not eighteen months previously!
This serves to show an increased willingness on the part of their Lordships to recognize the fallibility of their previous decisions.
The case of Murphy v. Brentwood DC [1990]2 All ER 908, examined in ‘the common law in action’ section, provides another example of the use of the 1966 Practice Statement.
The Court of Appeal
The Court of Appeal is divided into two divisions: the Civil Division and the Criminal Division.
Civil Division.
The decisions of this court are binding on all inferior courts trying civil or criminal cases, including divisional courts.
The Court of Appeal is bound by decisions of the House of Lords and by its own earlier decisions.
Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co.
Ltd [1944]2 All ER 293 (CA) affirmed that the Court of Appeal was bound by its previous decisions, save in three exceptional circumstances:
1
Where there are two conflicting Court of Appeal decisions on a point, the Court may choose which it will follow, the decision not followed being deemed to be overruled.
2
Where a previous Court of Appeal decision cannot be said to be in line with the House of Lords' authority on the same subject.
3
Where the previous Court of Appeal decision was reached per incuriam.
The rule in Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co.
Ltd has not gone unchallenged.
Lord Denning sought to avoid it on a number of occasions, the most notable case being Davis v. Johnson [1978]2 WLR 182 (CA).
In that case Lord Denning argued that the Court of Appeal should issue guidelines similar to those of the House of Lords in the 1966 Practice Statement, thereby enabling the Court of Appeal to depart from its own previous decision where the decision was wrong; in other circumstances it would hold itself bound by Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co.
Ltd.
However, the House of Lords, when hearing the appeal in Davis v. Johnson [1978]1 All ER 1132, expressly affirmed the rule in Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co.
Ltd, directly criticizing Lord Denning's proposed departure from the rule.
Why should the Court of Appeal be bound by its own decisions?
The answer to this question stems from the position of the Court of Appeal in the hierarchy of the courts; it has an intermediate position.
As Scarman LJ observed in Tiverton Estates Ltd v. Wearwell Ltd [1974]1 All ER 209 (CA): ‘To a large extent the consistency and certainty of the law depend on it.’
Hence, certainty of the law, an essential requirement in a common-law system, is dependent upon consistency in the decisions of the Court of Appeal.
Scarman LJ later in his judgment observes:
The appropriate forum for the correction of the Court of Appeal's errors is the House of Lords, where the decision will at least have the merit of being final and binding, subject only to the House's power to review its own decisions.
Criminal Division.
The decisions of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) bind courts trying criminal cases, that is the Crown Court and the Magistrates' Court.
The Criminal Division also binds the Divisional Court which hears appeals from decisions of the Magistrates' Court.
Following from the case of R. v. Taylor [1950]2 KB 368 (CA), the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), whilst generally bound by its own previous decisions, will not be bound where to apply the previous decision of the court would cause injustice to the accused.
The rationale for such an approach is that the desire to attain justice in the case overrides the need for certainty in the law.
High Court
When sitting as a first instance court (i.e. the first court to try the case at issue), the High Court binds all inferior courts (i.e. County Court).
The High Court itself is bound by the House of Lords and the Court of Appeal, yet it is not bound by its own previous decisions.
The Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division, which exercises a supervisory capacity over the inferior courts and sits as a court to which an appeal ‘by way of case stated’ may be made from the Magistrates' Court, is bound by the House of Lords, the Court of Appeal and its own previous decisions.
The inferior courts
Those courts which do not form part of the Supreme Court of Judicature are collectively known as inferior courts.
This group comprises the County Court, the Magistrates' Court and tribunals.
County Court.
Bound by the House of Lords, the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) and the High Court, but not by its own previous decisions.
Magistrates' Court.
Bound by the House of Lords, the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) and the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division.
The Magistrates' Court is not bound by its own previous decisions.
Industrial tribunal.
Perhaps the most important of the tribunals, the industrial tribunal is bound by the House of Lords, the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) and the Employment Appeal Tribunal.
The industrial tribunal is not bound by its own previous decisions.
Courts outside the English legal system
Two courts which strictly are outside the English legal system are of importance.
European Court.
The European Court binds all English courts on all matters relating to the Treaties by which the EC was formed and EC legislation.
It is only on matters relating to the EC that decisions of the European Court have binding authority.
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
This is the ultimate judicial body hearing appeals from Commonwealth  jurisdictions .
Decisions of the Privy Council, whilst they do not bind English courts, are very persuasive.
This stems from the fact that members of the House of Lords make up the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
The common law in action
An understanding of how the complicated process which we call the common law operates is best achieved by studying the development of a legal concept through decided cases.
Of all the twentieth-century cases Donoghue v. Stevenson [1932]AC 562 (HL) serves to illustrate the process most clearly.
Prior to Donoghue v. Stevenson the law relating to the tort of negligence had been fragmented.
In the House of Lords' decision we see a fundamental principle emerge.
DONOGHUE v. STEVENSON [1932]AC 562 (HL)
The facts.
The plaintiff drank a bottle of ginger beer manufactured by the respondent, which a friend had purchased on her behalf from the retailer.
The retailer opened the opaque bottle and poured some of its contents into a glass.
The plaintiff drank the ginger beer, and when a second glass was poured for her by her friend a decomposing snail which had been in the bottle floated out.
The plaintiff suffered physical illness.
The decision.
The House of Lords upheld the plaintiff's claim for damages.
It was held that a  manufacturer of products, which he sells in such a form as to show that he intends them to reach the ultimate consumer in the form in which they left him, with no reasonable possibility of intermediate examination, and with the knowledge that the absence of reasonable care in the preparation or putting up of the products will result in injury to the consumer's life or property, owes a duty to the consumer to take reasonable care.
The House found that the defendant had not fulfilled such a duty to take reasonable care and was thus liable to the plaintiff for the damage caused to her health.
The neighbour principle.
The case of Donoghue v. Stevenson is noted moreover for the general test as to liability in negligence propounded by Lord Atkin where he says: ‘You must not injure your neighbour.
You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour.
Who, then, in law is my neighbour?
The answer seems to be — persons who are so closely and directly affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called into question.’
Furthermore, Lord MacMillan observed that ‘the categories of negligence are never closed’, thus leaving the way open for the broadening of the concept of negligence and its later application to a great number of different situations.
In Donoghue v. Stevenson we see the synthesis of the previous decisions on the tort of negligence.
This case reduces them to a single principle, the ‘neighbour principle’, which emerges as part of the ratio decidendi of the case.
The question arose after Donoghue v. Stevenson as to how broadly the ratio decidendi could be interpreted.
The ratio decidendi of Donoghue v. Stevenson is open to two interpretations.
The ‘narrow ratio' of the case may be stated thus:
A manufacturer of products, which he sells in such a form as to show that he intends them –o reach the ultimate consumer in the form in which they left him, with no reasonable possibility of intermediate examination, and with the knowledge that the absence of reasonable care in the preparation or putting up of the products is likely to result in injury to the consumer's life or property, owes a duty to the consumer to take reasonable care.
(per Lord Atkin).
It is arguable that the ratio decidendi of the case is limited solely to this principle, and cannot be extended so as to include the neighbour principle.
The ‘wide ratio' of the case may be stated as being the neighbour principle.
It is important to understand that the ratio decidendi of a particular case is not wholly to be found in the case itself; rather one must look to the way in which later courts interpret the case.
Will later courts broaden the scope of the ratio decidendi when they interpret the case, or will they restrict it and narrow it down, confining it to the particular factual situation of the original case?
Which view has been taken by the courts with regard to Donoghue v. Stevenson?
Following from Donoghue v. Stevenson there have been a number of cases which have sought to apply the neighbour principle to different situations and thus broaden its scope.
HEDLEY BYRNE & CO.
LTD v. HELLER & PARTNERS LTD [1964]AC 465 (HL)
The plaintiffs, a firm of advertising agents, booked advertising on behalf of E, a customer, on terms that if E defaulted on payment the plaintiffs would have to pay.
The plaintiffs obtained a report from the defendants, merchant bankers with whom E had an account, as to E's creditworthiness.
The defendants replied in their reports that E was ‘trustworthy…to the  extent of a £100 000 per annum advertising contract’.
The defendants' reply incorporated a disclaimer, namely that the report was ‘without responsibility on the part of this bank or its officials’.
The plaintiffs relied upon the defendants' report and as a result lost some £17 000 in monies owed by E on advertising contracts when E went into liquidation.
The House of Lords held that in the present case the defendants' disclaimer was sufficient to exclude the assumption by the defendants of a duty of care towards the plaintiff.
However, in the absence of such a disclaimer the circumstances would have given rise to a duty of care.
The essential element which gives rise to the duty, in the words of the Lord Morris, was a ‘special relationship’ between the parties.
Lord Morris observed: ‘If someone possessed of a special skill undertakes (irrespective of contract) to apply that skill for the assistance of another person who relies on such skill he voluntarily undertakes the responsibility of so acting.’
Although what was said in Hedley Byrne & Co.
Ltd v. Heller & Partners Ltd was an obiter dictum, later courts interpreted the case as extending the scope of Donoghue v. Stevenson beyond negligent actions which cause physical damage, to include negligent statements which occasion monetary loss.
This case also identifies a further point, namely that of judicial policy.
Lord Pearce in Hedley Byrne & Co.
Ltd v. Heller & Partners Ltd observed:
How wide the sphere of the duty of care in negligence is to be laid depends ultimately on the court's assessment of the demands of society for protection from the carelessness of others.
After Hedley Byrne & Co.
Ltd v. Heller & Partners Ltd there was considerable debate as to how far monetary loss might be recoverable.
Was the decision in that case to be limited to those situations where a ‘special relationship’ existed?
Did the decision extend to all negligently caused economic loss or was it confined to economic loss sustained in consequence of physical harm?
Lord Denning in Dutton v. Bognor Regis UDC [1972]I QB 375 (CA) highlighted perhaps the most important issue in setting the limits upon the scope of the duty of care in Donoghue v. Stevenson:
It seems to me that it is question of policy which we, as judges, have to decide.
The time has come when, in cases of new import, we should decide them according to the reason of the thing.
Lord Reid in Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co.
Ltd [1970]AC 1004 (HL) further explains judicial opinion on this question when he states:
Donoghue v. Stevenson may be regarded as a milestone, and the well known passage in Lord Atkin's speech should I think be regarded as a statement of principle.
It is not to be treated as if it were a statutory definition.
It will require qualification in new circumstances.
But I think that the time has come when we can and should say that it ought to apply unless there is some justification or valid explanation for its exclusion.
How has the law developed regarding the neighbour principle in Donoghue v. Stevenson?
In Anns v. London Borough of Merton [1977]2 All ER 492 (HL), Lord Wilberforce in a now well-known passage, attempted to articulate a general principle in seeking to determine the existence of a duty of care when he stated:
Through the trilogy of cases in this house, Donoghue v. Stevenson, Hedley Byrne & Co.
Ltd v. Heller & Partners Ltd and Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co.
Ltd, the position has now been reached that in order to establish that a duty of care arises in a particular situation, it is not necessary to bring the facts of that situation within those of previous situations in which a duty of care has been held to exist.
Rather the question has to be approached in two stages.
First one has to ask whether as between the alleged wrongdoer and the person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient relationship of proximity or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable contemplation of the former, carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage to the latter, in which case a prima facie duty of care arises.
Secondly if the first question is answered affirmatively, it is necessary to consider whether there are any considerations which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of duty or the class of person to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach of it may give rise.
Whilst this provided an approach adopted in subsequent cases, the limitations of such a general principle have, more recently, been recognized in judgments of the House of Lords and Privy Council: see, for example, Governors of Peabody Donation Fund v. Sir Lindsay Parkinson & Co.
Ltd [1985]AC 210; Yuen Kun-yeu v. AG of Hong Kong [1987]2 All ER 705; Hill v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989]AC 53; Caparo Industries v. Dickman [1990]1 All ER 568.
In Caparo, a case concerning the duty owed by accountants, as auditors of a company report, to potential and individual shareholders, Lord Bridge recognized that concepts such as‘proximity’
are not susceptible of any…precise definition as would be necessary to give them utility as practical tests, but amount to the features of different specific situations which, on a detailed examination of all the circumstances, the law recognises pragmatically as giving rise to a duty of care of a given scope.
Note should also be made in this context of the case of Murphy v. Brentwood DC [1990]2 All ER 908, discussed below.
What then has happened with regard to cases of economic loss?
In Spartan Steel & Alloys Ltd v. Martin & Co.
(Contractors) Ltd [1972]3 All ER 557 (CA) the question arose whether profits lost in consequence of physical damage were alone recoverable, or whether profits lost which were not related to physical damage were also recoverable.
The Court of Appeal decided that only the former and not the latter were recoverable.
Lord Denning in his judgment took the following view:
At bottom I think the question of recovering economic loss is one of policy.
Whenever the courts draw a line to mark out the bounds of duty they do it as a matter  of policy so as to limit the responsibility of the defendant.
Whenever the courts set bounds to the damages recoverable — saying that they are, or are not, too remote they do it as a matter of policy so as to limit the liability of the defendant.
Referring specifically to the decisions on economic loss, Lord Denning later in his judgment observes:
The more I think about these cases, the more difficult I find it to put each into its proper pigeon-hole.
Sometimes 1 say ‘There was no duty’.
In others I say: ‘The damage was too remote’.
So much so that I think the time has come to discard those tests which have proved so elusive.
It seems to me better to consider the particular relationship in hand, and see whether or not, as a matter of policy economic loss should be recoverable.
Edmund Davies LJ dissents from the views of Lord Denning MR and Lord Justice Lawton.
He regards both economic loss which is occasioned by physical damage and ‘pure economic loss’ regardless of physical damage to be recoverable.
He states in Spartan Steel & Alloys Ltd v. Martin & Co.
(Contractors) Ltd:
Having considered the intrinsic nature of the problem presented in this appeal, and having consulted the relevant authorities, my conclusion…is that an action lies in negligence for damages in respect of purely economic loss, provided that it was a reasonably foreseeable and direct consequence of failure in a duty of care.
The application of such a rule can undoubtedly give rise to difficulties in certain sets of circumstances, but so can the suggested rule that economic loss may be recovered provided it is directly consequential on physical damage.
The Court of Appeal was clearly divided as to the approach which should be taken with regard to economic loss.
The question was later considered by the House of Lords in Junior Books Ltd v. Veitchi & Co.
Ltd [1982]3 WLR 477 (HL).
Lord Roskill took the view that:
There was no reason why ‘damage to the pocket' simpliciter should be disallowed when damage to the pocket coupled with physical damage has always been allowed.
No untoward consequences would result.
Lords Fraser and Russell agreed with this opinion.
Obviously this meant that the majority view of Lords Denning and Lawton in Spartan Steel & Alloys Ltd v. Martin & Co.
(Contractors) Ltd was considered ‘old law’ and to be incorrect, and the dissenting view of Lord Edmund Davies appeared to be vindicated.
Lord Keith in Junior Books Ltd v. Veitchi & Co.
Ltd opines:
The Donoghue v. Stevenson duty of care had been extended to situations where pure economic loss was recoverable.
Lord Keith cites Hedley Byrne & Co.
Ltd v. Heller & Partners Ltd and Anns v. London Borough of Merton as the authorities which give rise to this proposition.
He does rather qualify his view where he later considers that the present case is not ‘an appropriate case for seeking to advance the frontiers of the law of negligence’, and he seeks to confine the decision to its own particular facts.
Lord Brandon, who dissents from the majority viewpoint, considers that only economic loss which is consequential upon the existence of actual or threatened physical injury is recoverable, as within the scope of Donoghue v. Stevenson.
In one respect the Atkinian neighbour principle and Lord Wilberforce's opinion in Anns are similar; they both extend the boundaries of tortious liability in negligence to new areas, the former to product liability, the latter to a failure to inspect a defective building.
However, the approach taken to each case in subsequent decisions has been entirely different.
The neighbour principle did not attain ready acceptance for some years after 1932, whereas Lord Wilberforce's statement in Anns became broadly accepted at once.
After the courts' acceptance of the neighbour principle, there was an increasing tendency to apply it to new areas, heralding a major advance in the recovery of damages for economic loss (e.g. Hedley Byrne & Co.
Ltd v. Heller & Partners Ltd).
With respect to the Anns test, there has been a growing reluctance to apply it, and, as noted above, recent cases have cast doubt on its validity.
In Peabody Donation Fund Governors v. Sir Lindsay Parkinson & Co.
Ltd [1985]AC 210, it was held that a property developer, as opposed to a building owner, was not owed a duty of care by a local authority.
In the recent decision of Murphy v. Brentwood DC [1990]2 All ER 908, the House of Lords has put an end to what it described as the ‘uncertainty’ created by Lord Wilberforce's wide principle by using the 1966 Practice Statement to overrule Anns.
The effect is consequently a reversion to the pre-Anns position of developing new categories of duty incrementally by analogy with established categories rather than by a wide prima facie duty constrained only by undefined ‘considerations which ought to negate, or to reduce or limit the scope of the duty or the class of persons to whom it is owed’.
Junior Books has raised more questions than it has answered and has wide-ranging implications for the nature of obligations arising in both contract and tort.
The tenor of Lord Roskill's speech in Junior Books suggests that he intended to develop a principle of general application to cases of pure economic loss caused by negligent acts.
In subsequent cases, however, the decision has been described as limited to its own facts, e.g. Candlewood Navigation Ltd v. Mitsui OSK Lines Ltd [1986]AC I (PC) and Muirhead v. Industrial Tank Specialists Ltd [1986]QB 507 (CA).
In D & F Estates Ltd v. Church Commissioners for England and Wales [1988]2 All ER 992 (HL), the House of Lords distinguished Junior Books v. Veitchi as being peculiar to its own facts.
One view which can be taken in the light of this decision of the House of Lords is that it is unsafe to rely upon Junior Books as establishing any general principle of liability, a view which accords with the recent decisions of the House of Lords in Caparo v. Dickman and Murphy v. Brentwood DC.
Forms of precedent which are not binding
There are certain forms of precedent which are not binding.
1
Persuasive precedent:
(a)
obiter dicta:
(b)
decisions of those courts not within the hierarchy of the English legal system.
i.e. the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
2
Precedents which have been overruled by later decisions at a higher level.
3
Precedents which have been distinguished and confined to their own particular facts.
4
Statements of law made per incuriam (i.e. without considering relevant authorities).
In Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co.
Ltd [1944]2 All ER 293 (CA) the Court of Appeal decided that it was not bound by a previous decision of that court, if satisfied that the decision in question was reached per incuriam.
In effect this covers cases where some relevant statutory provision or precedent which would have affected the decision was not brought to the attention of the court.
1.4 GOING TO LAW
Whilst we may learn about the legal principles which regulate our daily lives, both at work and at home, the actual process of ‘going to law’ and bringing an action before the courts is not necessarily as simple as one may imagine.
Specialist advice should be sought before embarking upon litigation.
Normally one consults a solicitor.
The solicitor is a trained legal professional who has usually obtained a law degree and will have studied for the Law Society Final Examinations in order to practise in the profession.
Solicitors also undergo two years of training at work known as articles.
In certain areas law centres, staffed by professional lawyers and advisers, offer a good free legal advice service.
Equally citizens' advice bureaux may be able to assist with advice and information which may further your case.
If more specialized expertise is required the solicitor whom you have instructed to act on your behalf may consult, i.e. ‘brief’, a barrister.
Solicitors therefore take counsel's opinion on difficult or technical questions of law or procedure.
A barrister may appear in any court, whereas a solicitor's rights of audience are currently limited to the inferior courts.
Barristers may not be approached directly by most clients: they may only be briefed by solicitors.
The English legal profession, therefore, is in effect split into two halves offering a complementary service.
There is some doubt about whether such a system is the most effective.
Some people, both in academic circles and within the profession, think that a single profession, i.e. that of an advocate who could both be consulted directly and have rights of audience in all courts, might be preferable.
One may on the other hand consider that the ancient traditions and methods of training for the Bar are worthy of preservation.
Such debate surrounds the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, by which the potential lies to increase solicitors' rights of audience and effectively streamline the profession.
It will, however, remain to be seen what practical effect is achieved by this legislation, given the central role of the senior judiciary in determining this issue and in the light of judicial criticism of such a measure.
Barristers normally take a law degree, after which they join an Inn of Court and read for Bar finals.
They then complete twelve months of unpaid work, known as pupillage, for a practising barrister at that person's chambers.
The courts of first instance
A court of first instance is one in which an action is commenced.
A civil claim is commenced in either the High Court or the County Court according to the nature and size of the claim.
If the claim is one which relates to employment matters it will normally be within the jurisdiction of the industrial tribunal.
Criminal prosecutions are commenced either in the Magistrates' Court if the matter is to be tried summarily or, following a committal before a Magistrates' Court, in the Crown Court if the matter is to be tried upon an indictment.
Indictable offences are the most serious and are tried before a judge and jury.
The Magistrates' Court therefore has a dual function: to try minor cases (summary offences) and to consider whether on indictable offences there is sufficient evidence for a Crown Court trial; this process is known as committal proceedings.
Caterers, hoteliers, innkeepers and restaurateurs may have recourse to any one of a number of courts for a multiplicity of reasons; the following are those which they are most likely to use.
The civil courts
High Court.
The High Court is a court of first instance which has unlimited jurisdiction.
Recently the respective jurisdictions of the High Court and County Court have been redefined.
The High Court is now taking a more specialist role and its jurisdiction is primarily concerned with high-volume claims, over £25 000.
One may appear in person before the court, but solicitors do not have a general right of audience; hence a solicitor must instruct a barrister to appear before the court on the litigant's behalf — note, however, the provisions of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 (ss. 27–33) discussed above.
Legal aid is available for most High Court actions.
Procedure in the High Court remains complex and cases take a considerable time to come to trial.
The County Court.
The County Court is an inferior court, in that its jurisdiction is limited.
The High Court and County Courts Jurisdiction Order 1991 sets out the parameters of the County Courts' jurisdiction.
It is normal to commence proceedings in the local County Court — e.g. for the recovery of a debt.
The limitation which used to apply was with regard to the value of the action.
Previously a small claim, under the small claims procedure, was up to a maximum of £500.
This has now been increased to £1000.
Other claims used to be to a maximum of £5000.
The High Court and County Courts Jurisdiction Order 1991 provides that cases to a value of £25 000 must be heard in the County Court.
Disputes of between £25 000 and £50 000 may be heard in either the County Court or the High Court.
Any claim for an amount exceeding £50 000 shall be commenced in the High Court.
A case can be transferred from the County Court to the High Court or vice versa if it is for a claim between £25 000 and £50 000 at the determination of the court after the court has considered (a) the financial substance of the case,(b) the importance of the case,(c) the complexity of the legal issues, and (d) the speed of trial.
Two further points should be noted.
Firstly, all personal injury claims, e.g. arising from an accident at the work place, for up to £50 000 in damages must be heard in the  County Court.
Secondly, Default Actions (i.e. debt recovery claims) are no longer subject to geographical limitation or jurisdiction, but proceedings should be commenced in the County Court where the trial is likely to take place.
The County Court is particularly useful in that it operates a small claims procedure.
This procedure applies to actions brought for the recovery of a sum, in either contract or tort, not exceeding £1000.
The matter is dealt with in an informal way before the Registrar of the County Court, and costs are not incurred by the use of this form of action (i.e. costs cannot be awarded against a party).
If the matter is not resolved by the small claims procedure it may go forward to a full hearing before a County Court judge in the normal way.
Legal aid is available in the County Court.
Industrial tribunal.
Like other tribunals, the industrial tribunal is an inferior court, having jurisdiction in limited matters only, in this case employment.
Legal aid is not available for industrial tribunals, and many litigants appear without legal representation.
Procedure before the industrial tribunal is relatively simple, being designed to make applications easy to process without legal advice, and the rules of evidence are not strictly applied by the tribunal.
The main work of the industrial tribunal is concerned with individuals' contracts of employment.
Hence unfair dismissal and redundancy are considered by the tribunal, as are cases of discrimination on the grounds of race, sex or trade union activities.
Caterers are most likely to come into contact with industrial tribunals if one of their past or present employees refers a matter to the tribunal with regard to his or her contract of employment.
Unlike the courts previously considered, which are presided over by a sole judge, the industrial tribunal is presided over by a legally qualified chairperson and two lay persons ('wing men').
The ‘wing men’ comprise one person nominated by trade unions and employees' federations and one person nominated by the CBI and various employers' federations.
The Magistrates' Court.
The primary function of the Magistrates' Court is to try criminal cases.
However, a very important civil part (especially for the caterer) of the Magistrates' Court's jurisdiction is the granting of licences.
This covers the granting of liquor licences, gaming licences, etc.
The Magistrates' Court consists of a bench of three lay magistrates, or in metropolitan areas a single stipendiary magistrate who is legally qualified.
The clerk to the magistrates advises lay magistrates on points of law, practice and evidence.
The magistrates' decision may be either unanimous or by a majority of the bench who heard the case.
On an application for a licence, the applicant will normally attend the court.
Although applicants are entitled to legal representation, they are not always legally represented, the proceedings being simple and involving little or no legal principle.
Legal aid is not available.
The Magistrates' Court is an inferior court and solicitors as well as barristers have a right of audience.
The criminal courts
The Magistrates' Court.
The Magistrates' Court, when hearing a criminal case, is constituted in the same way as for licensing applications.
The Magistrates' Court is limited in its jurisdiction.
It may impose a fine of up to £2000 (unless the Statute creating the offence provides otherwise) and a maximum term of six months' imprisonment on any  one charge (and a maximum of twelve months where the person is charged with more than one offence triable ‘either way’, e.g. theft).
With regard to criminal matters the magistrates have a twofold jurisdiction:(a) to try people summarily; and (b) to commit people for trial to the Crown Court before a judge and jury.
Summary trial covers the less serious offences and is commenced by the laying of information and a summons.
Caterers may come into contact with the Magistrates' Court in this way if they commit one of a number of offences relating to their profession, for example licensing offences, or offences under the Food Safety Act 1990, or possibly offences under the Trade Descriptions Act 1968.
Legal aid is available for summary trial.
However, because of the nature of the cases concerned in summary trial, it is not often given.
Since the Magistrates' Court is an inferior court, the party need not be represented by a barrister; solicitors can provide representation if any is required.
The Crown Court.
This court was set up in 1971 by the Courts Act.
Unlike the Magistrates' Court, the Crown Court's jurisdiction is not limited to a given area.
The Crown Court is presided over by a judge or a recorder and it hears the more serious criminal cases.
The mode of trial in a Crown Court is known as trial on indictment.
The indictment is the document which charges the defendant with the offence.
The trial is before a jury of twelve.
The function of the jury is to determine all questions of fact in the case, whilst the function of the judge is to determine the admissibility of evidence and all questions of law raised by the case.
It is worthy of note that in the Magistrates' Court the separate functions of the judge and jury are both performed by the magistrates.
Caterers may come into contact with the Crown Court either on appeal from a conviction before the Magistrates' Court or when they are tried for serious criminal offences.
Since the Crown Court is a superior court, its power to punish is limited only by the maximum penalty set for the offence by an Act of Parliament.
Currently a solicitor does not have a right of audience; only members of the Bar may appear before the court, although, again, reference should be made to the provisions of the Court and Legal Services Act 1990.
Legal aid is available for cases in the Crown Court.
The catering enterprise
In this chapter we shall examine the various factors which may influence the entrepreneur when deciding on the form the business will take, and consider the legal framework within which the business will operate.
When establishing the catering enterprise the entrepreneur will have to make a number of vital decisions about the form the business will take.
These decisions will be based on a range of different factors.
Figure 2.1 is a flow chart which covers some of the major decisions which have to be made as part of the formation of a catering enterprise.
2.1 CHOOSING THE FORM OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
This decision is of vital importance, and of course it must be made before trading can commence.
It is this decision which will affect the size, scope and financing of the enterprise, and determine other operational criteria.
According to the type of enterprise chosen, certain formalities may or may not have to be carried out, those participating in the finance of the company may or may not be protected by limited liability, and the potential growth and financial resources of the enterprise may also be determined.
What factors are of influence in the making of this fundamental decision?
Limited liability
Limited liability means that the financial liability of each person responsible as a member of the business is fixed from the outset and limited to a fixed amount.
In other 28  words, the people investing money in the enterprise from the beginning know the extent of their potential financial loss should the enterprise fail.
The knowledge that the failure of the business will not mean inevitable personal disaster has motivated many business people to seek shelter behind the screen of limited liability.
Limited liability is available in either of two business forms, as follows.
The limited company
This is a distinct and separate legal entity from the people who own it which provides limited liability for shareholders.
Shareholders are liable only to the extent of the value of their paid-up shares.
In other words, they can lose only the value of their shares in the company.
Since most shares issued are ‘fully paid up’, shareholders may hide behind the corporate veil, assured that their liability with respect to the company does not extend beyond the value of their shares.
Therefore a shareholder's shares become valueless, this is the extent of his or her loss.
Neither partnership nor sole trading has this advantage; the owners of these forms of enterprise are fully liable for all debts incurred by the business.
This stems from the fact that neither form has the advantage of being a separate legal entity; thus the debts of the business are the debts of the people who own that business.
Limited partnership
This is a specialized form provided for by the Limited Partnership Act 1907.
Limited partnership is not, however, a well-used or popular form of business enterprise.
A limited partnership comprises both limited and full partners.
Only limited partners may claim limited liability.
Hence, full partners, of which there must be at least one, are liable to the full extent of their personal assets, as with other forms of partnership.
The limited partner(s) contribute a fixed amount of money when joining the partnership, and this money must remain in the partnership.
The limited partner must not participate in the management of the partnership.
Any interference by limited partners in the running of the enterprise will render them personally liable for all debts, as with full partners.
Limited partners do, however, have a right to advise full partners, though it is a matter for the full partners whether or not they follow such advice.
Limited partners, provided they fulfil the above investment criteria and do not participate in the management of the partnership, may claim limited liability.
Limited liability is such a useful asset to the person in business that one may wonder why partnership and sole trading still flourish.
They flourish in part because the benefit of limited liability must be weighed against the need for legal formalities in the formation, running and closure of companies, amongst other burdens which operating as a company brings (e.g. publication of accounts).
Limited liability is today of reduced significance, since many major creditors, such as banks, leasing companies, etc., require personal guarantees from directors of a limited liability company.
Such personal guarantees become effective if and when the company itself cannot meet its financial obligations.
Hence a director of a company may stand to lose financially even though the company has limited liability.
Trade creditors, however, do not normally require personal guarantees; therefore the ‘corporate veil’ is effective in guarding against the personal liability of a director for such debts.
Involvement in the management of the enterprise
Sole traders, otherwise known as proprietors, have total control over the management of their businesses.
The proprietor is accountable to no one in the running of the business, for it is the proprietor alone who will sustain the loss in the event of the financial failure of the enterprise.
It is the autonomous nature of sole trading which is an attractive feature of this form of business enterprise.
A partner is entitled to full participation in the management of the partnership.
However, since the essence of this form of enterprise is the relationship between the partners, to be successful business decisions must be made with the consensus of all partners.
Hence autonomy is lost and some form of agreement with the other partners is necessary in order to make worthwhile business decisions.
A company, being a separate legal entity, makes decisions through its annual general meeting of shareholders and its board of directors.
Normally, any decision made about the management of the company requires a consensus of a majority of shareholders.
A further limitation upon the actions of those managing the company is imposed by the company's memorandum of association, which sets out the bounds within which the company must operate.
Only those actions which are within the ‘objects clause’ of the memorandum of association may be undertaken, otherwise actions are deemed to be ultra vires(outside the power of the company) and do not bind it.
An entrepreneur who wishes to have full control over the management of an enterprise may well opt for sole trading as the only form which offers sufficient freedom of action.
Financial considerations
There are many different financial considerations which may affect the decision as to which form of business enterprise to undertake.
Raising capital
Since neither the sole trader nor the partnership is protected by limited liability, both may find difficulty in raising sufficient money to commence trading from a secure financial position.
This is because both forms of enterprise are identical to the individuals who own them; their creditworthiness is that of those individuals.
Hence, someone wishing to finance a catering enterprise may have to guarantee the loan by using their own personal assets, e.g. their house, as security.
A company, however, may create a ‘floating charge’, a device which provides sufficient security for a loan.
Few financial institutions are prepared to lend to proprietors and partnerships on this basis.
A floating charge gives the lender continuing security against all company assets, e.g. stock in trade, plant, machinery.
The company may still, of course, deal with these assets as if they were not subject to a floating charge.
A floating charge is therefore a most effective and flexible security; it provides security for the lender and allows the company to trade with its assets unencumbered.
A company, by virtue of the floating charge, has a distinct advantage over other forms of trading when raising capital.
However, if small companies wish to borrow extensively, the directors may be asked to provide personal guarantees for the company's loan; hence their own personal assets may be called upon to repay the loan in the event of the company's financial collapse.
Expense of formation
Neither a sole trader nor a partnership is inhibited by legal formalities when commencing trading.
For a company, sizeable fees may be payable because of the need for legal formalities to be followed.
A solicitor may be instructed to draft the company's memorandum and articles of association, and a registration fee is payable.
Considerable expense is incurred because of the requirement for the annual publication of audited accounts.
Furthermore, the duly audited accounts must be filed with the Registrar of Companies, at a fee.
Companies make statutory returns to Companies House; their annual accounts must by law be fuller and more complicated than those of a sole trader or a partnership and must be laid out in a statutory format.
Minutes of board meetings must be kept and an annual general meeting must be held.
The administrative costs of running a business as a company are therefore greater.
Income tax
The sole trader or partner pays income tax under Schedule D (subject to allowances) on all profits, even if they have been reinvested in the enterprise.
In a company, directors pay income tax on their salaries under Schedule E. Excess profits can be kept within the company, in which case they are subject to corporation tax.
Therefore it may be advantageous to sole traders or partners whose incomes from the business mean that they are taxed under Schedule D at a higher rate to convert the business into a company to minimize the amount of tax to be paid out of the profits made.
Whilst this is a clear tax advantage to be considered when forming a company, there are tax advantages to sole trading or trading as a partnership.
1
The national insurance contributions for Schedule D earners (partners and sole traders) are less than the combined contributions of the company and the directors.
2
Schedule D income tax, as paid by partners and sole traders, is paid on a preceding year basis.
This is most useful, since it promotes cash flow through the business in the first and early years of trading.
The director of a company paying Schedule E income tax does so on a current year basis under the PAYE system.
3
A partner or sole trader paying Schedule D income tax is able to claim more by way of expenses and allowances against income than a Schedule E person earning the same amount.
4
If a partner or sole trader has more than one business enterprise (e.g. two or three small cafes), and one is successful whilst another runs at a loss, the loss incurred by one enterprise may be offset against the tax liability for the successful enterprise.
By balancing profits and loss in this way, total tax liability may be reduced.
However, if each enterprise is a different company, each company being in itself a separate and distinct legal entity and thus taxed separately, the balancing of profit and loss between the enterprises so as to minimize overall tax liability cannot be achieved.
It may be considered advisable with small units which form a chain of enterprises to expand trading by means of partnership or sole trading so that initial losses made in new units may be offset against profit obtained through trading at established units.
Balanced against this view one might consider the limited liability offered through trading as a company so advantageous in the event of the business failing that a company is the preferred form of trading.
5
In a family business (such as a tea-room, cafe, small guest-house or hotel) where those working for the business are simply the husband and wife, if the enterprise is run on a sole trader basis, the husband, as the proprietor, may claim that his wife works in the business as an employee and so she may make use of her married woman's earned income allowance against any income she may earn.
If the business is run as a partnership between the husband and some person other than his wife (e.g. his son), the same proposition holds true; the partners may employ their wives and take advantage of this form of tax allowance.
Value added tax
VAT is a dirty word among small businesses, mainly because this tax places considerable administrative burdens upon business people, who often consider themselves to be unpaid tax collectors.
As far as consumers are concerned, they pay VAT when they make a purchase.
As far as business people are concerned, they pay VAT when they buy goods from other businesses and charge VAT when selling their goods or services.
VAT is charged on what are known as taxable supplies.
Not all goods supplied to a business are taxable; some are exempt, i.e. VAT is not charged on them.
Thus where a business sells another business something which is a taxable supply, the VAT which that business charges on it is known as output tax.
The business to which the goods are sold (if it is registered for VAT), when it makes its return to Customs and Excise, claims back the VAT which it has paid on the goods, which is known as the input tax.
Who must register for VAT?
It is the person, not the business, who is registered for VAT.
Each registration covers all the business activities of the registered person.
For VAT purposes, a company is treated as a person.
A business is required to register for VAT if at the end of any month its turnover in the past twelve months exceeds £36 600.
A business can apply to register for VAT purposes even if the value of its taxable supplies is below the limit.
The Customs and Excise must be satisfied that there is a good reason for registration, and that the income derived from taxable supplies contributes substantially to the livelihood of the business.
The practice of ‘business splitting’ is called ‘disaggregation’.
The Customs and Excise have the power to direct that where two or more people purport to trade separately to avoid registration for VAT, but are really part of a single business, they shall be treated as a single business for VAT purposes.
What are taxable supplies and what are exempt?
Where a business supplies goods and services these will normally be taxable supplies unless they fall within the category of being exempt from VAT.
If all the goods and services which the business supplies are exempt, then the business cannot register for VAT purposes.
This also means that the business cannot claim back VAT on the purchases which it makes.
If a business is composed of some taxable and some exempt supplies, the business will still have to comply with the registration requirements.
The rate of tax.
For taxable supplies there are at present two rates of tax:
(a)
the standard rate, which is currently 17.5 per cent; and
(b)
the zero rate.
The standard rate is charged unless the government specifies otherwise.
Supplies relevant to the hotel and catering industry which are zero rated are food and drink which are not:
(a)
supplied for catering;
(b)
non-essential items, e.g. chocolate and crisps:
(c)
hot food to be taken away.
Working out VAT.
A business charges VAT on the taxable sales which it makes; this is ‘output tax’.
The amount of VAT is worked out on the price of the goods supplied by the business.
A business claims back VAT on the goods and services used by the business.
VAT cannot be reclaimed on certain expenses, e.g. cars or business entertainment expenses.
Registration for VAT requires the business to maintain additional records for VAT purposes which must be kept for six years.
These are:
(a)
the tax invoice;
(b)
a VAT account showing the results for each tax period;
(c)
the returns made to Customs and Excise showing the VAT payable or repayable.
If the business fails to keep proper records it may be charged a financial penalty.
VAT inspectors will visit registered businesses periodically to ensure that accurate records have been maintained and proper returns made.
Paying VAT.
Any VAT which is due to Customs and Excise is payable within one month of the end of the quarterly accounting period.
This is so whether or not the business has actually received from its customers the money on which the VAT is due.
Late payment of VAT will give rise to severe consequences, in the form of punitive interest charges.
Using the enterprise's money
The restrictions upon the extent to which a person may withdraw money from his or her business vary according to the form of business operated.
Clearly, proprietors or sole traders may withdraw as much money from their business funds as they wish; the funds of the business are the same funds as their own.
Being sole traders, they are answerable to no one else within the business.
Partners may withdraw such funds as they may have agreed with their fellow partners to withdraw.
If partners withdraw money from the partnership dishonestly, so as to deprive the partnership permanently of its use, they may, of course, be criminally liable and be prosecuted for theft; see R. v. Bonner[1970] 2 All ER 97 (CA).
A company director or shareholder is in a more constrained position: the Companies Act forbids loans from the company to directors and reductions in the company's capital.
The size of the enterprise
Sole traders may find that their businesses are retarded in their development by the fact of their being sole traders.
They may not be able to raise sufficient capital to fund effective expansion.
Hence they are faced with a dilemma: the business may continue to operate at the same level, but without the prospect of expansion, or they may alter the form of business enterprise to a partnership or a company.
A company is the most  flexible form of business enterprise as far as expansion is concerned.
A company may of course have only one director.
A company may expand by increasing the share capital and the number of directors.
The nature of the enterprise
If the proposed catering enterprise is novel and the market for the service is uncertain (e.g. the launching of a new type of fast-food outlet), a limited liability company may be the most suitable form of business, since if the venture fails the liability of those concerned with financing the business will be protected.
Equally, the catering enterprise may need to be established quickly to take advantage of market trends.
If time is of the essence, sole trading or partnership may be the preferred forms, since they require few formalities to commence trading.
If trading is likely to be temporary or of uncertain duration (e.g. for one summer season only), sole trading is perhaps the best choice.
It may be that the nature of the enterprise requires substantial investment in capital, equipment or premises.
In this instance the size of the venture will determine the form of enterprise.
Substantial capital may usually be raised by means of trading as a company.
2.2 THE PROPRIETOR OR SOLE TRADER
Only a ‘legal person’ can have rights and be subject to duties and obligations under the law.
The relevant law recognizes a ‘legal person’ in either of two forms.
An individual is a ‘legal person’ in the sense that an ordinary man or woman is subject to the laws of the land.
Equally, the law recognizes that a company is a discrete and separate legal entity from those individuals who have a financial interest in it.
Hence a company has its own legal capacity and is able to contract, etc. in its own right.
A sole trader is the proprietor of the business.
The business as such is equal to the ‘legal person’ of the proprietor; he or she is the business.
Hence the business debts, and of course the profits, are the proprietor's alone.
Since sole trading is where an individual carries on his or her own business, it is very simple to establish.
It is identical to the individual, and the ability of such an enterprise to enter contracts or to be bound by duties or obligations is the same as that of an individual.
The only formality required of a person who wishes to commence trading in this way concerns the naming of the business.
Naming the sole trader's business
If one were starting a fast-food outlet aimed at selling sausages of various sorts and sizes prepared in different ways, it is unlikely that one would wish to open one's new premises under the name of the proprietor; ‘Alan Pannett's Sausage Cafe’, for instance, hardly has an impressive ring about it for marketing and promotion of this new product and business venture.
If one were to choose to operate the enterprise under one's own name there would be no need for any formalities to be observed.
If, on the other hand, one wishes to name the fast-food outlet ‘The Saucy Sausage’, then certain formalities must be observed.
1
Section 4 of the Business Names Act 1985 requires that sole traders who operate their business in any name other than their own must display their own name clearly on all business letters, invoices, receipts, written orders for goods, etc. to be supplied to the business, and written demands for payment of debts owing to the business.
2
On all business letters, etc. there must be included an address within Great Britain where, in the event of legal proceedings being brought against the proprietor, documents may be served.
If a proprietor were to trade as ‘The Saucy Sausage’ and failed to comply with either of the above requirements, then he or she would be liable to criminal prosecution for such a failure.
3
At the business premises, the name and address of the proprietor must be clearly displayed.
Such a notice must be displayed at any premises where the business is carried on and to which customers and suppliers have access.
4
The name and address of the proprietor must be supplied to any person who enters into business transactions with the enterprise, or who has entered into discussions with a view to a business transaction.
This requirement arises only where such a person demands to know the name and address of the proprietor and not otherwise.
Failure to comply with this requirement is also a criminal offence.
Although criminal liability is imposed to ensure compliance with the provisions of s. 4 of the Business Names Act 1985, there is a further sanction, and in practical terms this may be more effective.
Section 5 of the Business Names Act 1985 provides that where a person fails to comply with the requirement set out in s. 5 and thereafter seeks to enforce a business contract with a party in default by means of a court action,(a) if the person in default can establish that he or she has a claim against the proprietor, which due to the proprietor's failure to comply with s. 5 he or she has been unable to pursue, or (b) if a breach by the proprietor of s. 5 has caused the person in default some financial loss, the proprietor's claim shall be dismissed, unless it is ‘just and equitable’ that the proprietor should be allowed to continue the action.
The effect of s. 5, therefore, is to render unenforceable business contracts entered into by the proprietor, where he or she is in breach of the requirements of s. 5 and this breach has caused some ‘loss’ to the other party.
It is clearly a most effective sanction, if proprietors are aware that failure to comply with the requirements under s. 5 may render them unable to enforce what would otherwise normally be enforceable contracts.
2.3 PARTNERSHIP
A partnership is not a distinct legal person; rather it is a group of individuals who have entered into business with a common aim — profit.
The law relating to partnerships is regulated by the Partnership Act 1890.
Section I of the Partnership Act defines partnership in this way:
Partnership is the relationship which subsists between persons carrying on a business in common with a view of profit.
The intention of the parties entering upon a partnership is seen to be of paramount importance.
Section 2 of the Partnership Act 1890 provides that where certain circumstances exist the law presumes that the persons concerned intend to create a partnership.
However, where a given circumstance provided for in section 2 exists, this will not of itself affirmatively establish that a partnership exists; it is a matter of fact in each case whether or not there is sufficient evidence to support a presumption of the existence of a partnership.
The definition of a partnership provided by s.
I may be subdivided into three elements.
1
.
For a partnership to exist there must be a ‘business’.
Business is defined for the purpose of s. 45 of the Partnership Act 1890 as including ‘every trade, occupation or profession’.
Hence the Act is really talking in terms of a commercial venture A single transaction will be sufficient to satisfy s 45.
2
.
The business must trade.
Section 1 talks in terms of‘carrying on’ a business.
Common sense tells us that this requires some form of trading activity, and although this will cover such things as the purchase of raw materials, capital equipment, etc., it should be noted that if such actions were merely preparatory to the later formation of a company then these cannot be considered as the actions of a partnership ‘carrying on a business’.
KEITH SPICER LTD v. MANSELL [1970]1 A11 ER 462 (CA)
X and the defendant agreed to create a limited company in order to run the defendant's restaurant.
In pursuance of this wish goods were purchased.
Later, when they had not been paid for by the defendant, the plaintiff brought an action for payment of the sum due against the defendant.
The plaintiff's contention was that a partnership had existed between the defendant and X at the time the goods were purchased, prior to the formation of the company, and since the defendant was a partner, he was fully liable to pay the debt.
The Court of Appeal held, however, that there was no partnership in existence, since no business was being carried on by the defendant and X; on the contrary, the goods had been ordered in preparation for the formation of a company, and such transactions could not be considered as ‘carrying on a business’.
MARSON (INSPECTOR OF TAXES) v. MORTON [1986]1 WLR 1343
It was held that a one-off purchase, and sale three months later, of land that gave rise to a profit was not trade assessable for Schedule D income tax.
3
There must be an intention on the part of the partners to make a profit.
If a number of people for purely social or philanthropic reasons agreed upon a joint plan of action, the purpose of which was not to make a profit, this would not be a partnership.
How can we identify a partnership?
A partnership may be entered into either formally, by means of a partnership deed, or informally, simply by verbal agreement or otherwise between partners.
We can identify a formal partnership by the partnership deed.
With regard to informal partnerships, s.2 Partnership Act 1890 provides a number of rules whereby we can ascertain the nature of the enterprise and identify whether or not it is a partnership within the scope of the 1890 Act.
The rules contained in s. 2 of the 1890 Act may be paraphrased thus:
1
Common or joint ownership of property: s. 2(1) provides that common ownership of property is not sufficient in itself to create a partnership.
This is  so even if both the joint owners share in the profits made from the property.
Section 2(2) provides in like terms for a share in the gross returns from a business or property.
2
Taking a share of the profits: Prior to s. 2(3) of the Partnership Act 1890, the courts had decided that if a person took any share in the profits of a business this made that person a partner.
Section 2(3) provides:
The receipt a person of a share of the profits of a business is prima facie evidence that he is a partner in the business but the receipt of such a share, or of a payment contingent on or varying with the profits of a business, does not of itself make him a partner in the business.
Section (3) further provides five particular situations which do not per se render the persons involved partners.
In each of the five situations the court will consider all the circumstances and decide whether the parties in fact intended that a partnership be brought about.
The formal partnership
There is no legal requirement that a partnership be commenced by a formal written agreement between partners.
It is, however, in the best interests of the partners if the partnership is commenced in this way, since the document agreed upon by the partners will make provision for most eventualities which may affect the partnership.
Such a document is known as a ‘partnership deed’(otherwise known as the ‘articles of partnership’).
This document indicates the acceptance by each of the partners of the terms and conditions set out in the document.
It is these terms and conditions in conjunction with the Partnership Act which will regulate the running of the enterprise.
It is the partnership deed which regulates the various legal rights and duties of the partners as between themselves.
The partnership deed
A properly drafted partnership deed should contain articles which seek to regulate the following matters:(a) the name of the
(a)
the name of the business for the purposes of trading;
(b)
management of the business;
(c)
financing the partnership;
(d)
profits and remuneration of partners;
(e)
accountancy procedures and the financial year
(f)
the business premises;
(g)
rights and duties of the partners;
(h)
termination of the partnership;
(i)
disputes between partners.
Rights, duties and liabilities of partners
The partners' rights
The relationship between partners should normally be made clear in the partnership deed.
The articles of the partnership deed should clearly state the rights of partners with regard to one another, and the duties which each partner owes to the other members of the partnership.
Since not all partnerships are created formally by means of a partnership deed, s. 24 of the Partnership Act 1890 provides for certain rights of partners.
Section 24 applies to all partnerships irrespective of the provisions of a given partnership deed.
Partnership property.
An individual is not required to contribute either property or capital in order to be a partner.
However, once property or capital has been brought into the partnership, the partner as an individual ceases to have any right over the property.
Where there is no specific agreement in the partnership deed, all partners, whatever their contribution, are entitled to share equally in the property and capital of the business.
Management.
All partners have the right to participate in the management of the firm.
Profits.
Each partner is entitled to share in the profits of the business.
The proportions in which partners are to share in the profits of the business will normally be set out in the partnership deed.
In the absence of an express provision, the profits are to be shared equally.
Remuneration.
No partner is entitled, as of right, to a salary for work done for the partnership.
Some partnership deeds do, however, expressly provide for the payment of a salary in addition to a share of the firm's profits.
Indemnity.
Each partner is entitled to an indemnity for all bona fide expenses incurred on behalf of the partnership.
Accounts.
The accounts, records, etc. of the partnership must be kept at the principal place of business, and be held available for inspection by any of the partners.
Membership of the partnership.
Any partner may prevent a new partner from being taken into the partnership.
Equally, a partner cannot be expelled by the other partners unless there is an express agreement to this effect in the partnership contract.
The partners' duties
A vital component of a partnership is the mutual trust between partners.
This is otherwise known as a fiduciary relationship.
Since the partners are, in law, agents for the partnership, they may therefore by their actions bind the partnership to a particular course of conduct.
The law therefore places duties upon partners which they owe towards the other members of the partnership.
These duties seek to regulate the conduct of partners and promote good faith between them.
Disclosure.
Partners are under a duty, by s. 28 of the Partnership Act 1890, to disclose  to other partners all matters relating to the partnership which are within that partner's knowledge.
This duty is of particular importance with regard to money spent by a partner on behalf of the partnership, and funds received by a partner on account of the partnership.
Duty to account.
Each partner must deal in partnership affairs with the utmost good faith.
Hence partners must inform the other partners of all personal profits which have accrued to them by virtue of their being partners.
This is provided for by s. 29 of the Partnership Act 1890.
Competition.
Partners must not engage in any form of enterprise which is in competition with the partnership.
To do so would be a breach of their fiduciary relationship with the other partners, and contrary to s. 30 of the Partnership Act 1890.
A partner who does make a profit through such competition may be required to forfeit such profit and pay the profit over to the partnership.
Care and diligence.
There is an implied duty upon partners to exercise reasonable care in the performance of their duties under the agreement.
Should partners neglect to do their work or fail to ‘pull their weight’ through absence, etc., the other partners are entitled to compensation.
Liabilities of partners
Here we are concerned with the relationship between partners and persons outside the partnership.
A partner may be personally bound by legal relations with persons outside the partnership.
However, he or she may also render all the partners collectively liable.
Debt.
All partners are jointly liable for the partnership's debts.
A creditor of the partnership may therefore sue any partner for the full amount of the debt.
Prior to the passing of s. 3 of the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 it was the law that judgment against one partner was a barrier to further proceedings brought against other partners for the recovery of the same partnership debt.
However, this barrier was removed by s. 3 of the 1978 Act, the effect of which has been to enable a party to bring an action against any one partner for the recovery of the partnership debt irrespective of the liability of other partners.
Where a partner's actions bind the partnership.
The partnership will be collectively bound by the actions of a single partner in the following circumstances:
(a)
the sale or purchase of goods, being goods either usually employed by the firm for its own business, or in which the firm deals, or goods belonging to the firm;
(b)
the settlement and receipt of payment for debts owed to the partnership;
(c)
the hiring and dismissal of employees;
(d)
the borrowing of money for the partnership's business, or the pledging of partnership property as security for a loan;
(e)
the drawing, issuing, receiving and endorsing of negotiable instruments on behalf of the partnership;
(f)
engaging the services of a solicitor to defend a legal action brought against partnership.
Where a partner's actions do not bind the partnership.
A partnership will not be bound by the actions of a partner where the partner's actions fall within the following situations:
(a)
The execution of a deed on behalf of the firm.
Therefore, without express authority by deed, a partner is unable to buy or sell land, or execute a legal mortgage on behalf of the partnership.
(b)
A partner may not submit a dispute to arbitration on his or her own authority.
(c)
A partner may not by guarantee undertake to pay a debt incurred by another person, on behalf of the partnership.
Closing down the partnership
A partnership may come to an end in any one of a number of different ways, as follows.
Time.
A partnership will end with the passing of the fixed period of time set out in the Partnership Deed (s. 32(a) Partnership Act 1890).
Notice.
A partnership will end by notice given by a partner of intention to leave the partnership (s. 32(c) Partnership Act 1890).
Bankruptcy.
A partnership will cease upon the bankruptcy of any one partner (s. 33(1) Partnership Act 1890).
An interesting case on bankruptcy of a partnership is Re Citro (Domenico) A Bankrupt) and Re Citro (Carmine)(A Bankrupt)[1990]3 WLR 880 (CA).
In 1985 two brothers, D and C, were adjudicated bankrupt.
Their only assets were their half shares of the beneficial interests in their matrimonial homes.
D was judicially separated from his wife and she lived in their house together with their three children, the youngest of whom was twelve.
C lived in his home with his wife and their three children, the youngest of whom was ten.
The debts owing by each of the bankrupts exceeded the values of their interests in the homes.
The trustee in bankruptcy of their joint and separate estates applied to the court by notices of motion for declarations as to the beneficial interests in the two properties and for orders under s. 30 of the Law of Property Act 1925 for possession and sale of them.
Hoffmann J. declared that in each case the beneficial interest in the property was owned by the bankrupt and his wife in equal shares and he made orders for possession and sale but, after considering the circumstances of the two wives and their children and, in particular, that the half shares to which they would be entitled would be insufficient for them to acquire other accommodation in the area and the educational problems of the children, imposed a provision for postponement until the youngest child in each case attained the age of sixteen.
On appeal by the trustee in bankruptcy:
Held, allowing the appeal and substituting a period of postponement not to exceed six months (Sir George Waller dissenting), that for the purposes of making an order for sale in favour of a trustee in bankruptcy under s. 30 of the Law of Property Act 1925 no distinction was to be made between a case where a property was being enjoyed as the matrimonial home and one where it had ceased to be so used; that where a spouse, having a beneficial interest in such property, had become bankrupt, the interests of the creditors would usually prevail over the interests of the other spouse and a sale of the property ordered within a short period; that only in exceptional circumstances, more than the ordinary consequences of debt and improvidence, could the interests of  the other spouse prevail so as to enable an order for sale to be postponed for a substantial period; and that, accordingly, since the circumstances of the wives and their children, albeit distressing, were not exceptional, the order sought by the trustee should be made.
Death.
Any partner's death will bring the partnership to an end.
By court order.
Section 35 of the Partnership Act 1890 enables any partner to apply to the court seeking an order that the partnership be dissolved in the following circumstances:
(a)
when a partner is, or has become, of unsound mind;
(b)
when a partner has become incapable of performing his or her duties;
(c)
when a partner has been guilty of misconduct likely to be harmful to the firm's business;
(d)
when a partner is guilty of wilful or persistent breach of the partnership deed;
(e)
when the business of the partnership can be carried on only at a loss;
(f)
whenever the court is of the opinion that in the circumstances it would be just and equitable to dissolve the partnership.
Illegality.
Where an event has occurred (e.g. the passing of legislation by Parliament) which renders the business carried on by the partnership unlawful, s. 34 of the 1890 Act provides for the ending of the partnership
When partners leave the partnership they remain personally liable for all debts incurred during the period of their membership.
Realization and distribution of partnership assets will occur after the dissolution has been brought into effect and all outstanding debts have been settled.
The dissolution, taking an account of the distribution of assets, should normally be provided for in the partnership deed.
Section 44 of the Partnership Act makes clear the procedure to be followed for the distribution of assets; s. 44(a) provides:
Losses, including losses and deficiencies of capital shall be paid first out of the profits, next out of capital and lastly, if necessary, by the partners individually in the proportion in which they were entitled to share profits.
Section 44(a) deals with cases where the partnership's assets are insufficient to meet its liabilities.
In the happier situation where the assets are sufficient, s. 44(b) provides that debts and liabilities to persons outside the partnership are to be settled first: partners' loans should then be repaid; thereafter, partners' capital contributions and finally any surplus assets should be distributed among the partners in the same proportions as they are entitled to take a share in the profits.
Limited partnerships
The essence of limited partnership as a form of business enterprise has been explained on p. 29 in the section on choosing the form of business enterprise.
That which sets a limited partnership apart from an ordinary partnership is the fact that provided certain  requirements are met ‘limited partners’ may escape full liability for partnership debts; thus their liability is limited to the extent of their investment in the partnership.
The partnership's name
It is normal for a partnership to trade under the names of the partners.
If, however, the partnership trades under a separate name, e.g. ‘La Bonne Maison’, the provisions in the Business Names Act 1985 will apply.
We have discussed these provisions in relation to sole traders in the section on naming a sole trader's business.
2.4 COMPANIES
A company is a distinct and separate ‘legal person’.
The formation of a company therefore involves the creation of a new legal entity which is able to trade and be responsible for its own actions.
The law relating to companies is regulated by the Companies Acts 1985 and 1989 and other specific legislation, e.g. the Business Names Act 1985, the Insolvency Act 1986.
The various types of companies
We are primarily concerned in the hotel and catering industry with registered companies incorporated and registered under the Companies Act 1985.
Registered companies fall into two main categories: public limited companies (PLCs) and private companies.
Private companies may be divided into limited and unlimited companies, and private limited companies can be further subdivided into those limited by shares and those limited by guarantee.
Public companies
A public company is one owned by its members; it is not public in the sense that it is nationalized.
However, to fall within the category of a public company the company must satisfy the following criteria:
1
The company must have a nominal issued share capital of £50 000.
2
The second clause of the company's memorandum of association must state that the company is a public limited company.
3
The name of the company must include the words ‘public limited company’ or ‘PLC’.
4
There must be a minimum of two members of the company.
5
The company must register (or, where the company is already established, re-register) under the Companies Act 1985.
A public company has a major advantage over a private company in that only public companies are able to offer shares to the public at large, and where possible to be quoted on the Stock Exchange.
However, not all public companies are quoted on the Stock Exchange.
By virtue of s. 81 of the Companies Act 1985 it is a criminal offence for a private company to offer its shares for sale to the public.
Large hotel and catering organizations, as well as breweries and other large enterprises, fall into the category of public limited companies.
Private companies
Private companies trade on a smaller scale than public companies, although many private companies operate a considerable business organization, e.g. major hotels.
The private company was the favoured form of enterprise where the membership of the company was to remain small, and there was a wish to restrict the transferability of share, e.g. within a family business.
However, the class of private companies is very broad; a private company under the Companies Act 1985 is any company which is not a public company and which consists of at least two members.
Previous restrictions on the transfer of shares in private companies and the limit on the number of members of a private company have been removed.
However, by virtue of s. 89 of the Companies Act 1985 both private and public companies which wish to allocate shares for cash must offer these shares for purchase by existing members before offering them outside the company.
A public company, unlike a private company, must be limited by shares.
A private company may, however, be limited by shares or limited by guarantee.
Alternatively, a private company need not be limited at all, and can trade as an unlimited company.
Limited companies
A fundamental reason for the formation of a company as a form of business enterprise is the protection of limited liability which it affords to members.
(For an explanation of limited liability refer to section 2.1.)
A limited company is one which provides limited liability for its members.
Limited liability may be provided in either of two ways: by shares or by guarantee.
Liability limited by shares.
A member's liability is limited to the amount, if any, which remains unpaid upon the member's shares.
Since normal practice is for a member to be issued with paid-up shares, the member's liability is limited to the extent that the shares which he or she has in the company are rendered valueless.
Liability limited by guarantee.
Where a company is limited by guarantee, the extent of the member's liability is the amount which he or she has pledged to guarantee the company in the event of liquidation.
A limited liability company therefore allows its members the privilege of being shielded by the ‘corporate veil’ from unlimited liability for company debts.
An often cited example of how this protection works is as follows.
SALOMON v. SALOMON & CO. [1897]AC 22 (HL)
Salomon carried on a business as a sole trader.
In 1892 he formed a limited liability company to take over his business.The memorandum of association of the new company was signed by Salomon, his wife and his five children, each signatory being issued with one share.
The company paid approximately £39 000 to Salomon for the business.
The method of payment comprised £10 000 in debentures (secured by a floating charge), 20 000 £1 shares and the remainder in cash.
The company later ceased to trade and a liquidator was appointed.
The debts owed to unsecured creditors by the company were approximately £8000, whilst the total of the company's assets was only £6000.
The unsecured creditors  therefore sued Salomon personally for the debts which were owed by the company to them, alleging that the company merely acted as an agent or a ‘front’ for Salomon himself.
Held:
1
The company incorporated by the memorandum of association was a separate legal entity from Salomon himself.
2
Salomon was not himself fully liable for the company's debts; his liability was limited to the extent of his shares.
3
Salomon, himself a secured creditor of the company, was therefore entitled to the remaining £6000 in company assets as part payment of his secured debentures.
We can see by reference to the Salomon case the great advantage of limited liability.
Imagine the result if Mr Salomon had continued to trade as a sole proprietor; he would have been personally liable to the full extent for all business debts incurred.
Unlimited companies
If a company is formed without limited liability it will enjoy the benefits of being a corporate personality.
Amongst other things:
(a)
the company holds its own property;
(b)
the company does not die with its membership;
(c)
the company can sue or be sued in its own name.
However, the members will be personally liable to the company to the full extent for the debts of the company.
Hence the fundamental advantage of incorporation is missing.
Imagine what the result would have been in Salomon's case if the company created was one of unlimited liability: all the members would have been personally liable for the debts owned by the company to the creditors.
Starting the company
The formalities required before a company can commence trading are relatively straightforward.
However, they are more onerous than the simple formalities involved in undertaking partnership.
Registration
By ss. 10 and 12 of the Companies Act 1985 the memorandum of association, together with the articles of association, are to be delivered to the Registrar of Companies, who retains and registers them.
The full list of documents which must be delivered for registration are:
(a)
the memorandum (s. 10);
(b)
the articles, if any (s. 10);
(c)
a statement signed by the subscribers to the memorandum
(i)
containing the names and particulars of the directors and secretary and a consent signed by each of them to act in the relevant capacity; and
(ii)
specifying the intended situation of the company's registered office (s. 10 and the 1st Schedule);
(d)
a statement of capital (s. 47(3) Finance Act 1973);
(e)
a statutory declaration of compliance signed by a solicitor engaged in the formation of the company, or a person named as director or secretary in the statement delivered under s. 10 (s. 12(3)).
Once the required documents have been delivered, the registrar, under s. 12(1), must be satisfied that all the requirements of the Act in respect of registration have been complied with.
He or she then, in accordance with s. 13(1), issues a certificate of incorporation and, under s. 705, allocates to the company its registered number
Section 13(3) provides that from the date of incorporation, stated in the certificate, the subscribers to the memorandum become a body corporate with the name contained in the memorandum.
Section 13(7) states that the certificate, once issued, is conclusive evidence that the company has been duly registered.
If the certificate contains a statement to the effect that the company is a public company it is conclusive evidence of this fact.
The Registrar of Companies must publish notice of the issue of the certificate of incorporation in the Gazette (see s. 711).
The company is now formed and trading can commence.
Obviously the formalities required to create a company incur costs:
(a)
registration fee
(b)
stamp duty of i per cent of the actual value of assets of any kind contributed by the members, less any liabilities assumed by the company as consideration for them.
Perhaps the lion's share of the costs of formation is the professional fees of the solicitors and accountants involved in a formation.
Where the company to be formed is of a kind which can be purchased ‘off the peg’ from an agency specializing in company formation, this is a cost-effective way to proceed.
The process of registration enables a private company to commence trading immediately.
However, a public company must obtain in addition a trading certificate from the Registrar before it may commence trading.
The memorandum of association
The memorandum of association is of crucial importance to the company, for it is this document which lays down the boundaries of the company's activities.
A useful approach is to think of this document as the company's constitution, giving the company power to act in certain ways and limiting its powers in others.
Since this document sets out the framework of the company and the purposes for which the company has been established, it is a public document available for inspection at Companies House, where companies are registered.
The contents of the memorandum of association are statutorily laid down by s. 2 of the Companies Act 1985.
The document must contain:
(a)
The name of the company.
If the company is a public company, s. 25(1) requires its name to end with the words ‘public limited company’, and by s. 1(3) the memorandum must state that the company is to be a public company.
If the company is a private company, the last word of its name must be ‘limited’(s. 25(2)).
(b)
The domicile of the company, i.e. whether the registered office is to be in England and Wales, Scotland or Wales.
(c)
The objects of the company.
(d)
The limitation of the liability of the members, if the company is limited by shares or guarantee.
(e)
Unless the company is an unlimited company, the amount of share capital, divided into shares of a fixed amount.
By s. 2(6) the memorandum must be signed by each subscriber in the presence of at least one witness.
Each subscriber must take at least one share, and against his or her name must be shown the number of shares taken (see s. 2(5)).
Model forms of memorandum  for different types of companies can be found in the Companies (Tables A-F) Regulations 1985.
Table B contains the model form for a private company limited by shares.
Section 3(1) requires that the models be followed as closely as circumstances permit.
The company's name.
A limited company may register any name it chooses, provided that the word ‘limited’ appears at the end of it.
The Registrar may refuse to register an undesirable name.
A public company must use the words ‘public limited company’ or ‘PLC’in its name, and the company's memorandum of association must also state that the company is a public limited company.
Public companies are also subject to the provisions of the Business Names Act 1985 if they are trading under a name other than the fully registered name of the company.
The reason for the inclusion of the word ‘limited’ in the title of limited companies is to enable those trading with the company to know that the liability of members of the company with which they are trading is limited.
It is a criminal offence for a company to use a misleading name (s. 33 Companies Act 1985).
Equally, it is an offence for a private company to pass itself off as being a public company and vice versa.
As to the choice of name, s. 26 of the Companies Act 1985 prohibits the registration of certain names:
(a)
names which include the words ‘limited’, ‘unlimited’ or ‘public limited company’(or abbreviations thereof) anywhere except at the end of the name;
(b)
any name which is the same as a name appearing in the index of names kept by the Registrar of Companies (s. 714);
(c)
any name the use of which would in the opinion of the Secretary of State constitute a criminal offence or be offensive.
Once a company has chosen its name it must comply with ss. 348–50 Companies Act 1985 regarding publication.
These sections make it compulsory to have the company's name painted on or affixed to the business premises and mentioned on all business documents and negotiable instruments.
Non-compliance is punishable by way of a fine.
The registered office.
Every company must have a registered office.
The fact that the registered office is located in England, Wales or Scotland must be stated in the memorandum of association, and the full address must be filed with the Registrar of Companies.
The importance of the registered office is that it is the address where writs may be served on the company and where communications may be sent.
It is also the address at which the following registers and documents must normally be kept:
(a)
the register of members;
(b)
the register of debenture-holders;
(c)
the register of directors and secretaries;
(d)
the register of directors' interests in shares and debentures;
(e)
the register of charges;
(f)
copies of instruments creating the charges;
(g)
minute books of general meetings;
(h)
the register of interests in shares.
The objects for which the company was formed.
The objects clause of the memorandum of association is the most important, since it sets out the purposes for which the company was formed.
The general rule was that a company could lawfully do only that which fell within the scope of the objects clause.
Should the company do a thing which  was outside the scope of the clause it was said to be beyond the company's powers and ultra vires.At common law an ultra vires act was unlawful and without binding effect and a shareholder could restrain the company from undertaking ultra vires activities.
A clear example of the ultra vires rule is set out in the following case.
ASHBURY RAILWAY
CARRIAGE & IRON CO. v.
RICHE [1875]LR 7 HL 653
The memorandum of association of the Ashbury Railway Company stated the company's objects to be: ‘to make or sell or lend on hire railway carriages, wagons and all kinds of railway plant, fittings, machinery and rolling stock; to carry on the business of mechanical engineers and general contractors, to purchase and sell as merchants timber, coal, metal and other materials, and to buy and sell such materials on commission or as agents’.
The directors, on behalf of the company, bought the right to build and run a railway in Belgium.
They contracted Riche to do the construction work.
Later, when the Ashbury Railway Company ran into financial problems, they declared that they no longer wished to be bound by their contract with Riche.
Riche brought an action against the company seeking to enforce the contract.
Held: The House of Lords held that the contract between the Ashbury Railway Company and Riche was outside the scope of the objects clause of the company's memorandum of association.
The company's actions in entering into a contract with Riche were ultra vires, and therefore the contract between the company and Riche was void and not binding upon either party.
Riche could not enforce the contract since the objects clause did not provide for the construction and running of railway systems, only for the manufacture of railway equipment.
Many companies currently in existence have ‘objects clauses’ in their memoranda of association which run to several pages in an attempt to ensure that the company will have the power to do anything the directors feel it needs to do.
The Companies Act 1989 attempts to remove the need for these lengthy clauses by providing that a company's objects may be stated in any manner.
Section 108 of the Companies Act 1989 has amended the ultra vires rule previously set out in s. 35 of the Companies Act 1985 by inserting new provisions (ss. 35A, 35B) that Act.
The effect of these changes may be summarized as follows:
The validity of an act done by a company cannot be questioned on the ground of lack of capacity by reason that the act is beyond the company's objects.
This does not prevent members from seeking an injunction to restrain the act from being done, nor does it affect the liability of the directors for such an act (s. 35(1) —(3) CA).
In favour of a person dealing with a company in good faith, the power of the board of directors to bind the company or to authorize others to do so is deemed to be free from any limitations under the company's constitution (i.e. memorandum of association).
This applies only where the person dealing with the company does not know that the action is beyond the powers of the company's directors under its constitution (s. 35A(1) —(3) CA).
Where the board of directors exceed any limitation on their powers resulting from the ‘objects of the company’, their actions may be ratified by a special resolution passed by a general meeting of members.
Such a resolution does not release the directors or any other person from liability to the company (s. 35A(3)CA).
A party to a transaction with a company is not bound to enquire whether it is within company's objects or as to any limitation on the powers of its board of directors to bind the company or to authorize others to do so (CA s. 35B).
It  may arise that the ultra vires transaction entered into by the company is one in which a director or some other person connected with the company has an interest.
Section 322A of the Companies Act 1985 now provides that such a transaction is voidable (i.e. can be set aside) by the company unless it is ratified by the company by a special resolution of its members.
However, such a transaction is valid as between the company and the other party to it, and the court may on the application of the company or the other party to the transaction, affirm, sever, or set aside the transaction on such terms as the court sees fit (s. 322A(7)CA).
The objects clause of a memorandum of association will normally be drafted in broad terms to enable the directors to have scope to manage the company as they see fit.
Two further points arise from s. 110 of the Companies Act 1989 which relate to the breadth of the objects clause:
A statement in its memorandum of association that the company's object shall be to carry on business as a general commercial company shall mean that its object is to carry on any trade or business whatsoever, and in such a case the company has power to do all such things as are incidental or conducive to the carrying on of any trade or business by it.
A company may by a special resolution of its members alter its memorandum with respect to the statements of its objects, subject to the power of the court to cancel the alteration.
Liability clause.
This simply states, in the case of a limited company, that the liability of members is limited.
In the normal trading company, as we have seen, the members' liability will be limited to the amount, if any, unpaid on their shares, but in a company limited by guarantee, it will be limited to the amount which the members have agreed to contribute to the assets in the event of liquidation.
This amount will be the sum specified in the capital clause.
Capital clause.
This clause must state the company's nominal capital, and how the capital is divided into shares.
The figure given in the capital clause of the memorandum is the nominal or authorized capital of the company.
The Act does not state any minimum figure for share capital in the case of a private company.
This can, in theory, be of any amount, provided the subscribers to the memorandum take at least one share each.
The minimum capital for a private company is one penny.
In the case of a public company, however, s. 11 requires the capital clause of the memorandum to state a figure which is not less than the authorized minimum.
The shares must have a fixed value, which can be any amount.
This fixed value is called the nominal value of the shares.
The compulsory clauses of the memorandum are only part of it.
The memorandum may have other clauses covering a range of different matters.
The articles of association
The articles of a company are the regulations for its internal management.
Sections 3 and 8 of the Companies Act 1985 authorize the Secretary of State to make regulations specifying forms of memorandum and articles for the different categories of registered companies.
These regulations are the Companies (Tables A-F) Regulations 1985.
The  forms of memorandum of association and articles of association are to be found in the Schedule to these regulations.
Section 8 of the 1985 Act deals with the forms of articles.
Table A in the Schedule to the Act specifies articles of association for both private and public companies limited by shares.
The articles of association as specified in Table A relate to the following aspects of the management of the company:
(a)
share (share capital, share certificates, lien on shares, calls on shares and forfeiture, transfer of shares, alteration of share capital, purchase by company of its own shares);
(b)
meetings (general meetings, notice of general meetings, proceedings at general meetings, votes of members);
(c)
directors (number of directors, alternate directors, powers of directors, delegation of directors' powers, appointment and retirement of directors, disqualification and removal of directors, remuneration and expenses of directors, directors' appointments and interests, directors' gratuities and pensions, proceedings of directors' meetings (including board meetings));
(d)
company secretary;
(e)
minutes;
(f)
company seal;
(g)
financial matters (dividends, accounts, capitalization of profits);
(h)
notices;
(i)
winding up;
(j)
indemnity.
A company limited by shares, by s. 7(1) of the 1985 Act, may register articles if it so wishes.
A company limited by guarantee must register.
Articles of association must, by virtue of s. 7(3), be signed by the subscribers to the memorandum.
The duties of the subscribers
The duties of the subscribers must at some stage be noted, and since we have already come across three of them, they can now conveniently be listed in full:
1
They must sign the memorandum.
2
They must sign the articles.
3
They must take at least one share each.
4
They normally appoint the first directors.
5
They must sign the statement required by s. 10 on the registration of the company.
The legal effects of the articles
Section 14(1) states that the memorandum and articles of association bind the company and the members as though signed and sealed by each member, and as if they contained covenants by each member to observe their provisions.
The effects of the articles of association are:
1
The company is bound to the members in their capacity as members.
2
The members in their capacity as members are bound to the company.
3
The members are contractually bound to each other.
4
The company is not bound to any person, except to members in their capacity as members.
Summary
It is appropriate at this stage, having considered the formation and structure of both a partnership and a company, to compare and contrast these two business structures.
1
A limited company is an artificial legal person.
A partnership is not.
It is an association of two or more legal persons, in the same way as a company, but the association itself has no legal personality and outsiders deal directly with the members.
2
In a limited company the liability of the members is limited to the amount unpaid on their shares.
In a partnership, the liability of the partners is unlimited except in the case of a limited partnership, and even then there must be at least one general partner with unlimited liability.
3
A limited company must be formed by the process of registration.A partnership may be formed quite informally, e.g. orally, or even by conduct, though it is wise to have a written agreement or articles, often called the deed of partnership.
4
In a public limited company the shares are usually freely transferable.
In a partnership no partner may transfer his or her share without the consent of the others.
5
In a limited company the members are not ipso facto agents of the company.
In a partnership each partner is an agent of the others, and each therefore is also a principal.
A partnership is thus a collection of principals and agents.
6
In a limited company the death or bankruptcy of a member (or even of all the members) has no effect on the existence of the company.
In a partnership death or bankruptcy of a partner causes dissolution unless the articles provide otherwise.
7
A limited company is subject to many special rules of law both statutory and otherwise.
The ultra vires doctrine is one instance of this.
In a partnership the partners are free to make any arrangement they like which would be lawful between private persons.
Running the company
There are many complex legal aspects of the running of a company which the nature of this text does not allow time to consider.
We shall confine ourselves here to the statutory requirements which must be observed.
Membership
The usual method of investing in a company is by taking shares in it.
By taking shares a person becomes a member of the company with voting rights and rights to a dividend.
A shareholder is therefore involved in the running of the company, and shares in the profits and losses of the company.
If, on the other hand, a person decides to invest in a company by taking debentures (a loan made by the investor to the company which is normally ‘secured’) that person is not a member of the company and has no involvement in the running of the company.
The rights of members of a company are set out in the articles of association.
A principal right of a member is the right to vote on company resolutions.
In addition to this right, minority shareholders are afforded further statutory rights by the Companies Act 1985, to ensure that their position is respected by majority shareholders.
Directors
Who is a director?
Section 741 (1) of the 1985 Act defines a director as ‘any person occupying the position of director, by whatever name called’.
This defines a director with reference to the functions which he or she performs.
A director is an officer of the company and implicitly an agent of the company.
A director is not an employee of the company and is not entitled to preferential payment when the company goes into liquidation.
How many directors are required?
By s. 282 of the 1985 Act every public company must have at least two directors.
A private company need have only one.
A company which has a sole director is required by s. 283 to have another person as its company secretary.
The normal practice is to appoint two or more directors, one of whom is the company secretary.
The appointment of directors.
Section 13(5) provides that the persons named in the statement (required by s. 10 upon registration of the company) shall, upon incorporation, be treated as appointed to be the company's directors.
By s. 288(1) of the 1985 Act every company must keep a register of its directors at its registered office, giving details of each director — name, address, nationality, business occupation, etc.
Profiting from the position as a director.
This can be illustrated by the following case.
GUINNESS PLC v. SAUNDERS AND ANOTHER (1990) Financial Times, 14 February (HL)
Where a company's Articles of Association state that only the Board of Directors can grant special remuneration to a director, a committee of the Board does not have authority to pay a special fee to one of its members.
In these circumstances, where a director alleges an agreement with a committee of the Board for payment of remuneration, the court will not, in law or equity, award a sum to him for services to the company, as in relying on such an alleged agreement the director involves himself in an irreconcilable conflict between his duties as a director and his personal interests.
The Board of Guinness properly established a committee for the purposes of the take-over bid for Distillers PLC.
Under an alleged agreement with the committee, Mr Thomas Ward, who was a member of the committee, received a payment of £5.2million for advice and services in connection with the bid.
Guinness claimed repayment of the sum.
It was admitted by Mr Ward that the Board had not authorized the payment.
Guinness conceded for the purposes of the application that Mr Ward had performed valuable services.
Mr Ward's position was treated by the House of Lords as that of a trustee.
The Guinness Articles of Association relaxed the general rule of equity, which forbids a trustee to profit from his trust, to the extent of enabling a director to make such a profit provided the Board of Directors of the company approved any special remuneration.
The Articles also permitted the Board to delegate any of the powers vested in it to a committee and defined ‘the Board’ so as to include any committee authorised by the Board to act on its behalf.
However, the Article dealing with special remuneration drew a distinction between the Board and a committee of the Board so that as a matter of construction ‘the Board’ in that context meant the Board and not the committee.
This interpretation was supported by the fact that a committee which might consist of only a few members could not, however honest and conscientious, assess impartially the value of its work or that of its individual members.
In their Lordship's judgment, the Guinness Articles permitted only the Board and not a committee of the Board to make the award of a fee to Mr Ward.
The disqualification of a director.
The provisions of the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 apply here.
A disqualification order is an order made by the court forbidding a person from being:
(a)
a director of a company; or
(b)
a liquidator or administrator of a company; or
(c)
a receiver or manager of a company's property; or
(d)
in any way, directly or indirectly, concerned in the promotion, formation or management of a company.
DISQUALIFICATION FOR MISCONDUCT.
By s. 2 of the 1986 Act the court may make a disqualification order where a person is convicted of an indictable offence in connection with the promotion, formation, management or liquidation of a company.
The order may last for a maximum period of 15 years.
By s. 3 of the 1986 Act the court may make a disqualification order where it appears that the person has been persistently in default in delivering returns, accounts or other documents to the Registrar of Companies.
By s. 4 of the 1986 Act a disqualification order may be made by the court in the course of winding up a company, if it appears that the person:
(a)
has been guilty of fraudulent trading contrary to s. 458 of the Companies Act 1985;
(b)
has been guilty of any fraud in relation to the company while an officer, etc., of the company.
The maximum period of disqualification is 15 years.
Section 5 covers convictions for minor offences, e.g. a failure to deliver a return, account or document to the Registrar of Companies, and may lead to disqualification for a maximum period of five years.
DISQUALIFICATION FOR UNFITNESS.
By s. 6 of the 1986 Act the court is required to make a disqualification order against a director when satisfied:
(a)
that he or she is or has been a director of a company which has at any time become insolvent (whether while he or she was a director or subsequently); and
(b)
that his or her conduct as a director makes him or her unfit to be concerned in the management of a company.
A company becomes insolvent for the purposes of this section if:
(a)
the company goes into liquidation at a time when its assets are insufficient for the payment of its debts and other liabilities and the expenses of the winding up; or
(b)
an administration order is made in relation to the company; or (c) an administrative receiver of the company is appointed.
The minimum period of disqualification is two years and the maximum period is 15 years.
DISQUALIFICATION FOR OTHER REASONS.
Section 10 of the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 and s.213 of the Insolvency Act 1986 together provide that if in the course of winding up it appears that any business of the company has been carried on with intent to defraud creditors of the company or other persons, or for any fraudulent purpose, the liquidator may apply to the court for a declaration that any persons who  were knowingly parties to such fraudulent trading are liable to make such contributions to the company's assets as the court thinks proper.
By s. 10 of the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 the court has the power to make a disqualification order against the person concerned, up to a maximum period of 15 years.
Section 18 of the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 requires officers of courts to give particulars of cases where a disqualification order is made.
The Secretary of State must maintain a register of such orders which is open to inspection.
Removal of directors.
Section 303 of the Companies Act 1985 provides that a company may by ordinary resolution remove a director before the expiration of his or her period of office and despite anything in the company's articles or in any agreement between the company and the director.
There is one exception for certain directors of private companies.
The intention of the section is clear: the shareholders must have power to remove the board.
However, the director so removed is not without remedy.
Section 303(5) provides that the section does not deprive the director of the right to sue for damages for breach of contract, if in fact he or she has one.
The legal position of a director.
Certain legal rights and duties arise from undertaking the post of director of a company:
1
A company cannot make a loan to a director of the company (see s. 330).
2
A director is an agent of the company and is therefore under a duty not to make a secret profit from the company.
3
A director owes a fiduciary duty to the company; there is nothing which a director can do in his or her capacity as a director which is not required to be done in good faith for the benefit of the company.
4
A director owes a duty to take reasonable care in the discharge of his or her duties as a director.
The role of managing director.
The articles of association will usually authorize the appointment of a managing director.
The MD will normally be an executive director, with a contract setting out his or her powers and duties, and terms of employment; thus the MD has a dual role — that of director and that of an employee.
The company secretary.
The company secretary is an officer of the company, one which every company is required to have by s. 283 of the 1985 Act.
The secretary is the chief administrative officer of the company.
The status of this role is recognized by s. 286 of the 1985 Act, which in effect requires the secretary of a public company to be a qualified individual.
Meetings
Ultimate control in a company rests in its members; they make up the company.
Directors, although often members themselves, are answerable to the majority of shareholders for their actions.
Control of company actions is provided for by a general meeting of shareholders.
The arrangements for such a meeting are normally set out in the articles of association of the company.
An annual general meeting (AGM) of shareholders must be held in each calendar  year, and not more than 15 months may elapse since the previous AGM (s. 366 Companies Act 1985).
The AGM will be convened by the company secretary, who must give at least 21 days' notice.
A certain number of members must be present before a meeting is said to be quorate and can proceed.
The Companies Act 1985 does not specify in detail the business to be transacted at an AGM but it will normally include:
(a)
annual report presented by the chair;
(b)
declaration of a dividend, if any;
(c)
adoption of the auditor's annual account;
(d)
election of directors and auditor.
A complete record of the business transacted at the AGM must be filed with the Registrar of Companies.
An extraordinary general meeting (EGM) may be convened by the directors if some business of special importance has arisen that warrants a meeting of members, or upon the request of members holding 10 per cent of the voting power of a general meeting.
Accounts and company records
The Companies Act 1989 requires a company to keep accounting records which give a true and fair view of the financial position of the company.
In Parts I and 11 of that Act provision is made for a new form of ‘annual returns’.
A company must also keep the following ‘statutory books’:
(a)
register of members;
(b)
register of debenture holders;
(c)
register of charges;
(d)
minute books;
(e)
register of directors' interest;
(f)
register of directors' service contracts;
(g)
register of substantial individual interests.
These records must be kept at the company's registered office.
Abolition of requirement for company seal
The requirement for a company in England and Wales to have a common seal was abolished on 31 July 1990.
Although a common seal may still be used to execute a document, a document signed by a director and the secretary, or by two directors, and expressed (in whatever form of words) to be executed by the company will have the same effect as if executed under the common seal of the company.
The change is effected by the bringing into effect of s. 130 of the Companies Act 1989, which substitutes a new s. 36, and inserts a new s. 36A, into the Companies Act 1985.
Section I of the Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 came into effect at the same time.
This abolished the need for individuals to seal deeds.
It is sufficient that a deed is signed and that the signature is witnessed and attested.
For both companies and individuals a new requirement is introduced for deeds: that the instrument must make it clear ‘on its face’ that it is intended to be a deed.
Private versus public companies
In the hotel and catering industry small businesses formed as private companies can easily grow, through successful management, to form very sizeable businesses.
The company is then faced with the prospect of stepping from private ownership to public ownership to ensure future prosperity.
A private company differs from a public company in a considerable number of ways.
Following from the Companies Acts of 1980 and 1981, it is much more advantageous to register as a private company.
Thus a private company may not always consider it advantageous to ‘go public’.
Closing down the company
Because a company is a distinct legal person, created by a legal procedure, it can be brought to an end only by further legal processes.
A company may be brought to an end by one of the methods of dissolution.
These methods include, but are not limited to, winding up, otherwise known as liquidation (see p. 59).
The Insolvency Act 1986 covers the procedures to be followed when closing a company.
It should be noted that, while many companies which go into liquidation are insolvent (i.e. cannot pay their debts in full), insolvency is not an essential ingredient of liquidation.
All the provisions relating to winding up are contained in the Insolvency Act, regardless of whether or not the company is actually insolvent.
There are two methods of winding up (s. 73(1) Insolvency Act 1986):
1
Voluntary winding up;
(a)
a members' voluntary winding up;
(b)
a creditors' voluntary winding up.
2
Compulsory liquidation, i.e. winding up by the court.
The major legislative provisions on insolvency are contained in Part IV of the Insolvency Act 1986 and the Insolvency Rules made pursuant to s. 411 of the Act.
These provisions cover:
(a)
court procedure;
(b)
notices;
(c)
the liquidator and his or her functions;
(d)
proof of debts;
(e)
distribution of company assets;
(f)
financial matters, e.g. liquidator's fees;(g) criminal offences for non-compliance.
Liquidation is not the only option available to a company.
Two others exist:
(a)
company voluntary arrangements;
(b)
administration order.
These are provided for in Part I of the Insolvency Act 1986.
Voluntary arrangements
Sections 1–7 of the Insolvency Act 1986 relate to a procedure whereby a company which is nearly or actually insolvent may resolve its financial difficulties to the satisfaction of its creditors without incurring the expense and adhering to the formalities otherwise involved under the Act.
Administration orders
An administration order is designed to help a company which is likely to become or actually is insolvent to survive as a going concern, or if this is not possible to ensure an advantageous realization of the company's assets.
The provisions regarding administration orders are contained in ss. 8–27 of the Insolvency Act 1986.
What is an administration order?
It is an order of the court directing that, for the duration of the order, the affairs, business and property of the company shall be managed by an administrator appointed by the court.
When can an administration order be made?
The court may make an administration order if:
1
it is satisfied that the company is or is likely to become unable to pay its debts; and
2
it considers that the making of an order would be likely to achieve one or more of the following purposes
(a)
the survival of the company, or part thereof, as a going concern;
(b)
the approval of a voluntary arrangement;
(c)
the sanctioning of a compromise or arrangement between the company and its creditors or members under s. 425 of the Companies Act 1985;
(d)
a more advantageous realization of the company's assets than would be achieved by winding up.
An administration order cannot be made in relation to a company which has gone into liquidation (s. 8(4) Insolvency Act 1986).
How is an administration order obtained?
The application for an administration order is made under s. 9 of the Insolvency Act 1986, by a petition presented to the court by the company, its directors, or a creditor (or creditors).
Even if the court is satisfied that there is a real prospect that one or more of the purposes (set out above) can be satisfied, it still retains a discretion as to whether or not to make an administration order.
The effects of an administration order.
As the purpose of an administration order is to give the company the necessary breathing space to achieve one or more of the purposes for which the order was made, the Act contains provisions designed to preserve the status quo and protect the property of the company against claims by creditors while the administrator attempts to achieve the purpose of the administration order.
By s. 10 of the Act, during the period beginning with the presentation of the administration petition and the making of the order or dismissal of the petition:
(a)
no resolution may be passed or order made for the winding up of the company;
(b)
no steps may be taken to enforce any security over the company's property, or to repossess goods in the company's possession under any hire purchase agreement (defined widely and including conditional sale agreements, chattel leasing and retention of title agreements), except with the leave of the court and subject to such terms as the court may impose;
(c)
no other proceedings, or execution or other legal process may be commenced or continued, and no distress may be levied against the company or its property except with the leave of the court and subject to such terms as the  court may impose.
The question whether a landlord can peaceably re-enter is not clear; it would be prudent to apply for leave.
The moratorium created by presentation of the petition does not prevent:
(a)
the presentation of a winding up petition — it has, however, been held that a winding up petition cannot be advertised during this period;
(b)
an administrative receiver may be appointed by a floating charge holder.
If this happens, the court must then dismiss the administration petition unless either:
(i)
the party that appointed the administrative receiver consents to the making of the administration order (something which is not likely to happen); or
(ii)
the security under which the administrative receiver was appointed was void or released.
The consequences of an administration order being made are as follows:
(a)
any outstanding petition for the winding up of the company is dismissed;
(b)
any administrative receiver of the company automatically ceases to be the receiver and must vacate office;
(c)
any receiver of part of the company's property (e.g. a Law of Property Act 1925 receiver appointed to collect rent) must vacate office if the administrator requires him to do so;
(d)
no resolution can be passed or order made for the winding up of the company;
(e)
no administrative receiver, Law of Property or any other kind of receiver can thereafter be appointed;
(f)
no other step may be taken to enforce any security over the company's property or to repossess goods in the company's possession under any hire purchase agreement, except with the consent of the administrator or the leave of the court and subject (where the court gives leave) to such terms as the court may impose;
(g)
no other proceedings, and no execution or other legal process may be commenced or continued, and no distress may be levied against the company or its property except with the consent of the administrator or the leave of the court and subject (where the court gives leave) to such terms as the court imposes;
(h)
an application to register a charge out of time over assets of the company will normally be refused.
The administrator is given extremely wide powers under the Act.
In general, he may:
(a)
do all such things as may be necessary for the management of the affairs, business and property of the company;
(b)
remove any director of the company and appoint any person to be a director of it (to fill a vacancy or otherwise);
(c)
call any meeting of the shareholders or creditors of the company; and finally
(d)
consent to secured or unsecured creditors enforcing their rights.
Voluntary winding up
A voluntary winding up will occur in any of four situations:
(a)
where the specific period for which the company was incorporated has expired;
(b)
on the occurrence of a specified event which the articles of association determine will bring the company to an end;
(c)
where a special resolution has been passed by members to wind up the company;
(d)
where there has been an extraordinary resolution to the effect that the company cannot meet its liabilities and should therefore be wound up.
A voluntary winding up may be a members' winding up or a creditors' winding up.
The financial circumstances of the company will determine which it is to be; a creditors' winding up will normally occur where the directors fail to register a declaration of solvency and the majority of creditors agree to petition the court for a dissolution of the company.
The consequences of a voluntary winding up.
The following consequences arise from a voluntary winding up:
1
The company ceases to carry on business.
2
The powers of the directors cease on the appointment of a liquidator.
3
Where the liquidation arises from insolvency, the company's employees will be dismissed.
If they are retained by the liquidator, this will be under a new contract of employment.
4
The liquidator or a creditor of the company is able to apply to the court to decide upon any question arising in the winding up and to exercise those which the court might exercise in a winding up by the court.
Winding up by the court
Section 122(1) of the Insolvency Act 1986 provides that a company may be wound up by the court if:
(a)
the company has passed a special resolution to that effect;
(b)
the company does not commence business within one year from incorporation or suspends business for a whole year;
(c)
the number of members is reduced below two;
(d)
the company is unable to pay its debts;
(e)
the court is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound up.
The most common ground for a winding up by the court is a company's inability to pay its debts.
When is a company considered unable to pay its debts?
A company is deemed unable to pay its debts, by s. 123 of the Insolvency Act 1986, where:
(a)
a creditor for more than £750 has served on the company a demand for the sum due, and the company has for three weeks failed to pay the debt;
(b)
a creditor has judgment for a debt, execution of which is unsatisfied;(c) the court is satisfied that the company is unable to pay its debts as they fall due;(d) the court is satisfied that the value of the company's assets is less than the amount of its liabilities.
The procedure for winding up by the court.
Section 124 of the Insolvency Act provides that a winding up petition may be presented to the court by:
(a)
the company itself, where a special resolution has been passed;
(b)
the directors of the company;
(c)
a creditor.
The court, when hearing the petition, may dismiss the petition, adjourn the hearing, or make any order which it thinks fit.
The consequences of a winding up order.
Where a winding up order is granted the following are the consequences of granting the order:
1
Any disposal of company property or transfer of shares, etc., is void.
2
Any execution of judgment against company property is void.
3
A copy of the winding up order must be sent to the Registrar of Companies immediately, and he or she is required to publish it.
4
Any legal actions against the company are stayed.
5
The official receiver becomes the liquidator of the company.
6
The directors cease to have power.
7
The company's employees are dismissed.
The official receiver
Official receivers, appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, are attached to courts.
By s. 136 of the Insolvency Act 1986 the official receiver automatically becomes the liquidator of the company upon the granting of the winding up order.
Following s. 131 of the Act a statement of affairs, in the prescribed form, must be submitted to the official receiver by the officers of the company.
As liquidator, the official receiver's function is to ensure that the company's assets are got in, sold and distributed to the creditors and other persons properly entitled.
By s. 144 of the Insolvency Act 1986 the liquidator obtains custody and control of the company's property.
He or she does not obtain ownership, unless this is given by a court order.
The full powers of the liquidator are to be found in s. 167 of the 1986 Act.
Payment of debts
In order to have a claim for payment a creditor must prove the debt owed to him or her by the company.
There are detailed rules setting out how proof is to be established.
It is important to note that the law gives preference to certain debts owed by the company before non-preferred debts are paid off.
Section 175(1) of the Insolvency Act 1986 states that the preferential debts must be paid in priority to all other debts.
The expenses of the winding up must always be met first; thereafter all preferred debts rank equally if sufficient funds are available to meet them, otherwise the following ‘pecking order’ is observed:
(a)
debts owed to the Inland Revenue;
(b)
debts due to HM Customs & Excise, invariably VAT;
(c)
social security contributions;
(d)
monies owed by the company as contributions to pension schemes;
(e)
wages and salaries payable to employees for the preceding four months.
Interest payable up to the date of winding up is included as part of the debt.
Notifying the public
Section 188(1) of the Insolvency Act 1986 requires that where a company is in liquidation, every business document on which the name of the company appears must state that the company is being wound up.
Company fraud, etc.
To discourage and prevent unjust and criminal practices, and to make provision for the punishment of those who indulge in them, ss. 206–11 of the Insolvency Act 1986 make stringent provisions for company fraud and deception.
These offences are ones of which a past or present officer of a company in liquidation can be found guilty.
Section 212 makes provision for the court to compel past and present officers of the company to restore monies or property misapplied, or to contribute such a sum as the court thinks just by way of compensation.
The court may impose personal liability for a company's debts on:
1
Persons who have knowingly been parties to the carrying on of the company's business to defraud creditors.
This is known as fraudulent trading.
2
Directors who ought to have realized that insolvent liquidation was inevitable, but who failed to take the necessary step to minimize the potential loss to creditors.
This is known as wrongful trading.
The franchise
The franchise is a form of business which has grown up in recent years and offers the would-be entrepreneur what may at first sight appear to be an easy way to start up in business.
The perceived advantages of a franchise are:
1
The business format has been tried and tested; thus the problems normally encountered in starting up a business have been overcome.
2
The risk of business failure is reduced in a franchise.
3
The franchisee receives ongoing advice and support from the franchisor.
4
The business will have a recognized brand name to sell, one which is supported by marketing activity for all franchisees.
5
Training is offered by the franchisor; thus the entrepreneur has a helping hand to assist in the early stages and thereafter.
6
Because of the scale of the business, a franchisor has considerable negotiating power with suppliers.
The benefits of these cost savings can be passed on to the franchisee.
Operating as a franchise may, however, have a number of disadvantages:
1
An initial fee is payable to the franchisor, as well as a percentage of the annual profits.
2
The franchisor controls and therefore limits the scope of the franchise and the methods of business operated.
3
The franchisor is the supplier of stock to the business, which limits the scope of the franchisee to find more competitive suppliers.
4
Sale of the franchise may not always be easy.
Starting a franchise
The initial cost of a catering franchise in the fast-food industry may be extremely high, depending on the product and its profile within the market.
Initial costs can be between £¼ and £½ million.
Usually the initial fee payable to the franchisor is between 5 per cent and 10 per cent of the total investment.
The fees payable by a franchisee to the franchisor include an initial fee which gives the franchisee the right to use the brand name within the specified territory, product training and advice on starting up the business.
A service fee is payable on sales made by the franchisee.
This varies according to the franchise, but averages between 10 and 12 per cent.
Advertising is a major cost in any business; with a franchise the franchisee hopes to make the most effective use of the franchisor's resources to raise the profile of the franchise and the product it sells.
The media coverage available to a large franchise operation is vastly different from that available to a small restaurant or hotel.
It is normal for the franchisor to charge the franchisee an advertising levy for promoting the product and the franchise.
Under the franchise agreement the franchisor grants the franchisee the right to sell the product in a particular territory.
If the premises are a fast-food outlet, the territory is delimited by limiting or excluding other outlets within a certain distance of those premises.
Training and product support are an essential part of a franchise agreement.
The ‘helping hand’ offered by the franchisor is often perceived as a key reason for the franchisee entering a franchise agreement.
The franchise agreement
The franchise agreement contains clauses covering the following aspects of the business:
(a)
the business name and the use to which the name can be put;
(b)
the territory within which the franchisee can operate;
(c)
the period of time for which the franchise is granted;
(d)
the initial fee to be paid by the franchisee for the franchise, the service fee and the advertising levy;
(e)
the limitations on the scope of the business, including the franchisee's right to sell or transfer the franchise;
(f)
terms which put the agreement into effect, including sales targets, the purchase of supplies from the franchisor, quality control, training and franchise support, and management and advisory services.
CASE STUDY
The Blue Parrot is a well-known cafe in King's Oak.
All its business is carried out under that name.
1
How should it be possible to find the name(s) of the owner(s) of the Blue Parrot?
2
Discovery of the ownership of the Blue Parrot will enable a person to know the form of business organization which is behind it.
What might this be?
3
In the event of the Blue Parrot closing down through lack of business, what, if any, is the significance to its creditors of the form of business organization by which the cafe was run?
4
If you were considering (either by yourself or with others) taking over the Blue Parrot, what factors would influence you in deciding which form of business organization to select?
Key points
The Blue Parrot is a well-known cafe in King's Oak.
All its business is carried out under that name.
1
How should it be possible to find the name(s) of the owner(s) of the Blue Parrot?
The Business Names Act 1985 makes provision for the declaration of the names of the owners of a business (see p. 36).
If the Blue Parrot is a company the names of the directors of the company are registered with the Registrar of Companies (ss. 10–13 Companies Act 1985)(see p. 46).
2
Discovery of the ownership of the Blue Parrot will enable a person to know the form of business organization which is behind it.
What might this be?
The possible forms of business organization behind the ‘Blue Parrot’ are:
(a)
sole trader (see p. 36);
(b)
partnership (see p.37);
(c)
limited liability company (see p. 45).
The Blue Parrot may be operated in any of these forms.
It may also be a franchise of a large company which is operated as a limited liability company (see p. 62).
3
In the event of the Blue Parrot closing down through lack of business, what, if any, is the significance to its creditors of the form of business organization by which the cafe was run?
The significance to the creditors of the form of business organization rests on the issue of limited liability (see p. 28).
If a sole trader or a partnership goes bankrupt the sole trader or partners respectively are fully liable for the debts of the business.
With a limited liability company the liability of the directors for the debts of the company is limited.Where a company is insolvent, the Insolvency Act 1986 applies (see pp. 57–621
4
If you were considering (either by yourself or with others) taking over the Blue Parrot, what factors would influence you in deciding which form of business organization to select?
The factors which would influence you in deciding on the form of business include:
(a)
financing the business;
(b)
grants and government assistance;
(c)
taxation and VAT;
(d)
formalities when starting the business;
(e)
limitation of liability.
These factors are fully explained on pp. 28–37.
Hotel and catering premises
The decision to embark upon a hotel or catering enterprise and the form that business will take are closely linked with the acquisition of suitable premises.
Indeed the type of enterprise envisaged will normally determine the kind of premises required.
Catering entrepreneurs will have three choices: first, to take over an existing catering establishment as a going concern and adapt the premises as they see fit; secondly, to convert already existing premises to be used as a catering establishment, such premises being derelict or presently used for some other purpose; and thirdly, to have purpose-built premises designed by an architect and built to their specifications.
In any of these circumstances the entrepreneur is advised to seek expert advice from a solicitor.
The acquisition of premises and their conversion to a specific use may on occasions raise complex legal issues; the acquisition of an establishment as a going concern may involve different, though equally perplexing, points.
The points set out below are not intended to be a full explanation of the intricacies of the acquisition of premises and their use as a catering enterprise; they are designed to illustrate some of the legal issues involved.
23.1 ACQUISITION OF PREMISES
A fundamental question to be considered when embarking on any form of business is whether to buy or rent the business premises.
Since the passing of the Law of Property Act 1925 there are only two legal estates in land:
(a)
freehold, the proper name for this being ‘the fee simple absolute in possession’;
(b)
leasehold, the proper name for this being ‘a term of years absolute’.
Hence one may have freehold possession (i.e. ownership) or leasehold possession (i.e. tenancy).
Freehold possession
Freehold possession (ownership) describes the situation where the freeholder or owner has more control over the premises than any other person or organization.
Ownership does not give the owner absolute rights over the property in question, since in some cases others may also have rights over the property; e.g. Lord Bogside may be the freeholder of Wychwood Manor, including five acres of parkland, yet the owner of the neighbouring property, Wormwood Cottage, may have a right of way to cross over Lord Bogside's land.
The owner of land must have due regard for others who occupy adjoining property.
Whilst one of the rights of owners is to use the land which they own as they please, there are restrictions on their use of land due to the rights of others.
A person has a right of use and enjoyment of his or her property.
Therefore, if the owner of the Wayward Inn, by using the premises as a hostelry, unlawfully interferes with another's use or enjoyment of his or her land, or some right over or in connection with that land, the other will have a right of action under the tort of private nuisance against the owner of the Wayward Inn.
Only a person entitled to the quiet enjoyment of land may bring an action for private nuisance, so the occupant of the property affected by the nuisance is the person who should bring the action.
It is sufficient for that person to establish that he or she has been prevented to an appreciable extent from enjoying the ordinary comforts of life; there is no need to establish direct injury to health.
The types of annoyance to the quiet enjoyment of an occupier are infinite.
It may be argued that the use of premises as a disco or late-night entertainment venue, especially if such premises are in a residential area, may amount to a nuisance to adjoining occupiers.
In Laws v. Florin Place [1981]1 All ER 659, residents sought to establish nuisance where the defendants had commenced trading as a sex shop in a residential area.
A further matter of some importance is the Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act 1969, which empowers a public health inspector who has been requested to visit the premises in question to issue a prohibition notice.
If the notice is ignored, after two hours of non-compliance the public health department of the local authority may commence a prosecution for breach of the Act.
This is not a civil remedy (as above with private nuisance); it is a criminal deterrent, to be used to ensure compliance with standards of health and hygiene, etc.
It may, however, be a useful tool where certain establishments (e.g. a local club or bar) hold overcrowded late-night ‘parties’ which occur on a regular basis and are a nuisance to occupiers in the residential area where the establishment is situated.
We have considered the tort of private nuisance; public nuisance should also be mentioned.
This is some unlawful action or omission endangering or interfering with the lives, comfort, property or common rights of the public.
An example might be obstruction of the highway, as in A-G v. Gastonia Coaches (The Times, 12 November 1976).
Hence if a wine bar in a residential area attracted such patronage that the patrons of the wine bar blocked access to residents' driveways by parking their cars, this is a potential public nuisance.
Public nuisance is a crime as well as a tort.
Either criminal or civil proceedings may be brought by the Attorney General.
Any private individual who has suffered particular damage as a result of the nuisance (i.e. damage over and above that suffered by the public as a whole) may bring a civil action in tort to seek the abatement of the nuisance and recover damages for loss already sustained.
Easements
These amount to the rights of others over the owner's land.
Easements include the right to light.
Hence if the construction of the building which is to be the catering premises shuts out light to the adjoining premises it thereby infringes the rights of the neighbours and gives rise to a cause of action for contravention of their easement of light.
Easements cover such things as the erection of advertising hoardings, etc, on the premises of the owner.
Covenants
Restrictive covenants amount to a restriction on the use of the owner's land for the benefit of an owner of other land.
Covenants also appear in leases where the person letting the property includes terms in the lease which restrict the person renting the property as to the use he or she can make of the property, e.g. the premises are to be used only for storage, not for retailing goods.
Statutory restraints
There are various statutory restraints on the manner in which freeholders may use their premises.
The local authorities have in recent times been empowered to control both the use to which property is put and the maintenance of premises.
Under the Public Health Acts building regulations have been imposed which cover the quality of materials and procedures to be followed during construction.
Furthermore, by means of various statutes, e.g. the Fire Safety and Places of Sport Act 1987, etc., Parliament has placed in the hands of local authorities the power to control the condition and usage of business premises.
Permission to ‘develop’ land must now be obtained from the local planning authority prior to building work or any material change in the use of a building.
Hence, building, converting or redeveloping premises (or simply changing the use to which premises are put) requires permission (see the section on planning permission on p. 71).
We can see that, whilst freeholders have substantial rights over the property which they own, these rights are by no means absolute.
Even the primary right of freedom to dispose of the property as the owner wishes is not absolute.
Can owners be forced to sell?
Indeed they can.
Public bodies may apply for a compulsory purchase order in respect of certain property.
The Secretary of State must be convinced before confirming such an order that the granting of the order is in the public interest.
The purpose of making such orders is to enable public bodies to carry out their function, e.g. the building of highways, etc.
Hence if the Roundabout Motel were to find itself traversed by the proposed M15 bypassing Seachester, it may be compulsorily purchased after the holding of the requisite public inquiry and the approval of the M15 route.
Leasehold possession
This form of possession describes the situation where a tenant (otherwise known as a lessee) occupies the property of another, the landlord (or lessor).
Landlords are usually the freehold owners of the property (or they may themselves be the tenants of the freehold owners).
The landlords are therefore entitled to all those rights of ownership other than those which they grant to the tenants under the lease, and those which they are  prevented from exercising due to statutory restrictions imposed by the Rent Acts, etc.
The lease granted by the landlord to the tenant gives the tenant exclusive possession of the premises for a fixed period of time, at the end of which (subject to any statute which provides otherwise) the property reverts to the landlord.
The tenants will normally be answerable to the landlord for the use they make of the property, and certain restrictions are normally agreed upon and are contained in the covenants in the lease.
The tenant is, of course, subject in the same way as the freeholder to statutory restrictions imposed upon the use of the premises, e.g. Fire Precautions Act 1971.
The respective rights and duties of the landlord and tenant, e.g. the duty to maintain and repair, are set out in covenants in the lease.
The landlord, being in the stronger bargaining position (even in the commercial setting), may be able to impose onerous requirements upon the tenant by means of covenants in the lease.
The normal forms of express covenant contained in a lease include amongst others a covenant to repair by the tenant, and a covenant that the tenant will not sublet the premises.
Covenants, though not expressly stated in the lease, may be implied from the fact of a lease being entered into.
Such implied covenants include:
(a)
a covenant to pay rent;
(b)
a covenant not to repudiate the landlord's title or ownership.
Implied covenants are of little significance with regard to business tenancies, since business leases are usually comprehensive and expressly deal with many points which would otherwise be implied.
The aspects of fundamental importance to an entrepreneur when seeking to establish a business in leasehold premises are the amount of rent payable for the premises, the length of the lease and security of tenure.
Obviously entrepreneurs will seek to pay the cheapest possible rent in order to minimize costs; moreover, they will seek to establish a fixed rent for the duration of the lease, so that the money paid in rent can easily be forecast when planning the business.
In times when there is moderate inflation a fixed rent means that the real cost of the lease decreases over the period of the lease.
However, most leases incorporate a rent review clause which provides for the periodic raising of the rent.
The question of the Rent Acts' regulation of tenancies is in the main  irrelevant , since this legislation applies primarily to domestic tenancies, and business tenancies are outside the scope of the Rent Acts.
Security of tenure is, however, provided by legislation, namely Part 11 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 as amended by the Law of Property Act 1969.
Business tenants within the scope of the 1954 Act are entitled (save in certain circumstances) to a new tenancy at the end of the old one.
This is so even if the landlord is otherwise unwilling to grant a new tenancy.
Hence if, when the lease of The Country Tearooms comes to an end, the tenant, Ms Prim, wishes to renew the tenancy and the landlord is unwilling to do so, Ms Prim may apply to the local county court for a new tenancy based upon the terms of the tenancy which has just expired.
The protection afforded by the 1954 Act applies to the majority of business tenants, even where the tenant is a company rather than an individual.
An exception to the protection of the 1954 Act was licensed premises where the primary purpose was to sell alcohol.
However, hotels, restaurants and other places of entertainment where the substantial proportion of the business consisted of transactions other than the sale of intoxicating liquor came within the 1954 Act.
The Landlord and Tenant (Licensed Premises) Act 1990 repeals s. 43(1) (d) of the 1954 Act, which provided the above exemption, so licensed premises will no longer be excluded from the 1954 Act.
The 1954 Act now applies to any tenancy of licensed premises granted after 11 July 1989.
However, an existing tenancy entered into prior to the above date will not be protected, unless it continues for two years, when it will come within the 1954 Act from 11 July 1992 and be protected thereafter.
The landlord may, of course, resist the granting of a new tenancy to the existing tenant on the basis of certain grounds provided for by the Act:
(a)
where the tenant has failed to comply with repairing obligations under the existing tenancy;
(b)
where the tenant has been offered suitable alternative premises by the landlord;
(c)
where the tenant occupies only part of premises, and therefore the landlord is suffering financially by not being able to let the property as a whole;
(d)
where the landlord requires the premises for demolition or reconstruction;
(e)
where the landlord personally intends to occupy the premises for business or residence, and has been the landlord for five years or more;
(f)
where the tenant has persistently delayed in paying rent which has fallen due;
(g)
where the tenant has substantially breached obligations under the current tenancy.
Compensation is payable if the tenant is precluded from obtaining a new tenancy on ground (c),(d) or (e).
Where the County Court grants a new lease to the tenant it may do so for a period not exceeding 14 years.
The parties may agree upon their own terms (this may be unlikely, since the situation is imposed upon the landlord rather than coming about through negotiation); otherwise the County Court may give the terms of the new tenancy.
The terms given will normally mirror those in the original lease, except that the County Court has the power to increase the rent payable.
The court does not, however, have the power to create a more extensive lease than the original expired lease.
If the landlord succeeds in opposing the granting of a new tenancy, compensation may in certain circumstances be payable to the tenant.
When tenants take on a lease they may make extensive alterations to the premises in order to make them better suited to the type of catering enterprise they intend to undertake.
Obviously, tenants will be unwilling to invest what may be considerable sums in refurbishing premises if at the end of the lease they will not be paid anything in recognition of the improvements to the premises which they have made.
Outgoing tenants may, under the 1954 Act, claim compensation from the landlord for any alterations or improvements which they have made to the premises where these have increased the letting value of the premises.
Prior to the making of such alterations the tenants should obtain the consent of the landlord to the proposed alterations.
Notice is given to the landlord in writing.
If three months thereafter the landlord has not replied in writing to the tenant objecting to the proposed alterations, the tenant is entitled to presume that the landlord consents to the alterations.
The tenant may then undertake the alterations, in full knowledge that he or she will be able to claim compensation for the improvements made when the tenancy ends.
If, during the three-month period after notice has been given by the tenant, the landlord lodges an objection to the proposed alterations, the tenant may apply to the County Court or High Court, depending on the value of the property, for a certificate authorizing the alterations.
A certificate will be issued by the court only if the improvements are ones which are reasonable and suitable and which will add to the value of the premises and do not detract from the value of any other property belonging to the landlord.
If the County Court issues a certificate authorizing the alterations, the tenant may claim compensation for the improvements made when the tenancy ends, although the landlord had not actually consented to the alterations.
Compensation in such cases must be claimed within three months of the landlord  serving a notice to quit upon the premises, or from three to six months from the date of the expiry of the lease.
The County Court rules cover the rules of procedure to be followed when claiming compensation.
What does the compensation cover?
Obviously the compensation covers improvements to the premises.
In addition it may also cover the goodwill of the business.
Can a landlord exclude liability to pay compensation by means of an express term in the lease?
No, he cannot.
Covenants
We are concerned with two forms of covenant: restrictive covenants, which may affect the use to which freeholders may put their land; and covenants contained in a lease, which restrict the position of tenants.
Restrictive covenants
A restrictive covenant is essentially a contract between two landowners whereby one agrees to restrict the use of his or her land for the benefit of the other.
However, this presents a difficulty: what if Lord Sloane, the owner of Ramsden Manor, agrees with Lord Wellworthy, the owner of the Stately Mansion Hotel (a nearby country retreat for ‘yuppies’), not to use Ramsden Manor as a hotel, and Lord Sloane thereafter sells Ramsden Manor to Mr Sly, an entrepreneur who wishes to use the premises as a country club?
Can Lord Wellworthy enforce the covenant made with Lord Sloane against Mr Sly and prevent Mr Sly's intended use of Ramsden Manor as a country club?
The common law does not allow Lord Wellworthy to enforce the covenant against Mr Sly due to the doctrine of privity of contract.
Only those who are party to an agreement are bound by the agreement.
However, equity does allow the enforcement of the covenant provided three preconditions are satisfied:
1
The covenant must be negative in its terms.
2
The covenant must benefit the land and not be merely for the personal benefit of the person claiming the benefit of the covenant.
3
The person claiming the benefit must retain the land which can benefit from the covenant.
In the example, clearly the covenant is framed in negative terms; however, is it for Lord Wellworthy's personal benefit (i.e. business interests)?
Could it be said that it benefits the land (i.e. it seeks to keep the residential character of the area)?
Lord Wellworthy can enforce the covenant only whilst he retains the legal estate in the Stately Mansion Hotel.
Restrictive covenants are sometimes used in relation to the future use of licensed premises.
If, for example, the Gnat's Water Brewery, which operates three inns in a small country village, wishes to close and sell off one of these inns so as to improve the profitability of its remaining inns, it may insert a restrictive covenant into the conditions of sale of the inn in question, whereby the purchaser of the inn covenants not to use the premises as licensed premises.
If the inn is later sold to another person who wishes to reopen as licensed premises or the first purchaser wishes to open the inn once more as licensed premises, the Gnat's Water Brewery will seek to rely upon the covenant to restrain such trading.
However, the wording of such covenants is by no means simple.
Covenants in leases
These are usually express, i.e. stated in the terms of the lease, though covenants may also be implied.
Covenants in a lease are enforceable as part of the contract between the landlord and tenant.
Such covenants are to be found in leases between breweries and their tenants.
Two examples are:
1
The tenant undertakes to obtain all his or her liquor from the brewery.
2
The tenant undertakes to do nothing which would put in jeopardy the continuation of the licence in respect of the premises.
Certain covenants are explicit, like the above, whereas others are very broad in their scope.
In Egerton v. Esplanade Hotels London Ltd [1947]2 All ER 88, the tenants covenanted not to do, or allow to be done, on the premises anything which might annoy their landlords or other tenants.
In fact the tenants allowed the hotel rented under the lease to be used as a brothel.
The landlords were able to enforce the somewhat broadly worded covenant and after due notice evict the tenants for breach of covenant.
4 Planning permission
Since the acquisition of premises (other than where the entrepreneur purchases the premises as a going concern and merely takes over an existing catering enterprise) normally involves at least a change of use and often the development of the premises, planning permission is required.
The Town and Country Planning Acts 1947 and 1971 place official control over the use to which land and property are put.
Control is vested in local planning authorities, who are under a duty to ens–e that all land and property within their area is used for the best possible purposes in view of the shortage of land and the needs of the community.
The Acts relate to the development of land, which encompasses building, etc., or any material change in the use of land or buildings.
Developments of this sort cannot be carried out without planning permission granted by local planning authority.
For what kind of building work is planning permission required?
If, for instance, Ms Intrepid acquires a small cafe and wishes to convert it to high-class tearooms and this necessitates minor internal building works and extensive redecoration, planning permission will not be required, since the alterations are purely internal and do not alter the use to which the buildings are put, nor do they materially affect the external appearance of the property.
However, any alterations which are external, or any which are internal and arise from an alteration of use, do require planning permission.
Hence, if Mr Keen purchases a freehold shop which was previously an undertaker's and wishes to open Ghosts, a wine bar, on the premises, although the building work he undertakes may be wholly internal, a change of use is involved and therefore planning permission is required.
In the many instances of old warehouses, barns, etc. being converted to catering premises, even though external work may not be undertaken, planning permission is required owing to the change of use, and similarly with large private residences being converted into small country hotels.
Where a change of use occurs the local planning authority is concerned with the intended use to which the property is to be put in order that the character of the locality may be maintained in accordance with other development schemes.
Before planning permission is required the change of use must be a ‘material’ change.
This is ultimately a question of fact.
In the case of Forkhurst v. Secretary of State [1982]46 P & CR 89, Hodgson J gave  a clear indication of the way in which the judiciary approach the issue of ‘use’ and ‘change of use’from one class of use to another:
arrive at an accurate description of the actual use,
see, as a matter of description, whether that description fits into a use class,
see whether the description includes activities that fit into more than one class,
decide, when there are activities that fit into more than one class, whether the one is ordinarily incidental to the other,
one can have a use that does not come within any of the specified classes but the activity either comes within the use specified or it does not and there is no scope for the management of the problem in terms of facts and degree.
Clearly if a wine bar were to find that the catering side of the business brought more trade and wished to convert part of the bar area into a restaurant, this would not be a material change and would not require planning permission.
However, if a pub wished to expand its business by the creation of a restaurant and moreover by offering accommodation, this would amount to a material change and planning permission would be required to convert the premises for such use.
‘Use classes’ are set out in the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1972 and the Use Classes Order 1987.
A change within each class does not require planning permission, whereas a change from one class of use to another normally does require planning permission.
However, even a change from one class of use to another will require planning permission only if the change is deemed to be a ‘material’ change: if, for instance, an entrepreneur wishes to convert a shop, which falls into the class of buildings used primarily for the sale of goods by retail, into a restaurant see Westminster City Council v. McDonald's Hamburgers (1986) 7 CL 325 (b).
Restaurants, cafes and public houses are outside the ambit of that class of use and planning permission is therefore required.
Indeed, restaurants, cafes and licensed premises which sell liquor for consumption on the premises (e.g. pubs and wine bars) were for the first time was the 1987 Use Classes Order brought within a stated class.
It used to be necessary whenever there was a change of use to one of these forms of enterprise for planning permission to be obtained.
Guest houses and hotels constitute a class of use; hence if premises such as a large farmhouse are to be converted to use as a small country hotel or guest house, planning permission is required.
However, if a farmer decides to let out, in return for money, some of the rooms in the farmhouse to friends, relatives and associates during the summer months, this may not be a material change of use and planning permission is not required: Blackpool Borough Council v. Secretary of State for the Environment 11980]40 P & CR 104 (QBD).
Use classes — illustrative examples
A1 Shops
A2 Financial and professional services
A3 Food and drink — restaurants, snack bars, wine bars, cafes, public houses, fast-food outlets/take-aways.
B1 Business
B2 General industrial
C1 Hotels and hostels
C2 Residential — care homes
C3 Dwelling houses
D2 Assembly and leisure — cinema, dance hall, swimming pool, leisure centre
Is planning permission required where the logical expansion of the catering enterprise requires part of the premises to be put to a different use?
If Mr Bulger, the proprietor of the Seagull Hotel, Loathesome-on-Sea, wishes to open a non-residents' bar at the  hotel to attract passing trade, whereas at present the hotel bar is open to residents only, does Mr Bulger require planning permission?
In Emma Hotels v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1980]258 EG 64 (QBD), it was held in identical circumstances that the operation of a non-residents' bar was not a material change of use and did not require planning permission.
This was due to the fact that the opening of the bar to the public was merely incidental to the existing use of the premises as a hotel.
It should not be forgotten that where structural alterations are made to licensed premises the approval of the licensing justices is required in addition to planning permission.
The benefit of planning permission to carry on a business from premises is normally lost by a subsequent change of use of those premises.
Hence fresh permission would be required before the original business use could be resumed, as the Court of Appeal held in Cynon Valley Borough Council v. Secretary of State for Wales and Another [1986]JPL 760.
A further example would be where the proprietor of a country hotel wishes to expand her business by adding a heated swimming pool, sauna, solarium, etc. to the premises and advertising the establishment as a health club open to non-resident members as well as guests at the hotel.
Such a proposal transcends three classes of use: first the existing use as a hotel; secondly the use of the premises as a non-residential club; and thirdly use as a swimming pool.
Clearly in such circumstances there appears to be a material change of use.
However, if the swimming pool, sauna, etc. exist and the ‘change of use’ is merely to increase their use and attract outside custom to the premises, is such a change merely incidental to the present use of the hotel premises, as in the Emma Hotels case above?
Where planning permission is required an architect will need to be instructed to draw up complete plans of the proposed work which are thereafter submitted to the local planning office.
There may be an inspection during the course of the work by local authority officials to check that the work is being executed according to the plans submitted.
If the developer has not sought planning permission prior to the commencement of work and has started work which requires planning permission, he or she may be served by the local planning authority with an enforcement notice.
This notice will require the developer to return the property to its original condition.
If planning permission is refused, or an enforcement notice served, the developer has a right of appeal to the Secretary of State for the Environment.
3.2 THE HOTELIER'S LIABILITY AS AN OCCUPIER OF PREMISES
Occupiers of premises, for example hoteliers or caterers, owe a statutory duty of care to all their lawful visitors under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957.
This duty is owed only to lawful visitors and is a statutory form of negligence derived from the ‘neighbour principle’ in Donoghue v. Stevenson [1932]AC 562 (HL).
The duty owed to lawful visitors
The extent and nature of the duty owed to lawful visitors are set out in s. 2(1) and s. 2(2) OLA 1957.
Section 2(1) states:
An occupier of premises owes the same duty, the ‘common duty of care’, to all his visitors, except insofar as he is free to and does extend, restrict, modify or exclude his duty to any visitor or visitors by agreement or otherwise.
We shall see later that the power of the occupiers to exclude or restrict their liability towards visitors has to a considerable extent been eroded by s. 2 Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
Section 2(2) OLA 1957 defines the duty owed:
The common duty of care is a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there.
In order to understand how the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 operates we must consider who may be an occupier and who constitute lawful visitors.
Who is an occupier?
An occupier of premises for the purposes of the OLA 1957 is a person who has control over the premises.
It is important to distinguish control from ownership.
Whilst X may be the owner of a hotel managed by Y, Y has control of the premises and Y will be the occupier of the premises.
However, the point is not clear-cut, since occupancy may in fact be shared by the owner and the person managing the premises on behalf of the owner (see Wheat v. E. Lacon & Co.
Ltd).
Furthermore, by the doctrine of vicarious liability, if Y is employed by X, X will be vicariously liable for the actions of Y. The essence of occupancy therefore is ‘occupational control’.
WHEAT v. E. LACON & CO.
LTD [1966]1 A11 ER 582 (HL)
The manager of a public house was permitted by the owners, E. Lacon & Co., to take paying guests into the ‘private’ rooms of the manager's living accommodation for his private profit.
The plaintiff and her husband were such guests.
The plaintiff's husband was killed after falling down a staircase in the private part of the pub.
In an action brought by the plaintiff against E. Lacon & Co. under the OLA 1957, E. Lacon & Co. denied liability on the grounds that they were not occupiers of the private part of the premises.
Held: The defendants, E. Lacon & Co., retained occupation and control of the staircase together with the manager.
Hence the plaintiff's husband was a visitor to whom both E. Lacon & Co. and the manager owed a duty of care under s. 2(1) OLA 1957.
However, on the facts the plaintiff failed to establish a breach of such duty to take care and E. Lacon & Co. were held not to be liable to the plaintiff.
Lord Denning observed: ‘In the OLA 1957 the word occupier is used [as]…a convenient word to denote a person who had a sufficient degree of control over premises to put him under a duty of care towards those who came lawfully on to the premises.’
Two points should therefore be noted.
First, differing parts of the same premises may be covered by different ‘occupiers’ who have control over them, and secondly, certain parts may be jointly occupied.
In a hotel a guest may indeed be the ‘occupier’ of his or her bedroom for the purposes of the Act.
So if a guest invites a friend back to the room, and the friend is injured in that room, the guest and not the hotel has occupational control and may be liable to the friend.
Alternatively, the court may hold that occupancy was shared between the guest and the hotel.
Equally, certain places such as public rooms or staircases remain in the occupancy of the hotel throughout.
Who is a lawful visitor?
Since the duty under s.2 (1) OLA 1957 is owed only to lawful visitors it is crucial determine in any given case whether the person in question is a lawful visitor.
A lawful visitor is a person who has the permission of the occupier to enter the premises.
In other words, the visitor has been either expressly or implicitly invited to the premises.
It will be a question of fact in each case whether the person is a lawful visitor and has been invited to the premises.
Since s. 2(2) OLA 1957 requires the occupier to take such care as is reasonable to see that visitors will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which they are invited or permitted by the occupier to be there, lawful visitors will be owed a duty only in so far as they remain within the scope of their invitation or permission to be on the premises.
Hence people who enter the premises as lawful visitors may not remain so if they step outside of their invitation or permission to be on the premises.
Guests will be lawful visitors to those parts of the hotel to which they have been invited, i.e. all public rooms (lounge, reception, restaurant), their bedrooms, conveniences, etc. provided for guests' use.
However, guests will cease to be lawful visitors if they enter parts of the premises, such as the kitchen, offices, laundry, etc., which they do not have permission to enter or if they enter parts of the premises where no one would reasonably expect them to go.
These principles are clearly illustrated in the following case.
CAMBELL v. SHELBOURNE HOTEL LTD [1939]2 KB 534 (CA)
The plaintiff was a guest at the defendants' hotel in London.
He had previously stayed at the hotel on twelve or thirteen occasions, but had never before occupied a room on the ground floor.
At about 11.20 on the night in question he arrived back in his room and wanted to use the lavatory.
He had ascertained during daylight that the lavatory was diagonally across the passage from his room door, and, as the passage was now unlit and he was unable to find the light switch, he crossed the passage in the dark and, by feeling his way, came to a door which he believed to be that of the lavatory, but which was in fact a door leading to the basement.
On opening the door and passing through the doorway the plaintiff immediately fell down a flight of steps and sustained injury.
Held: The defendants owed to the plaintiff, as a guest, a duty to take all reasonable care to see that the premises were safe, and their failure to light the passage in a London hotel at 11.20 p.m., when guests might reasonably be expected to be using the passage was a breach of that duty which had resulted in injury to the plaintiff.
As the plaintiff had not been shown to be guilty of contributory negligence, he was entitled to recover damages, on the grounds of negligence.
If, for instance, guests used a swimming pool at a hotel after dark, it is clear that they have by so doing stepped outside the scope of their invitation or permission to use that part of the premises, and a duty is not owed to them.
In Hillen and Pettigrew v. ICI (Alkali) Ltd [1936]AC 69 (HL), Lord Atkin observed:
The duty to a lawful visitor only extends so long as, and so far as the lawful visitor is making what can reasonably be contemplated as an ordinary and reasonable use of the premises by the lawful visitor for the purposes for which he has been invited.
Another aspect of this problem is that the permission of the occupier may be extended to the visitor for a fixed period of time and thereafter the visitor becomes a trespasser, and is outside the scope of the OLA 1957.
STONE v. TAFFE [1974]3 A11 ER 1016 (CA)
Mr Stone was a committee member of a society which regularly met at a public house owned by a brewery and managed by their employee, Taffe.
Taffe agreed to allow the society, of which he was also a member, to use an upstairs room at the public house for a social occasion.
Drinks were served to members of the club by Taffe until the early hours of the morning, without any extension having been granted by the licensing magistrates.
Mr Stone, when leaving the premises by a narrow, unlit staircase at approximately 1.00a.m. fell and was killed.
The widow of Mr Stone sued both Taffe and the brewery for damages inter alia under s. 2 OLA 1957.
The trial judge held that the brewery, through their employee, Taffe, were the occupiers of the staircase.
However, since the presence of the deceased on the premises was in direct contravention of an express instruction issued by the brewery to their manager, the brewery were not liable; his permission to remain on the premises had ceased at closing time, 10.30 p.m.
Held: Upon an appeal by Mr Stone's widow it was held that an occupier who intended to permit another person to enter and use the premises for a limited period of time had to give a clear indication to the other that the permission was subject to a time limit.
Accordingly, at the time of the accident the deceased was a lawful visitor on the premises, since the brewery had not given the deceased any indication that the permission they had given him to be on the premises expired at 10.30 p.m.
It followed therefore that at the time of the accident the brewery still owed him a duty of care under s. 2 OLA 1957.
Although we have discussed the duty of an occupier to lawful visitors in relation to guests and customers, the duty is also owed to employees and other people such as tradespeople who have a legitimate purpose, and thus an implied permission to be on the premises.
In Stenner v. Taff-Ely Borough Council (The Independent, 25 May 1987), the Court of Appeal held that a local authority which employed a gymnastics coach at its leisure centre was not liable to the plaintiff (a friend of the coach), whom the coach had permitted to use the gym at a time when the leisure centre was closed to the public.
Restrictions on the OLA 1957 duty
Exclusion clauses
The duty set out in s. 2(1) OLA 1957 applies ‘except insofar as he (the occupier) is free to and does extend, restrict, modify or exclude his duty to any visitor or visitors by agreement or otherwise’.
A hotelier may ‘so far as he is free to’ exclude or restrict his liability under the OLA 1957 by means of a notice (or a clause in the contract of booking vis-a-vis guests).
The clause must be sufficiently brought to the attention of visitors to the premises and must clearly cover the breach of duty which it seeks to exclude.
However, s. 2(1) UCTA 1977 operates to limit the effect of such notices and clauses.
Section 2(1) UCTA 1977 states:
A person cannot by reference to any contract terms or to a notice given to persons generally or to particular persons exclude or restrict his liability for death or personal injury resulting from negligence.
Hence a hotelier may not, in a case which has resulted in the death of or personal injury to a lawful visitor due to the hotelier's breach of duty under the OLA 1957, rely upon a notice or clause which purports to exclude liability for such injury.
Warning notices
Warning notices may in certain circumstances absolve the occupier of liability for the visitor's injuries.
Section 2(4) a OLA 1957 states:
Where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he had been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe.
It will not be all warnings therefore which provide a defence, only such warnings which enable the visitor to be reasonably safe.
An example would be if on a door to a storeroom which contained high-voltage electrical equipment involved in the supply of electricity to the hotel there was a notice which said ‘Danger: Keep Out: High Voltage’.
This might not be sufficient if the guest who strayed into the storeroom and was injured could not read English.
A warning notice must be readily understandable and clear symbols explaining the danger are required.
Liability to children
Not all guests at a hotel will be adults.
Is a higher duty owed under the OLA 1957 to children?
Section 2(3)a OLA 1957 states that in determining the degree of care ordinarily required, ‘an occupier must be prepared for children to be less careful than adults’.
Thus a higher duty is imposed (i.e. more is required of the occupier).
Liability towards employees and specialist subcontractors
Section 2(3)b OLA 1957 provides:
An occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so.
If, for example, a hotelier contracts for a window cleaner to clean all the outside windows of the hotel and, while undertaking this job, the person contracted falls and is injured, although the hotelier owes the window cleaner a duty of care under s. 2(1) OLA 1957, the extent of this duty is modified by the fact that window cleaners will themselves guard against the ordinary risks of carrying out the job and thus the hotelier may not be liable for their injuries.
Volenti non fit injuria
This amounts to the voluntary assumption of the risk of injury.
Section 2(5) OLA 1957 provides:
The common duty of care does not impose on an occupier any obligation to a visitor in respect of risks willingly accepted as his by the visitor…
It will be a question of fact in each case whether the visitor has voluntarily or willingly accepted the risk as his or her own.
Reference here should also be made to s. 2(3) UCTA 1977, which provides in relation to exclusion clauses:
Where a contract term or notice purports to exclude or restrict liability for negligence a person's agreement to or awareness of it is not of itself to be taken as indicating his voluntary acceptance of any risk.
Contributory negligence
Where visitors have contributed to the injuries they have sustained due to the defendant's breach of duty under the OLA 1957, then the damages to which they are entitled may be reduced.
Section 1(1) of the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945 states:
Where any person suffers damage as the result partly of his own fault and partly of the fault of any other person or persons, a claim in respect of damage shall not be defeated by reason of the fault of the person suffering the damage, but the damages recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced to such an extent as the court thinks just and equitable having regard to the claimant's share in the responsibility for the damage…
In Stone v. Taffe (above) a 50 per cent reduction was made owing to the claimant's contributory negligence.
See also Sayers v. Harlow UDC 11958]2 All ER 342 (CA).
Liability for work of independent contractors
If, for example, a hotelier contracts with a lift company to repair the lift of the hotel, and thereafter the lift malfunctions and causes injury to a guest, will the hotel or the lift company be liable to the guest?
Section 2(4)b OLA 1957 states:
Where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger due to the faulty execution of any work of construction, maintenance or repair by an independent contractor employed by the occupier, the occupier is not to be treated without more as answerable for the danger if in all the circumstances he had acted reasonably in entrusting the work to  an independent contractor and had taken such steps (if any) as he reasonably ought in order to satisfy himself that the contractor was competent and that the work had been properly done.
Hence, provided the independent contractor was one who could reasonably be entrusted with such work and the hotelier did what he could to ensure that the work was done properly, the lift company as independent contractors will alone be liable.
Liability to trespassers
The liability of an occupier towards a trespasser is now covered by the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984.
At common law an occupier did not owe a duty of care towards a trespasser under the rule in R. Addie & Son (Collieries) Ltd v. Dumbreck [1929]AC 358 (HL) where the following was said:
Towards the trespasser the occupier has no duty to take reasonable care for his protection or even to protect him from concealed danger.
The trespasser comes on to the premises at his own risk.
An occupier is in such a case liable only where the injury is due to some wilful act involving something more than the absence of reasonable care.
There must be some act done with the deliberate intention of doing harm to the trespasser, or at least some act done with reckless disregard of the presence of the trespasser.
However, this decision was subsequently overruled by the House of Lords.
BRITISH RAILWAYS BOARD v. HERRINGTON [1972]1 A11 ER 749
An electrified railway line owned by BRB ran through property open to the public.
The fences on either side of the track were in poor repair and in April 1965 children were seen on the line.
A particular place in the fence has been used as a route to cross the railway.
In June 1965 the plaintiff, a child of six, was severely injured when he stepped on the line, having passed through the broken fence.
The plaintiff claimed damages for negligence on the part of BRB due to the disrepair of the fence through which he had passed.
Held: While occupiers do not owe the same duty to trespassers which they owe to lawful visitors, they owe trespassers a duty to take such steps as common sense or common humanity would dictate to avert the danger, or warn persons coming onto the premises of its presence.
Lord Pearson observed: ‘In my opinion.
the occupier of premises does not owe any such duty to a trespasser: he does not owe to the trespasser a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the trespasser will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is trespassing.
That seems to me to be the fundamental distinction, and should be fully preserved.
It does not follow that the occupier never owes any duty to the trespasser.
If the presence of the trespasser is known to or reasonably to be anticipated by the occupier, then the occupier has a duty to the trespasser, but it is a lower and less onerous duty than the one which the occupier owes to a lawful visitor.
Very broadly stated, it is a duty to treat the trespasser with ordinary humanity…the occupier is not at fault if he has done as much as  is required of him, if he has taken reasonable steps to deter the trespasser from entering or remaining on the premises, or part of the premises, in which he will encounter a dangerous situation.
In simple language, it is normally sufficient for the occupier to make reasonable endeavours to keep out or chase off the potential or actual intruder who is likely to be or is in a dangerous situation.
The erection and maintenance of suitable notice boards or fencing or both, or the giving of suitable oral warning…will usually constitute reasonable endeavours for this purpose.’
The Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 outlines where an occupier owes a duty to a trespasser in respect of any risk of that person suffering injury on the premises, by reason of any damage due to the state of the premises or to things done or not done on the premises.
The Act further outlines the scope of the duty owed.
A point of difference between the 1984 and the 1957 Acts is that liability for loss or damage to the property of the non-visitor is not covered by the 1984 Act, whereas loss or damage to the property of a visitor is covered by the 1957 Act.
An occupier owes a duty to non-visitors, including trespassers, by s.
I(l) (a) of the 1984 Act.
When does the duty exist?
The Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 creates separate tests for the existence of the duty owed to the non-visitor and the content of the duty, if it is found to exist.
Section 1(3) states that an occupier owes the statutory duty if:
(a)
he is aware of the danger or has reasonable grounds to believe that it exists:
(b)
he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the (non-visitor) is in the vicinity of the danger concerned or that he may come into the vicinity of the danger (in either case, whether the (non-visitor) has lawful authority for being in that vicinity or not); and
(c)
the risk is one against which, in all circumstances of the case he may reasonably be expected to offer the (non-visitor) some protection.
Where the section states ‘he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe’ this applies to the situation where the occupier knows or is aware of the primary facts but fails to draw the reasonable inference that the premises are dangerous or that the non-visitor's presence is likely.
Whether the risk is one against which the occupier may reasonably be expected to offer some protection will depend upon factors which are more usually taken into account when assessing the standard of care, e.g. the nature and extent of the risk, practicability of precautions and, possibly, the type of entrant.
Where s. 1(3) is satisfied one must then consider the content of the occupier's duty.
The content of the duty
Under s. 1(4), the duty is to take such care as is reasonable in all the circumstances of the case to see that the non-visitor does not suffer injury on the premises by reason of the danger concerned.
This is an objective test which does not depend upon either the skill or the resources of the particular occupier.
However, what constitutes ‘reasonable care’ will vary considerably taking account of ‘all circumstances of the case’.
Factors to be considered when applying, s. 1(4) OLA 1984 are:
(a)
the gravity and likelihood of the probable injury — high risk merits greater precautions;
(b)
the nature of the premises.
(c)
the foreseeability of the presence of the entrant — the more likely the presence of the non-visitor the greater the precautions required.
Warning notices
Not in all cases, but in ‘appropriate cases’, an occupier may discharge his or her duty by taking reasonable steps to warn of the danger, or taking steps to discourage people from incurring the risk (see s. 1(5) OLA 1984).
Where the non-visitor is a child a warning will be inadequate to discharge the duty; further steps should be taken to discourage the person from taking the risk, e.g. the erection of fencing.
With adult non-visitors a warning notice will be sufficient.
Volenti non fit injuria
Section 1(6) OLA 1984 preserves this defence in relation to non-visitors.
The defendant must establish not only that the plaintiff consented to the risk but also that he or she agreed that if he or she was injured the loss should be his or hers and not the defendant's.
The plaintiff should also appreciate both the nature and extent of the risk, not simply the fact there is some risk.
Excluding liability
The OLA 1984 makes no reference to the question of whether an occupier can exclude or restrict his or her potential liability under the Act.
Negligence liability outside the OLA 1957
Whilst the OLA 1957 embodies a statutory duty of care towards lawful visitors, liability under the tort of negligence still exists outside the OLA 1957 with regard to visitors to the hotelier's or caterer's premises.
The OLA 1957 abolished the previous common-law distinction between invitees and licensees and substitutes a single duty of care.
However, there are two further points to be considered, as follows.
Contractual entrants.
(See Maclenan v. Segar [1917]2 KB 325 (KB) below) There may be an implied term of contract, namely that the occupier will take reasonable care regarding the safety of the party entering the premises under the contract.
Duty at common law.
It is arguable that the ‘activity duty’, namely a duty owed by people carrying out an activity on their premises (e.g. hotel or catering business) to take reasonable care for the safety of people who may be injured by their activity has survived the OLA 1957.
In other words, there may be a common-law duty to ensure that the hotel and catering premises are reasonably safe, apart from the duty owed as an occupier under the OLA 1957.
Duty to ensure that premises are reasonably safe
Whilst it may be argued that this is merely an illustration of the duty owed under the OLA 1957, it may also be said that this exists as a form of liability under the tort of negligence but outside the scope of the 1957 Act.
MACLENAN v. SEGAR [1917]2 KB 325 (KB)
A guest, upon arrival at the hotel, was taken directly to her [1917]2 KB 325 (KB) room by lift.
During her night's stay a fire broke out in the hotel and the guest, in a panic, attempted to leave her second floor room through her window by means of a ‘rope’ made from bed linen.
She fell through a glass roof and sustained injuries.
Held: The fire was caused by the negligence of the hotel management and, furthermore, the premises were not reasonably safe.
The trial judge, in finding for the plaintiff, elucidated two grounds for the decision.
1
‘Where the occupier of premises agrees for reward that a person shall have the right to enter and use them for a mutually contemplated purpose, the contract between the parties (unless it provides to the contrary) contains an implied warranty that the premises are as safe for that purpose as reasonable care and skill on the part of anyone can make them.’
2
‘The defendant had been personally negligent in that he had failed to take such steps and make such inquiries as would have revealed to him the defects in his structure and the risks of fire thereby occasioned.’
The first ground for the decision appears to be derived from the contract of booking.
In other words, there is an implied term of the contract that the premises are reasonably safe.
What if the plaintiff in this case had been a tradesperson (i.e a lawful visitor to the premises, but one who was not in a contractual relationship with the hotel) who was injured whilst trying to escape from the fire?
It would, of course, not be possible to argue along the lines of an ‘implied term’ of contract, since no contract exists.
However, the tradesperson would surely be a ‘neighbour’ under the neighbour principle in Donoghue v. Stevenson and be owed a duty of care in line with that principle.
It may, however, be argued that such a duty is identical with the statutory duty set out in s. 2 OLA 1957.
The second ground appears to be straightforward negligence liability regarding defective premises.
The case is of course silent as to the neighbour principle since it predates Donoghue v. Stevenson, but there is no reason to doubt that the facts of the case, if they were to occur again, could be dealt with as a straightforward application of the neighbour principle.
SALMON v. SEAFARER RESTAURANTS LTD [1983]3 A11 ER 729 (HC)
The plaintiff, a fireman, was injured by an explosion on premises occupied by the defendants, a fish and chip shop, when a fire in the premises melted a seal on a gas meter, thus allowing gas to escape.
The fire was caused by an employee of the defendants negligently forgetting to extinguish a gas flame under a chip fryer before leaving the premises for the night, with the result that the oil in the chip fryer continued to heat up until it caught fire.
The plaintiff brought an action in negligence against the defendants, contending that, because the fire had been started negligently and because he had been injured as a result, he was entitled to recover damages from the defendants.
The defendants denied liability, contending that an occupier's duty of care to firemen attending his premises in the course of their work was limited to protecting the firemen from any special or exceptional risks over and above the ordinary risks necessarily incidental to a fireman's job, and did not extend to protecting firemen from such ordinary risks which, on the facts, included an explosion of the  kind which had taken place on the defendants' premises.
At the trial of the action the plaintiff conceded that the defendants could not have foreseen the precise chain of events which led to the explosion.
Held: An occupier of premises owed the same duty of care to a fireman attending the premises to extinguish the fire as he or she owed to other visitors under s. 2 of the OLA 1957.
In determining whether the occupier was in breach of that duty, it was expected that the plaintiff fireman would exercise those skills expected to be shown by firemen.
Since the fire at the premises of the defendants was caused by their employee's negligence, and since it was reasonably foreseeable that firemen would be required to attend the fire and that an explosion of the kind which occurred might result from the fire, the defendants were liable to the plaintiff.
More recently, the House of Lords decided a similar case in Ogwo v. Taylor [1987]3 All ER 961 (HL):
OGWO v. TAYLOR [1987]3 All ER 961 (HL)
The defendant negligently started a fire by using a blowlamp to burn off the paint on the fascia board under the guttering of the roof of his house, thereby causing the timbers to catch fire.
The plaintiff, a fireman, went into the roof space to tackle the fire and sustained serious injuries caused by steam generated by water poured onto the fire, notwithstanding the fact that he was wearing standard protective clothing.
There was no suggestion that the contents of the roof space were unusually combustible or that there was any special danger from such a hidden cause.
The plaintiff brought an action in negligence against the defendant, contending that because the fire had been started negligently and because he had been injured as a result, he was entitled to recover damages from the defendant.
Held: A person who negligently starts a fire is liable for injuries suffered by a fireman while attempting to put out the fire, regardless of whether the particular injuries suffered by the fireman were reasonably foreseeable or whether the injuries were suffered as the result of exceptional or merely ordinary risks undertaken by the fireman.
There is a clear point of distinction between the two cases.
Salmon's case is based on the Occupiers' Liability Act, in that it was key to the decision that the defendant was the occupier.
In the Ogwo case, the decision is based solely upon the neighbour principle, the issue before the court being whether the injuries sustained by the plaintiff were foreseeable.
The extent of the duty
The duty to ensure that the premises are reasonably safe, either under the OLA 1957 or at common law, only requires the occupier to do that which is reasonably practicable to ensure the safety of visitors to the premises.
It is not an absolute duty requiring the closing down of the premises; it is sufficient if the defendant has done that which was reasonably practicable in the circumstances.
LATIMER v. AEC LTD [1953]2 All ER 449 (HL)
A violent rainstorm flooded the defendants' factory.
They put down sawdust but had insufficient to deal with the flooding to all areas of the factory.
The plaintiff slipped and injured himself on an area of floor to which sawdust had not been applied.
The plaintiff alleged negligence on the part of the defendants, arguing that they should have closed the factory to remove any risk to employees and visitors to the premises.
Held: The risk of injury did not justify the closing of the factory.
In the circumstances the defendants had done that which was reasonably practicable and had thereby satisfied the duty of care imposed upon them.
Lord Tucker observed: ‘I do not question that such a drastic step [closure of the factory]…may be required on the part of a reasonably prudent employer if the peril to his employees is sufficiently grave, and to this extent it must always be a question of degree, but, in my view, there was no evidence in the present case which could justify a finding of negligence for failure on the part of the respondents to take this step.’
ROBERTSON v. RIDLEY [1989]2 All ER 474
The liability of club officials for injuries sustained by club members on the club's premises has recently been considered by the Court of Appeal.
The plaintiff, a member of an unincorporated member's club (the Conservative Club at Sale), rode his motorcycle out of the club grounds.
In doing so, he failed to see a pothole in the driveway, fell off and was injured.
He brought an action against the chairman and secretary of the club, as officers of the club, claiming that they were liable for the injuries he had sustained by reason of the condition of the club's premises.
He brought his action on the basis that the rules of the club provided that the chairman and secretary ‘were responsible in Law…for the conduct of the Club’ and that by reason of this they were under a duty to maintain the premises in a reasonable state of safety and repair.
At first instance the trial judge dismissed the claim.
On an appeal by the plaintiff the Court of Appeal held (dismissing the appeal) that in so far as the rules of the club provided that two of its officers were to be responsible in law for the conduct of the club then (in the absence of an express provision that the officers were responsible for the condition of the club premises) the rules did not give rise to a duty of care towards individual members to maintain the club premises in a reasonable state of safety and repair.
This case is illustrative of the general common-law rule that there is no liability between an unincorporated club or its members on the one hand and individual members on the other.