

INTRODUCTION
A paradox confronts anyone who tries to understand the perplexing and persistent phenomena of ‘race’ and racism in Europe today.
On the one hand, in genetic terms, the physical or biological differences between groups defined as ‘races’ have been shown to be trivial.
No persuasive empirical case has been made for ascribing common psychological, intellectual or moral capacities or characteristics to individuals on the basis of skin colour or physiognomy.
Certainly, no good ethical case has been made to justify differential or inequitable treatment on such arbitrary grounds.
And yet, on the other hand, it is all too clear that racism still remains a widespread, and possibly intensifying, fact of many people's lives.
Reiterating that ‘there's no such thing as ‘race’’ offers only the frail reassurance that there shouldn't be a problem.
It cannot deal with the problems that do exist, because it fails to see them for what they are.
Our pragmatic starting point here is not whether ‘race’ exists.
Instead, we rephrase the question and ask how the category operates in practice.
The issue is not how natural differences determine and justify group definitions and interactions, but how racial logics and racial frames of reference are articulated and deployed, and with what consequences, ‘Race’ is conceptualized as ‘an unstable and ‘decentred’complex of social meanings constantly being transformed by political struggle’(Omi and Winant, 1986, p. 68).
Getting to grips with the dynamics of ‘race’, racism and antiracism in Britain today therefore means studying an ever changing nexus of representation, discourse and power.
And that requires a critical return to the concept culture .
Why a critical rereading of culture?
There are two reasons.
First, the academic study of the concept has been profoundly transformed in the past twenty years or so.
The belated impact of Saussurian semiotics, Althusserian and other neo- and post-marxist theories of ideology, Lacanian psychoanalysis and its account of subjectivity and identity, the tradition of British cultural studies associated with people like Raymond Williams and Stuart Hall, various strands of feminism, Foucault's concern with discourse and power: these are just some of the developments that today make it impossible to think of culture as a finite and self-sufficient body of contents, customs and traditions.
Second, it has been around the definition and significance of culture that some of the sharpest disagreements and disputes in the field of multiculturalism and antiracism have been expressed.
One of the most telling strands in the antiracist critique of multiculturalism in the 1970s and 1980s, for example, was that it suffered from an overemphasis on  culture.
We would give that a slightly different gloss: multiculturalism, certainly as it was translated into educational and political practice, often conflated the question of culture with a particular understanding of ethnicity .
The positive achievement of this tradition was that it allowed different communities, and their claims over their members, to be acknowledged and valued with a new, official respect.
Its drawback was that a multicultural celebration of diversity tended to reproduce the ‘saris, samosas and steel-bands syndrome’.
That is, by focusing on the superficial manifestations of culture, multiculturalism failed to address the continuing hierarchies of power and legitimacy that still existed among these different centres of cultural authority.
By exoticizing them, it even colluded in their further disenfranchisement.
Despite its apparent relativism, in practice it defined alternative centres of cultural authority primarily in terms of their difference from the norm of English culture, not in their uniqueness and their discontinuities.
‘Other cultures’, in more technical philosophical terms, were specified in terms of an all-embracing A:not-A opposition, not as a sequence of proliferating A:B, A:C, A:n differences that might call into question the very idea of such a definitive centre of cultural reference and authority.
The potential of such different communal traditions and emerging subcultures as rivals to the dominant national culture in generating and legitimating beliefs, values and behaviour was disavowed.
Multiculturalism thus remained within the political logic of assimilationism.
However unwittingly, it endorsed the claims to tolerance and inclusiveness of English national culture and the British state.
The limits of this approach were cruelly exposed by intellectual as well as political responses to the Satanic Verses affair in the late 1980s.
Attempts to accommodate both a sensitivity to difference and a commitment to the universalistic claims of post-Enlightenment liberalism became increasingly convoluted and forlorn.
Under pressure, an aggressive assimilationism began to reassert itself — for instance in Fay Weldon's pamphlet Sacred Cows (1989).
Another good reason for antiracist scepticism about culture was the emergence in the 1980s of a ‘new racism’ based not on ideas of innate biological superiority, but on the supposed incompatibility of cultural traditions (see, for example, Barker, 1981).
This presented itself as a worldly acknowledgement that different communities have different values and different ways of life which they have an instinct and a right to defend.
There was an increasingly explicit articulation of a ‘white ethnicity’ linking discourses of family and community, national belonging, English patriotism, xenophobia, and popular conservatism.
Neo-conservative philosophers asserted that ‘the consciousness of nationhood is the highest form of political consciousness’(see Gilroy, 1987, p. 44).
The same logic was evident in the self justification offered by one of the parents who in 1987 withdrew their children from a school in the Yorkshire town of Dewsbury because the majority of pupils were of South Asian origin.
This father insisted that all they wanted was for their children to receive a  schooling based on English traditions and values.
Denying the charge of racism, he protested that: ‘It's not a question of race, it's a question of culture.
In this climate, it is easy to understand why antiracists became impatient with the whole question of culture.
It is not individual beliefs and prejudices about ‘race’ that are the main problem, they argued, nor the contents of different traditions.
What matters are the structures of power, the institutions and the social practices that produce racial oppression and discriminatory outcomes.
In practice, of course, antiracist intellectuals and activists did not ignore the problematic relationship between the production of racialized meanings and the exercise of power.
Rather than pose it as a question of culture, however, they tackled it — often very productively — in terms of ideology .
This concept has the advantage of stressing that people's perceptions and beliefs are not just the inheritance of a shared ethnic descent, but are rooted in broader economic structures and material interests.
It can also provide the rationale for arguing that certain perceptions and beliefs conceal real social contradictions and thus present an inadequate representation of reality.
This made it possible to rethink multiculturalism's psychological interpretation of racism as individual prejudice in more structural and politicized terms.
Meanings and beliefs had not become irrelevant, but the coherence and falsity of racist ideas were now ascribed to the function they serve in legitimating social practices that reinforce an unequal distribution of power between groups differentiated in racial and/or ethnic terms (see, for example, Troyna and Carrington, 1990, p. 56).
In such definitions, ‘race’ is still conceived as a false representation of reality rather than as part of the process of constructing an operative symbolic and social reality: literally, a common sense.
By continuing to ask ‘is it true?’ instead of analysing ‘which truth?’and ‘whose truth?’, antiracists often remain trapped within the paradox we identified at the beginning of this Introduction.
While they chastised multiculturalism for identifying racism as the ideas in people's heads when it should be located in institutional structures, they themselves underestimated the resilience, malleability and power of ‘race’ as a discursive category.
Their strategies therefore still targeted the irrationality of racist beliefs, whereas, as Omi and Win ant's definition suggests, the fictional or metaphorical status of the category ‘race’ in no way undermines its symbolic and social effectuality.
‘Race’ can produce simplified interpretations of complex social, economic and cultural relations for antiracists as well as racists.
This signals another danger.
The term racism can be stretched to impose a brittle coherence on multi-faceted phenomena, thus avoiding the need for more diverse and discriminating forms of analysis.
It can also impose a constraining and reductionist interpretative grid on the political and cultural life of Afro-Caribbean, Asian and other minority communities in  Britain today.
Not only can it homogenize these communities as insensitively as assimilationism or multiculturalism.
It can also imply that all the experiences and aspirations of their members are exhausted by the fact of racial subordination.
How can the critical reappropriation of the concept of culture proposed here overcome the limitations that we have identified in both multiculturalism and antiracism?
It begins by re-posing the question in terms of cultural authority and individual agency.
These cannot be explained simply in terms of shared descent (as they were in some multicultural accounts of ethnicity) or a shared socio-economic location and history (as they are in some antiracist versions of ‘the black experience’).
Rather, they require a careful analysis of contemporary political struggles over questions of representation, symbolic boundary formation, and identification.
It is in this conflictual dialogue that the meanings of ‘race’, racism and antiracism are forged, broken and remade.
This suggests a definition of culture that is closer to what many social scientists and cultural theorists would have in mind when they talk about culture than the versions associated with either multiculturalism or antiracism.
This is not limited to religious beliefs, communal rituals or shared traditions.
On the contrary, it begins with the way that such manifest phenomena are produced through systems of meaning, through structures of power, and through the institutions in which these are deployed.
In the following summary of current approaches to the analysis of culture, for example, Raymond Williams suggests that it is these interactions which produce the way of life defining a social collectivity:
…there is some practical convergence between (i) the anthropological and sociological senses of culture as a distinct ‘whole way of life’, within which, now, a distinctive ‘signifying system’ is seen not only as essential but as essentially involved in all forms of social activity, and (ii) the more specialized if also more common sense of culture as ‘artistic and intellectual activities’, though these, because of the emphasis on a general signifying system, are now much more broadly defined, to include not only the traditional arts and forms of intellectual production but also all the ‘signifying practices’— from language through the arts and philosophy to journalism, fashion and advertising — which now constitute this complex and necessarily extended field.
(Williams, 1981, p. 13)
From this point of view, culture is no longer understood as what expresses the identity of a community.
Rather, it refers to the processes, categories and know ledges through which communities are defined as such: that is, how they are rendered specific and differentiated.
It is worth observing how devastating this reconceptualization is for the cultural absolutism evident in the National Curriculum introduced into  the schools of England and Wales in the wake of the Education Reform Act (1988).
Although this had a complex rationale, there is no question that one motive behind it was a desire to reassert a largely factitious national identity — the ‘imagined community’ of nationhood that is supposed to transcend all inequalities, oppressions and exploitation (Anderson, 1983).
In the face of an increasingly miscegenated and polyglot population, the National Curriculum proposed a standard language, a definitive canon of English literature and a single, shared narrative of the nation's history.
In classic style, it claimed the legitimacy of anteriority for these.
‘Let's get back to the safe, sure way things used to be,’ was its implicit message, ‘back to the virtues and verities that have served ‘us’since time immemorial.’
The trouble is that the traditions and symbols that embody and transmit these supposedly universal and perennial virtues usually turn out to be modern inventions (Hobsbawm and Ranger, 1983).
In that sense, the apparent traditionalism of the National Curriculum was a typical tactic of modern state craft and modern nation formation.
The rethinking of culture in the light of theoretical advances and political experience over recent years undermines the claims and comforts of community understood in terms of a normative identity and tradition, whether that of nation, religion, ethnicity or ‘the black experience’.
It emphasizes the contingency of any instituted cultural authority.
It insists that ‘race’ and identity are inherently contestable social and political categories: that is why it calls into question multicultural and antiracist paradigms, as well as the logic of assimilation.
What new intellectual and political agenda does this reorientation imply?
What new possibilities and demands — political, educational, aesthetic — does it create?
Once the apparent coherence and universality of racism is questioned, it becomes necessary to grasp the historical and cultural specificity of different racisms.
This in turn raises a serious and subversive problem identified by Paul Gilroy: that ‘the content of’ antiracism’has not always been a direct response to the ideologies and practices of racism' (Gilroy, 1987, p. 114).
Both these anti-essentializing moves demand a reconceptualization of community: a shift from the idea of inherited or imposed authority and towards the principles of difference and dialogue.
The practical working out of this change can be seen in the syncretism of what Gilroy terms ‘black expressive cultures’ in contemporary Britain (Gilroy, 1987, ch. 5).
It is also particularly striking in the exploration and articulation of hybrid identities — both black and British — of artists photographers and film-makers like Sonia Boyce, David A. Bailey, Reece Auguitse, Isaac Julien, and Pratibha Parmar.
For all its variety, one question that is posed by their work — sometimes explicitly, often implicitly — is this: how might it be possible, in unpropitious times, to create a radically pluralistic culture for a post-colonial society like Britain?
This represents neither the old multicultural celebration of diversity, nor  a naïve post modern embrace of an endless multiplication of cultural identities.
The debate about representation and culture is here articulated with a sharper political urgency.
Their work raises questions with far reaching implications for the educational orthodoxies of both multiculturalism and antiracism.
What would be the institutional conditions for a genuine cultural and political democracy, for example?
And what would be the role of education and cultural production in the attempt to bring those conditions into being?
A critical rethinking of the relationship between culture, ‘race’ and politics is the linking thread that runs through the various articles collected together here.
The book is divided into three sections.
The first presents a number of critiques of antiracism.
Although there are differences between them, each addresses in its own way the range of concerns sketched in this Introduction.
In contrast to the ‘anti-antiracism’ generated by the New Right, all these articles come out of a continuing and committed opposition to the demonstrable inequities and injustices of racism.
In exemplary fashion, however, they enact a critical self -reflection.
What comes under critical scrutiny here are the presuppositions, habits of thought and strategies that, under the banner of Antiracism, dominated political interventions in local authorities, education and the arts from the late seventies to the mid-eighties.
In a wide-ranging challenge to the opposition of multiculturalism to antiracism as an adequate framework for educational debate, Ali Rattansi argues that, in the wake of the Burnage Report, it is necessary to identify new priorities that undermine old certainties.
In a similar vein, Paul Gilroy develops his critique of antiracist strategies that remain too firmly embedded within the (municipal) state.
He insists that there is more to the emancipation of black people than opposition to racism.
The alternative he poses is the creation of a radical, democratic civil society by linking immediate local concerns to globalizing economic and political developments.
This entails a new conception of ‘micro-political’ activity.
In reflecting on his own practices as an antiracist teacher, Philip Cohen too argues for more nuanced and localized initiatives to replace what he sees as the overly prescriptive and universalistic policies of the past.
Caroline Knowles and Sharmila Mercer in their article, and Avtar Brah in hers, explore the articulations — actual and potential — between antiracism and feminism.
Both articles sustain the case for an anti-essentialist and pragmatic politics, and therefore question the appeal to the category of experience in the two movements.
Knowles and Mercer reject the idea that there is any general relationship between ‘race’ and gender as forms of division: rather, both racism and sexism should be ‘viewed as a series of effects which do not have a single cause’.
They argue that close attention to the processes through which constituencies are constructed and — inevitably temporary — links articulated between them  allows for more effective forms of political calculation and intervention.
Brah's review of the debate about the inclusiveness and limitations of the category ‘black’ and of the often fractious engagement between feminism and antiracism shows her to be not unsympathetic to this post-structuralist perspective.
Nevertheless, she argues the case for continuing to set the micro-political perspective in the context of a macro-political explanation of social relations.
The second section of the reader outlines some of the diverse phenomena that are often lumped together and explained by the single category of racism.
In tracing how the study of English literature took on its claims to be a moralizing influence, Gauri Viswanathan contributes to a history of the subtle stratagems of colonial administration and their contemporary legacy.
In doing so, she also shows how a literary education took on this curious status in India before the state took any role in popular education in England and before literary studies had been institutionalized as ‘English’.
Starting from Manet's two pictures Olympia and Nana , Sander Gilman unravels their semiotic conditions of existence.
His cultural detective work leads him through aesthetic, anthropological and medical discourses about ‘race’ and sexuality, specifically as they were articulated around the figures of the female Hottentot and the prostitute in the nineteenth century.
He uncovers the complex interaction between ‘race’ and sexuality in the visual representation of the Other, and suggests the sources of the male/white fascination with the mysteries of the female/black.
In establishing the relevance for this field of psychoanalytic concepts, Claire Pajaczkowska and Lola Young identify some of the psychological mechanisms involved in the production of individual and social racism.
Their article is structured around two case studies in racialized representation: the film Mona Lisa and the novel Beloved .
In his seminal chapter ‘The fact of blackness’, from Black Skins ,White Masks , Frantz Fanon vividly conveys the experience of being Other —‘the desperate struggles of a Negro who is driven to discover the meaning of black identity’.
In doing so, he shows how the socially and historically constructed opposition between blackness and whiteness takes on the absolute, unquestionable authority of a natural fact.
By exposing the process, Fan on opened the way to the sort of anti-essentialist understanding of racial categories that is the theme of this book.
The third section offers a critical exploration of possible starting points for new strategies, not least by looking anew at some of the difficult and resilient questions about cultural identity and belongingness, about ethnicity and community, that were often glossed over or disavowed in the antiracist movement.
Robert Young suggests why the presupposition of a shared humanity cannot provide such a starting point, although it may operate as a horizon of thought, a desirable if always unachievable aspiration.
Stuart Hall suggests that certain artistic and aesthetic practices  prefigure a new conception of ethnicity, one which would be neither homogeneous nor normative, but always negotiated and in a state of becoming.
In his analysis of the Satanic Verses affair on British Asian Muslims, Tariq Modood challenges the hegemonic claims of the category ‘black’ and criticizes the indiscriminate and ill-informed use of the term ‘fundamentalism’.
As an alternative, he offers a reasoned defence of the demands of community understood in more traditional terms.
Drawing in part on her involvement in the organization Women Against Fundamentalism, Nira Yuval-Davis registers some of the potential pitfalls of that approach for women.
James Donald Ali Rattansi
ANTIRACISM
POSSIBILITIES AND LIMITS
CHANGING THE SUBJECT?
RACISM, CULTURE AND EDUCATION
ALI RATTANSI
The multiculturalist and antiracist initiatives in education that emerged in the 1980s set themselves extraordinarily difficult tasks.
In challenging the structural and cultural marginalization of Britain's black minority communities, they also began to shift the terms around which British national identities had sedimented over the years of colonial domination and imperial grandeur and before.
This was an absolutely necessary intervention.
This article is written with some knowledge, experience and appreciation of the commitment, the personal costs and the professional risks involved for those engaged in the struggle to reform school curricula, teacher education and other spheres and practices.
I do not wish to sell their achievements short.
New cultural and political spaces have been opened up, and hegemonic racial identities and structures have been loosened.
Despite these real successes, however, my sense is that now is a time to take stock and to reflect on the theoretical, pedagogic and political foundations of multiculturalism and antiracism.
This is a period of transition.
Significant changes are under way in the economic, political and cultural formation of black British communities.
Older certainties about the nature and direction of black struggles no longer hold.
In education, the liberal optimism of the 1985 Swann Report has not only been punctured by the policies of Conservative governments and by the ideological counter-offensive of the New Right.
From within the movement, the publication of the Macdonald Report on the tragic events at Burnage High School has been widely interpreted as signalling the failure of the antiracist project in education.
If antiracism is to be effective in education, it is therefore necessary to take a hard and perhaps painful look at the terms under which we have operated so far.
We need to understand the extent to which oppositional practices have, wittingly or unwittingly, shared the assumptions of the dominant state-led strategies that have also attempted to respond to the black presence in British education and society.
And it is necessary to assess the nature and significance of the polarization between ‘multiculturalism’ and ‘antiracism’in this field, especially given the left's  construction of antiracism as representing the more genuinely radical intervention in this field.
The article begins by setting out Swann's terms of reference and contrasts its liberal optimism with the Macdonald Inquiry's condemnation of antiracist policies at Burnage High School.
It then sketches in how it was that ‘race’ came to be constructed as a significant educational issue at all.
It interrogates earlier state, academic and other public responses to the black presence in education, and documents their continuing influence and weaknesses in a critique of the debate around the question of black ‘underachievement’ in education.
This is followed by a brief and selective representation of the forms of racism identified within the education system.
A sympathetic but rigorous critique of some of the assumptions underlying both multiculturalist and antiracist interventions is then erected, demonstrating some of the unacknowledged weaknesses they share.
The article concludes that what is now required is not only a consolidation but also a rethinking of educational interventions if issues of racism, ethnicity and cultural difference are to be adequately addressed in the 1990s and beyond.
From Swann to Burnage
1985 saw the publication of Education for All , the 800-page Swann Report on the education of children from ethnic minority groups (DES).
Set up in 1979 under the chairmanship of Anthony Ramp ton, its original brief was primarily concerned with the causes of ethnic minority, and especially ‘West Indian’, ‘underachievement’.
Amid a series of controversial resignations and the replacement of Ramp ton by Lord Swann, the inquiry broadened its scope to consider the creation of an education system appropriate to a multi-ethnic society.
(An insider account of the politicking around the Ramp ton and Swann phases can be found in Parekh, 1989b).
Broadly speaking, Swann provided a liberal, semi-official legitimation for tackling issues of racism (or, more accurately, prejudice) and what it coyly referred to as ‘cultural pluralism’ in all schools, including the so-called all-white schools which hitherto had maintained the stance of ‘No problem (i.e. blacks) here’.
By advocating a non prejudiced, pluralist ‘education for all , Swann, however obliquely and weakly, had begun to problematize whiteness and the deeply embedded racism of the national culture.
It had begun to chip away at the common sense attribution of ‘race’ problems simply to a black presence.
Despite the then Education Secretary Keith Joseph's almost instant equivocations, the recommendations of the Report did give some legitimacy and impetus to local education authorities (LEAs) and schools already tentatively and sometimes vigorously pursuing one or another  variety of multicultural or antiracist policy.
Although it's naïvété and many internal contradictions and evasions were easily exposed by its critics (Chivers, 1987), it is arguable that Swann put multiculturalism and at least weak versions of antiracism on the national educational agenda.
Multiculturalist and antiracist lobbies could regard this as a partial vindication.
The expectation that the Afro-Caribbean and Asian minorities would simply blend into a homogeneous British or even English stew, perhaps adding some harmless spice, was revealed as not only hopelessly unrealistic but symptomatic of a form of racism which regarded ‘Britishness’ and ‘Westernness’as the only touchstones of cultural value.
In the aftermath of the urban uprisings of 1980–81 and Scarman's subsequent call for a speedy response from the education system (HMSO, 1981; Scarman, 1982), Swann attempted to construct a liberal consensus in a very troubled area.
Four years later came the Macdonald Report,Murder in the Playground , stemming from an inquiry into the murder of 13-year-old Ahmed Iqbal Ullah by a white boy in the playground of Burnage High School in South Manchester.
The committee of inquiry, composed of individuals with impressive antiracist credentials — Ian Macdonald, Gus John, Reena Bhavnani, Lily Khan — delivered a strong and, for some, an astonishing condemnation of the antiracist policies apparently vigorously pursued at the school, castigating them as doctrinaire, divisive, ineffectual and counterproductive.
The policies of Dr Gough (the head teacher) and his colleagues were not actually blamed for the fatality.
But this is exactly what large sections of the media, especially given Manchester City Council's refusal to publish the full report for fear of litigation, took to be the real meaning of the report.
The day after the conclusions had been leaked,The Daily Telegraph had no doubts: ‘Antiracist policy led to killing’, it claimed.
Peter Wilby in the Independent concluded that antiracist education had been ‘a disaster’.
In the years between Swann and Burnage the media had in any case had a field day.
There had been the row over Ray Honeyford's diatribes against what he regarded as the nightmare of multiculturalism imposed on well-intentioned schools by a combination of the race relations industry and ‘volatile’, ‘half-educated’ Asian and Afro-Caribbean parents (Honey ford, 1983, 1984).
A group of Dewsbury parents had refused to send their children to a predominantly British Asian school.
And moral panics had been orchestrated around ‘loony left councils’ supposedly banning black dustbin liners, insisting on renaming black coffee ‘coffee without milk’, and banning ‘Ba-ba black sheep’from the classroom — scares which turned out to rest on complete fabrications (Media Research Group, 1987).
Meanwhile, in a series of moves capped by the Education Reform Act and the proposals for a national (or, as some were quick to point out, national ist ) curriculum, the Conservative government had effectively challenged and undermined the fragile liberal consensus Swann had tried to erect in the mid-1980s.
But how did ‘race’ come to occupy a place in post-war British education in the first place and what were its terms of entry?
‘Race’, ethnicity and culture in British educational policy
Recent research has disrupted the conventional narrative which represented the period between the end of the Second World War and the passing of the first Immigration Act in 1962 as an era of laissez-faire , with restrictions on black immigration supposedly only being reluctantly considered and implemented in the wake of campaigning by small right wing elements in parliament and a groundswell of racism in the constituencies, especially in the Midlands.
In fact, there was considerable debate in official circles during the time of both the Labour administration of 1945–51 and the subsequent Conservative administration about the consequences of black immigration on the ‘racial character’ of the British, and several covert and sometimes illegal administrative measures were put into operation to discourage black immigration (Carter, Harris and Joshi, 1987).
The inhibitions against introducing full-scale controls against black immigration are likely to have stemmed from their possible impact on Britain's role as head of the Commonwealth and Colonies and concern over the national and international legality of controls based on colour (Solomos, 1989, p. 47).
When controls were increasingly applied through successive Immigration Acts, these were always accompanied by official disavowals that black immigrants were the real target.
This form of political rhetoric Reeves (1983) has dubbed ‘discursive deracialization’(what more appropriately should be called discursive deracialization).
By the 1960s the new British Afro-Caribbean and Asian communities had become well aware of the racism embedded in the national culture and institutionalized in the practices of many public and private agencies.
They daily encountered ‘colour bars’ in employment, housing and pubs.
Their children had begun to face racial abuse on the streets and in the schools.
Documents recently released by Birmingham LEA also reveal the degree of teacher and local authority hostility to the growing black presence in the schools, and the caricatures that had begun to circulate around the lifestyles and ‘racial character’ of ‘Asia tics’and ‘West Indians’.
Racism, patently, was a problem that required urgent attention.
Official policies geared towards the black presence did, indeed, begin to emerge from the DES and some LEAs, often under prompting from agitated schools and head teachers who refused to admit more black pupils (Grosvenor, 1991).
The policies did not develop on the terrain of racism, however, but under the sign of culture.
Just as in a previous era an official ‘gentling of the masses’ by way of induction into a culture of civilization had accompanied  the educational and political entry of the working classes into citizenship within the nation, so now assimilation into an imagined British national culture and way of life became the preoccupation of the educational establishment (Open University, 1974; Jones and Kimberley, 1982).
The issue of language symbolized and condensed the anxiety provoked by the black presence and became the preferred site for an educational response.
Soon after the first Immigration Act, the DES produced its first major intervention, revealingly entitled English for Immigrants (1963).
Although the primary target for the policy of Anglicization was the Asian communities, schools appeared to be equally concerned with what they regarded as the ‘plantation English’ of Afro-Caribbean pupils (Grosvenor, 1991).
Teaching English, being a metaphor for a policy of enforced cultural assimilation, dovetailed with the view expressed by a large proportion of heads and teachers that ‘immigrant’ cultures — the desire to hold on to which was seen as evidence of a ‘ghetto mentality’— were an educational hindrance requiring vigilant exclusion from the culture of the school (Brittan, 1976).
In this spirit, Section 11 of the 1966 Local Government Act offered financial assistance for those authorities finding themselves with substantial proportions of Commonwealth migrant communities ‘whose language and customs differ from those of the community’.
The assimilationist thrust was, and still is, through and through essentialist.
Like all essentialisms it assumes an obvious, definable, homogeneous essence (British culture) into which the hapless migrant might be inducted, given a suitable dose of English and an undiluted diet of the official school curriculum.
The simultaneous cultural, racial and educational panic and white backlash, moreover, led to a policy of dispersal of black students by bussing, initiated in South all and gaining DES support and subsequent endorsement by the Labour Education Secretary, Anthony Crosland.
Racism and its accompanying cultural essentialism thus received further official backing, although, eventually, protests from black parents, educational critiques, administrative problems and an emergent ideology of cultural pluralism undermined the practice of bussing (Kirp, 1979, p. 69–103).
Something of a shift in official perspectives was signalled by Home Secretary Roy Jenkins's famous demand in 1966 that the ideology of assimilation be replaced by an ethic of ‘equal opportunity accompanied by cultural diversity’.
Here was an admission that it was not so much an issue of transforming alien black cultures, but a problem of cultures and practices of white racism leading to unequal opportunities.
This racialization of the debate was further propelled onto local and national agendas by campaigning black parents and teachers.
Afro-Caribbean parents, in particular, had consistently attempted to bring the fate of their children in British schools to public attention.
The frustration of Redbridge's black parents, for example, forcing them to initiate an inquiry which was published as Cause for Concern (Redbridge Community Relations Council, 1978).
Bernard Coard's How the West Indian Child is made Educationally Sub-Normal in the British School System (1971) had already given concrete expression to many black parents' justified fears that their children were being systematically mis-classified as educationally subnormal and relegated to a ‘special’ education which effectively excluded them from any possibility of acquiring decent qualifications.
By the end of the 1970s, the question of ‘underachievement’ was firmly on the agenda.
Class, gender and culture in the black ‘underachievement’ debate
Remember that what became the Swann Inquiry started life under the chairmanship of Anthony Ramp ton as an investigation into the causes of ‘West Indian’‘underachievement’ and, in a curious and even paradoxical discourse of exclusion and inclusion, entitled its interim report West Indian Children in Our Schools (DES, 1981)!
Meanwhile disturbing evidence had begun to accumulate about the relatively poor performance of children of Afro-Caribbean and Asian origin in schools (see Tomlinson, 1983, pp. 27–59 for a useful review).
This fragmentary evidence could not, strictly speaking, be regarded as cumulative, being based on a variety of different criteria and deriving from children with varying degrees of residence in Britain, to mention just two complicating factors.
(See Troyna, 1984, Open University, 1989a and Rattansi, 1988, for more detailed discussions of the evidence.)
More pertinent here is the curious manner in which categories of class, ‘race’, gender, ethnicity and culture intersected, or were excluded from, the debates surrounding the performance of pupils of Afro-Caribbean and Asian origin.
Cultural and ethnic essentialism, of one variety or another, disfigured much of the debate.
In its survey of six LEAs the Ramp ton Report primarily divided its sample into ‘Asian’, ‘West Indian’ and ‘Other’school leavers, concluding that while ‘Asians’and ‘Others’performed equally well at O level and CSE, ‘West Indian’school leavers performed significantly worse.
On the complex differences of social class, gender and ethnicity, Ramp ton was conspicuously silent.
Actually, the emerging evidence suggested that, once social class differences were taken into account, the performance of ‘Asian’, ‘West Indian’ and ‘Other’students was more nearly comparable (although not necessarily identical)(Reeves and Chevannes, 1981; Roberts et al.,
1983); that it was likely that British Afro-Caribbean girls, for a variety of reasons, were more successful at school level than Afro-Caribbean boys (Driver, 1980; Fuller, 1983); and that pupils of Bangladesh I origin were performing particularly badly (House of Commons, Home Affairs Select Committee, 1986).
Even in this last case not enough connections were made between racism and class — poverty, unemployment, poor housing and racial harassment and violence — in the lives of the community and its children (CRE, 1979,1981; Gordon, 1990).
Although it was mindful of such factors as teacher racism and recognized that ‘West Indian’ parents expressed considerable interest in their children's education, the Ramp ton Report succumbed to other cultural essentialism which replicated the presuppositions of earlier debates about working-class families and educational ‘underachievement’.
It reproduced American anxieties around cultures of deprivation and the supposed pathologies of ‘the black family’, stressing the relatively large proportion of ‘West Indian’ mothers who undertook paid employment outside the home, the incidence of one-parent families, and the supposed ignorance of ‘West Indian’parents about the need to help their children academically at home (DES, 1981, pp. 15ff, 43).
Although not to anything like the same extent as in an earlier period in the United States, quietly and firmly the British black family was becoming the focus of official anxieties.
This was no doubt reinforced by a growing concern over disaffection and alienation among black youth, culminating in the ‘moral panic’ that erupted after the urban uprisings of 1980–81 (cf.
Hall et al.,
1978, pp. 16–17 for a discussion of ‘moral panics’ and their racialization).
Lord Scar man, in constructing his view of the Brixton disorders expressed anxieties about the black family in almost identical terms to those of Ramp ton (Scar man, 1982, pp. 24–5).
By the time the Swann Report came to be written, some progress had been made in the debate about ‘underachievement’.
Swann displayed a much firmer grasp of the significance of socio-economic circumstances in explaining the fate of students of Afro-Caribbean origin in the education system and had begun to notice that the achievement of students of Bangladesh I origin should also give cause for concern.
But the terms of the Report's discussion remained ultimately trapped within the ethnic and cultural essentialism inherited from Ramp ton.
This emerges clearly in its tortuous attempt to grapple with what it still regarded as a fundamental difference between ‘Asian’ and ‘West Indian’patterns of educational performance.
‘West Indian’‘underachievement’ was attributed to a combination of poor socio-economic circumstances, which were exacerbated by racism, and to racism within the education system.
Given the awareness that not all ‘Asians’ were middle class and/or immune to racism within the education system, however, how could the apparently better ‘Asian’educational performance be understood?
In the final analysis, the Swann Report not only put aside what it had already acknowledged about the relatively poor performance of students of Bangladesh I origin, but ignored evidence that students of Mirpuri Pakistani origin were also under performing, while students of East African Asian origin seemed to be achieving exceptionally well.
Social class and rural-urban contrasts, and different relations with British colonial states and education systems, are very likely to be involved as  causal influences here, and Swann could well have commissioned research to explore some of the underlying issues.
Instead, despite its disavowals and qualifications the Report slid into the trap of singling out ‘Asian’ culture and especially its main bearer, ‘the Asian family’, to explain the contrast with ‘West Indians’.
Asians ‘kept their heads down’, a strategy supposedly more likely to succeed in a ‘hostile’(read: ‘racist’) environment — a view perhaps based on a selective construction of Jewish history in Britain?— in contrast to the ‘West Indian’ tendency to engage in protest (against racism).
The ‘tightly knit’ Asian community, symbolized by the ‘tightly knit’Asian family was said to be more likely to create a supportive educational environment (DES, 1985, p. 85).
The Swann Report thus failed to break with the cultural and ethnic essentialism which had hegemonized debate in this area and which, as we shall see, continues to mark both the ‘multiculturalist’ and ‘antiracist’discourses and programmes of educational reform.
In the period since Swann the collection of official statistics on educational achievements has displayed a slightly greater sensitivity and discrimination.
The Inner London Education Authority, before its abolition, had begun to classify its students as being of ‘African, African Asian, Arab, Bangladesh I, Caribbean, ESWI (English, Scottish, Welsh and Irish), Greek, Indian, Pakistani, SE Asian, Turkish and Other’ origin (ILEA, 1987).
Some attempt was made to provide even finer discriminations, Gujerati-speaking pupils being singled out as ‘performing better than average’, for example(ibid., p. 15).
There was even some attention to gender: the ILEA report pointed out that for every ethnic group in its area the mean performance of girls was better than that of boys (ibid., p. 19).
But no ‘sub-ethnicities’ were considered, nor was there any indication of differences in performance on particular subjects.
An insight into the way the official terrain is constructed can be gained by noting the exclusion of other categories, which might have yielded different ‘problems’: ‘Muslims’, ‘Jews’, ‘Catholics’, ‘Protestants’, etc.
Crucially, social class was again a significant absence.
If ethnic monitoring recommendations are anything to go by, both in schools and elsewhere, official information on the fate of pupils from the minorities will continue to suffer from this lacuna.
Particular cultural and ethnic essentialisms, in other words, look set to structure public debate in the future despite attempts by activists and researchers to press for more sociologically informed discussion.
And this will assist the fragmentation around the imagined absoluteness of ethnic differences upon which both the New Right and the ‘cultural nationalists’ from the ethnic minorities have been premising their demands for cultural separatism in education (cf.
Gilroy, 1990).
Discussions around the educational achievements of British Afro Caribbean and Asian girls are also significant in what they reveal about the contradictions and reductionisms of both public and academic debate in the whole area of racism, culture and education.
Take, first, one of the major contradictions.
The ‘tightly knit’ Asian culture and its cultural  agent, the ‘tightly knit’Asian family, are regarded in the Swann Report and elsewhere as a key influence in producing high educational achievements.
But this same culture and family system is held responsible for a widespread pathology supposedly afflicting ‘Asian’ girls and thus also their education: the malaise of being ‘caught between two cultures’, an ‘identity crisis’, a form of individual splitting between two essentialized cultural forms, ‘Asian’and ‘British/Western’.
Avtar Brah and Rehana Minhas (1986), amongst others, have challenged the cultural racism and the insensitivity to the vibrancy of Asian female cultures embedded in this type of representation.
Brah's own research has revealed that the larger proportion of Asian girls continue to have strong and supportive relationships with parents and that the degree of inter-generational conflict is not necessarily higher than among white families.
Lest it be thought that the form of cultural essentialism being challenged here appears only in lay public debate, consider this astonishing but revealing passage from Professor John Rex, a leading figure in British ‘race relations’ research.
Contrasting the ‘altruistic solidarity’ of Asian culture with the Western ‘middle-class’culture of ‘individualism’and ‘competition’, Rex concludes: ‘Thus, being a good Indian and being a successful middle-class student at the same time are by no means easy goals to attain.
There is bound to be breakdown’(Rex, 1982, p. 61).
What is meant by class and ethnic reductionism and essentialism is illustrated here by Rex's assumption of deterministic and invariable cultural patterns producing inevitable individual responses.
(Cash more and Troyna, the editors of the volume in which Rex's paper appeared, were widely criticized for their own collapse into a cultural essentialism which accused ‘black youth’ of being ‘arrogant, rumbustious and contemptuous’and having ‘a certain fascination for violence’(1982, pp. 18, 33).)
‘The Asian woman’ is subject to contradictory and ambivalent stereo typification.
This figure acts variously as the symbol and chief bearer of the admirably strong, tightly-knit family and culture, as the oppressed subject of traditional Asian patriarchal practices, as a problem because of her failure to learn the language and customs which might allow a smoother integration of her community and children into ‘the British way of life’, and full of sexual charm and allure produced by a demure seductiveness replete with the promise of a mysterious Oriental eroticism.
Afro-Caribbean girls and women, on the other hand, are often represented as crushed under the weight of a triple oppression of class, gender and racism.
This common-sense image implies a linear model which sees these burdens as cumulative in operation and effect, although also overlain with images of the strong black woman, the single mother, holding the family together in the face of irresponsible black males, whether they be husbands or disruptive youth.
Most research has thoroughly problematized these conceptions.
It is not merely that the incidence of single-parent black families has been exaggerated (Phoenix, 1988), but that class, gender and racism intersect in  highly complex and contradictory ways in the lives of black women (Anthias and Yuval-Davis, 1982; Phizacklea, 1983; Ramazanoglu, 1989; West wood, 1985; West wood and Bhachu, 1988).
The notion of cumulatively disadvantaging oppressions, leading to inevitable failure, is belied by the educational responses of British Afro-Caribbean girls.
What research and evidence there is appears to suggest that at school level at least their educational achievements are higher than those of Afro-Caribbean boys, and that they exhibit a greater tenacity in the pursuit of educational qualifications than white girls.
Many working-class British Afro Caribbean girls, it appears, have been adopting a clever and effective strategy which combines resistance and accommodation, instrumentalism and commitment.
They work hard at school without giving the appearance of being swots, thus pre-empting derision from their peers.
They resist school procedures and rules but not to the point of risking outright confrontation with teachers.
And they aspire to interesting and well-paid work but without any illusions about the degree of racial discrimination and sexual segregation in employment.
There is, in other words, no simple ‘culture of failure’ or ‘culture of resistance’, but rather a complex set of strategies set generally within the context of strong attachments to families and black cultural identities (Fuller, 1982, 1983; Dex, 1983; Riley, 1986; Mac an Ghaill, 1988).
Similar complexities need to be acknowledged in the case of British Asian girls (Fuller, 1983; Brah and Minhas, 1986; Mac an Ghaill, 1988).
So far, I have sketched in some of the contours of early educational debates and policy in the field of racism, culture and education and explored the way in which the problem of cultural and ethnic essentialism, in particular, has structured and indeed disfigured public debates and the production of relevant knowledge.
This is how the ground was unwittingly prepared for New Right and other interventions based on rigid, absolutist conceptions of cultural and ethnic difference.
The issues of social class and racism, as I have argued, have been significant casualties of the discursive formations and apparatuses of knowledge and power which defined the emergence of the black presence as an object of public discussion and policy.
It is time to turn more explicitly to the question of racism.
Racism and schooling
One of the fundamental charges levelled by antiracists against the culturalist assumptions underpinning much public and academic debate, especially in the field of education, is that the specificity and significance of racist ideologies and structures have received inadequate attention.
Whenever the issue of racism is put on the agenda, they suggest, it is transmuted into questions of prejudice and attitudes, thus leaving a wide  range of discriminatory practices and structures unchallenged.
This charge is well aimed.
As we shall see later in this essay, however, there is a definite, and what at first sight may appear to be surprising, degree of isomorphism between the two perspectives.
Before I make that case, it is first necessary to set out, albeit briefly, some of the documented forms of exclusion and violence that are targeted by practices designed to challenge racism in schools.
Racial abuse and violence
The sheer prevalence, intensity and normality of abuse, harassment and violence directed by white students against British Asian and Afro Caribbean students as part of the informal, popular culture of schools is horrifying.
Accounts abound of the distress, trauma and injury involved.
The acts range from verbal abuse — continual taunts of ‘Paki’, ‘Nigger’, ‘Blacky’, ‘Chocolate face’, ‘Black bastard’— to vicious physical attacks by both boys and girls in corridors, on playing fields and at bus stops; hospitalization for broken bones, stitches and broken noses is not uncommon.
The extent of the problem compelled the Commission for Racial Equality to entitle its survey of racial harassment Learning in Terror (1988), giving added weight to other accounts (see, for instance, DES, 1985, pp. 31–5; Kelly and Cohn, 1988; Stronach and Akhtar, 1986).
The historical and contemporary experiences of Jewish children attest to the continuing significance of Britain's other racisms and, in the context of another phase of rising anti-semitism, clearly need greater attention (Pilkington 1990).
In the wake of Burnage the risk of fatality can hardly be denied.
To some degree, the racial abuse and violence in schools mirrors that meted out to black minorities in British cities more generally (the anti-semitic parallels must again be recalled).
In the absence of adequate police action, this is producing a growing number of self-defence and monitoring groups among black minorities (Gordon, 1990).
The culture of teacher racism
A frequent complaint of black students is that their reports of racial abuse and violence are habitually ignored or their racial elements denied by white teachers.
This is only one form of teacher collusion with racialized processes.
There are many others, again amply documented.
Black students, for example, are not infrequently humiliated with jokes.
Common ‘witticisms’ range from the threat to send a student back to the ‘chocolate factory’to be ‘remade’to remarks about ‘jungle-like behaviour’, ‘Go back to the trees’, or ‘Stop laughing like monkeys’.
(See for instance Wright's chapter in Eggleston et al.,
1986, and Macdonald et al.,
1989, pp. 140–2.)
Many black teachers hardly fare better at the hands of their white colleagues, often finding themselves the butt of racist jokes, hostile  remarks and isolation in the staff room.
Here is part of an account of the experiences of an extremely well-qualified woman teacher of Afro Caribbean origin:
In school she has had to contend with discussions about ‘Pakis’ in the staff room.
One teacher said he would like to send all blacks back on the banana boat, and another told her that he was unable to sit by her because she was black.
(The Guardian , 5 April 1988, reprinted in Open University, 1989a)
The Burnage Report gives a further sense of the routine culture of teacher racism:
A teacher who showed an interest in Asian culture was asked by a colleague, ‘why don't you wear Indian dress?’ and was greeted by a mock Indian prayer movement every time she passed this colleague in the corridor.
A Section 11 teacher who was wearing a hair slide was asked if it was a West Indian hair slide she was wearing.
She replied: ‘no, it's just a hair slide’, and was told ‘why don't you take the bone out and wear it through your nose?’
The wearing of pig badges by a large group of staff, many of whom were members of middle management, after the Deputy Head, Peter Moors, had suggested that pork was less suitable than turkey for the school's Christmas dinner, since it prevented Muslim boys from taking part.
Pork scratching packets were pinned to his notice board and he was and still is referred to as ‘Porky’.
(Macdonald et al.,
1989, pp. 140–41).
Selection and allocation procedures
Schools are pre-eminently institutional sites for selection and deselect ion, for the allocation of students to different levels in status hierarchies of subjects in the curriculum and public examinations.
The subsequent outcomes are of some significance in determining further educational chances and career opportunities.
The various forms of Al locative discrimination which operate against black students have been the subject of several investigations.
Again, a few instances must suffice to show how the culture of racism, and institutional processes which provide discretionary Al locative power to teachers, tend to intermesh and work against many black students.
Cecile Wright's research for the Eggleston Report,Education for Some (Eggleston et al.,
1986), is one of the most compelling documentations of the process at work.
It reveals a systematic tendency for able black students to be allocated to sets and streams and  entered for examinations below their capacities, and exposes the significance of racist discourses in legitimating these practices (see also Wright, 1987).
The obverse of this process is the tendency to channel Afro Caribbean students, especially, into sports or music on account of supposedly innate physical capacities and ‘a natural sense of rhythm’(Carrington, 1983).
Careers advice given to both Afro-Caribbean and Asian students is frequently based on conceptions of their supposedly unrealistic and over-ambitious aspirations.
Attempts are made to route them into low-level manual work regardless of ability or level of motivation for further education, and discrimination in entry to training schemes acts as a further block to employment and careers (Wrench, 1987, 1990).
One symptomatic phenomenon was revealed in my own research in Leicester for an Open University television programme, when I found that many teachers of English were unwilling to come to terms with the interest and creative potential of Asian students in English language, literature and drama.
These exclusionary effects of a culture of Englishness embedded in the discourses and practices of English teaching appear rather ironic in view of the significance for the growth of English literary studies of the colonial attempt to ‘Anglicize’ Indians (Open University, 1989b; Viswanathan, 1987).
School subjects and the production of racialized subjectivities
Caricatured images of ‘natives’— African, Asian and Arab — and selective and often fanciful representations of their histories and cultures, reinforced in comics, adventure stories and films, have long been a powerful presence in the official curriculum of British schools (Mackenzie, 1984, 1986; Klein, 1985,; Ahier 1988).
They continue to be an important mechanism of exclusion, stereo typification and marginalization, reinforced as they are by representations in the mass media (Hartmann and Husband, 1974; Hall, 1981; Murdock, 1984).
Institutional procedures
Black minorities have frequently been casualties of rules and procedures which may not have been intended to discriminate against them but which, in effect, do so and there is considerable resistance when the hitherto taken-for-granted procedures are brought into question.
Rules about appropriate modes of dress, whether concerning school uniforms or clothing for PE and sports, have been one such arena.
Some schools refuse to allow Sikh boys to wear turbans, or girls to cover their legs.
These constitute a form of indirect discrimination which in the case of turbans was fought successfully by a Sikh family under the terms of the 1976 Race Relations Act (porn, 1985).
Other instances include the lack of avail-ability of vegetarian food or Halal meat, the failure to communicate school  messages to parents in languages other than English, and the absence of policies on racial abuse or equal opportunities.
Mention must also be made of the marginalization of many black teaching staff because of their employment in ‘community language’ teams or as Section 11 teachers.
(See the accounts of black teachers at Burnage in Macdonald et al.,
1989, pp. 215–44.)
‘Multiculturalism’ and ‘antiracism ‘: a binary opposition?
It is often asserted that the 1980s saw a polarization of two fundamentally opposed educational movements, multiculturalism and antiracism.
These were based on different understandings of racism which apparently led to radically divergent programmes of educational reform.
In part the debate has been presented as an opposition between a broadly liberal programme — multiculturalism — and an antiracism which claimed for itself the mantle of left radicalism (Dodgson and Stewart, 1981; Mullard, 1984; Troyna, 1987a; Gill and Singh, 1987).
It is certainly the case that there have been debates, often acrimonious ones, between self-styled multiculturalists and antiracists.
It is less clear, however, to what extent and in what ways this broad division has actually manifested itself in the classroom and in internal school debates and policies, and in local authority policies.
In many institutions complex and varying combinations of the two have been put into practice, and there are in any case many differences and contradictions within the two movements (see, for example, Bonnett, 1990).
My argument here is that, despite some differences of approach, at a deeper level there are fundamental similarities in conceptualization and prescription between multiculturalism and antiracism which are flawed.
Although both movements have made important contributions, my judgement is that their frameworks and policies share significant and disabling weaknesses.
I cannot emphasize too strongly that I have not here attempted to provide a detailed exposition or erect a comprehensive critique of multiculturalist and antiracist assumptions and practices.
The discussion that follows is necessarily selective, highlighting some key issues, but inevitably neglecting others, for example around the vexed question of cultural relativism and the problems surrounding the marginalization of ‘race’ policies at the institutional level, which might be treated in a text of quite different length and scope.
Multiculturalism, as expressed in the Swann Report or in the writings of Jeffcoate, James, Lynch and Parekh, is based on the premise that the key issue facing schools is how to create tolerance for black minorities and  their cultures in a white nation now characterized by cultural diversity or cultural pluralism.
Intolerance is conceptualized basically as a matter of attitudes , and is said to be constituted by prejudice .
The basic educational prescription is the sympathetic teaching of ‘other cultures’ in order to dispel the ignorance which is seen to be at the root of prejudice and intolerance.
The overall social and political project is the creation of a harmonious, democratic cultural pluralism, a healthy cultural diversity.
There are internal differences among the multiculturalists, of course, and under relentless criticism from antiracists most multiculturalists have acknowledged the significance of tackling institutionalized racist practices in schools (Lynch, 1986).
Nevertheless, these are the key principles held by those who see themselves more as multiculturalists, and continue explicitly to take a critical distance from antiracism (cf.
Lynch, 1990, pp. 32–3).
Antiracists have pointed out that in privileging prejudice and attitudes the multiculturalists have neglected racism as embedded in structures and institutions.
However, the case against prejudice is even stronger, and more complex.
The case against prejudice
Prejudice, as conceptualized both in the educational literature around multiculturalism and in more specialized psychological discourses, is defined as hostile or negative attitudes based on ignorance and faulty or incomplete knowledge.
It is characterized by a tendency to stereotype, that is, a tendency to assign identical characteristics to whole groups regardless of individual variations (Twitchin and Demuth, 1985, p. 170; Aronson, 1980, p. 197).
Thus, multicultural handbooks and official reports such as Ramp ton and Swann warn against the common teacher stereotypes of Afro-Caribbean (‘disruptive’, ‘lazy’) and Asian (‘industrious’, ‘passive’, ‘over-ambitious’) students which are also documented in academic research on teachers' attitudes (Brittan, 1976).
As we have seen, multi-culturalist accounts emphasize the way in which stereotypes may be affecting classroom encounters (DES, 1985, pp. 46–56, reproduces a piece of research on this by Peter Green); the channelling of Afro Caribbean students into sports; and the allocation of Afro-Caribbean and Asian students to streams, sets, examinations and career paths which grossly underestimate their abilities and potential.
One major difficulty about these notions of prejudice and stereotype concerns the all too common assumption that individuals hold prejudiced views consistently and express them and act in accordance with them in a systematic and uncontradictory manner.
This therefore tends to essentialize ‘the prejudiced individual’— the prejudiced teacher or student — who becomes the target for pedagogies that are supposed to cure them of this pathology.
There is mounting evidence, however, to suggest a more complex picture.
For one thing;, many people who might be labelled  racially prejudiced on the basis of attitude surveys or expressive behaviour in particular contexts turn out to be more ambivalent and contradictory in their discourses and practices.
Thus Billig and Cochrane (1984) report that during their research a white girl, who in discussions with them had expressed strongly racist views, was seen walking out of school arm in arm with an Asian girl.
Even more dramatically, Darren Coulbourn, the white boy from Burnage High School who murdered Ahmed Iqbal Ullah and triumphantly proclaimed ‘I've killed a Paki’, was also known to have collaborated with an Asian boy in burning down the art block and ‘used to get into trouble’ at school (as the Burnage Report puts it) in the company of an Afro-Caribbean boy.
Darren Coulbourn's ‘attitudes on race are not clear-cut’, the report concludes (Macdonald et al.,
1989, p. 8).
In Philip Cohen's research (1989b) white working-class youths in south London expressed more or less sympathetic views on blacks depending on the context and topic of conversation.
Talking to the researcher about South Africa, they voiced sympathy for the plight of black South Africans.
Talking to their mates about British blacks, they tended to complain about becoming second-class citizens in their own country.
Although it appears to be the same principle that promotes sympathy for South African blacks in their country, this confirms rather than vitiates the point that the form and meaning of racist discourses depends on and varies in context and enables a range of verbal and practical interactions and positions.
(Cohen also refers, for instance, to white youth who supported overtly racist immigration policies but dissociated themselves from the National Front; see also the research on white youth reported in Coffield et al.,
1986).
Billig's research (1978) on adult National Front members revealed a complexity of attitudes and practices which belies what is, ironically enough, a social scientific stereotype of the strongly prejudiced individual who operates with a rigid set or framework of categories.
A notable illustration of this complexity even among hard-core racists was the NF official who pointed out that he had been elected by both black and white work mates, despite his well-known NF affiliation, because he fought equally hard for blacks and whites; he claimed a liking for blacks and maintained that he played football and drank with them, although politically he supported repatriation.
In the United States, Well man (1977) has shown how anti discrimination legislation in the sphere of employment can be supported by people who reject it in the field of housing.
This is part of a much wider pattern of contradictions in white attitudes.
Investigations in New Zealand have pointed up the complexity and variability of white orientations towards the entitlements of Maoris within the policy (Wetherell and Potter, 1988).
The circulation of contradictory stereotypes is partly responsible for the complexity and ambivalence of discourses surrounding ‘race’.
This is graphically illustrated by Jenkins's investigations (1985, 1986) of white managers' varying conceptions of the capacities of Asian and  Afro-Caribbean workers.
Some regarded Asians as lazy compared with Afro-Caribbeans, while others reversed the comparison.
Generally, Asians in Britain have been regarded both as scroungers and as so industrious that they are taking over jobs and businesses, as both thrifty and flashy.
They may be resented or hated, but there is admiration for their supposed ‘industriousness’, ‘ambitiousness’, ‘enterprise’, ‘family values’, ‘respect and care for their elderly’, ‘respect for authority’, and so on.
Afro-Caribbeans are seen as both lazy and as extraordinarily successful in activities requiring considerable physical exertion and mental discipline such as sport and athletics.
Stereotypes, moreover, are subject to historical change and geographical variation and salience.
Such ambiguities and variations are particularly evident in New Right discourses but can also be found in popular culture.
Afro-Caribbeans may be reviled as ‘niggers’, but their musical forms and stylistic innovations exercise considerable fascination, attraction and influence in popular culture (Jones, 1988).
Some of the most common forms of ambivalence, of course, are expressed in disavowals such as ‘Some of my best friends are…’, or ‘You [some]are all right , it's the rest…’.
The question of sexuality further complicates racialized encounters, such as racial harassment and violence.
These are not simply between ‘black’ and ‘white’, but between white and black men (West wood, 1990), white men and black women, and so on.
Both working-class and middle-class masculinities are involved, with defences of the neighbourhood against racialized ‘others’ which Cohen refers to as the ‘nationalism of the neighbourhood’(Cohen, 1988); the proving of masculinity by beating up ‘Pakis’(Willis, 1978); the sexual harassment of black women; and an aspect that deserves much greater research, in the middle-class and professional institutional context, the complex intertwining of masculinity, class and racism in the exclusion of blacks from employment or promotion by white male managers.
Racialized discourses are always articulated in context: in an English or history class; in a school corridor, dinner queue or playground; at work or on the streets; in one neighbourhood or another.
These different sites can yield complex and shifting alliances and points of tension.
(See Nanton and Fitzgerald, 1990, for the complexity of alliances around racial harassment on public housing estates.)
The ambivalences generated for many white youth by the attractions of Afro-Caribbean, Afro-American and African musical forms, and their admirations for some aggressive forms of Afro-Caribbean masculinity, have resulted in alliances in particular schools and neighbourhoods between white and Afro Caribbean youth against Asian youth, while in some schools where black white conflicts remain submerged the dominant form of racist insult occurs between different ethnic minority groups, for instance Asian and Afro-Caribbean or Cypriot and Vietnamese (Cohen, 1987).
An appreciation of contradiction, ambivalence and context, combined with a sensitivity to the variability of discourses among teachers and their  practices also puts into question simplistic models of the process whereby (uncontradictory) teacher stereotypes of black pupils are supposedly translated into discriminatory practices that lead to unequal outcomes.
Recent research paints a more complex picture of contradictory teacher attitudes varying within and between schools and provoking a range of responses from black male and female students (Mac an Ghaill, 1989; Foster, 1990).
This point is also being registered in relation to sexism in schools (Wolpe, 1989) and has provoked a more general rethinking of educational processes in which poststructuralist theorizing is beginning to exercise a belated, but in my view welcome, influence (Walkerdine, 1991).
The Burnage Report is the first document of its kind to attempt to deal with some of these complexities.
It points inter alia to the ambivalence of Darren Coulbourn's racism and the significance of the masculine cult of violence that had a strong presence in the all-boys school.
It also emphasizes how the generalized context of racism in the school was relevant to their conclusion that the murder of Ahmed Iqbal Ullah was a ‘racial’ murder.
All this is a far cry from the simplifications of the multicultural discourse of prejudice and the prejudiced subject or individual.
But this is not the end of the story.
Conceptions of prejudice, and associated forms of multiculturalism in education, are premised on the view that prejudice is primarily caused by ignorance — in this case of black cultures.
The educational prescription is therefore a curricular dose of knowledge about those ‘other cultures’, taught in a variety of sometimes imaginative ways.
The problem with this is not merely that there has been very little serious thinking within multiculturalism about how ‘cultural understanding’ actually occurs, about its forms, mechanisms and limits.
What, after all, does it mean to understand any culture, including one's own, whatever that might be in ethnic, class, or any other terms?
The more subversive possibility is that the discourse of prejudice contains an element that threatens the foundations of multiculturalism from within.
That is, there is a contradiction between the rationalism of the multiculturalist project, which recommends a reduction of prejudice by teaching a combination of facts and cultural empathy, and the insistence, also within the discourse of prejudice, that prejudice involves a strong element of irrationalism .
A further question mark over the practices of multiculturalism concerns the actual effects of teaching about ‘other cultures’.
Little evidence, sceptics argue, has been adduced to support the claim that such teaching has a significant impact in reducing prejudice.
The ‘culture contact’ hypothesis as investigated by psychologists has produced poor results (Troyna, 1987a).
What evidence there is often exists only in the anecdotal form of teacher accounts or in multicultural handbooks (Burgess, 1986; Nixon, 1985).
However, the whole question of the effects of teaching around ‘race’, whether in multiculturalist or other forms, requires recasting in the light of the more complex understanding of racism and  racist subjectivities being proposed here.
If subjects are contradictorily and ambivalently positioned in discourses and if racist practices are significantly affected by social context, research into the effects of teaching about ‘race’ cannot operate with the linear and essentialist models used by most conventional psychology and sociology.
Far more subtle, long-term ethnographic research has to be undertaken to establish how subjects negotiate such teaching and how subjectivities are recomposed in different contexts.
In the absence of such research, Troyna's confident rejection of multiculturalist strategies cannot be sustained, although of course the antiracist argument that teaching about ‘other cultures’ does not necessarily give an understanding of the racism of one's own remains intact.
Racism and the antiracists
Antiracists have rightly pointed to the limited nature of multiculturalism's focus on prejudice and attitudes, and its strategy of prejudice reduction by teaching about ‘other cultures’.
Racism, the antiracists argue, must be challenged head on.
That requires a dismantling of institutionalized practices of racism, whether in education or in employment, housing, immigration policy, and so on, as well as a direct confrontation with racist ideologies, for example , in the school curriculum.
(See, for example, Hatcher and Shallice, 1983; Mullard, 1984; Sivanandan, 1985; Sarup, 1986; Troyna, 1987a; Gill and Singh, 1987.)
On closer examination, however, their conception of racism, both at the level of ideology and structures, also suffers from oversimplification, often of a very similar kind.
When racism is addressed as a set of ideologies, for example, none of the antiracist analyses cited above displays an awareness of contradictions, inconsistencies and ambivalences of the kind I have sketched earlier.
In this sense, the antiracists' understanding of racist ideologies and racist subjects or individuals is no more sophisticated than that of the multiculturalists.
Also absent is an understanding of the complex intertwining of racism with sexuality (not the same point as the increasingly common reference to the ‘triple oppression’ of the black woman).
It is now quite clear that the complexities of white racism (which is the focus here) cannot be grasped without an exploration of the anxieties and ambivalences generated particularly by white male, but also female, sexual anxieties and desires.
From the earliest encounters between Europeans and Others right to the present, these manifest themselves in an endless series of speculations, projections, fantasies and crimes in relation to‘African’ and ‘Oriental’women and men (Gilman, 1985, 1987; Cohen, 1988; Open University, 1992).
This interaction between sexuality and racism is an important source of the irrationalities and resistances  encountered by a rational ‘facts and empathy’ approach, whether of an antiracist of multicultural variety, and poses highly complex problems for any project of deracialization.
There are no easy answers here.
Even the prescription of a joint approach to issues of sexism and racism (Brah and Deem, 1986) does little more than scratch the surface of a very much deeper problem.
Educational and pedagogic strategies developed by feminists more conscious of the need to dig deeper into psychic processes in tackling sexual identities and subjectivities (e.g. Walker dine, 1991) require more serious attention within antiracism, and have found a sympathetic counterpart in Phil lip Cohen's cultural studies approach to antiracism (Cohen, 1987, 1988, 1989a).
In antiracism as much as in multiculturalism, the absence of any serious engagement with issues around sexuality in the ‘irrationality’ of popular racism is symptomatic of a rationalist understanding of pedagogies and educational processes.
In the case of antiracism, this is further underpinned by an overly rationalist conception of state and dominant class racism.
I begin by examining the antiracists' notion of racism as a form of irrationalism.
The mode by which the discourse of prejudice consigns racism to a form of irrationalism is, at bottom, a pathologization of the individual subject.
Racism is interpreted as a form of displacement and objectification deriving from unhealthy neuroses and personality traits.
In antiracist analyses the irrationality of popular or working-class racism is conceptualized primarily as a form of false consciousness.
There are several variants of the argument, differing at least in part around the degree of class reductionism and the amount of reflexivity allowed to the working class racist subject.
In the crudest analyses, working-class racism is interpreted as composed of a set of falsehoods perpetrated by one, or a combination, of the following agencies: capital, the ruling class, the mass media, and the state.
These are conceptualized as unified, non-contradictory, omniscient ‘actors’, united by the common objective of dividing the working class along racial lines so as to facilitate the economic exploitation of both sections of the class.
The state is viewed as an instrument of capital and state policies such as immigration and race relations legislation are seen as the outcome of deliberate, thus ‘rational’, manipulation by agents of capital and the capitalist state.
The working class racist, in this construction, is reduced to a ‘cultural dope’.
That is, he or she is viewed as a passive and helpless victim of ruling class, media and state propaganda.
Reformist black activists are also seen as cultural dopes and/or traitors to class and community, bought off by the race relations industry of the Commission for Racial Equality, Community Relations Councils, local authority ‘race’ posts, community and welfare projects, or multiculturalism.
All these have been supposedly cynically instituted by the state capital complex.
Some of the highly influential writings of Sivanandan, director of the Institute of Race Relations and editor of the journal Race and Class fall  squarely within this tradition (1974, 1985).
These operate within a crude Marxism which became the object of considerable internal criticism within Marxism (see, for example, Gabriel and Ben-Tovim, 1978; Hall, 1980) but which appears to have failed to shift the class reductionism and instrumentalism associated with his project.
Other left antiracists, like Madan Sarup, are more aware in principle of the pitfalls of such class reductionism, and attempt to disavow it.
In practice, however, they often fall back on a similar analysis (Sarup, 1986, pp. 40, 95–8).
(It is worth adding that multiculturalists are prone to another essentialism with regard to the state, often seeing it as a neutral and uncontradictory vehicle for educational and other reforms — see Troyna's critique (1987b) of the Swann Report.)
Although it is not possible to rehearse here the many deficiencies of the antiracist brand of class reductionism, some of the difficulties are signalled by my description of instrumentalism and the patronizing ‘cultural dope’ stereotype of the white working-class racist.
It is also worth emphasizing the links between a view of racist subjects and ideologies which neglects contradictions and ambivalences and the conception of racism as, simply, a form of false consciousness.
Note, too, that nothing is said within such analyses about forms of middle-class racism — the discussion pivots around a simple polarization between a ‘ruling’ and ‘working’class.
Not all antiracists, however, whether in education or elsewhere, appear to subscribe to such a simplified version of the racism-as-false-consciousness argument.
Others (e.g. Hatcher and Shall ice, 1983) have drawn upon Phizacklea and Miles's North London research which, although in the final analysis conceives of racism as a form of false consciousness, nevertheless gives a more active, reasoning or reflexive role to the working class racist subject.
Phizacklea and Miles (1979, 1980) argue that, in the particular inner-city context that they researched, white racism operated not simply in the form of cultural stereotypes but as part of the process whereby white residents and workers attempted to make sense of public housing shortages, reduction in employment opportunities, and other aspects of urban decline.
These features for many whites were primarily associated with the arrival of black settlers, who were thus blamed for the problems.
This gave rise to the resentment and hostility which Phizacklea and Miles regard as a characteristic form of modern, inner-city, working class white racism, although they have been mindful that the findings may only apply to particular sections of the class and in particular areas.
Thus racist discourses and practices are seen to emerge in specific forms.
More generally, they are seen to flourish in situations of acute competition for scarce resources such as employment and housing and they are exacerbated by the insecurities of rising inflation.
Phizacklea and Miles show some sensitivity to the contradictory nature of working-class consciousness and emphasize that in a number of workers high levels of class consciousness nevertheless coexisted with considerable hostility towards local blacks.
They stress the often fragmented and  piecemeal character of the racial hostility expressed by some white people in their survey: some of them blamed black settlers for housing shortages but not the loss of employment opportunities, for example.
Nevertheless, the forms of racism revealed here are seen as a form of false consciousness hosed on the
attempt to understand and explain immediate daily experience , while the real reasons for both the socio-economic decline and New Commonwealth immigration are to be found in much more abstract and long-standing social and economic processes which cannot be grasped in terms of daily experience.
(original emphasis, Phizacklea and Miles, 1979, p. 118)
Note the important educational and pedagogic conclusion Phizacklea and Miles draw from their research: the significance of immediate daily experience in producing and reproducing inner-city working-class racism, in conjunction with the backdrop of a widespread nationalist culture of racism in British society, means that those who express racist hostility ‘are very resistant to modification as a result of argument from outsiders’(ibid., p. 120).
Phizacklea and Miles warn of the limits of any strategy premised on the assumption (made in the 1970s by the TUC and the Labour Party) that ‘the way to eliminate working-class racism was to provide counter-arguments to common racist beliefs’, to push out of workers' heads an ideological baggage primarily produced by the dominant class and replace it by ‘the truth’.
This research has been expounded at some length here to demonstrate that despite some limitations it is informed by a relatively subtle and complex analysis.
Antiracist educators have read it in a simplistic manner, however, much to the detriment of their pedagogic project.
Hatcher and Shallice, for instance, having cited Phizacklea and Miles's research, conclude, contrary to the researchers, that in education the key task must be the provision of superior explanations for unemployment, for example , which would also involve discussions of issues of class politics.
They stress the significance of a cognitive emphasis, and link this to an older labour movement project for the provision of ‘really useful knowledge’(Hatcher and Shallice, 1983, pp. 8–10; cf.
Troyna, 1987a, p. 316 for a similarly misleading reading of Billig and Cochrane's research).
Moreover, while Phizacklea and Miles believe that changes in the material circumstances of the working class can provide only a partial solution to the problem of racist ideologies, the political project of the transformation of capitalism and working-class conditions advocated by Hatcher and Shall ice (and other left antiracists in education) squeezes out of consideration the rather important caveat entered by Phizacklea and Miles about the prospects for change in racist ideologies as a result of changes in the material base.
Phizacklea and Miles's own research can be faulted on a Variety of  grounds.
There is little detailed exploration of the contradictions, and none of the ambivalences that might characterize the racism of their subjects (for contrasting discussions see Cohen, 1988,1991).
The analysis is also considerably weakened by the empiricism of their notion of ‘direct, immediate experience’, which writes out the significance of the complex interpretive frameworks through which events, processes and facts are constructed .
Experience, that is, is produced , rather than simply registered .
The implicit recognition of this in their work is obscured by the distinction they make between ‘direct experience’ and more ‘abstract’‘underlying’causes which cannot be grasped at the level of immediate experience.
Moreover, resistances other than those posed by ‘immediate experience’ are ignored; for instance, possible sexual anxieties provoked by moral panics, common enough in the 1970s and early 1980s, around black ‘muggers’and ‘rapists’.
Like the multiculturalists, antiracists have often failed to confront the limitations of a rationalist approach to education.
The rationalism of their educational project is contingent on the supposed irrationalism of the racist subject — often conceptualized as a collective, class subject.
In the context of schooling one significant issue that is paradoxically neglected is the ‘rationality’ of the working-class students' resistance to antiracist curricula and classroom discussions in so far as this resistance is bound up with a more generalized opposition to the degrees of surveillance, discipline, authoritarianism and class domination involved in conventional forms of schooling.
(The same point can be made against multiculturalist understandings of prejudice.)
Like the multiculturalist project of reducing prejudice by teaching about other cultures, the antiracist project of providing superior explanations for unemployment, housing shortages, and so forth, has so far, and for similar reasons, produced only patchy evidence of success.
The point is not simply to abandon this type of teaching but to acknowledge and analyse its limitations in the light of a more complex understanding of the nature of racism and to develop forms of educational engagement more likely to open up racist subjectivities and common sense to alternative discourses.
More democratic and collaborative pedagogies, as proposed by Troyna and Carrington (1990) and exemplified by some of the projects they have developed, are a step in the right direction.
They are still weakened, however, by the absence of a more complex understanding of the contradictions, ambivalences and resistances of the popular cultures of racism amongst white youth.
Indeed Troyna and Carrington have themselves expressed doubts about the efficacy of such initiatives (ibid., pp. 114–19).
One index of the theoretical and educational congruences between multiculturalism and antiracism is the underlying similarity between multiculturalist attempts to combat racial prejudice by the provision of ‘positive images’ and the antiracist injunction to present black histories primarily as narratives of resistance and struggle against racism  (Jeffcoate, 1979; Hatcher and Shallice, 1983, p. 10).
The aims are laudable, given the often grotesque caricatures of African, Asian and Arab histories and cultures; the neglect of the destructive, exploitative effects of colonialism and imperialism in school texts and in popular cultural forms such as comics, adventure stories, adult fiction and the cinema; and the absence of any serious treatment of resistance to imperial rule (Mackenzie, 1984, 1986; Klein, 1985).
Nevertheless there are difficulties here which must be confronted if both multicultural and antiracist attempts at the development of alternative curricula and popular cultural forms are to avoid oversimplification and naïvety.
There is an unacknowledged  disingenuousness involved in replacing one lot of selective images with another set of partial representations.
Among other things, this opens up the multiculturalists and antiracists to the very charge of propaganda and indoctrination which they level at the textbooks, authors and teachers they are attempting to challenge.
It also allows the New Right and sections of the media to connect the purging of ‘negative images’ from textbooks with other authoritarian or top-down antiracist policies by LEAs and schools and to represent the whole exercise as a Labour left and antiracist ‘totalitarian’conspiracy.
On this issue, the ‘traditionalists’, the multiculturalists and antiracists occupy the same epistemological terrain.
They all share the misleading assumption that it is possible to produce a singular, uncontestable, objective and accurate representation of the reality external to the literary or photographic or any other text.
They thus ignore or obscure a different, more democratic objective: that is, the search for mechanisms for giving voice to a range of representations, and for encouraging a critical dialogue and interrogation of all intellectual and political frameworks.
Black artists, photographers, film makers and cultural critics have been in the forefront of demands and attempts to break the bounds of an aesthetic of ‘positive images’.
They reject the reduction of the diversity of black histories, experiences and cultures to a response to racism, not least because this inhibits the productive exploration of the economic, cultural and sexual differentiations within black communities — for example, ‘positive images’ tend to privilege middle-class, heterosexual, familial respectability.
It also blocks the creativity of black artistic imagination and practices of representation.
Look, for example, at the photography of David A. Bailey, the films of Sankofa, the Black Audio Films Collective and Hanif Kureishi, the essays of Paul Gilroy and Kobena Mercer, or the paintings of Sonia Boyce (Areean, 1989; Bailey, 1988; Gilroy, 1987; Mercer, 1988).
This work explores questions of racism, ethnicity, nationality and sexual difference in ways which have problematized conventional assumptions and opened up a debate about the diversity and complexity of black British identities and voices.
The educational implication is not that the contestation of caricatures of black histories and cultures in school texts should cease, but that it should not be premised on the stifling aesthetic of the positive image.
Although, given their underlying premise of cultural pluralism, multiculturalists tend to be more sympathetic to giving voice to a plurality of positions, their project is vitiated by the tendency to cling to epistemological assumptions more congruent with the discourse of positive images.
A decisive break with realist conceptions of the curriculum is long overdue and is a precondition for genuinely pluralist forms of radicalization of the curriculum (Alvarado and Ferguson, 1983; Wexler, 1987).
Troyna and Carrington's dissatisfaction with simplistic assumptions about the antiracist effects of ‘culture contact’ and white students' ‘direct experience’of black realities, as well as their growing awareness of the limits of rationalist pedagogies, points to a need on their part to break with realist assumptions about the curriculum which still underpin their antiracist projects (Troyna and Carrington, 1990).
Both multicultural and antiracist critiques ignore the actual literary and pedagogic devices involved in the construction of subject positions for the child/reader in school texts.
They neglect how texts construct meanings as opposed to what they supposedly mean.
As a consequence, the complexity of the processes by which texts which form part of particular school disciplines — history or geography, etc. — have effects on the ‘subjects’ of schools, the students, is also neglected.
Too often, all the protagonists make simplistic assumptions about the ease with which subjectivities are produced by racist or antiracist texts (see, for a contrary analysis, Ahier, 1988).
A last important theme in the antiracists' analysis is their conception of ‘institutional racism’.
Originating in the Black Power Movement's struggles in the US, the term now generally signifies all the myriad, taken-for-granted ways in which routine institutional procedures, whatever their original purposes, end up discriminating against and disadvantaging black and other ethnic minorities.
Examples of some of the forms of institutional racism involved in the education system have been provided earlier in this article.
There has been, however, a tendency to use the concept in a reductive manner to imply that racist processes are the only or primary cause of all the unequal outcomes and exclusions which black students experience (Troyna and Williams, 1986; see also Mason, 1982).
The significance of the class and gender inequalities which are intertwined with the racism that black students encounter is thus underplayed.
This weakens the analysis and suggests inappropriate and possibly divisive policies which ignore discriminations and disadvantages common to white and black students, or which impinge in varying ways upon boys and girls.
The hostages to fortune delivered by simplistic uses of institutional racism can be seen in Antony Flew's New Right critique (1984).
An alternative framework
Having criticized the limits of the antiracist account of racism, this is an appropriate point at which to explicate my own conception of racism and to indicate why I think it is more persuasive (cf.
Open University, 1992).
In my view racism , which should be distinguished from racial discrimination , should be restricted to discourses which group human populations into ‘races’ on the basis of some biological signifier — for example, ‘stock’— with each ‘race’being regarded as having essential characteristics or a certain essential character (as in the phrase ‘the British character’, or in attributions to ‘races’of laziness, rebelliousness, or industriousness) and where inferiorization of some ‘races’may or may not be present.
Such views may be held alongside others in varying combinations.
They may shade off into what might more appropriately be called ethnocentrism , where ethnic groups are defined primarily in cultural terms and are regarded as having essential traits.
Although overt inferiorization may not be present, there is a tendency to view cultures from within the categories and frameworks of one ethnic group.
Nationalism may thus be regarded as one form of ethnocentrism, in which cultural groups and their essential characteristics are defined by nationality and the cultural attributes of one or more nations may be regarded as inherently superior or inferior.
Nationalism may also contain racial elements in so far as particular nations may be regarded as deriving from specific racial stocks; and biologically defined communities may be regarded as the prime source of cultural characteristics.
This type of analytical framework posits a range of views from strong versions of racism to weak versions of ethnocentrism.
It has a number of advantages.
It recognizes that most discourses, and especially individuals, are likely to express a complex combination of strong and weak racism and ethnocentrism (and nationalism), and that these may change in emphasis in different historical institutional and interpersonal contexts.
It has a theoretical structure which allows for the possibility of a variety of ‘racisms’, depending upon how various elements of ‘race’, ethnicity and nationality are combined, how they are articulated with gender and class, and how they are related to theories in the natural and social sciences and notions in popular culture and common sense.
Also, by restricting itself to the realm of discourse, the definition leaves open the relationship between particular discourses, specific practices of discrimination, and particular unequal or discriminatory outcomes (although bearing in mind that discourses themselves involve acts or practices of expression).
It clearly implies that racism and ethnocentrism are not necessarily confined to white groups .
And it should be added that some degree of ethnocentrism is likely to be endemic because all discourses and individuals necessarily have to use language and categories.
All enunciations have to be produced within particular discourses, and these are always liable to contain  particular ethnicities and thus likely to position individuals in specific ethnic locations, often in taken-for-granted and deeply unconscious ways.
Moreover, in keeping with my earlier remarks, I would argue that racialized and ethnic discourses and encounters have a tendency to be contradictory and ambivalent in character.
These internal complexities are contextually produced and differentially deployed in particular situations and institutional locations.
Racialized and ethnic discourses and encounters are also inevitably suffused with elements of sexual and class difference and therefore fractured and criss-crossed around a number of axes and identities.
The contradictoriness and ambivalence of racist discourses and interactions are produced by a complex combination of social and psychic structures and forces.
For one thing, the sheer range and historical variation of the sites where encounters between ‘white’ and ‘other’have taken place and the immense variety of specialized and popular discourses that have operated in these encounters have by now put into circulation a multitude of selective images.
These operate as discursive resources to be drawn upon and articulated in different combinations in particular contexts, thus constantly opening up the possibility of tension, inconsistency and contradiction within and between sites.
Sociologically, politically and educationally speaking, difficult but vital questions arise as to how and why particular images, labels, categories, anxieties, forms of rhetoric and practices come to be mobilized around specific sections of a population.
How, for example, do various forms of racism, ethnocentrism and nationalism interact with discourses of gender, sexuality, class and generation to produce different stereotypes and practices in official policy programmes and popular culture around ‘the Asian woman’ or ‘black youth’?
In explorations of the texture of racist discourses in recent years, the inner city has been a prime site for investigation.
Research into the complexities of urban power relations and conflicts over resources have produced important insights into the operation of complex rhetorics and categories of racialization (Well man, 1977; Phizacklea and Miles, 1980).
But there has been a relative neglect of the general institutional and discursive form of the liberal-democratic, capitalist nation-state and its effects in the production of contradictory discourses around ‘race’.
That is, racist, ethnocentric and nationalist ideas, which attempt to create strict symbolic and institutional barriers between collectivities, have also to coexist and continually articulate with a variety of discourses and practices around meritocracy, equal opportunities and citizenship rights.
This creates a multiplicity of axes for the production of possibly conflicting subject positions and potential practices and interactions.
Nevertheless, it is unlikely that the contradictions and ambivalences of stereotypes in general, and racist discourses in particular , can be fully understood without addressing the operations of the unconscious and the dynamics of psychic reality.
This therefore involves a difficult journey  through psychoanalytic theories and categories.
This is not the place to explain and justify different psychoanalytic accounts of the dynamics of identification, disavowal and ambivalence which characterize racist discourses.
One way of viewing the significance of psychoanalytic theories is to conceptualize the unconscious as productive of irrationalities and resistances which simultaneously organize and subvert the operations of conscious subjectivity (Craib, 1989); hence their relevance for transforming the rationalism which underlies the pedagogies of both multiculturalist and antiracist educational practices.
But their significance also needs to be grasped with respect to the operations of splitting, desire, fantasy, pleasure and paranoia which are deeply implicated in racist discourses, and which may inherently produce dualities and ambivalences in racialized encounters between selves and others.
The psychoanalytic historical investigations of Gilman (1985, 1987) and Bhabha (1983, 1986) provide contrasting routes into this terrain, while the theoretical historical and educational work of Philip Cohen, already referred to constitutes the most significant intervention around antiracist education informed by both psychoanalytic and sociological understanding.
Having set out a critique of multicultural and antiracist conceptions of racism and elements of an alternative theorization, it is time to turn to notions of culture in multiculturalism and antiracism.
The question of culture
Earlier in this article I have argued that the initial debates and policies which emerged in the wake of the growing black presence were characterized by various forms of cultural and ethnic essentialism or reductionism and that this still persists, for example, in the way ethnic monitoring and other official know ledges are produced.
Latter-day multiculturalisms, to turn our attention back to them, have by no means overcome the weaknesses of earlier discourses and policy interventions, despite the greater attention given to cultural pluralism and diversity (cf.
Parekh, 1989a).
Several key problems can be identified.
First, in occupying the terrain of prejudice, there continues — as in so many forms of antiracism — to be a fairly simplistic notion of how racism is culturally reproduced, or transmitted as the preferred term has it.
Prejudice acquisition is ascribed to a process of acculturation or socialization from family, peer groups, school curricula, the media, and so on(Lynch, 1987).
Contradictory discourses and practices within and between these agencies of socialization are given little serious attention.
Secondly, although the diverse bases of cultural differentiation — ethnicity, class, gender, region, etc. — are acknowledged, the primary emphasis in multiculturalist analysis is on ethnicity, such that economic and sexual  differentiations within the minority communities, for example, continue to be ignored (cf.
Lynch, 1986; Parekh, 1986, 1989a; Verma, 1989).
Thirdly, however, the focus on ethnicity as part of the discourse of cultural pluralism and diversity pays scant attention to the highly complex, contextually variable and economically and politically influenced drawing and redrawing of boundaries that takes place in encounters within the minority communities and in relation to white groups.
There is little exploration of the sorts of processes and events reported in research in Manchester (Ward, 1979) and London (Wall man, 1986), for example, which documents the shifting forms of boundary maintenance, division and alliance that emerge in relation to local politics.
To put it differently, sociologically speaking there can be no simple additive model of British cultural diversity as composed of a series of ethnic groups, as posited in the discourse of multiculturalism.
This implies, in turn, that the foundations of the whole project of teaching about ‘other cultures’ need to be rethought.
The shape and character of ethnic cultural formations is too complex to be reduced to formulas around festivals, religions, world-views and lifestyles.
These fail to grapple with the shifting and kaleidoscopic nature of ethnic differentiations and identities and their relation to internal divisions of class and gender.
Moreover, as I have remarked earlier, thinking around the question of what it means to understand cultures has hardly begun in multiculturalism, although there is a wealth of material and debate in cultural studies, social anthropology and philosophy upon which to draw (cf.
Geertz, 1973, 1983; Clifford and Marcus, 1986).
Definitions of culture are either not provided at all or conflate distinct conceptions such as symbolization, ethnicity and lifestyle (see the contributions of Lynch and Verma to Parekh, 1989a).
One consequence of these lacunae in multiculturalist discourse has been a failure to confront issues of cultural difference .
These are obscured by what I have called the additive model of cultural diversity.
The Rush die scandal has exposed the weaknesses of any benign multiculturalism premised on the assumption of easy harmony and pluralism.
The problem of epistemological and cultural relativism, amongst other things, looms large here.
Only recently has there been some serious debate within multiculturalism about the issues involved, although with very little guidance on how teachers are to approach and facilitate discussion around the inevitable questions which arise regarding the evaluation of different cultural representations, know ledges and practices.
And the debate is apt to collapse into a gross oversimplification of ‘other’ cultures, for example, with regard to the differing positions and politics of girls and women in Muslim cultures (Troyna and Carrington, 1987).
It might be thought that, given their aversion to the whole terrain of culture, antiracists are generally immune to the kinds of criticisms set out above.
This is only partly true.
Whereas multiculturalism often collapses analysis and prescription into some form of ethnic essentialism, in antiracism cultural essentialism emerges, ironically enough, partly out of the denial of ethnicity.
Antiracists have tended to reify the notion of community, and, by focusing for understandable reasons on unitary conceptions of ‘The black struggle’, to marginalize issues of ethnic, class and gender differences in the black communities.
Partly influenced by the Black Power Movement in the US, the category ‘black’ became, for the late 1960s, an important focus, especially among left antiracists, for mobilizing the growing communities of Afro-Caribbean and Asian descent.
‘Black’, here, denotes not simply an often successful political alliance against racism.
It operates as a profoundly cultural category, an attempted representation of particular experiences and a particular construction of unity around those experiences.
The category had a profound influence on antiracist activists and intellectuals of British Afro-Caribbean, African and Asian descent, and it can still serve as a powerful descriptive and political signifier.
But the cultural essentialism at its core has begun to disintegrate.
In the first place, there has been what one might call an ethnic ‘backlash’ from British Asian and Afro-Caribbean communities.
Some groups within both have protested at the homogenization of different histories, cultures, needs, aspirations and trajectories of migration and settlement, implied in the use of the singular category.
Secondly, it has become increasingly clear that the category can marginalize the racialization of other British minorities.
Turkish and Greek Cypriots, for example, Jewish people and the Irish have been unable to find a voice within a political and cultural space marked out as ‘black’.
The category, in other words, functioned both to include and exclude; in so doing it tended not to engage with the variety of British racisms.
It is true, of course, that the category was never intended to deny the existence of other racisms, nor as an all-encompassing identity that would make ethnicity invisible or irrelevant.
Here its hegemony has been challenged by a third cultural and political thrust.
A range of ‘black’ groups have begun to explore, construct and express identities and experiences not exhausted by the experience of and struggle against racism, or the polarization between social democratic and revolutionary strategic positions.
In this sense the growing dissolution of the category is also part of the collapse of older certainties and polarities of the British left and the emergence of concerns around socialist pluralism (Rust in, 1985; Keane, 1988).
We now have in play what Stuart Hall has dubbed ‘new ethnicities’.
These are evident in the projects of a wide variety of film-makers, artists, novelists, poets and photographers, some of whom I have already referred to.
In films such as My Beautiful Launderette ,Passion of Remembrance , and Sammy and Rosie Get Laid , or in the paintings of Sonia Boyce and others which formed part of The Other Story exhibition at the Hayward Gallery in 1989, complex intersections of sexuality, ethnicity and class are imaginatively constructed through representations which break decisively with the framework of positive and negative images.
There is emerging a new cultural politics of difference which overlays the  older ethnic differences whose divisive effects antiracists have always, rightly, warned against.
Neither the multiculturalist nor the antiracist movement in education has yet engaged with these ‘new ethnicities’.
Nor have they attempted to develop with students their potential for creative explorations of the shifting contours of black and white British cultural and political identities.
The issues thrown up by these works are hardly remote from the lives of students.
Many of them are engaging in their own complex negotiations and renegotiations around language and music, for example, borrowing elements from ‘white’, Afro-Caribbean and Asian forms and creating new syncretic versions (Jones, 1988; Hewitt, 1986; Gilroy, 1987).
For these developments to be taken seriously, the multiculturalists will have to abandon their additive models of cultural pluralism and their continuing obsession with the old ethnicities.
Antiracists, on the other hand, will have to move beyond their reductive conceptions of culture and their fear of cultural difference as simply a source of division and weakness in the struggle against racism.
They need to acknowledge the political significance of questions of national culture and ethnic identity, and to grasp how these intersect with questions of ‘race’ and racism.
They will also have to work through the consequences of other British racisms, especially towards Jewish people and the Irish, and the realignment of older Western Islamic polarities in the context of the Rush die scandal.
Political and cultural questions of representation were always implicit in the older conception of ‘the black struggle’.
Now they have to be reassessed in a context where older socialist and antiracist certainties no longer hold.
We need to move beyond both multiculturalism and antiracism.
Conclusions
I have not provided a manifesto for that next phase in this article.
I have merely tried to unravel what I take to be some of the main underlying oversimplifications which have informed educational practices in the field of ‘race’ and education, whether state-led or self-consciously oppositionist.
This does not imply, and should not be taken to mean, that everything being practised as multicultural and/or antiracist education in schools is worthless.
Much of that work should be defended against its attempted marginalization by the Education Reform Act, the New Right and others.
But we do ourselves no service if we neglect to ask fundamental, difficult questions about our understanding of some of the key issues, processes and terms involved; if we ignore contradictions in our underlying discourses; if we fail to grapple with the limitations of our assumptions about pedagogy and how subjects and subjectivities are formed; and if we fail to notice how economic, political and cultural differentiations are  undermining older fixities around the ethnic, class and political identities of the minority communities.
This was surely the lesson of the Macdonald Inquiry's critique of antiracist education at Burnage High School, and this is what I have tried to indicate through my critical interrogations of the theoretical and pedagogical foundations of multiculturalism and antiracism — especially in relation to the multifaceted nature of racism and the complexities of its intersection with gender and class (see also Cohen and Rattansi, 1991).
How will it be possible to develop educational practices that will build on existing multicultural and antiracist initiatives, but move beyond them?
They will have to take account of contradiction and ambivalence in the operation of racism, avoid cultural and ethnic essentialisms and reductionism, grapple with the limitations of rationalist pedagogies and rationalist assumptions about the translation of formal policies into practices, and engage with the ‘new ethnicities’ and other differentiations.
This is going to be a long and difficult task; difficult, but in my view, absolutely essential.
THE END OF ANTIRACISM
PAUL GILROY
The task of developing a radical critique of the moralistic excesses practised in the name of ‘antiracism’ is an urgent task today.
The absurdities of antiracist orthodoxy have become a target of critique by the right (Honey ford, 1988; Lewis, 1988), and have formed a backdrop to the bitter debates that have surrounded the publication of The Satanic Verses .
The dictatorial character of antiracism, particularly in local government, has itself become an important theme within the discourse of popular racism.
These assaults on the fundamental objective of antiracism and the attendant practice of multiculturalism in education, social work and other municipal services have passed largely unanswered and vocal political support for antiracism has been hard to find.
This is partly because the cadre of antiracism professionals which was created during the boom years of radicalism on the rates has lost its collective tongue: its political confidence has been drained away.
There has been little support from independent black defence organizations and authentic community groups whose actions go far beyond the narrow categories in which antiracism can operate.
Meanwhile, many of the ideological gains of Thatcherite conservatism have dovetailed neatly with the shibboleths of black nationalism — self-reliance and economic betterment through thrift, hard work and individual disciplines.
The impact of this resolutely conservative and often authoritarian political ideology can be felt right across the field of social and economic policy where an idealized and homogenized vision of ‘The Black Community’ is the object of a discourse that urges it to take care of its own problems and assume the major burden of managing its own public affairs.
This is not a wholly negative development, but in the new atmosphere it creates antiracist initiatives can only appear to be a patronizing and unacceptable form of special pleading.
Apart from these important changes, specialized antiracist work within the local state has been increasingly identified as an embarrassment by the Labour Party for whom political commitments to antiracism and multiculturalism are apparently a vote loser.
These developments have created political inertia in what was once an antiracist movement .
The political forces which once made that movement move are now enveloped in a catastrophe that has two distinct dimensions.
Firstly, there is a crisis of organizational forms.
In the absence of mass mobilization around antiracist aims, it has been impossible to construct  structures that could span the gulf between the elements of the movement which are outside the local state and the residues which are dedicated to remaining within it.
This problem is also conveyed in the considerable rift that has opened up between those sections which are ideologically committed to the Labour Party and those which are indifferent if not actively opposed to it.
Secondly, and more importantly for what follows, there is a crisis of the political language, images and cultural symbols which this movement needs in order to develop its self consciousness and its political programme.
This problem with the language of antiracism is acutely expressed by the lack of clarity that surrounds the term ‘antiracism’ itself.
It includes the difficulties involved in producing a coherent definition of racism (cf.
Miles, 1989) as well as the tension that appears from the need to link an account of the racialization of social and political structures and discourses with an understanding of individual action and institutional behaviour.
For all its antipathy to the new racism of the New Right, the common sense ideology of antiracism has also drifted towards a belief in the absolute nature of ethnic categories and a strong sense of the insurmountable cultural and experiential divisions which, it is argued, are a feature of racial difference.
I have argued elsewhere that these ideological failures have been compounded firstly by a reductive conception of culture and secondly by a culturalist conception of race and ethnic identity (Gilroy, 1987).
This has led to a position where politically opposed groups are united by their view of race exclusively in terms of culture and identity rather than politics and history.
Culture and identity are part of the story of racial sensibility but they do not exhaust that story.
At a theoretical level ‘race’ needs to be viewed much more contingently, as a precarious discursive construction.
To note this does not, of course, imply that it is any less real or effective politically.
It is possible, then, that the idea of antiracism has been so discredited that it is no longer useful.
It is certain that we have to devise ways to move beyond antiracism as it is presently constituted.
I must emphasize that I am thinking not of antiracism as a political objective, or a goal which emerges alongside other issues from the daily struggles of black people, from the practice of community organizations and voluntary groups, even from the war of position which must be waged inside the institutions of the state.
I am not talking about the ongoing struggle towards black liberation, for there is much more to the emancipation of blacks than opposition to racism.
I am thinking instead of antiracism as a much more limited project defined simply, even simplistically, by the desire to do away with racism.
The antiracism I am criticizing trivializes the struggle against racism and isolates it from other political antagonisms — from the contradiction between capital and labour, from the battle between men and women.
It suggests that racism can be eliminated on its own because it is readily extricable from everything else.
Yet in Britain, ‘race’ cannot be under  stood if it is falsely divorced from other political processes or grasped if it is reduced to the effect of these other relations.
Antiracism in this sense is a phenomenon which grew out of the political openings created by the 1981 riots.
In the years since then, antiracists have become a discrete and self contained political formation.
Their activism is now able to sustain itself independently of the lives, dreams and aspirations of the majority of blacks from whose experience they derive their authority to speak.
To criticize antiracism necessitates understanding racism and being able to locate the politics of ‘race’ from which it springs.
Analysing what racism does in our society means, first of all, claiming ‘race’ and racism back from the margins of British politics.
Racism is not epiphenomenal.
Yet just as racism itself views black settlers as an external, alien visitation, antiracism can itself appear to be tangential to the main business of the political system as a whole.
The apparent marginality of race politics is often an effect of a fundamental tension inherent in antiracist organizing.
A tension exists between those strands in antiracism which are primarily anti fascist and those which work with a more extensive and complex sense of what racism is in contemporary Britain.
This simplistic anti fascist emphasis attempts to mobilize the memory of earlier encounters with the fascism of Hitler and Mussolini.
The racists are a problem because they are descended from the brown- and black-shirted enemies of earlier days.
To oppose them is a patriotic act; their own use of national flags and symbols is nothing more than a sham masking their terroristic inclinations.
The price of over-identifying the struggle against racism with the activities of these extremist groups and group lets is that however much of a problem they may be in a particular area (and I am not denying the need to combat their organizing) they are exceptional.
They exist on the fringes of political culture and for the foreseeable future are destined to have only tenuous and intermittent relationships with respectability.
They are a threat but not the only threat.
There is more to contemporary racism than the violence they perpetrate.
We shall see in a moment that there are problems with the nationalism which goes hand in hand with this outlook.
A more productive starting point is provided by focusing on racism in the mainstream and seeing ‘race’ and racism not as fringe questions but as a volatile presence at the very centre of British politics, actively shaping and determining the history not simply of blacks, but of this country as a whole at a crucial stage in its development.
The importance of racism in contemporary politics betrays something about the nature of the painful transition this country, and the overdeveloped world as a whole, is undergoing.
The almost mystical power of race and nation on the political stage conveys something about the changing nature of class relations, the growth of state authoritarianism, the eclipse of industrial production, the need to maintain popular support  for militarism and exterminism and the end of the nation-state as a political form.
The highly charged politics of national identity that have been occasioned by these developments have been transposed into a higher, shriller key by current concern over the appeal of a wide pan-European disposition tailored to the new range of possibilities that flow from tighter political and economic integration of the European Economic Community.
This potentially post-national European consciousness has racial referents of its own.
It is however felt by elements of both left and right to pose a threat to the sovereignty and cultural integrity of the United Kingdom.
Whether it is possible to generate a political discourse capable of articulating the distinctive needs and historical experiences of black Europeans remains to be seen.
Though the rich legacy of an extensive black presence on this continent suggests that it may be possible for many commentators, the terms ‘black’ and ‘European’remain categories which mutually exclude each other.
Racism and the ideology of antiracism
The first question I want to ask of contemporary antiracism is whether it does not collude in accepting that the problems of ‘race’ and racism are somehow peripheral to the substance of political life.
My view, which locates racism in the core of politics, contrasts sharply with what can be called the coat-of-paint theory of racism (Gilroy, 1987).
This is not, in fact, a single theory but an approach which sees racism on the outside of social and political life — sometimes the unwanted blemish is the neo-fascists, sometimes it is immigration laws, other times it is the absence of equal opportunities — yet racism is always located on the surface of other things.
It is an unfortunate excrescence on a democratic policy which is essentially sound and it follows from this that, with the right ideological tools and political elbow grease, racism can be dealt with once and for all, leaving the basic structures and relations of British economy and society essentially unchanged.
Though not always stated openly, the different permutations of this view underpin much of contemporary antiracism.
I think there are particular problems posed by the fact that this type of theory is intrinsic to equal opportunities initiatives.
The coat-of-paint approach is doubly mistaken because it suggests that fundamental issues of social justice, democracy and political and economic power are not raised by the struggle against racial subordination.
Seeing racism as determining rather than determinate, at the centre rather than in the margins, also means accepting that Britain's crisis is centrally and emphatically concerned with notions of race and national identity.
It has been held together, punctuated and periodized by racial  politics — immigration, the myriad problems of the riotous ‘inner city’ and by the loony left.
These terms are carefully coded and they are significant because they enable people to speak about race without mentioning the word.
The frequent absence of any overt reference to ‘race’ or hierarchy is an important characteristic of the new types of racism with which we have to deal.
This kind of coded language has created further strategic problems for antiracism.
It is easy to call Mr Honey ford, the Bradford head teacher, a racist and to organize against him on that basis but less easy to show precisely how and why this is the case.
We must be prepared to focus unsentimentally on antiracism's inability to respond to other distinctive aspects of these new forms of racism.
Apart from the way that racial meanings are inferred rather than stated openly, these new forms are distinguished by the extent to which they identify race with the terms ‘culture’ and ‘identity’, terms which have their own resonance in antiracist orthodoxy.
The new racism has a third important feature which enables it to slip through the rationalist approach of those who, with the best will in the world, reduce the problem of racism to the sum of power and prejudice.
This is the closeness it suggests between the idea of race and the ideas of nation, nationality and national belonging.
We increasingly face a racism which avoids being recognized as such because it is able to link ‘race’ with nationhood, patriotism and nationalism, a racism which has taken a necessary distance from crude ideas of biological inferiority and superiority and now seeks to present an imaginary definition of the nation as a unified cultural community.
It constructs and defends an image of national culture — homogeneous in its whiteness yet precarious and perpetually vulnerable to attack from enemies within and without.
The analogy of war and invasion is increasingly used to make sense of events.
This is racism that answers the social and political turbulence of crisis and crisis management by the recovery of national greatness in the imagination .
Its dreamlike construction of our sceptred isle as an ethnically purified one provides a special comfort against the ravages of decline.
It has been a key component in the ideological and political processes which have put the ‘Great’ back in Britain.
The symbolic restoration of greatness has been achieved in part through the actual expulsion of blacks and the fragmentation of their households, which is never far from page three in the tabloids.
The shock of decline has induced Britons to ask themselves a question first posed by Enoch Powell: What kind of people are we?
The emphasis on culture and the attendant imagery of the nation composed of symmetrical family units contributes to a metaphysics of Britishness which has acquired racial referents.
I can illustrate this by referring to a poem which was part of a racist leaflet circulated in Haringey during the 1987 election.
It was illustrated by a picture of Bernie Grant, the black Labour candidate, with the hairy body of a gorilla.
It read:
Swing along with Bernie, it's the very natural thing
He's been doing it for centuries and now he thinks he's king
He's got a little empire and he doesn't give a jot
But then the British are a bloody tolerant lot
They'll let him swing and holler hetero-homo-gay
And then just up and shoot him in the good old British way.
These lines signify a powerful appropriation of the rights and liberties of the freeborn Briton so beloved of the new left.
The rhyme's historical references demonstrate how completely blackness and Britishness have been made into mutually exclusive categories, incompatible identities.
The problems which Bernie represents are most clearly visible against the patterned backdrop of the Union Jack.
The picture of him as a gorilla was necessary on the leaflet because the words make no overt mention of his race.
The crime which justifies lynching him is a form of treason, not racial inferiority.
This culturalist variety of racism and the cultural theory of ‘race’ difference linked to it hold that the family supplies the units, the building blocks from which the national community is constructed.
This puts black women directly in the firing line: firstly, because they are seen as playing a key role in reproducing the alien culture, and, secondly, because their fertility is identified as excessive and therefore threatening.
It has become commonplace to observe that the precious yet precarious Churchill Ian, stiff-upper-lip culture which only materializes in the midst of national adversity — underneath the arches, down in the air-raid shelters where Britannia enjoyed her finest hours — is something from which blacks are excluded.
The means of their exclusion is identified in the colourful deviancy which is produced by their pathological family forms.
Pathology and deviancy are the qualities which define distinct and insubordinate black cultures.
This applies in different yet parallel ways to both Afro-Caribbean and Asian populations, whose criminality violates the law — the supreme achievement of British civilization.
Deviancy, so the argument runs, has its roots in generational conflict which appears along cultural lines.
The antisocial activities of the ‘Holy Smokes’ in west London's Asian gangland are, in a sense, parallel to the barbarous misdemeanours of the Afro-Caribbean Yardies on London's proliferating front lines.
The ‘racial’ criminal subcultures of each group are seen to wantonly violate the laws and customs which express the civilization of the national community and in so doing provide powerful symbols which express black difference as a whole.
To be a street criminal is therefore to fulfil cultural destiny.
For a long while, the crime question provided the principal means to underscore the cultural concerns of this new nationalist racism.
Its dominance helped us to understand where the new racism began in Powell's bloody nightmare of the aged white woman pursued through the  streets by black children.
However, crime has been displaced recently at the centre of race politics by another issue which points equally effectively to the incompatibility of different cultures supposedly sealed off from one another forever along ethnic lines.
This too uses images of the black child to make its point — the cultural sins of the fathers will be visited on their children.
Where once it was the main streets of the decaying inner city which hosted the most fearsome encounter between Britons and their most improbable and intimidating other — black youth — now it is the classrooms and staff rooms of the inner-city school which frame the same conflict and provide the most potent terms with which to make sense of racial difference.
The publication of Antiracism: an assault on education and value , the book of essays edited by Frank Palmer (1987), confirmed the fact that the school has become the principal element in the ideology with which the new right have sought to attack antiracism.
While it is important not to be mesmerized by the gains and strengths of the new right — as many radicals are — it is essential to understand why their burgeoning anti-antiracism has focused upon education.
From their perspective, schools are repositories of the authentic national culture which they transmit between generations.
They mediate the relation of the national community to its youthful subjects — future citizens.
Decaying school buildings provide a ready image for the nation in microcosm.
The hard fought changes which antiracists and multiculturalists have wrought on the curriculum mirror the bastardization of genuine British culture.
Antiracism initiatives that literally denigrate educational standards are identified as an assault on the traditional virtues of British education.
This cultural conflict is a means through which power is transposed and whites become a voiceless ethnic minority oppressed by totalitarian local authority antiracism.
The racists are redefined as the black racists and Mr Honey ford, dogged defender of freedom, is invited to Number 10 Downing Street for consultation.
In The Independent of 23 July 1987 Baroness Cox argues that black parents are motivated to demand their own separate schools not by dissatisfaction or frustration with the way that racism is institutionalized in state education, but because they want ‘a good old-fashioned British education’ for their children.
I think we have to recognize that the effect of these images and the conflicts from which they spring in Brent or Bradford has been to call into question any antiracist or multicultural project in education and indeed the idea of antiracism in general.
The new racism's stress on cultural difference and its absolutist conception of ethnicity have other significant effects.
It is now not only a feature of the relationship between blacks and whites.
It enters directly into the political relations between the different groups which, in negotiating with each other, promise to construct a unified black community from their diversity.
The potentially unifying effects of their different but complementary experiences of racism are dismissed, while the inclusive and openly politicized definitions of ‘race’ which were a notable feature of the late seventies have been fragmented into their ethnic components, first into Afro-Caribbean and Asian and then into Pakistani, Bangladeshi, Bajan, Jamaican and Guyanese in a spiral.
This boiling down of groups into their respective ethnic essences is clearly congruent with the nationalist concerns of the right, but it is also sanctioned by the antiracist orthodoxy of the left and by many voices from within the black communities themselves which have needed no prompting to develop their own fascination with ethnic differences and thus reduce political definitions of ‘race’ to a narcissistic celebration of culture and Identity.
I have argued that antiracism has been unable to deal with the new forms in which racism has developed.
In particular, it has been incapable of showing how British cultural nationalism becomes a language of race.
The power of this patriotic political language is there for all to behold.
It puts the vital populist force into those processes for which ‘Thatcherism’ serves as a reasonable shorthand term.
However, it does not appear to be the exclusive property of the right.
Its magical populist appeal will tempt political pragmatists of all hues.
I am afraid there are segments of the left who are especially envious of its capacity to animate the groups which were once regarded as their traditional supporters.
Unfortunately, Labour's blustering ‘patriotism of freedom and fairness’, like its recent attempts to ‘take crime seriously’, is no less saturated with racial connotations than the Conservative versions of these arguments.
This is not to say that the right and left are necessarily the same, but rather that they converge at key points and share an understanding of what is involved in the politics of ‘race’.
The Bernie poem seamlessly knitted together images invoking empire, sovereignty and sexuality, with a concluding exhortation to violence.
There is nothing about this combination of themes which marks it out as the exclusive preserve of the right.
It is another example of how the racism which ties national culture to ethnic essences, which sees custom, law and constitution, schools and courts of justice beset by corrosive alien forces, has moved beyond the grasp of the old left/right distinction.
This populist character of the new racism works across class lines as well as within them.
It can link together disparate and formally opposed groups, leading them to discover the morbid pleasures of seeing themselves as ‘one nation’.
It transmits the idea of the British people as the white people .
While Labour seeks to simply snatch the language of one nation from the Tories, the danger here can only grow and it is compounded because it is by no means clear how far a reconstituted and emphatically ‘un-loony’ socialism may go in negotiating its own language of toughness on immigration and nationality, even perhaps on humane socialist repatriation.[…]
Racial justice and civil society
I think it is important to concede that what we can loosely call the anti-antiracist position associated with sections of the new right and with populist politics has fed on crucial ambiguities in antiracist and multicultural initiatives.
The definition of racism as the sum of prejudice and power can be used to illustrate these problems.
Power is a relation between social groups not a possession to be worn like a garment or flaunted like an antiracist badge.
Prejudice suggests conscious action if not actual choice.
Is this an appropriate formula?
The most elementary lessons involved in studying ideas and consciousness seem to have been forgotten.
Racism, like capitalism as a whole, rests on the mystification of social relations — the necessary illusions that secure the order of public authority.
There are other aspects of what has become a multiculturalist or antiracist orthodoxy which can be shown to replicate in many ways the volkish new right sense of the relationship between race, nation and culture — kin blood and ethnic identity.
I have already mentioned how the left and right distinction has begun to evaporate as formally opposed groups have come to share a sense of what race is.
These problems are even more severe when elements of the black community have themselves endorsed this understanding.
Here I am thinking of the definition of race exclusively in terms of culture and identity which ties certain strands in antiracism to the position of some of the new right ideologues.
By emphasizing this convergence I am not saying that culture and identity are unimportant, but challenging the routine reduction of race to them alone which obscures the inherently political character of the term.
The way in which culture is itself understood provides the key to grasping the extraordinary convergence between left and right, antiracist and avowedly racist over precisely what race and racism add up to.
At the end of the day, an absolute commitment to cultural insiderism is as bad as an absolute commitment to biological insiderism.
I think we need to be theoretically and politically clear that no single culture is hermetically sealed off from others.
There can be no neat and tidy pluralistic separation of racial groups in this country.
It is time to dispute with those positions which, when taken to their conclusions, say ‘there is no possibility of shared history and no human empathy’.
We must beware of the use of ethnicity to wrap a spurious cloak of legitimacy around the speaker who invokes it.
Culture, even the culture which defines the groups we know as races, is never fixed, finished or final.
It is fluid, it is actively and continually made and re-made.
In our multicultural schools the sound of the steel pan may evoke Caribbean ethnicity, tradition and authenticity, yet they originate in the oil drums of the Standard Oil Company rather than the mysterious knowledge of ancient African griots.
These theoretical problems are most visible and at their most intractable in the area of fostering and adoption policy.
Here, the inflated rhetoric and culturalist orthodoxies of antiracism have borne some peculiar fruit.
The critique of the pathological views of black family life that were so prevalent in Social Services during the late seventies and early eighties has led directly to an extraordinary idealization of black family forms.
Antiracist orthodoxy now sees them as the only effective repositories of authentic black culture and as a guaranteed means to transmit all the essential skills that black children will need if they are to ‘survive’ in a racist society without psychological damage.
‘Same-race’ adoption and fostering for ‘minority ethnics’is presented as an unchallenged and seemingly unchallengeable benefit for all concerned.
It is hotly defended with the same fervour that denounces white demands for ‘same race’ schooling as a repellent manifestation of racism.
What is most alarming about this is not its inappropriate survivalist tone, the crudity with which racial identity is conceived nor even the sad inability to see beyond the conservation of racial identities to possibility of their transcendence.
It is the extraordinary manner in which the pathological imagery has simply been inverted so that it forms the basis of a pastoral view which asserts the strength and durability of black family life and, in present circumstances, retreats from confronting the difficult issues which result in black children arriving in care in the first place.
The contents of the racist pathology and the material circumstances to which it can be made to correspond are thus left untouched.
The tentacles of racism are everywhere, except in the safe haven which a nurturing black family provides for delicate, fledgling racial identities.
The forces of antiracism
I want to turn now to the forces which have grouped around the antiracist project and to the question of class.
There is a problem here in that much of the certainty and confidence with which the term has been used have collapsed along with the secure life-time employment which characterized industrial capitalism.
Today, for example, I think it means next to nothing to simply state that blacks are working class when we are likely to be unemployed and may not recognize our experience and history in those areas of political life where an appeal to class is most prominent.
Class politics do not, in any case, enjoy a monopoly of political radicalism.
Obviously people still belong to classes, but belief in the decisive universal agency of the dwindling proletariat is something which must be dismissed as an idealist fantasy.
Class is an indispensable instrument in analysing capitalism, but it contains no ready-made plan for its overcoming.
We must learn to live without a theological faith in the working class as either a revolutionary or an antiracist agent.
There is a major issue here, but I want to note it and move on to consider a different aspect of how race and class intersect.
A more significant task for class analysis is comprehending the emergence of a proto-middle class grouping narrowly constituted around the toeholds which some blacks have been able to acquire in the professions, mostly those related directly to the welfare state itself — social work, teaching, and now antiracist bureaucracies.
A Marxist writer would probably identify this group as the first stirrings of a black petit bourgeoisie.
I do not think this grouping or group let is yet a class either in itself or for itself and it may never become one.
For one thing it is too small; for another it is too directly dependent on the state institutions which pay its wages.
But it is with this group that antiracism can be most readily identified and we need to examine it on its own terms and in its relationship to other more easily identifiable class groupings.
It is obviously in an uncomfortably contradictory position — squeezed between the expectations of the bureaucracies on which it relies and its political affiliation to the struggles of the mass of blacks which it is called upon to mediate, translate and sometimes police.
It is caught between the demands of bureaucratic professionalism and the emotive pull of ethnic identification.
This not-yet-class plays a key role in organizing the political forces of antiracism centred on local authorities.
It involves three opposed tendencies which have evolved an uneasy symbiosis.
They are not wholly discrete.
The campaign for autonomous Black Sections in the Labour Party, for example, involves elements of each of them.
First, there is the equal opportunities strand, which has its roots in the social democratic ‘race’ interventions of the 1960s.
It has also borrowed heavily from the experience of Afro-America's shift into electoral politics — the black mayors' movement and so on.
This tendency is proud and secure in its bureaucratic status and it identifies equality (antiracism) with efficiency and good management practice.
Policy questions dominate political ones and antiracism emerges from the production of general blueprints which can be universally applied.
Of course, equal opportunities afford an important interface between struggles around race and gender and they can be a locus of possible alliances.
However, in the context of local authorities these initiatives can also host a competition between different political forces over which of them is going to take immediate priority.
We should therefore be wary of collapsing antiracism let alone black emancipation into equal opportunities.
The second tendency is what used to be called Black nationalism but is now fragmented into multiple varieties, each with its own claim to ethnic particularity.
It is now emphatically culturalist rather than political, each ethnic or national group arguing for cultural relativism in the strongest form.
Very often, these mutually unintelligible and exclusive ethnic cultures just happen to be the same as the groups which common sense tells us are ‘races’.
Perversely and ironically, this tendency has happily co-existed with old-style Labourism for which ethnic absolutism and cultural  relativism have provided an obvious means to rationalize and balance its funding practices.
The third tendency is the most complex.
It unendingly reiterates the idea that class is race, race is class and is both black and white.
Its spokes people have sought refuge from inter-ethnic conflict in some of the more anachronistic formulae of socialist class politics.
For them class is the thing which will unify the diverse and end the polyphonic ethno-babble in the new municipal Tower of Babel.
Class remains synonymous with organized labour, regardless of the fact that in the context of local authorities organized labour is not always very radical.
This tendency overlooks the role which the bureaucratic hierarchy plays in coercing the actually existing working class into anti race line.
So far its class-based line has been almost exclusively animated by a critique of race awareness training — a practical strategy which has been thrown up in the grating between the first two tendencies.
This is an important issue, but it is nonetheless the most gestural and superficial aspect of deeper problems, namely culturalism and ethnic absolutism.
This tendency has mistaken the particular for the general — racism awareness training is a symptom, not a cause in its own right.
Apart from their conceit, these diverse yet inter-dependent groupings share a statist conception of antiracism.
In making the local state the main vehicle for advancing antiracist politics they have actively confused and confounded the black community's capacity for autonomous self-organization.
Here, we must make an assessment of the politics of funding community organizations and the dependency which that creates.
There is every likelihood that the versions of antiracism I have criticized will wither away as the local state structures on which they have relied are destroyed by the conflict with central government.
But antiracist activities encapsulate one final problem which may outlive them.
This is the disastrous way in which they have trivialized the rich complexity of black life by reducing it to nothing more than a response to racism.
More than any other issue this operation reveals the extent of the antiracists' conceptual trading with the racists and the results of embracing their culturalist assumptions.
Seeing in black life nothing more than an answer to racism means moving on to the ideological circuit which makes us visible in two complementary roles — the problem and the victim.
Antiracism seems very comfortable with this idea of blacks as victims.
I remember one simplistic piece of Greater London Council propaganda which said ‘We are all either the victims or the perpetrators of racism’.
Why should this be so?
Suffering confers no virtue on the victim; yesterday's victims are tomorrow's executioners.
I propose that we reject the central image of ourselves as victims and install instead an alternative conception which sees us as an active force working in many different ways for our freedom from racial subordination.
The plural is important here for there can be no single or homogeneous strategy  against racism because racism itself is never homogeneous.
It varies, it changes and it is always uneven.
The recent history of our struggles has shown how people can shrink the world to the size of their communities and act politically on that basis, expressing their dissent in the symbolism of disorderly protest while demanding control over their immediate conditions.
However you feel about the useless violence of these eruptions, it was the riotous protests of 1981 which created the space in which political antiracism became an option.
We must accept that for the years immediately ahead these struggles will be essentially defensive and probably unable to make the transition to more stable, totalizing forms of politics.
But the challenge we face is the task of linking these immediate local concerns together across the international division of labour, transcending national boundaries, turning our back on the state and using all the means at our disposal to build a radical, democratic movement of civil society.
This kind of activity could be called the micro-politics of race, though in practice, as where we align ourselves with the struggles of our brothers and sisters in South Africa, it is more likely to prove the micro-politics of race's overcoming.
‘IT'S RACISM WHAT DUNNIT’
HIDDEN NARRATIVES IN THEORIES OF RACISM
PHILIP COHEN
In their articles in this volume Ali Rattansi and Paul Gilroy have argued the case for new strategies in antiracist education that avoid what the Burnage Report criticized as its ‘moral, symbolic and doctrinaire’ forms.
This article is also a contribution to that process of critical revision, and therefore inevitably involves an element of self-reflection, focusing on some of the ideas and approaches which I have used in my own antiracist work over the years.
The story begins with two examples taken from work in the early 1980s.
The first is a transcript taken from some ethnographic research which I carried out into the culture of racism amongst young white men living on a large council estate in South London.
This was part of a wider project to develop forms of youth work to counter the appeal of the National Front amongst this group.
The second is the text of an unofficial lampoon that was being circulated among junior officers in the Metropolitan Police in 1982, in the wake of the Scar man Report.
I was given it at the end of a stormy course on race relations given to staff at Hen don Police College.
Shortly afterwards the lecturer who was responsible for arranging the course was sacked for leaking essays that revealed the extent of racism amongst the cadets, and a programme of ‘human awareness training’ was introduced instead.
The two texts provide vivid evidence of the continuing reality of racist cultures in Britain.
I do not provide a detailed analysis of them here, but use them as a reference point for raising a number of issues about different approaches to understanding and tackling the kind of racism which they represent.
I have in fact used these texts many times for study purposes in a variety of settings: with teachers, community activists, academics and ‘race professionals’.
It is the experience of listening to the responses or readings which have been triggered by them which has led me to question the nature of the arguments usually put forward by antiracists to explain racism.
It is often said that one of the problems with antiracism is that it knows what it is against, but not what it is for.
But do we really know enough  about the whys and wherefores of racism?
If not, then perhaps the models of racism which are implicitly or explicitly present in antiracist policies and practices may be inhibiting the development of more positive and effective strategies?
What alternative models are possible?
Before we even begin to consider how such questions could be productively posed, let alone answered, it is perhaps worth asking what it means to have a model of something at all.
There are a number of different senses in which the word has come to be used, both in the social sciences and in everyday parlance.
It may refer to a scaled down version of reality such as a model car, or to a form of symbolic representation such as a map.
In both cases the model is a device which reduces the complexity of what is represented, by selectively reproducing only those details which are deemed significant or useful for the purpose at hand.
A model car doesn't have to contain all the elements of an internal combustion engine in order to work as a toy!
A map does not have to indicate all the features of the terrain in order to help people find their way about it.
There is, however, another meaning which can be given to the term: the model as an ideal, an exemplary type or paradigm, as in model pupil, worker or wife.
These constructions also involve a process of selective reproduction in which certain features are privileged and others ignored.
For example, the ‘model’ pupil is one who is always eager to follow the teacher's line of instruction and is never bolshy or bored!
One of the things I want to argue is that in order to construct certain exemplary models of antiracist policy and practice it has been necessary to operate in terms of a reductive representation of racism, one which not only scales down its reality, but ignores its more complex features.
It is this ‘reductionism’, this disavowal of complexity for the sake of pursuing moral certainties or political ideals, which has lead to the present crisis of antiracist education.
In taking this line of thought for a walk I have had to develop a model of antiracism itself, and this in the more properly social scientific sense of the word — the model as a typology of instances.
I have tried to identify the pattern of presuppositions which underlay common sense arguments about the meaning of my two study texts; I look both at their theoretical adequacy as explanatory models of racism, and at their rhetorical power as a means of winning consent for certain‘exemplary’ or ‘ideologically correct’formulations of how antiracist work should be done.
Although I do not develop this aspect of the analysis here, I also suggest that the images or metaphors which are applied to define racism by analogy hold the key to understanding people's emotional investment in antiracist positions.
It is just as necessary to be aware of the role which desire, displacement and fantasy play in our own practices, as it is in relation to the perverse ideo-logic of racism itself.
In the light of this discussion I offer some indications as to how a strategy of reading might be applied to the study of racist discourses, and invite readers to try out this approach on the two study texts, not in order to produce ‘the right answer’ but to compare what is gained and what lost in detail and depth of  understanding by applying this kind of model compared to the others.
At times this may seem a difficult and roundabout journey.
But it will prove to be a necessary and worthwhile one if it leads us in the direction of a less doctrinaire and therefore more properly educational form of antiracism.
From the wrong side of the tracks
Fighting talk
You got into a fight the other night.
What happened?
Well, there was a fair fight between one of my brothers and this coloured kid, right?
They started one on to one.
And my brother won, right?
And half of the blacks said ‘Right, let's leave it at that.’
But the other lot come down the next night, and the night after that, and the night after that, all week they come down, about 40, 50 of them, from all over…
Shepherd's Bush, Notting Hill, White City…
…black city (laughter )…
…and there's just our lot from the estate.
What started the first fight?
I dunno, you never know, do you, it just happens…
Did all the black people come from outside the area?
All from outside, weren't they (general assent )…
Well one lived here, the rest came from outside.
Would you go outside the area to fight blacks?
No, not really.
You see, if we went outside our area we'd get nicked…remember that time the police come down and they said ‘if you're on your own territory we'll nick the others, but if you're outside, we'll nick you .’
So we let the blacks come down to us , we didn't go looking for them.
And on the Friday night we was fetching bottles and sticks and everything and we hid them ready.
And the Old Bill came down and found them and nicked us, even after what they'd said.
And we got done for conspiracy to cause GBH.
Nine of us got done.
But the blacks they just let them go.
They just put them in the meat wagon and dropped them up town.
Why do you think the police let them go?
Race relations…
Race Relations Act.
If the coons get nicked they start complaining, saying the police are nicking them unfairly…
Do you think the police in this area are biased against young white people?
No, they're not biased against white people they're biased against us !
They know quite a few of us, don't they, and if they see you, they nick you.
But if they see a bunch of black kids hanging around they won't nick them.
…
Blacks reckon the opposite; they reckon the police are picking on them.
…
Nearly every day round our area you used to get searched.
The Law come over if you were in a group.
If you hang about after 10pm they come over and say ‘If you lot ain't out of here in five minutes, you're nicked, the lot of you.’
…
Yes, there used to be a bigger lot you know, like 18, 19.
Now they're off and married, so we hang about and get the trouble.
What are the girls doing in all this?
Well, it depends.
Sometimes they egg you on, you know.
Most times they just hang about and watch if there's a fight.
If there's real trouble with the blacks most of them don't want to know.
But a few of them they're worse than us, ain't they?
Yeah but some of them are really scared of the coons, ain't they?
Like there was this girl, she worked in the paper shop down the road, and there was this black kid who kept pestering her all the time, so we had to go down and sort him out.
He left her alone after that.
What did your parents have to say about all this?
Well, they saw there was more of them [the blacks]than us.
And they saw the Old Bill nicking us and letting the coons go.
And they was right behind us.
…
Yes, cos they seen the trouble from the balconies, you know.
…
Everyone was looking over the balcony.
There was a big audience.
Everyone was out.
Some of the older blokes, they come out, and they started fighting as well!(laughter ) One bloke come down from the flats with just a pair of trousers and a vest on and he started having a go!
…
Yes, when they see all the white kids getting nicked, all the parents was going mad about it.
…and we got a petition!
…
Yes, we just went round the houses and we said to the people, you know, why we was getting nicked, and they just signed their names.
We got 100 names in three days!
Are most of the people on this estate white?
It used to be didn't it?(general assent ) But not no more, since they started bringing coloured families in.
Now it's about half and half.
When they first come over here it was probably all right.
But then more and more come and they all started acting flash, like they owned the place and that's when all the trouble started.
I went down the Kentucky in the High Street the other day, I had just come out, I was just standing there, when these black kids come up and start jostling me and then they nicks my chicken and chips.
Just like that, in front of my nose.
I mean I might think of doing something like that, but I'd never actually dare to do it…
What other changes have there been?
Well, they just keep building flats don't they?
They're opening a new lot now at the top of the road there.
It just keeps on getting bigger and bigger…
…and how many flats have gone to blacks in just the last few years?
That's where my first house was, where they are now.
…
It was good when we were smaller; it was much better wasn't it?(general agreement )
…
Where our flats are, all it is now is green and trees and everything.
There used to be rubbish dumps and mud and all that and we used to have a laugh there, you know what I mean?
…
There used to be a lot of older houses and we used to all go in them.
But they've been knocking everything down.
I mean we can't even have a bonfire round our way now, can we, without them phoning the police.
The last laugh?
The following instructions are to be brought to the attention of all officers.
Dress: No 2 trousers (pressed) boots (shone) reinforced helmets.
Truncheons and whistles must be carried.
Non-authorised clothing: crash helmets, steel capped boots, jogging shoes and squad ties will not be worn.
Inspectors in charge of serials will search their officers to ensure that no officers have concealed six foot scaffold poles or pick axe handles in their pockets.
Protective clothing: the only protective item allowed is a Police ‘Long Service and Good Conduct Medal’ which should be worn in a prominent position so as to allow the Local Youth to identify old  policemen who they do not like, from young policemen whom they like even less.
The following practices have been noted and should cease forthwith: Missiles thrown at the police should not be picked up and thrown back as once the missile has hit the ground it is deemed ‘out of play’.
However missiles in mid flight may be headed back although, prior to this, helmets should be removed to prevent damage to the helmet plate.
The practice, especially among members of shield serials, of ‘whooping like cowboys and indians’ and beating of truncheons on riot shields must cease as this tends to frighten and intimidate rioters.
The practice of ‘blacking up’ faces is definitely not appropriate in present conflict.
Officers who are unfortunately set alight by petrol bombs should not run down the road screaming, but should lay down with dignity and await their turn to be put out.
Before leaving for Brixton, Inspectors should brief their men on local customs and traditions.
It has been statistically proved that the young of the area are six times more helpful than youngsters in the rest of the country at carrying ladies bags.
This action leads to about sixty misunderstandings a week.
Brixton, like the rest of the country has its take away shops, only here the service includes jewellers, Burtons, Woolworths, and camera shops; in fact most shops can be regarded as ‘in the scheme’.
The youngsters of the area hold celebrations similar to our Guy Fawkes Night, when pubs, shops, homes and policemen are set alight.
Finally should any elderly residents approach officers complaining of being assaulted or mugged, they should be closely questioned to ascertain if they are trying to provoke a riot.
Reading ideologies
Simply to denounce the sort of racism which is evident in these texts does not in itself enable us to understand why this culture comes into being, and how it is perpetuated.
These questions should properly be the subject of extensive research and debate, since on the answers hang decisive issues of antiracist strategy.
We should not have to anguish over what needs to be done to stop the physical and mental havoc which such racists wreak on black people.
This can be limited and even stopped by resolute  political action.
But it is not so easy to legislate out of existence the cultures which produce these practices.
The stick-and-carrot approach to ‘race relations’ has done little to shift the moral economy of the street gang, or that of the rank-and-file police.
For at this level we are dealing with underlying causes, rather than immediate effects.
How those causes are identified will affect political priorities and is also partly influenced by them.
If you believe that racism is essentially a product of economic or political structures, then you will concentrate all your efforts on trying to change these.
Better opportunities for ethnic minorities in the housing and labour markets, plus more houses and jobs, equals less racism.
If you grant racist ideologies their own relatively autonomous conditions of existence, however, you might be inclined to give a higher priority to educational or cultural issues, whilst at the same time taking care, not to bracket out their links to other dimensions of racism.
You might, for example, be concerned that more and better jobs or housing for black people might produce a white backlash and result in more, not less, racism, unless it was accompanied by educational initiatives.
These different standpoints also have implications for the way racist discourses themselves are understood.
In the first case, they are held to reflect or express social realities external to them and to need no further analysis than that.
In the second case, how the discourses are constructed is seen as an integral part of the power which they exercise in and through material practices of discrimination.
Here discourse analysis becomes a central aspect of antiracist education.
Let us focus then on some of the contexts in which discussion about racism takes place.
When I have used these texts in workshops, we have usually started by reading them through silently, before breaking into small groups to discuss them in detail.
Initial ‘gut’ reactions have varied from righteous indignation to cynical amusement, from vocal anger to silent embarrassment.
One surprising aspect of these responses was the way they were almost always followed or overlaid by a sense of satisfaction, even pleasure, at having documentary evidence to support particular explanations of racism, and particular ideological standpoints related to them.
At one level this is hardly surprising.
Presented with such explicitly racist material and asked to make intellectual sense of it, most people's reactions are likely to be anchored to positions in which they have an emotional and material stake.
If you are black you find yourself being addressed directly as an object — and potential subject — of verbal and physical attack.
They're talking about you and no one else!
As a result you may be motivated to read the texts as confirming the existence of a persistent and all-pervasive racism inherent in white society.
In contrast, if you are white, and unless you actually subscribe to racist arguments, you will want to find ways of dissociating yourself from the views  expressed here.
You may try to do this by defining or explaining racism in terms which are specific to these two instances, but which also count you out.
If you happen to be a policeman, however, or a friend of one of the ‘lads’, but do not happen to share their attitudes towards black people, you are in an even more awkward and complicated position; how can you avoid being spoken for by those who ‘represent’ you in the text?
Only by finding evidence to ‘prove’ that these particular ‘spokesmen’are in fact ‘unrepresentative’and speak neither for you, nor for anyone but themselves.
This implies a certain kind of model of racism and its mode of representation, one which stresses the element of negotiation or contradiction in the way people are positioned in and by racist discourses.
I am not saying that people who are directly subjected to racism are inevitably attracted to one-dimensional argument or that those who are not necessarily take a more sophisticated view.
But it clearly is much more difficult and heroic for any group of people who are on the front line of discrimination to adopt a nuanced reading of racism's multiple forms than for those who are or want to be distanced from its processes and effects.
As a rule, how particular groups are located vis-à-vis racist discourse intimately affects the reading strategies their members adopt towards specific instances, and this in turn underwrites the explanatory procedures used to interpret and make common sense of them.
In most of our workshops the study texts would be used as a kind of mirror writing whose ‘decoding’ simply confirmed what was always and already known or felt to be inscribed in them.
The problem was not so much the offensive content of the material, since there was no one who was not familiar with it.
Rather it was the terms of that very familiarity which pre-empted any new reading.
For those who claimed to have seen or heard it all before, racism was always the same old story.
But this also held the depressing implication that nothing much had changed since 1981, and that the antiracist movement had largely failed to shift either popular attitudes or state policies.
It was very rare that this conclusion was actually reached however.
Such ineffectiveness, it was usually argued, had nothing to do with any deficiency in antiracist strategy or method.
On the contrary, it only proved how deep rooted racism was and how successful the New Right had been in discrediting these initiatives.
But from another point of view, the chronic repetitions of racist discourse were here being used as a defence against recognizing unpalatable truths.
There was, however, a minority of readers who detected something rather old fashioned in both ‘fighting talk’ and the police communique.
They argued that a new racism based on arguments about cultural difference had largely taken over the arenas of public debate.
This opened up an interesting line of enquiry.
How far had popular or institutional racism been transformed during the ‘Thatcher decade’, and by what?
Has the  next generation of unemployed white youth followed in the footsteps of their elder brothers or taken a new route?
Have police attitudes hardened or changed as a result of public pressure?
We will come back to these substantive questions later on.
For the moment what concerns me is the sources of these two positions.
Clearly they are symptomatic of investments in different kinds of discourse.
Those who had been formed by the politics of black nationalism, or roots radicalism, or by the various schools of classical Marxism all in different ways stressed the continuities with the past.
They were much more likely to stick to the ‘maginot line’ of municipal antiracism and therefore, paradoxically, to experience any shift away from that defensive position as a retreat.
Those who did not inhabit this universe of discourse had less difficulty in accepting possible discontinuities between different movements or forms of racism.
Equally, though, they tended to fetishize the ‘new’ at the expense of a more properly conjunctural analysis.
How do these different ways of understanding contemporary racism relate to the ideologies of reading which were applied to the study texts?
Is it just that people selectively applied to the task in hand some of the ideas they had come across in reading various books?
Or was the way they engaged with these theoretical explanations of racism governed by the same conditions as applied to their reading of the ‘primary’ material?
That question raises a further and even more interesting one about the status of different kinds of accounts.
Are theories just another kind of story, or do they constitute a radically distinct form of discourse?
Teleological tales
Theories which aim to explain social phenomena do so through methods of investigation and interpretation which strive for internal consistency, comprehensiveness, and conceptual clarity.
Sometimes it is argued that this requires a form of discourse which breaks with principles of narrative continuity and follows a purely analytic order of exposition, albeit one which remains open ended and exploratory.
From this position nothing would be assumed a priori about the meaning of our study texts (how far they qualified as racist, for example) until their actual conditions of existence had been exhaustively examined.
Social theories do not, of course, operate in an ideological vacuum, nor do they create one around themselves as a result of some special ‘scientific’ procedure.
The same theory may take on quite different political, moral and even existential meanings according to particular circumstances of context and conjuncture.
As a result theoretical discourses are traversed by narrative structures which form a hidden thread running through the argument.
Whereas in many cases this is only one dimension, albeit an  important one, in the case of what we might call theoretical ideology it constitutes the main organizing principle.
For here a particular epistemology is subsumed within a rhetoric of special pleading for a chosen reference group (the black community, the proletariat, the intelligentsia, women, the professions).
Such groups are constructed as the bearers of privileged knowledge or agency, by virtue of their social location.
As such they are invested with a unique role as makers of history, or as critics of society.
This is above all a narrative role, a role within a storyline which is unfolded as a teleology, that is a narrative moving towards a preordained conclusion, which structures the logic of preceding events.
Within this framework, in other words, societies or individuals are made to develop according to certain ‘laws of motion’ which are inscribed in their very mode of being.
It is because certain groups are held to exemplify the working of these laws that their structural positions or social attributes are held to possess a special explanatory power, or to equip them with a special ‘totalizing’ consciousness.
Teleologies produce stable narratives in which the meaning of any conjuncture can be read off from the ‘stage’ it is supposed to represent in the dynamic unfolding of some ultimate and pre-defined goal.
This is the diachronic , or historicist version.
Alternatively the nature of any institution is read off from its underlying role in reproducing the social structure of which it is a part.
This is the functionalist or synchronic version.
Either form of explanation acts as an insurance policy taken out against the contingency of actions and events.
Their outcome is guaranteed always and already to be inscribed in the process of their unfolding, according to certain overarching principles of causality.
How does this work in the case of theories of racism?
Perhaps the dominant account still belongs to the Whig interpretation of history.
This is a story of continuing progress, from the barbarity of slavery to the enlightenment of the contemporary race relations industry.
The onward march of reason and tolerance is led by their ‘natural’ standard bearers, the European intelligentsia, and its various allies, who wage an unremitting battle against the irrational prejudices of both masses and traditional elites.
The emancipation of the poor and oppressed is thus made part of a civilizing process, which is often seen to be conditional on assimilating their demands to the discourses of humanism and rationalism.
This is a fairy story version of race relations and it may reflect the hubris or wishful thinking of an intelligentsia which sets up its own preferred cultural practices as a referential model for everyone else.
Increasingly it has been challenged by a rival account which might be called a ‘teleology of the oppressed’.
Here things do not get better and better, they go from bad to worse.
The onward march of racism is traced through historical time and institutional space, from some presumed point of origination  which defines its essential character, to a present conjuncture which is the summation of its effects.
This narrative is often linked to another in which the victims of racism trace their own onward march, as an epic journey of emancipation from bondage, in which they alone carry the banner of human progress.
These narratives can be read as two sides of the same story.
The identity of Jews, blacks and others is made to depend on its inscription within an unfolding logic of racial oppression, which in turn is specified in terms of its formative effects upon their experience.
At one level, then, racism tends to be read as a kind of horrific soap opera in which the surface incidents are ever changing, but the underlying plot remains constant, generating one episode of discrimination after another, punctuated by atrocities which have no end even though paradoxically the final, cataclysmic outcome is never in doubt: for it will be the fire next time, the Armageddon which puts an end to chronic injustice, once and for all.
Past and present struggles are transformed into ‘epiphanies’, special moments in which the conditions of oppression are transcended and which prefigure the ultimate goal of Liberation.
Such triumphalist narratives can be empowering in the symbolic sense that they invest ethnic minorities with special powers of knowledge and action.
They break the signifying chains which have so often bound the project of emancipation to a strategy of cultural assimilation.
Yet this radical autonomy of means and ends is itself dependent upon a circumscribed and self-confirming discourse of origins and destinies.
It is like turning to the end of the story before you begin reading it, to find out if the bad dies got their just deserts, or the good guys won.
Or, as one of my students once put it to me, ironically, when I was still preaching this gospel, ‘I know, Sir, it was racism what dunnit.’
Why are ‘teleological tales’ so central to the common sense of antiracism?
I suspect that part at least of the explanation lies in the pressures which structures of racism exert on the forms of resistance to it.
I am thinking here of two distinct but linked operations which constitute racism as a  discoursive practice.
The first is a totalizing strategy which dissolves every distinction into the all-inclusive distinction of race: for example you are always and already defined as Jewish irrespective of age, class, gender, culture, or any other feature which might place you in a category with non-Jews.
The other is a strategy of discrimination which magnifies and exploits every kind of social distinction (of wealth, culture status, etc.) to be found within a designated subject population and gives it a racist connotation as signifying certain ‘exclusive traits’.
Used together these two strategies comprise that peculiar language game known as a double bind.
Thus if you are Jewish and working class, your Jewishness is used to disqualify you from membership of labour organizations; but equally if you are Jewish and poor, your poverty is made to signify the essentially parasitic nature of your ‘race’ on the host community.
How has the power of this system of classification been dealt  with by those who have been victims of its perverse games of inclusion and exclusion?
Perhaps the main defence has been to construct an imagined community of resistance which cuts across all internal divisions by emphasizing the levelling effects of racist oppression.
In this way diaspora communities are able to subsume all their disparate histories within a single meta-narrative which irons out all the ‘wrinkles’.
This may take the form of a genealogy which enables the present generation to see its own experience prefigured in the struggles of its ancestors, or to trace an unbroken line of descent to certain common codes and practices which define its ‘roots’.
Alternatively, it may provide a means of translating atrocity stories from simple acts of individual testimony into public iconographies, monuments in the living museum of collective memory.
In either case, another chapter is added to a ‘founding text’, a text which both authorizes its own dissemination, and gives everything which is recounted in it the imprimatur of a special truth: this is the word of a chosen people.
Here we can see the influence of religious ideologies in furnishing common sense explanations of racial intolerance and persecution.
What often begins with a vision of racism as a global force of evil often becomes focused down into a conspiracy directed against a chosen people in a way which invests their suffering and sacrifices with a special redemptive meaning.
The principle of salvation may be theological, as in the case of religious fundamentalism; or it may be purely secular, as with ethnic nationalism; or it may involve some combination of the two.
But in every case the populist element is reinforced by a particular practice of reading and writing the founding text which stresses the prescriptive or predictive value of an elective destiny.
This religious dimension is conserved as a sub text in many political ideologies, where it furnishes particular articles of faith in the self-emancipation of ethnic minorities, or in their special role as makers of their own history.
In this context Marxism furnishes its own distinctive teleology of the oppressed, which can easily be transposed from class to nation or ‘race’.
Here the myth of the founding text is most clearly articulated to that of the founding fathers, whose word lays down the laws of a history in which women and children do not count.
These narratives do not work only to unite across space and time.
They play a vital role in glossing over discontinuities in the here and now.
Where a minority within an ethnic minority successfully pursues a strategy of contest mobility, and rises to positions of relative power and affluence, the teleologies of roots radicalism can reassert the organic links binding those who are moving onwards and upwards to those still in the ghetto.
The racial success story turns those who have made it into narrative role models for the next generation, who are pledged to follow in their footsteps ‘one day’.
The elision between the onward march of the struggle against racism and the upward mobility of those who lead it, with its easy equation between individual success and collective emancipation has proved one of the more effective seductions offered by western  democracies.
It enables those who enter the professional middle class to avoid the worst traps of assimilation while disavowing the material advantages which now separate them from their erstwhile peers.
In such ways teleological tales of race and racism reinforce the imagined community of resistance at those points where divisions of class, gender or ethnicity threaten to break through.
They ease the pain of lived contradictions, furnishing missing links between origins and destinies, stitching together scattered histories into a singular totalizing consciousness of what it means to be black or Muslim, Palestinian or Jew.
The story lines which are woven together in this way are often spellbinding.
Their telling and retelling relay important principles of hope rooted in political and moral certainties about the outcome of struggle.
But do they really cauterize the wounds of historical separation and loss?
Or do they merely invite us to count and compare our scars?
Do these theoretical ideologies provide a strategic grasp of racism, or do they raise expectations which they cannot fulfil?
Language games
In this section I shall try to uncover some of the theoretical assumptions and rhetorical devices at work in ‘common-sense’ responses to the ‘Fighting talk’and ‘Last laugh’texts.
The following examples are typical of the sort of comments which were made.
All the speakers, some white, some black, were active in antiracist campaigns.
Statement A: Racism as institutionalized false consciousness
Britain is an intrinsically racist society…it's institutionalized…it runs right through everything like letters in a stick of rock.
You've only got to look at history…slavery which led into colonialism which developed into full-blown imperialism, right on up to the present-day immigration policies.
And now Mrs Thatcher comes along and tells us we've got to return to Victorian values.
as if they've ever been left behind as regards the treatment of black people!
Obviously a lot of this racism has seeped down from the top; for example the police are part of a racist legal system so you've got to expect them to hold those views.
It's the only way they can go around harassing and criminalizing black kids and think they're doing a good job.
They're complaining because blacks are fighting back — that's all.
As for the white kids on the estate, they experience the immediate effects — unemployment, bad housing, but they're in no position to understand or tackle the actual underlying causes.
Society tells them they're rubbish, because they can't find jobs, but it  also tells them that they are better than the blacks.
So it's not surprising they draw the racist conclusions — the blacks are getting jobs, housing etc. at their expense; and so they become fodder for the National Front.
Statement B: Racism as irrational prejudice
Racism poisons a lot of children's minds — they grow up in an environment with all these images around them, in comics, newspapers, TV, films, plus everything they hear from the family or friends — they just cannot help taking it in.
So they grow up just assuming that whites are the goodies and blacks are the bad dies and pass the same stereotypes onto their children.
It's not their fault, they just don't know any better.
As a teacher I try to do what I can, but in a lot of cases you come up against a brick wall with a lot of racist  graffiti on it!
The boys are the worst, especially if they're in gangs like the ones here.
They seem to think that they've got to prove how manly they are.
As for the police, they seem to think and behave in much the same way.
I should imagine that the police force attracts people who have got particular hang-ups about race.
They're hardly likely to have the most tolerant or liberal attitudes are they!
We've got to hope that something will happen to make these people change their minds, but do leopards ever change their spots?
Statement C: Racism as white power
From a black perspective you're up against a white power structure and it doesn't really matter whether you're being beaten up or abused by the police or by a group of kids on the street, it all comes down to the same thing — racism.
If you go for a job, or a place to live and they send you away, it's racism.
Discrimination can be institutionalized and done procedurally as a matter of course behind the scenes or it can be out in the open with insults to your face, but the result is the same.
It's so many stabs in the back…
It's the whole system which is tucking us up.
That's why it's only black people who will put an end to racism; our whole experience tells us that.
Statement D: Racism as class rule
Racism just boils down to ruling-class propaganda; you've only got to look at the popular Tory press, churning it out day after day, all owned and controlled by capitalists who've got a direct interest in setting white workers against black and undermining the unity of the working class.
The same papers are read by those kids and by the coppers who nick them, and basically they've both swallowed the same lies.
Statement E: Racism as rational self interest
I think that's absolute nonsense.
They're not as stupid as you make  out.
They're much more likely to be acting out of self interest.
If you know that employers are using immigrants as cheap labour, and that they're being used to undercut your rates of pay, you're going to be against that.
If you think that you're more likely to keep the price of your house high by keeping blacks out, then you'd be likely to go for that.
And if you're a policeman on the beat, with an eye on promotion, what easier way to keep your arrest rate up than to go out and pull in some black kids off the street.
Put it the other way round, what incentives have the police or the white working class got not to be racist?
These views do not, of course, exhaust the range of possible antiracist positions.
They all bear on actual realities, and contain elements of genuine insight.
They may be deployed in a variety of circumstances to greater or lesser effect.
For example, the argument about institutionalized racism in Statement A can be used to counter denials about the existence and effects of racial inequalities.
The denunciation of white racism in C is often used to make white people feel guilty about their structural or historical implication in the oppression of black people and to force them to concede the legitimacy of black demands.
In contrast the explanations of racism in terms of prejudice (B) or self interest (E) offer ‘get out clauses’ for whites and pinpoint specific types of motive or intent which may yield tactical priorities in antiracist work.
The identification of racism as a capitalist ploy (D) draws on a particular kind of political rhetoric which under some conditions may mobilize sections of the left or the labour movement in defence of the black community.
When they are cited in the context of discussion or debate, arguments about irrationality and its cultural transmission (B) are frequently used as a strategy of professional empowerment on the part of teachers, who define racism in such a way to privilege their own role, as guardians of reason and enlightenment, in combating it.
Equally the enunciation of statements C and D may enable certain individuals to dominate the group in the name of an ‘imagined community’ of race or class which they either claim or are made by others to represent.
The pragmatics of all these statements — the ways they are used to produce certain effects on the people to whom they are addressed — are thus tied to their propaganda value for particular campaigns or positions, or to their instrumental value in furthering the personal or political objectives of particular individuals or groups.
But however effective these arguments may be in political debate, that does not make them necessarily adequate as theoretical explanations of racism.
I would argue that the persuasive force of these statements owes a great deal to their teleological format.
In Statement A the history of racism is rigidly determined by specific laws of development.
Each phase is the outcome of the one before, whilst bearing the chronic imprint of an interior design.
Equally, when the argument goes synchronic it locates  racism in the structure of society, as key to the way the whole functions.
Statement C starts from the same premise, but is an even more explicit version of a teleology of the oppressed.
Every instance of racism is explicable as the effect of a white power structure whose overthrow is the historical mission of black people.
Rhetorically its strategy of reiteration attempts to unify different groups into one political bloc by appealing to a single source of oppression which they all share.
Statements D and E offer alternative views of racism as goal-directed behaviour on the part of groups who are held to have an intrinsic interest in pursuing these ends.
Statement B seems to admit the greatest amount of contingency into the determination of outcomes, but nevertheless still falls back on a  tendential law to explain how racism is reproduced.
The problem with all these formulations is that they are reductionist : that is, they claim that complex and multi-faceted phenomena can be explained by a single, simple cause.
These explanations are therefore limited.
They tell only part of the story, and leave out any elements which do not fit into their chosen line of argument.
I would identify two main types of reduction in these examples.
Statements A and C operate according to the procedures of radical holism .
They explain the actions or attitudes of particular individuals or groups, and the meaning of particular events, as the expression of an over-determining social totality —‘capitalist society’, ‘patriarchy’, or ‘the white power structure’— which supervenes in every case to determine the form of all social eventualities.
The method consists in extrapolating from concrete relations those properties which can be directly subsumed under these higher order abstractions.
Other features of the phenomena which cannot be treated in this way are ignored or denied any narrative or causal significance.
Thus, for example, an account of some episode of social conflict is constructed in which the discrete personalities of the protagonists are regarded as irrelevant to the outcome, and they are treated simply as the bearers or supports of certain political ideologies or economic forces.
In practice the effect is to dissolve the psychic into the social, and reify the social, turning it into an inert structural process.
This tendency is present in most theories of ‘institutionalized racism’.
The reductionism at work in the other three statements moves in exactly the opposite direction.
This mode of explanation has been called methodological individualism , for it seeks to disaggregate all larger institutional and historical entities into the practices and relations of the individuals or groups who compose or inhabit them.
Structural processes are rendered down into social or psychological properties, which are then erected into totalizing principles of explanation.
All macro-level features which cannot be made intelligible in this way are regarded as being of secondary importance to the outcome of the story.
For example statements B, D and E all assume that the outcomes of ‘race relations’ are explicable at a micro-level, in terms of the intrinsic propensities of particular individuals or groups: working-class children or parents (B), capitalists (D) or white residents or policemen (E).
From this standpoint racism appears to be a matter of individual prejudice which, even when institutionalized, is ultimately sustained by the attitudes and actions of racists.
Propositions generated by this type of reduction do not necessarily agree about the conditions under which racist positions or practices are adopted, as witness the dispute between D and E.
The two types of explanation appear to have rather different political implications.
Holistic theories suggest that racism cannot be eliminated without the radical transformation of state, economy and civil society — whether this entails the dismantling of key institutions or the overthrow of the power structure as a whole.
Whether or not methodological individualists subscribe to such views, for them, the important point is that the levers of power are to be found in the hands of strategically placed individuals or groups.
This does not make their account any less deterministic.
Attitudes are still read off from attributes.
What differs is that holists derive attributes from structural location, and individualists from relational properties.
In one case what counts is the ‘objective positions’ which ‘white people’as such occupy within the ‘racist power structure’; in the second it is their socialization, or cultural traditions which racializes their relationships to blacks.
In practice, then, these explanatory models can be either antagonistic or complementary.
Elements from both can be combined at the level of common-sense argument.
For example, in the heat of debate it is not unusual to hear radically holistic denunciations of ‘capitalism’, or ‘the racist power structure’, which imply the need for their wholesale destruction, followed in the next breath by appeals to specific individuals or groups to ‘change the system’ by virtue of their special predisposition to do so.
There is a good example of this in Statement C's juxtaposition of ‘the whole system’ with the specific appeal to black people to put an end to racism.
Such switches between the two forms of reductionism have several payoffs.
They get the argument out of a tight corner, and make for a less fatalistic scenario.
This particular example (C) may conceivably make it easier for community activists to occupy positions of influence within existing power structures without being accused of ‘selling out’.
Above all, however, it makes it possible to yoke together a generic model of racism as a global ideological form with a highly differentiated notion of its relational properties, in a way which makes its enactment or sufferance the monopoly of specific individuals or groups.
Everything in a given society is made to explain its racism, and this racism, in turn, is made to explain everything about a particular ethnic minority within it.
This practice of stitching together the two kinds of reduction into a single statement, which combines sweeping generalization with particularistic reference, is central to the discursive strategies which the Burnage Report criticized as ‘moral, symbolic and doctrinaire’ antiracism.
The double reduction formula is explicitly stated in the equation racism =  power + prejudice which was widely adopted within the movement during the 1980s.
It would be unfair to make too many demands of the statements I have quoted.
They are examples of people thinking on their feet, trying to rationalize their responses to texts which ‘hit below the belt’.
The aim was often to convince fellow students (and me) of the force of their own political perspective.
My point is not to criticize the theoretical deficiencies of these statements.
On the contrary, I would argue that the embedded narratives I have identified here can also be found in more elaborated academic discourses.
Problematics
There are forceful defences to be made of both holism and individualism as theoretical models within the social sciences.
The problem here is their application as practical models for understanding and tackling racism.
When they are deployed in arguments like the ones we have just looked at, they tend to be strong on moral denunciation but weak in their inclusiveness and weight of explanation.
This inevitably reduces their strategic purchase on racist practices.
The holistic statements in terms of institutional racism (A) and white power (C) articulate what has been called the dominant ideology thesis in the social sciences.
This perspective has been associated with the function of ideology in creating the perceptions and beliefs in individuals deemed necessary to reproduce the political and economic structures of class and/or ethnic hegemony.
These conditions are institutionalized through forms of discourse and power which establish a pervasive framework of values, beliefs, ideals and aspirations.
As a result, the ideology of the dominant class — or ‘race’— comes to be accepted as self evident ‘common sense’ by large sections of society, including groups who would seem to have little to gain from them.
Existing patterns of inequality can thus be experienced as both necessary and legitimate, while the very possibility of alternative social arrangements becomes unthinkable or marginalized.
This is a complex formulation which in practice can be given various emphases.
In every case, however, there is the assumption that forms of subjectivity can be read off from objective conditions of domination/ subordination.
In invoking slavery, colonialism, imperialism and contemporary immigration legislation, for example, Statement A stresses the weight of history and the continuity of practices in achieving this effect.
The idea of the pervasiveness and invisibility of racism in Statement C underlines the inertia of institutions and the sticking power of ‘ideological cement’.
There is agreement about the role of ideology in legitimating racial inequality, but in one case (A) this is related to the existence of a  dominant (though unidentified) class, while in (C) it is a question of a dominant ‘race’.
Where this model comes up against its own limitations is in explaining ‘popular’ or working-class racism.
In so far as these subordinated forms of racism are granted some relative autonomy, and are not treated as simply an echo of the dominant ideology, the argument usually reverts to the classical tenets of a ‘necessary false consciousness’.
This is what happens in Statement A.
The main problem with the concept of necessary false consciousness is the conjunction of these three terms.
Are the phenomena which it discloses really necessary, in the sense of being an inevitable concomitant of social structures?
(There are plenty of white working-class boys and even a few policemen who do not hold pronounced racist views.)
Are they false in the sense of being definable in opposition to some ‘true’ or ‘correct’consciousness?
Are they solely to do with consciousness (in so far as they relate to ontological stakes or emotional investments in racist ideology which may be pre- or even un-conscious)?
The arguments advanced by methodological individualists do not necessarily escape these problems.
The propositions advanced by the teacher in Statement B are a good case in point.
An apparently holistic analysis of racist images and their ideological effect is followed in the second sentence by a switch into an argument about the way racism is reproduced through processes of transmission in micro-contexts like the family or peer group.
The crucial question here is what makes individuals receptive or resistant to racist ideas.
The answer seems to be that it depends on their immediate environment, how they are socialized, their level of education or ‘culture’.
The assumption is that children from ‘deprived backgrounds’ are more likely to adopt racist attitudes and arguments because their cultural milieu is unable to equip them with a more enlightened understanding of the causes of their problems.
This model of working-class culture as pathological or deficient is often given a holistic twist and linked to notions of ‘necessary false consciousness’.
To treat racism as a matter of irrational prejudice is really a micro-reductive variant on this theme.
In the case of Statement B racism is entailed in a set of inherited predispositions passed on from one generation to another.
The initial supposition of environmental determinism makes space for the role of education in interrupting or reversing the trend, but this possibility gets weaker as the argument proceeds and its reductionism gathers strength.
The final reference to ‘leopards not changing their spots’ shows just how far this explanation has moved onto the terrain of ‘race’thinking itself.
Racism is ‘naturalized’ to the point where it ceases to be a cultural norm (and as such contestable) and becomes instead a quasi-biological trait, a symptom of inherent individual pathology.
The pathological model reaches its apotheosis in attempts to explain the origin and distribution of racist beliefs in terms of the personal characteristics of those who espouse them.
This finds academic expression in psychological theories of prejudice.
In Statement B this story line is  applied to the police force to suggest that the young white working-class men who enter the force are to a large extent preselected, and irrespective of recruitment and training policies are likely to be authoritarian personality types who flourish in a para-military environment and ‘have a hang-up about race’.
The difficulty with this argument is that whatever factor of psycho-social pathology is associated with racism or racists can be shown to exist just as widely in other institutions, or groups.
There is also a problem in principle with the inferences that can be made from such evidence, especially the assumption that the nature of a regime can be deduced from the unconscious motives or conscious intentions of the people who run it.
It does not follow that, because the legal system systematically discriminates against black people, such discrimination is its raison d'être , or even that it is the outcome of the undoubted prejudices of the police or judiciary.
The argument could far more plausibly be turned on its head: the ‘latent function’ of the operation of unofficial suspect categories may be to make the administration of (in) justice more efficient and ‘rational’, which in turn institutionalizes these practices and gives them the status of ‘due legal process’.
There is, however, another version of methodological individualism which proceeds from the opposite, and apparently more promising starting point — namely that racism is a rational or calculating strategy on the part of specific individuals or groups seeking to maximize their political or economic interests.
One example might be the ‘divide and rule’ thesis presented in Statement D. It is in the interests of employers to use immigrants as a source of cheap labour and this also usefully weakens the workforce politically by creating internal divisions.
As capitalists own and control the popular press they are able to spread disinformation about ethnic minorities and fan the flames of popular prejudice against them.
The rationality attributed to racism thus coincides with a presumed calculation of class interest: racism is a means to maximize profit, which is the individual aim of every capitalist enterprise.
This is a double reduction, inferring psychological motive or intention from economic or political effect.
It is the ‘profit motive’ which conditions the attitudes and actions of individual employers (as exemplified in their recruitment and training policies) and creates the general conditions of racial discrimination, which the ‘press barons’in turn deliberately exploit to sell more newspapers.
But how to explain the collective, and indeed international dimensions of capitalism and racism, which can and do operate independently of any local patterns of linkage?
To answer this it becomes necessary to invent a global conspiracy theory in which the ‘objective interests’ of capitalism and racism always and already coincide, and are actively co-ordinated by the many agents of the ruling class.
This, then is a micro-reductive version of the dominant ideology thesis.
The other side of the divide-and-rule thesis is that working-class racists are seen as the dupes of ‘bourgeois propaganda’.
The idea of racism as a  product of ignorance or superstition is conserved for ‘the uneducated masses’ while it remains a ‘rational choice’for the elite.
The notion of ‘rational choice’ introduces us to another, more sophisticated conception of the rationality of racism, and one which does not require this kind of double standard.
Starting from the premise that actions and attitudes are motivated by the maximization of self interest, the focus is on the micro-social conditions under which the ideology of individualism may be transcended, and collective aims given priority.
Thus, as Statement E argues, under certain conditions white workers or residents may get together to freeze out black immigrants because their presence is felt to depress wages or house prices, or to threaten allocation policies which have hitherto made certain jobs or housing the preserve of the indigenous population.
This racist behaviour is rational, because such strategies of social closure are logically consistent with the aims of protecting white privilege, and this can best be done through organized forms of discrimination, rather than at the level of individual expressions of prejudice.
This seems an apt description of the defensive strategies associated with a racism of relative affluence caught at a particular moment of its crystallization.
How far, though, is that an appropriate model to apply to the more aggressive racism of relative deprivation exampled in the ‘fighting talk’ transcript?
And are there not more general problems with such a ‘rationalistic’ theory of racism.
If the rationality of an action is judged solely by its realism then clearly reason must always be a characteristic of those who have the power to put their policies into practice, never of those who oppose them.
Even if we admit that an element of calculation usually enters into racist practices, rather than blind hatred, it is clear that this model ignores the deeper reaches of the racist imagination , the structures of feeling and phantasy which are embedded in even the most rationalized forms of racist argument and action.
Also, in giving racist explanations the status of realist accounts, without in any way questioning their ideological construction, common sense is taken at its face value.
It is only because they assume that the entry of black families into their neighbourhood makes it ‘undesirable’, for example, that white residents ‘act rationally’ to keep them out and protect the value of their properties.
The assumption is both racist and ignores the importance of macro-economic factors in determining levels of demand in the housing market.
The model takes such actions for granted because its reduction of macro to micro has bracketed out the conditions under which it might be put in question.
Imagining racism: phantasy, metaphor and the ideal type
Rational choice models, like class conspiracy theories, can be considered as micro-reductive variations on the dominant ideology thesis, just as, I  suggested earlier, the concept of racism as necessary false consciousness could be regarded as a macro-reductive correlate of ‘irrational prejudice’ arguments.
These principles of correspondence articulate two fundamentally different ways of conceptualizing racism.
In the first case (dominant ideology/rational choice) racism is regarded as functional to the society or the individual, in the sense of maintaining the power of specific groups.
In the second case (necessary false consciousness/irrational prejudice) racism is seen as dysfunctional because it distorts the perception of reality and generates division amongst those who should be on the same side.
This distinction also bears on the pragmatics of these models as they are applied in the context of political debates and campaigns.
The ‘functional’ argument provides a discursive strategy which is useful for implicating all sorts of groups and individuals in racism who would otherwise have cast-iron alibis.
For the same reason it is also an effective device for constructing a ‘common enemy’ or ‘system’for people to unite against.
The ‘dysfunctional’ argument can be a useful ploy against those who officially represent the unity of particular institutions of state or civil society.
If they do not want to be held responsible for ‘increasing racial tension’ on the street, or the shop floor, they had better do x, y, or z.
Of course such arguments may well backfire.
You are not likely to shake the beliefs of ex-colonials by arguing that racism was and still is ‘functional’ to their way of life!
And you may find that instead of making antiracism the rational choice for trade union officials and other bureaucrats, you are encouraging them to see immigration as dysfunctional, rather than racism!
But there never is any guarantee about the outcome of this or any other pragmatics.
It is not in any case possible to pin a particular explanatory model to a specific political strategy or standpoint.
For example, it is often assumed that multiculturalism is methodologically individualist, and reduces racism to an individual pathology of prejudice, whilst antiracism is radically holist and insists on the primacy of structural processes.
Our discussion suggests that this is not always the case.
Rational choice theories are often popular amongst left antiracists inspired by a particular reading of Marx.
Equally, some radical versions of multiculturalism make use of holistic arguments about power and ideology to legitimate ethnic minority cultures as an educational resource.
Where multiculturalists and antiracists share common ground is in their general reliance on problematics which make the detailed reading and analysis of racist discourses seem irrelevant.
This, I have argued, is evident both at the level of theoretical explanations and in the common-sense models of understanding which are deployed in the five statements I have quoted.
What all these approaches have in common is their essentialism .
By this I mean their tendency to explain racism in terms of an ‘ideal type’ or model, which makes certain a priori assumptions about its origins, causes, meaning and effect.
These assumptions correspond to particular forms or experiences of racism, which are translated into universal criteria  defining its ‘essence’.
Types of racism which do not conform to this model are either ignored, marginalized, or ‘redescribed’ in ways which deny their independent significance.
Racism becomes defined in terms of features which are specific to the black (or Afro-Caribbean) experience, for example, or to the peculiarities of English history, so that anti-semitism, or the specific articulations of racism which have developed in, say, the Irish or Scottish contexts, or in other European countries, are treated as ‘special cases’, because their inclusion would ‘deconstruct’ the ideal type.
At the same time, at a micro level an assumption is made about who is racist and who is not in terms of a set of essential defining properties or predispositions.
This is not to suggest that each of the sample antiracist statements does not have something pertinent to say about the particular instance of racism which it privileges as paradigmatic.
But putting these accounts together does not unfortunately add up to a multi-dimensional model which could provide the basis for a general theory; it only amplifies their essentialism.
Indeed it is when these statements strive to go beyond themselves to grasp the complexities of the phenomena to which they refer that they are most likely to resort to rhetorical devices.
These often take the form of images and metaphors which are used to define racism by analogy.
For example in Statement A, the persistence of racism is compared to a stick of lettered rock.
What does this image signify in this context?
A principle of continuity which is ‘inscribed’ in such a way that it can only be established by breaking into it, but which nothing can interrupt or change!
This is an example of an attempt to grapple with the issue of discontinuity from within a problematic which allows it no space.
The resultant image, far from putting reductionism in question, turns racism into a perpetual seduction of the senses.
Just how difficult it is to move beyond this kind of thinking can be seen from Statement B. Here the principle of continuity is rooted directly in the process of generational transmission.
Racism is likened to a poison which children take in, if not from their mother's breast, then at least from its mechanical substitutes.
It is a dangerous substance which, once internalized, enters ‘into the system’ and attacks its defences.
In many statements of this sort racism is likened to a contagious disease, which people catch off each other, or a cancer in the body politic, something which can only be stopped by either eliminating its carriers, or protecting others, especially children, from contact with its ‘breeding grounds’.
Short of such drastic screening processes the ‘germs of racism’ will go on spreading.
In Statement C a rather different metaphor is at work.
Racism operates everywhere, working now openly, now secretly to stab black people in the back.
This idea of a white conspiracy, between police, unemployed youth, employers, and the mass media relies on the assumption that equivalent effects in disparate contexts must be produced by the same omnipresent agency or cause.
Such constructions are ‘paralogical’ in the sense that the conclusions do not strictly follow from the premises.
In this case the image  seems to be informed by a phantasy of some omnipotent power of destruction which ‘penetrates everywhere’, and is bent on ‘fucking people up’.
A rather similar phantasy informs the divide-and-rule thesis except that here it is the ruling class whose power is both all-pervasive, and works to sow the seeds of rivalry amongst those ‘brothers and sisters’ subjected to its tyrannical will.
The force of such metaphors is all the greater because of the unconscious effect which racist discourse itself exerts.
For this is above all a discourse which ties a congenital link between origins and destinies, and which draws on images of birth and blood, the functions of the body and sexual reproduction, kinship and filiation, to do so.
It is not surprising that such symbolism should unconsciously echo or evoke those infantile structures of representation through which identities and differences are first negotiated and invested with a sense of mastery, or that these models should be reproduced in the way racism is itself conceptualized.
Of course these constructions are never just phantasies.
The conspiracy theory of racism makes sense of a particular social reality: it is because the police force, which is supposed to uphold justice and protect ethnic minorities from racist attacks, is itself responsible for so much of the violence and injustice suffered by black communities that it is experienced as being part of the same oppressive system as the gang of white unemployed youth who are beating up people on the street.
It is this kind of objective correspondence which makes it possible for the experience of racism to become connected to paranoid structures of feeling and phantasy which originate at a quite different and more unconscious level of representation.
In general, the more persecutory and overpowering the reality principles of racism, the more likely it is that they will be ‘totalized’ in this way.
Logically such constructions should make ethnic minorities feel even more powerless than they actually are.
But paradoxically, or rather, paralogically, they have the opposite effect.
This is because they are embedded in what I have called a teleology of the oppressed.
These metaphors are important rhetoric devices in narratives of empowerment and emancipation, where they are used to ‘naturalize’ particular victimologies, and even, sometimes, to justify the enterprise of revenge.
The issue is whether making the protean forms of racism seem more omnipotent, cohesive and enduring than they are does after all serve to strengthen and unify the antiracist movement, or whether it reinforces the more sectarian elements within it.
On the positive side, I would argue that these devices may make it easier to withstand setbacks, to hold on to a belief in ultimate victory when times are hard, because they all underline the continuities of racial oppression.
Indirectly this may also help legitimate an autonomous space of representation for ethnic minorities who have been otherwise silenced or marginalized, a place where they can find their own political voice, in their own mother tongue.
But, on the other hand, this perspective produces global strategies which  have little purchase on concrete instances, and tend to assume instead the burden of a messianic project in which the enemy is supposedly being smashed, crushed, or stamped out for ever.
Pushed to the limit it leads to splitting the world into a racialized opposition between goodies and baddies.
And once this kind of polarization is set in motion, it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy in which everyone who is not with us is against us.
If you're white, you're not part of the solution you're part of the problem…
It must be a matter of personal judgement, as well as political debate, as to whether the gains outweigh the losses when it comes to sustaining such a manichean, ‘black and white’ view of the world.
In my view, in the longer term, and in the context of the more complicated state of contemporary race relations in Britain, the ‘fix’ or ‘hold’or ‘take’which this standpoint offers seems likely to prove disappointing.
Even if the catechisms of ‘correct thought’ are updated and find new roots, and old upbeat endings are set to more popular and contemporary tunes, they will not be able to generate the more intricate models or maps which are required to confront successfully the types of racism which are evidenced by our two transcripts.
But what kind of resources or strategies could be committed, both theoretically and practically to this task?
Notes in the margin
In what follows I am going to use a general procedure for reading texts to examine specific features of racist discourse to be found in ‘Fighting talk’ and ‘The last laugh’and to suggest a series of questions which they raise as an agenda for further research and debate.
To begin with we need to be aware of the extra-discursive realities which environ these statements.
These reality principles may be alluded to, or they may be disavowed in various ways, but in either event they set limits and conditions to what is articulated about racism.
First and foremost we have to consider the immediate social contexts in which the statements are made: in one case an intervention in a youth project on a council estate dominated by the particular group of boys being interviewed; in the second case a course run for police officers who had special responsibility for training cadets in the art of ‘good community relations’.
In both cases people who were directly or indirectly implicated in racial harassment were asked to reflect on their actions and attitudes by an outsider who did not share their views; moreover, as a researcher I was concerned to elicit evidence about racist assumptions or practices which as an educator I was also concerned to challenge.
How did this relationship and the context in which it occurred ‘overdetermine’ these texts?
How did it affect the way the story about the fight is told, for example, or the uses to which the unofficial communique was put?
We also need to look at the wider political conjuncture.
The backdrop to ‘Fighting talk’ was the growing appeal of the National Front to sections of the white working class in inner city areas where youth unemployment was high.
My actual intervention was linked to wider attempts to combat these influences by developing a new cultural politics of antiracism based around ‘two tone music’.
In the second instance public criticism of the policing of the urban disorders and riots of 1981/82, coupled with mounting evidence of systematic discrimination against the black community, created a situation in which the practices of the ‘copper on the beat’ came under close scrutiny both from within the force itself and from various watchdog bodies.
Clearly these sets of circumstances influence the pragmatics of these statements, in ways that we have to unravel by close analysis.
Finally there are some deeper structural factors which constitute the hidden or unconscious premises of these types of racist discourse.
Here, perhaps we need to frame ‘Fighting talk’ within a historical perspective, to consider the particular versions of ethnicity and body politics which developed within working-class cultures, as well as their complex articulation to dominant ideologies of race, nation and Empire.
Similarly, to understand where the police are coming from we should look at the changing role which the institutions and practice of law have played in racializing the place occupied by immigrant populations within the urban social structure, as well as the internal contradictions of the apparatus of enforcement itself.
To say that these factors of context, conjuncture and wider conditionality are ‘extra-discursive’ does not mean that discourses do not enter into their determination, only that they involve processes which cannot be reduced to this effect.
By the same argument, the way such factors are constructed discursively does not always correspond to the role which they play in other, non-discursive, forms of racial discrimination.
Sometimes the relationship may be direct but the reference deleted.
The fact that several of the boys were active members of the National Front, for example, had an all too direct bearing on how they positioned themselves as narrators of the fight, even though they were anxious to characterize their role as merely voicing public opinion on the estate.
Equally, the unofficial communique was undoubtedly part of a rank-and-file protest against pressures for reform generated by the Scarman Report, even if no mention is made of it!
Often the relation is more oblique.
The eliciting context of ‘Fighting talk’ was one in which the boys may have been quite strongly motivated to impress the researcher by exaggerating the extremity of their views on race.
Nevertheless they are constrained from deploying the usual wind-up techniques by their overriding concern to justify their actions and attitudes to someone who disapproved of them but whom they perceived to be in a position to influence their situation for better or worse.
So we  have a rehearsal of grievances centring on the injustices they feel they have suffered as a result of black immigration into the area.
The element of playing to the gallery is conserved in the way they portray the fight as a piece of street theatre, with the adults cheering them on from the balconies, while the girls offer silent support, as the boys defend the honour of the white community against the ‘black invasion’.
In this way they achieve the desired effect of both showing off their street fighting skills and justifying their moral commitment to racism, while positioning me, alongside their parents and girl friends as admiring spectators of their ‘protection racket’.
Of course while they may be imagining that they are bending my ear and creating a good impression, they are also providing me with the kind of evidence I am looking for about the gendered and generational aspects of this kind of racism.
But would the story have been told in quite the same way if I had been black, or a woman, or nearer their own age and social background?
Indeed would it have been told at all?
Such questions point up the importance of recognizing how the reality principles of power are reworked ‘intra-discursively’.
Consider the boys' version of the ‘numbers game’ at the beginning of ‘Fighting talk’: ‘and the other lot come down the next night, and the night after that and the night after that, all week, about 40, 50, from all over…’
The use of reiteration coupled with vocal register (increased pitch and speed of delivery) served to convey a dramatic atmosphere of mounting racial conflict in which excitement is tinged with anxiety (defused here by the joke about ‘black city’).
This structure of feeling is produced by a particular rhetorical device, providing an image which resonates with an unstated discourse about ‘waves of black immigration swamping the British way of life’— a theme which Thatcherism was in the process of popularizing at the time.
Note how blacks are invested with vastly exaggerated powers of social combination whilst the ethnic majority are reduced to minority status —‘just our lot from the estate’.
In this way the real principles of powerlessness which govern these boys' lives are both doubled over and displaced by the sense of being overpowered or outnumbered by a group which in political and demographic terms are in an even weaker position than they are.
A rather different reworking is to be found in ‘The last laugh’.
Its rhetorical effectiveness comes from the way the language of official communiques issued by the command structure to other ranks is deliberately parodied.
The impersonality of this discourse of power is here used to signify an unfeeling bureaucracy out of touch with the realities of policing a riot —‘Officers who are unfortunately set alight should lie down patiently and wait their turn to be put out.’
This regulatory code is put to even greater effect when it is used to turn an exchange of missiles between rioters and police into a surreal game of football in which the rules have been deliberately bent to give the ‘opposing team’ an unfair advantage!
All texts contain elements of metacommunication — devices which refer the recipient to a preferred reading of the relational contexts in which the statements are being made.
‘Fighting talk’ stakes its claim to credibility through the narrative conventions of autobiographical realism; the continual citation of ‘first hand’experience conveys an implicit message that it is their encounter with black people which has led these boys to adopt racist arguments and not any external ideological influence.
In fact the function of such eye- and ear-witness accounts as the ‘Kentucky fried chips’ incident is to authorize and authenticate the racialization of experience by making it seem like an entirely spontaneous and natural process, and one for which blacks themselves must be held responsible.
In ‘The last laugh’ a quite different strategy of citation is adopted, one which consciously aims to draw the reader's attention to the problematic status of the text.
For all its underground samizdat quality, this document is designed to be discovered in order to draw the attention of the police authorities to the strength of rank-and-file feeling.
So here the use of quasi-official language to make a series of provocatively racist statements serves to undermine the credibility of the authorized version of ‘community relations’ by contrasting its unrealistic viewpoint with the putative realities of ‘the job’.
As an example of this consider the use made of multiculturalism (‘briefing about local customs and traditions') and quasi-sociological jargon (‘it is statistically proven…’) to comment ironically about the kind of theories they have encountered during their training in community relations.
Citation is here an act of revenge against what is seen as a liberal apologetics for black crime.
Other sources of quotation may be more disguised or unconscious.
For example there are echoes of colonial discourse in the way the boys make a distinction between the ‘good blacks’(who accept the verdict of the first, lost fight) and the ‘bad blacks’ who cry foul and fight back, trying to reverse the verdict of a society which has made them permanent losers.
And it is there in the way the police communique constructs its surreal anthropology of Brixton and the ‘alien black presence’.
Yet the picture that all this conjures up of a thin red, white and blue line defending civilization and the British sense of ‘fair play’ against serried ranks of black barbarians is suddenly counterpointed by an even more arresting image — that of the police themselves who are frightening the local inhabitants of Brixton by whooping like red indians, and beating on their shields like Zulu warriors.
Why do the police characterize themselves as ‘behaving like savages’ in this way?
Is it a consciously ironic reversal of the negative stereotype of blacks?
Or a distanced comment on the fact that this is how a lot of people actually see them?
Does it even speak from some recognition, however disavowed, that police practices transgress the ‘rules of civilized conduct’ which they are supposed to be upholding, and nowhere more obviously than in their treatment of black people?
In this context what is the significance of the ironic statement prohibiting ‘blacking up’ given its double connotation as a practice of camouflage used  in night-time military manoeuvres, and as a means for white entertainers to impersonate blacks?
Between the lines
To stop our enquiry at this point would be to bracket out those elements which I suggested earlier constitute the deep structures of these texts.
To understand the cultures of racism from which these texts are produced we need to moved from a formal or semiotic level of analysis to a consideration of more substantive issues.
I start from an apparent paradox.
Here we have a gang of unemployed white boys who imagine themselves to be some kind of local ruling class, and who feel outraged that this omnipotent position is being usurped by groups of black youth who are even more disadvantaged than they are.
And there is a group of policemen, empowered by the State with all the prerogatives of coercion, who imagine themselves to be a beleaguered and oppressed minority victimized by an all-powerful conspiracy between the white liberal establishment and the black community.
The racist imagination turns the world upside down, but it does so through a conservative appropriation of existing structures and discourses of power.
The white boys impute an imaginary position of advantage to blacks, which allows them not only to deny the actual conditions of black oppression, but to claim them as their own, in order to justify exclusionary practices which keep blacks ‘one down’ and themselves ‘one up’.
The police, who routinely bend the rules in black areas, portray the youth of Brixton as doing the same, acting as if they were ‘above the law’ because of special measures designed to protect them from the consequences of their illegal actions — a fairly apt description of the police's own position until very recently.
This kind of ‘trading places’ certainly has played its part in fuelling the dynamics of racial envy.
The white boys admire the cheek of the black lad who nicks their Kentucky'n'chips, as well as wanting to beat him up for it, just as many of them secretly envy and try to emulate the black street style which at another level they experience as so invasive.
Similarly, police outrage at ‘blacks getting away with murder’ is often tinged with grudging respect for the way they flout authority.
But envy is an ambivalent structure of feeling; it involves the desire to possess certain idealized attributes of the Other and the desire to destroy them because they signify what is felt to be lacking.
The racism of relative deprivation, with its constant refrain ‘the blacks are taking our jobs, houses, women and now our exams’ plays upon this sense of ‘getting our own back’.
The central paradox of this kind of ‘trading places’ is that through the very symmetry of its inversions it postulates imaginary correspondences between black and white positions even as it seeks to naturalize difference and domination.
Is this because the construction of racialized identities  depends on the existence of the Other, while at the same time it is this ‘alien presence’ which is seen to be such a threat to identity that its total annihilation is required?
Are racial double standards (viz., good/bad natives) and double binds (damned if you are different and damned if you are like the master race) a function of this contradictory or dual relation to the Other?
Or do we have to look to more concrete and historically specific forms of mediation to explain the racialization of envy and desire?
In this context, it is perhaps worth noting that the body politic oscillates between two contradictory modes of address towards the civil population.
There are those who are hailed as the backbone of ‘the nation’, and who are often idealized as the defenders of ‘ancient liberties and laws’ associated with the ‘free-born Englishman’; and there are those who are denigrated as a ‘race’apart, the ‘enemy within’, the ‘Other England’.
This device has served to draw a moral dividing line between the ‘respectable’ and ‘rough’elements of the working class, as well as between indigenous and immigrant populations.
Moreover, it has been reworked within the cultural forms and practices of a whole variety of subaltern groups.
Both indigenous and immigrant working classes have at various times staked claims to be considered the true backbone of ‘the nation’(as against a decadent aristocracy or unpatriotic bourgeoisie for example) through various institutions of public propriety (churches, labour organizations, community associations) which at the same time defend the integrity of their own traditions against negative influences in the wider society.
By definition this is largely an enterprise of elders and women who are charged with transmitting these traditions to a new generation.
But there are also groups within these communities which have taken the other route, and adopted the position of a ‘race apart’, investing it with a positive image as a means of asserting the distinctiveness of their own culture and its powers of resistance to the dominant society.
This has been largely an enterprise of male youth, asserting their own ‘body politics’ of the street through rules and rituals of territoriality.
In these contrasting ways imagined communities of ethnicity and neighbourhood have been sustained, giving these groups a sense of pride in both their historical origins and their present place.
But this has also ensured that when these structures become racialized, elders and women become mobilized around the defence of public proprieties while male youth become locked in struggles for territorial dominance.
Indigenous working-class cultures of racism have thus been internally fragmented by strong sexual and generational divisions, as well as being externally mirrored in the forms of resistance mobilized by immigrant communities against them.
The police have played a key role in the development of this configuration.
The maintenance of legal definitions of public order, based on a principle of ‘free circulation’, inevitably brings them up against the annexation of the street by male youth culture.
In practice it proved logistically impossible to observe the strict letter of the law or to completely suppress these cultures.
Instead, in many localities informal norms of public order  were negotiated which recognized popular sovereignties of place, in return for co-operation from ‘responsible’ internal agencies of social control.
There is an example of this in ‘Fighting talk’ where the police are recorded as using the white boys' own rules of territoriality as a device to keep them apart from blacks (‘if you're on your own territory we'll nick the others, but if you're outside, we'll nick you').
The boys are furious when the police break their own rules by arresting them for public order offences while they are fighting on their home ground.
This puts the Law literally and metaphorically on the side of the blacks, who are also deemed ‘out of order’ for having broken the rules of a fair fight.
And this in turn mobilizes the forces of public propriety in the shape of community elders who want to ‘clean up the estate’ and who willingly sign the petition to keep it as white as possible.
The irony in the situation is that the real double standard involved in policing the area is not applied to white youth, but to their black counterparts.
For until very recently the police made no concession to black street culture, but instead rigidly interpreted and ruthlessly enforced statutory norms of public order, first through the notorious ‘Sus’ law (abolished after a long campaign by black and civil liberties groups) and then through routine powers of search and arrest.
Moreover, it is through such means that the discretionary powers and prerogatives of the copper on the beat come to be exercised.
The practices associated with harassment are so jealously guarded, not just because they articulate a culture of institutionalized racism within the force, but because they form part of a system ‘workers’ control' against the encroachment of line management.
The fact that the police are positioned as at once the backbone of the State and a pariah within civil society in a way that is similar, though not identical, to that of the working class adds a further twist to the tale.
The racialization of place, the construction of a political geography in which certain areas like Brixton and White City are coded in terms which mark them out as ‘front lines’ of racial confrontation (inner city/urban jungle/ghetto) is thus the outcome of complex antagonisms within and between the police force and working-class communities, and is reinforced from both sides.
It is complimented by a racialization of time, the construction of a ‘golden age’ before the blacks/Jews/Irish came.
In ‘Fighting talk’ the two are tied together in the nostalgic account of an idyllic childhood landscape, all large back gardens and open public spaces, where you could mooch about for as long as you wanted.
This daydream of a space and time of unbounded freedom is rudely interrupted by the advent of the forces of the State (in the form of the municipal bulldozer) and the Asian shopocracy (as property owners).
This unholy alliance is not only supposed to have destroyed the traditional amenities of working-class community life, but to have robbed these boys of their childhood patrimony as well!
It is hard to see anything like the controlling hand of a single dominant  ideology in all this, given the complex shifts of power and positioning which are in play in these constructions.
If there is a common underlying theme or thread it would seem to be the unstated assumption that ‘anyone can make it if they try, and if they conform to the rules’; those who fail must suffer from some congenital lack of capacities, or be of an alien disposition.
This would seem to invite an invidious comparison between white youth who are unemployed and their more successful black peers.
But this is avoided through the assertion that blacks are being given an unfair advantage by the hidden helping hand of the race relations industry.
Thus black achievement has nothing to do with their struggles and the white boys' failure is dissociated from any implication of personal inadequacy.
For their own very different purposes the police adopt elements of this working-class position in their battle against their superiors.
In both cases we seem to be dealing with a subordinated racism which becomes ‘common sense’ as a result of its articulation through a dominant but non-racist ideology of competitive individualism — a situation which is the exact opposite of what is normally argued!
The question of individualism raises the issue of whether we are dealing with a ‘new racism’ or merely an updated version of the old ‘race and empire’story.
There certainly are continuities in the way black people are characterized.
I have tried to indicate some of them, and no doubt other readers of these texts will find others.
I believe that the major discontinuity lies in the discursive forms through which positions of racial superiority are constructed.
Instead of self-confident assertions whose utterance actually enacts the superiority that is claimed, and which make it possible to identify with ‘the master race’, as being and having everything that the subject races lack, we have discourses which resort to all manner of rhetorical devices to construct a narrative of special pleading marked by highly ambiguous and ironic self-reference and a litany of real or imagined grievance.
This is a racist discourse profoundly marked by the fractures of identity which produced it, and consequently one whose internal contradictions are both more explicitly articulated and more strongly disavowed.
For example, it has become more difficult than ever to reconcile the proprietary brand of ‘backbone of the nation’ style racism, with the aggressive body politics of the ‘territorial armies’who march under the banner of Millwall or Manchester United.
The last-night-of-the-prommers may wave the same flag as England's World Cup supporters but they do not, at the end of the day, dance to the same tunes.
This seems to me to be a real cause for celebration.
The popular culture of racism is neither so unified, nor the positions within it so fixed as is sometimes supposed.
Not every aspect of ‘Fighting talk’ is racialized.
There is the comment which allows a black perspective to momentarily emerge (‘Blacks reckon the opposite; they reckon the police are picking on them').
Some members of the group were avid supporters of reggae — they loved the music even while they hated the people who made it.
And there were elements of their life history which remained open to non-racist  articulation.
These are all points of possible engagement for antiracist work.
Even police culture is not monolithic.
The officer who handed us the unofficial communique was risking his neck by taking a public stance against racism amongst his colleagues.
‘Grassing up your mates’ and cooperating with the ‘enemy within' (antiracists, liberals, etc.) are both capital crimes in this rank-and-file code, yet he had enough moral courage and support to bring this material out into the open for discussion.
This finally leads us into a series of other more practical questions.
Should the youth workers have tried to integrate these boys into ‘the community’, or to isolate them from it?
Would it have been a good tactic to try and exploit adult hostility towards this group on account of their delinquent activities, rather than highlight their racist involvements which clearly did have a measure of adult support?
Would such a move have m–de it easier or more difficult to confront the local police about their failure to protect the black community from racial attack?
In the longer term, is there a risk that in focusing attention on such ‘hard core’ racist groups there is a danger of making them seem glamorous?
Is it more productive to concentrate on doing antiracist work with parents and younger children, to try to minimize the influences exerted by such gangs as role models for the next generation?
Or is this a counsel of despair which makes the culture of racism seem more entrenched and unchangeable than it really is?
As regards the police, should the publication of racist statements like the unofficial communique be made a disciplinary offence, or would this merely strengthen rank-and-file resistance to the implementation of antiracist policies within the force?
Would it be more useful to devise training regimes in which such attitudes could be systematically confronted?
What kind of changes in police structure and ideology would be necessary before such regimes could influence actual police behaviour towards black people on the street?
Even if there never will be any easy answers to such questions, and certainly not ones which could be read off from some kind of ‘correct analysis’, it is still the case that the better informed we are about the complexities which underlie them the quicker we will be able to learn from our mistakes.
Relative autonomy rules
I have outlined one possible approach to reading discourses, whether racist or antiracist, which suggests that what is going on in and between them may be more complex and contradictory than is often allowed.
To regard them as an example of a clear-cut binary opposition between good and evil, or rationality and irrationality fails to engage with the kinds of investments which they actually entail.
I have examined these ‘other  scenes’ of theoretical and political ideology in detail elsewhere.
Here I just want to concentrate on what may be required if we are to shift to a different mode of argumentation.
What needs to be changed in the ‘etiquettes’ of antiracism to create the conditions for a more productive debate?
There are a number of unwritten rules or axioms which perhaps need to be questioned.
The first and most restrictive of these might be called the ‘totalization’ rule.
According to this any theoretical statement, or political initiative, is supposed to tackle racism as a whole, all at once, and once and for all .
If it fails to do so it is condemned as being ‘reformist’, or ‘liberal’ or even ‘racist’.
I suggest that we substitute for this what might be called a ‘relative autonomy’ rule.
Just as different sites or forms of racism have their own conditions of existence and articulation, so they require specific modes of analysis and intervention, each of which has its own criteria of efficacy.
This rule may help to keep clear the distinction between those interventions which seek to challenge the structural conditions under which racist discourses are directly or indirectly reproduced, and those strategies which aim to interrupt their circulation in specific micro-contexts, and/or introduce alternative story lines.
Both are necessary but they require radically different forms of organization and styles of action.
Success at the level of macro-institutional policies does not automatically produce a knock-on effect at the level of everyday social interaction, and local ‘grass roots’ initiatives do not necessarily yield models which are applicable to strategies of structural transformation.
This is no reason to rubbish what is achievable by these different means.
Ironically, one reason why so many antiracist initiatives have failed is because they have assumed some kind of transitive relation between policy and practice.
But as anyone who has sat on an equal opportunities working party will tell you, it is one thing to formulate policies and quite another to implement them.
And partly this is because the closer you get to concrete ‘race relations’ the less likely they are to conform to the models which have informed policy making.
A second problem is the way ethnic credentialism has been used to canonize certain texts, or underwrite certain schools of thought as possessing the authentic or correct perspective on racism.
The unwritten rule of this knowledge/power game is that one set of rather benign standards are applied to texts produced by ‘ethnic’ writers (black, Jewish, Irish etc.) and other far more critical ones to work produced by those who lack such ‘authorizations’.
The exploitation of ethnicity may perhaps work as a form of primitive accumulation of cultural capital, but it does nothing to enlarge the audience or scope of such work, which is why most artists and writers of any stature have rejected this appellation, even if they have benefited indirectly from it.
The attempt to insist that a particular intellectual tradition or body of work possesses a monopoly of the truth about racism because it ‘objectively corresponds’ to the experience of those subjected to it, is part of the same game.
Against all this I would propose a rule of limited self-reference.
Any work or practice should first of all be judged on its own merits independently of the ethnic origins, affiliations or status of its author.
Such judgements should be based on criteria which are directly and internally related to the form as well as the content of the text.
It is quite appropriate to apply political criteria to a political statement such as a manifesto, or policy document.
It is not appropriate to judge a novel or film, a work of art or philosophy in political terms if the work in question does not take that form (i.e., does not organize itself in terms of political discourse).
Applying purely literary, cinematic, aesthetic or philosophical criteria to such work does not mean that it cannot be located in terms to which value judgements may be attached.
It is certainly possible to identify the features of a racist aesthetic or an antiracist philosophical practice, for example, and to assess the contribution which a particular work makes to their development.
A corollary of this rule, and a condition of its operation, is the establishment of a proper intellectual division of labour, one which is no longer based on the rival claims of totalizing theories or disciplines.
For example, historical materialism may have a lot to tell us about the political economy of immigrant labour and the unequal exchange between metropolitan capitalism and the third world, but it has proved quite incapable of grasping the micro-foundations of racist ideologies.
Equally, psychoanalysis is proving an indispensable method for investigating the deeper reaches of the racist imagination, but produces the most absurdly reductionist theories when it tries to apply its concepts to explaining the rise of fascism or the nation-state.
Respect for the relative autonomy of these levels, and of the different modes of enquiry appropriate to them is a sine qua non of developing anti-reductive perspectives.
A further difficulty has arisen concerning the priority which has been given to judicial or quasi-judicial measures in the attempt to suppress racist discourses.
Although it is certainly necessary to protect ethnic minorities from verbal attack, and to signal society's disapproval of all forms of racial abuse, it does not follow that criminalization is always the best method of doing this.
Not only does it risk making heroes and martyrs out of the perpetrators, but in practice it has led to a damaging split between reactive strategies, which are aimed at highly specific target groups, and proactive approaches which rely on nebulous generalities, viz., ‘creating the right ethos’.
More seriously, forms of discipline and surveillance may be developed to police — and hopefully deter — discriminatory behaviour in public settings, whilst the informal cultures of racism which actually sustain these practices are relegated to an untouchable realm of ‘private attitude’.
When attempts are then made to intervene at this latter level, they often use the same procedures as are applied to the public realm.
This is what occurred with racism awareness training (RAT).
RAT may have succeeded in driving the culture of racism underground, but enforced privatization did not always silence; in many  cases it resulted in more secretly coded forms of expression, which actually strengthened popular resistance to antiracism.