

‘Roll over Beethoven’?
Sites and soundings on the music-historical map
What is popular music?
So riddled with complexities has this question proved to be that one is tempted to follow the example of the legendary definition of folk song —‘all songs are folk songs; I never heard horses sing 'em’— and suggest that all music is popular music: popular with someone .
Unfortunately, this would be to empty the term of most of the meanings which it carries in actual discourse.
However, it does have the merit of beginning to touch upon the multiple sources of these meanings: what I think ‘popular’you may not.
And it follows from this that all such meanings are socially and historically grounded: they come bearing the marks of particular usages and contexts, and are never disinterested.
The briefest ‘archaeology’ of the more general term ‘popular’reveals both the plurality of its inflections and some of their historical movements (see Williams 1976: 198–9).
It has to do with ‘the people’(but who are they?), though often this has the sense of the vulgus , the common people, and to describe something as ‘popular’ may then have the (depreciatory) implication that it is inferior or designed to suit low tastes.
Under the influence of democratic ideologies, on the other hand, this usage may be turned round and then ‘popular’ can become a legitimating term; this was the case in post-revolutionary America.
A different sense —‘well favoured’(but with whom?)— became predominant, at least in Britain, by the late eighteenth century, and in the nineteenth this could shift to ‘well liked’(that is, judged good — but by whom?).
The origins of a positive, class orientated usage — something ‘popular’ as the type specifically produced by the lower classes — lie in this period also; and this has become one of the common twentieth-century senses.
In music, the quantitative usage (‘well favoured’) seems to have come to the fore in the eighteenth century — alongside the development of a (bourgeois) commercial market in musical products; and when, in the first half of the nineteenth century, songs for the bourgeois market (including what we would now call ‘drawing-room ballads’) were described as ‘popular songs’, the intended implication seems to have been that they were good (that is, well liked by those whose opinion counted).
Older senses survived, too; and, under the impact of Romanticism, ‘popular songs’ could in the nineteenth century also be thought of  as synonymous with ‘peasant’, ‘national’and ‘traditional’songs.’
Later in the century, ‘folk’ took over these usages from ‘popular’, which was transferred to the products of the music hall and then to those of the mass market song publishers of Tin Pan Alley and its British equivalent.
In the twentieth century, many of these meanings coexist and intertwine, in a variety of usages.
Frans Birrer has provided a useful summary of the main categories (Birrer 1985: 104), which exist in combination as well as in pure form)
1
Normative definitions .
Popular music is an inferior type.
2
Negative definitions .
Popular music is music that is not something else (usually ‘folk’ or ‘art’music).
3
Sociological definitions .
Popular music is associated with (produced for or by) a particular social group.
4
Technologico-economic definitions .
Popular music is disseminated by mass media and/or in a mass market.
All these categories are interest-bound; none is satisfactory.
The first relies on arbitrary criteria.
The second gets into trouble on the boundaries — where neat divisions between ‘folk’ and ‘popular’, and ‘popular’and ‘art’, are impossible to find — and also tends to use arbitrary criteria to define the complement of ‘popular’.
‘Art’ music, for example, is generally regarded as by nature complex, difficult, demanding; ‘popular’music then has to be defined as ‘simple’, ‘accessible’, ‘facile’.
But many pieces commonly thought of as ‘art’(Handel's ‘Hallelujah Chorus’, many Schubert songs, many Verdi arias) have qualities of simplicity; conversely, it is by no means obvious that the Sex Pistols' records were ‘accessible’, Frank Zappa's work ‘simple’ or Billie Holiday's ‘facile’.
The third category of definition fails because musical types and practices, even those of the most minority sort, can never be wholly contained by particular social contexts.
Social mobility and class fluidity make this obvious today, as does the increasingly undifferentiated character of media diffusion and cultural markets.
But even in the nineteenth century, the drawing-room ballads and theatre tunes ‘of the bourgeoisie’ were heard and reproduced by many workers, just as ‘art’music was regaled to them by brass bands and in promenade concerts; while ownership of ‘folk’songs would be a matter of dispute between ‘peasants’, industrial workers, petty bourgeois writers and artisans, and patrician collectors.
Putting this point on a more theoretical level, the musical field and the class structure at any given moment, though clearly not unconnected, comprise different ‘maps’ of social/cultural space, and they cannot be reduced one to the other (see Williams 1981).
The fourth category is unsatisfactory, too, this time for two reasons.
The development of methods of mass diffusion (first printed, then electromechanical and electronic) has affected all forms of music, and any of them can be treated as a commodity; if a widely distributed recording of a Tchaikovsky symphony turns the piece into ‘popular music’, then the definition is, to say the least, unhelpful.
At the same time,all forms of what would usually be considered popular music can in principle be disseminated by face-to-face methods (for instance, in concerts) rather than the mass media, and can be made available free, or even structured as collective participation, rather than sold as a commodity; it is hard  to believe that a few friends, jamming on ‘Born in the USA’ at a party, are not producing ‘popular music’.
There are two definitional syntheses that have a particular currency, both in everyday discourse and among scholarly approaches.
The first is positivist .
It centres on the quantitative sense of ‘popular’, proposing ‘to deal with the pieces which are demonstrably the most popular items of ‘popular music’, with the most widely disseminated items of music disseminated in the mass media' (Hamm 1982: 5; see also Hamm 1979: xvii–xxii; 1982,passim ).
It draws, therefore, mostly on category 4 but also to some extent on categories 2 and 3.
The second synthesis can be described in terms of sociological essentialism .
Here the ‘essence’ of the popular is constant, though whether this is seen as proffered from above or engendered from below, whether ‘the people’is regarded as an active, progressive historical subject or a manipulated dupe, varies.
This approach draws mostly on category 3 but also to some extent on categories 1 and 4.
The positivist approach claims to be objective but it is no more ideology-free than any other.
It takes its primary level of analysis to be that characterized by the question of size and by the phenomenal form of the series .
It is methodologically bound, therefore, to the requirements of measurement and to the mechanisms of the market , and excludes anything that does not fit these.
What this tends to lead to is indicated in Keil's sharp review of Hamm's history of American popular song (Keil 1980: 577; Hamm 1979):
a steady reporting of names, dates, song titles, musical examples, from the procession of songs in commodity form that began…in 1789.
[But]the author excludes too many dialectical tensions from the book at the start: no church music will be considered; no worrying about those Americans who couldn't afford sheet music and a piano in the parlor is allowed either; and no room for primarily instrumental music like marches, ragtime, jazz, or polka music up to 1950.
Leaving out white and black American Christians is leaving out a lot.
Leaving out poor and working people doesn't seem right.
And my grandfather, who used to weep over the ‘Second Connecticut March’, why can't he be included?
And all those dancing immigrants?
Even within its own terms of reference, the positivist approach has problems.
The reliability of sales figures, record charts and air play statistics is notoriously suspect.
The bases of statistics are often unclear or unsatisfactory, and comparability is often impossible.
Figures are open to manipulation and corruption (hyping, payola, and so on).
What they represent is also influenced by institutional constraints, and choices of output by record companies and radio stations (see Frith 1987d: 137–8; Street 1986: 116–25; Wallis and Malm 1984: 242–52; Harker 1980: 94–100).
But the terms of reference themselves pose problems, too.
The most obvious are:
i
the tendency to treat heterogeneous markets as parts of an aggregate; thus, an example of relatively high dissemination in one sector may be lost among the larger figures of the whole;
ii
the tendency to privilege the category of ‘youth’, because, for some time now, young people have spent a disproportionately large part of their disposable income on leisure commodities such as records; this leads to  neglect of older age-groups who may use different musics and use them differently;
iii
the focus on the ‘moment of exchange’ rather than the ‘moment of use’— for example, dissemination through radio-listening, background music, live performance and home-taping;
iv
similarly, non-commodity-form musical practices are ignored;
v
there is a tendency to standardize different time-scales — but in fact different musical types, and sometimes different pieces within a type, may sell at different rates over different time-spans; thus the Beatles' ‘Can't Buy Me Love’ sold a million copies in a week while Ken Dodd's ‘Tears’took five months to do the same (Harker 1980: 98–9).
At best, positivist approaches measure not ‘popularity’ but sales.
The result is to reify popular music, treating songs solely as objects, neglecting their role in cultural practice or ‘way of life’.
The circularity of the method —‘popularity’ is conceived in terms of‘how many’, the numbers are totted up, and are then used to define popularity — means that what it can tell us about is limited, first, to the data themselves, as categorized, and, second, to its own assumptions.
It cannot tell us about the meaning of the term ‘popular music’, since that meaning, ideologically replete, has been pushed outside the frame of reference.
In the methods I described as essentialist, the underlying assumptions are qualitative rather than quantitative.
Indeed, here it is precisely a particular conception of ‘qualitative shifts in cultural relations’ which supports the ideological basis of the approach (Hall 1978: 11).
As a rule, the essentialist perspective is brought to bear either from ‘above’ or from ‘below’.
In the first case, the organizing principle goes under such terms as ‘manipulation’ and ‘standardization’, and ‘popular’is more or less equated with ‘mass’or ‘commercial’.
In the second case, the important concepts are ‘authenticity’, ‘spontaneity’, ‘grass-roots’; and ‘popular’ means, in a particular sense, ‘of the people’.
In both cases popular music is located, implicitly, within a larger field, for in both cases the nature of popular music is established through comparison with something else, an absent Other.
And both, implicitly or explicitly, organize this field historically, for the non-popular is, depending on the perspective, either what the popular has tried to replace or what has tried to replace the popular.
In both cases the problem is that concrete cultural processes, in particular historical locations, are reduced to abstract schemata.
Contradictions within the productive process are ignored.
Consumers are regarded either as blank receptors, by the mass culture theorists, or as an inherently oppositional class, by ultra-leftists searching for pure proletarianism.
But in practice, neither popular music, however understood, nor its Others —‘folk song’, ‘traditional music’, ‘art music’, ‘bourgeois music’, or whatever else — walk on to the historical stage in this uncontaminated form.
All the approaches mentioned so far are engaged in dividing up the musical field in a particular way — between this and that, better and worse, elite and mass, higher and lower, aristocratic and plebeian, and so on.
Of course, in internally differentiated societies, distinctions are necessary, otherwise important tensions and conflicts will pass unremarked.
The danger is of over-rigid definition, usually built on a failure to recognize the framework of assumptions underlying every distinction.
It is noticeable that in other languages, in other  societies, different terms are used and different distinctions are made.
Whichever terms are used, their contents should not be regarded as absolute.
Moreover, this conclusion points to two additional guidelines.
‘Popular music’(or whatever) can only be properly viewed within the context of the whole musical field , within which it is an active tendency; and this field, together with its internal relationships, is never still — it is always in movement .
A theoretical framework
We need, then, to locate musical categories topographically .
‘Popular culture is neither, in a ‘pure’ sense, the popular traditions of resistance…nor is it the forms which are superimposed on and over them.
It is the ground on which the transformations are worked' (Hall 1981: 228).
If one must assert, against the positivists, that it is impossible simply to wipe out the ideological accretions to a term like ‘popular music’, it is also necessary to insist, against the essentialists, that these accretions, and the musical practices to which they refer, cannot be simply disentangled, either from each other or from cultural relations as a whole.
They always contain contradictions.
This is because, in class society , the society is internally contradictory.
What the term ‘popular music’ tries to do is to put a finger on that space, that terrain, of contradiction — between ‘imposed’and ‘authentic’, ‘elite’and ‘common’, predominant and subordinate, then and now, theirs and ours, and so on— and to organize it in particular ways
The relationships crossing this terrain take specific forms in specific societies and must be analysed in that context.
And, since they are also active, the field never quiescent, the possible meanings of ‘popular music’ must be historically located, too.
Indeed, the very appearance of ‘popular culture’ within discourse arises at specific moments in specific societies; in Britain this is the mid eighteenth century, with the rise of mature bourgeois society.
Significantly, the terms ‘society’ and ‘culture’themselves, in their modern usage, appear at the same time.
In this sense, and at a rather high level of abstraction, the very possibility within discourse of a historically located cultural field, marked by internally contradictory relations and hence by particularly difficult questions of causation and explanation, is part of the problematic of bourgeois society; that is, it is internal to, and historically related to, a particular historical-social stage (see Burke 1981).
Much recent historical work, notably Michel Foucault's, has stressed the importance of investigating the discursive formations through which knowledge is organized.
If we do not try to grasp the relations between popular music discourses and the material musical practices to which they refer, and at the same time the necessary distinctness of level between these, we are unlikely to break through the structures of power which, as Foucault makes clear, discursive authority erects.
And we are likely to abandon the sphere of the concrete to the positivists and that of theory to the essentialists, rather than to theorize the relationship of the two at a higher level.
Though the structure of the musical field is related to structures of power, it is not determined by them.
We need to talk of the relative autonomy of cultural practices, and it is helpful to introduce Gramsci's insight that the relationship  between actual culture, consciousness, ideas, experience, on the one hand, and economically determined factors such as class position, on the other, is always problematical, incomplete and the object of ideological work and struggle.
This is linked to Gramsci's general conception of the relationship between economic forces and ‘super structural’ elements.
While retaining a determinative role for the former, he insists on the relative autonomy of the latter: these have their own modes of existence, their own inertia, their own time-scales, such that we have to speak of a ‘necessary reciprocity’ between economic/social and cultural/ideological levels.
Cultural relationships and cultural change are thus not predetermined; rather, they are the product of negotiation, imposition, resistance, transformation, and so on.
In class societies this process will obviously be mediated primarily — though not exclusively — through class relationships and class conflict.
Thus particular cultural forms and practices cannot be attached mechanically or even paradigmatic ally to particular classes; nor, even, can particular interpretations, valuations and uses of a single form or practice.
In Stuart Hall's words (1981: 238)‘there are no wholly separate ‘cultures’…[no ‘bourgeois’ hit-song, no ‘proletarian’industrial folk song, no ‘petit bourgeois’musical comedy, or ‘working-class’rock and roll]…attached, in a relation of historical fixity, to specific ‘whole’classes — although there are clearly distinct and variable class cultural formations'.
‘Class does not coincide with the sign community’(Volosinov 1973: 23); therefore the best approach is one that
treats the domain of cultural forms and activities as a constantly changing field…looks at the relations which constantly structure this field into dominant and subordinate formations…[and]at the process by which these relations of dominance and subordination are articulated' (Hall 1981: 235)
The meaning, the accentuation , and the form, of, for instance, early British music hall, early syncopated dance music, early rock 'n' roll, were subject to precisely this kind of struggle.
What is the nature of this process?
How are musical forms and practices appropriated for use by particular classes?
Hall used the word ‘articulate’, and other writers, too, drawing on Gramsci, have talked of a ‘principle of articulation’(see, for example, Mouffe 1979).
The argument is that while elements of culture are not directly, eternally or exclusively tied to specific economically determined factors such as class position, they are determined in the final instance by such factors, through the operation of articulating principles which are tied to class position.
These operate by combining existing elements into new patterns or by attaching new connotations to them.
Examples of the latter — attaching new connotations — would be the way musical elements of the bourgeois march were made to connote something different in nineteenth century labour anthems; or the way the supposedly liberated individualist eclecticism of counter cultural 1960s rock —‘liberated’ in the Marcusian sense — was, in a process of recuperation, re-articulated to the long tradition of bourgeois individual bohemianism.
Examples of the former — recombining existing elements — would be the way this eclecticism in 1960s rock came into being in the first place, formed as it was from disparate sources, including many  elements from bourgeois ‘art music’; or the way rhythmic techniques derived from working-class black American music were combined with other elements in 1920s dance music to signify a kind of safe but exotic, hedonist escapism for a broad grouping of classes in Britain.
Particularly strong articulative relationships are established when what we can call ‘cross-connotation’ takes place: that is, when two or more different elements are made to connote, symbolize or evoke each other .
This is what seems to have happened in the late Victorian music hall, when a style evoking a particular class subject — the ‘remade’ working class described by the historian Gareth Stedman Jones (1974)— is crossed with political elements — the ideology of imperialism — resulting in a relatively unified mode of ‘popular imperialism’within this song category.
Similarly, early Elvis Presley managed to link together elements connoting youth rebellion, working-class ‘earthiness’ and ethnic ‘roots’, each of which can evoke the others, all of which were articulated together, however briefly, by a moment of popular self-assertion.
In the 1960s, the connection to a political theme — the supposed new energies released by a Labour-led ‘swinging Britain' — of the notions of boy-next-door, man-in-the-street ‘classlessness’ constructed around the early Beatles, was one way in which the music's meaning was secured for the dominant social interests.
When the articulative process works well, the pattern of elements that it organizes comes to seem ‘natural’; in this form it usually spreads widely through society.
An example would be the mid-Victorian ‘song synthesis’ which spread across a wide spectrum of musical types, from operetta and parlour ballad to music hall and pub singing, displaying variants within a broad congruence of musical code.
Another would be the Hollywood/Broadway/Tin Pan Alley synthesis of the 1930s.
A third, perhaps, would be the generalized notion of pop/rock represented in chart hit/Eurovision Song Contest/mainstream rock in the 1970s and 1980s.
These patterns represent moments when cultural hegemony is relatively unquestioned.
It is in this context that we must understand the reception of syncopated dance music in the early 1900s, of rock 'n' roll in the 1950s, and of punk in the late 1970s, as not only new but unnatural .
These are moments involving elements of social crisis, or at least social unrest, when the strength of accepted articulated patterns declines.
The theory of articulation recognizes the complexity of cultural fields.
It preserves a relative autonomy for cultural and ideological elements (musical structures and song lyrics, for example) but also insists that those combinatory patterns that are actually constructed do mediate deep, objective patterns in the socio-economic formation, and that the mediation takes place in struggle : the classes fight to articulate together constituents of the cultural repertoire in particular ways so that they are organized in terms of principles or sets of values determined by the position and interests of the class in the prevailing mode of production.
This theory seems to me the most sophisticated method at present available of conceiving the relationship between musical forms and practices, on the one hand, and class interests and social structure, on the other; more sophisticated, say, than the theories of homology put forward by some ethnomusicologists and subcultural theorists, which suggest the existence of structural ‘resonances’, or homologies, between the different elements making up a socio-cultural whole.; Such theories always end up in some kind of  reductionism —‘upwards’, into an idealist cultural spirit, ‘downwards’, into economism, sociologism or technologism, or by ‘circumnavigation’, in a functionalist holism.
However, I would like to hang on to the notion of homology in a qualified sense.
For it seems likely that some signifying structures are more easily articulated to the interests of one group than are some others; similarly, that they are more easily articulated to the interests of one group than to those of another.
This is because, owing to the existence of what Paul Willis calls the ‘objective possibilities’(and limitations) of material and ideological structures, it is easier to find links and analogies between them in some cases than in others (Willis 1978: 198–201).
Consider, for example, János Maŕthy's (1974) distinction between what he calls ‘collective-variative’ methods, which he connects primarily to proletarian musical practice, and the symmetrical solo song forms typical of bourgeois music culture, from the Middle Ages onwards.
It would be a mistake to regard these two categories as simple products of class needs.
But it is clear that, for objective structural reasons, it was, during a certain long historical period,easier for the bourgeoisie to make meaningful use of the second, and the working classes the first, than vice versa.
Similarly, working-class musical practice found it hard to deal with the elements of bourgeois solo song except by acquiescing in the norms of the dominant musical culture, or by treating them parodistically or through other methods of distortion.
Moreover, however arbitrary musical meanings and conventions are — rather than being ‘natural’, or determined by some human essence or by the needs of class expression — once particular musical elements are put together in particular ways, and acquire particular connotations, these can be hard to shift.
It would be difficult, for instance, to move the ‘Marseillaise’ out of the set of meanings sediment Ed around it — hence around other tunes of the same type, too — which derive from the history of the revolutionary French bourgeoisie.
Similarly, it is not easy to disturb the connotations of those types of ‘folk song’ constituted by bourgeois romanticism as signifying (sentimentalized)‘community’, an organic social harmony.
The romantic-lyrical ballad style of twentieth-century Tin Pan Alley clings stubbornly to its role in the representation of gender relations within the norms set by the stereotype of the bourgeois couple, despite attempts made from time to time to move it into new patterns with new meanings.
Thus a theory of articulation does not mean that the musical field is a pluralistic free-for-all.
It is not un determined but over determined, and the ruling interests in the social formation take the lead in setting the predispositions which are always trying to constitute a received shape.
As Gramsci points out (1971: 260), ‘the bourgeois class poses itself as an organism in continuous movement, capable of absorbing the whole society, assimilating it to its own cultural and economic level’, and this would-be universalizing push provides one of the most important elements in music history of the last two hundred years.
Thus, underlying the other side of Gramsci's picture — the continuous construction of class alliances, with its articulative dimension in the cultural domain — there is a basic dichotomy, organized around the relationship of ‘hegemonic’ and subordinate blocs, ‘power bloc versus popular classes’(Hall 1981: 238–9), the content of each and the terrain it controls being precisely the object of cultural as well as economic struggle.
It should be added that cultural formations are not only conditioned by class position, central though that is; age, gender, ethnicity and nationality are also important.
Each of these can mediate any or all of the others.
Thus, it can be argued that the impact of the young Elvis Presley was due to the way in which, taking a range of pre-existing musical, lyric and performance elements, he rearticulated them into a new pattern set by the intersection and intermediation of certain images of class (proletarian), ethnicity (black/poor white), age (‘youth’), gender (male) and nationality (American South).
The articulating principle governing the social meaning of this music for its audience must be defined in terms of a conjunction of new representations of leisure, the body, gender relations and capitalist consumption, tied in turn to the objectively new social-economic position of this audience in post-war capitalist society.
This is how the romantic-lyric elements in Elvis's style, for example, could take on new meanings, mediated as they were by country and western's and black music's previous appropriations of them, by the ‘under view’ of the working class of the South on the American Dream, and by an awareness of a new freedom in adolescent leisure behaviour.
Of course, the effect of such a ‘constellation’ is nuanced by the social situation of listeners .
The ‘nationality’ factor in early Elvis signified rather differently for British adolescents in the mid-1950s; it was mediated through the image presented by the ‘American South’within their national tradition, and, more widely, through the rather different gender, generational and class structures obtaining in Britain.
(This is no more than to say that, within the operation of articulation processes, production and consumption are inextricably tied together.
) Similarly, the effects of early Elvis (and of early rock ‘n’ roll in general) change over time, as the articulating factors change.
Sometimes this affects the production of the music; in any case, it always affects the ways in which it is received.
Thus the class orientation of early Elvis was shifted as his music was articulated to the interests of the dominant elements in the music business; at the same time, his generational sharpness was muffled.
Subsequently, revivals reinvest in meanings closer to the originals but inevitably transformed by the effects of the intervening struggles over the ownership of rock 'n' roll and of its meanings.
Elvis — that particular musical agglomeration — never belonged to anyone in particular, then; he — it was there to be fought for.
A Historical Framework
It will be clear by now why, in order to study historically located forms of popular music, it is necessary to place them within the context of the whole music historical field.
‘The assumption…that you might know before you looked at cultural relations in general what, at any particular time, was a part of elite culture or a part of popular culture is untenable’(Hall 1978: 6–7).
Thus, to grasp properly the significance of popular dancing in the mid-nineteenth century — the waltz, for example— it is necessary to look not only at the waltz culture of the popular classes but also at such factors as: the peasant sources of the waltz; the use made of those sources in bourgeois culture; the changing social relations involved in the growth of industrial capitalism, to which the romanticizing of  popular culture found in bourgeois waltzing, together with its cultivation of an explicit sensuality, was probably a reaction; the tendency of the social developments to result in the atomization of established collective social patterns and modes of corporeal expression, leading, among avant-garde composers, to a music more overtly of thought and feeling, as against a music of social gesture; the way these same composers, by way of reaction to that situation, incorporated spiritualized versions of dance elements in their music.
The internally contradictory form, waltzing, as a genre, cuts across classes, and, as a practice, is inscribed in the overall relations of cultures and classes in the period.
Similarly, one could not satisfactorily analyse modalism in rock music without also dealing with the decline of modal folk song, in its traditional social contexts; the urban folk revival; the use of modal techniques by elite composers, and the ‘discovery’ of modal medieval and renaissance music; the commodification of major-minor tonality by Tin Pan Alley and Hollywood, against which modalism could be seen as ‘exotic’or ‘primitive’; the internationalization of capital bringing, through American cultural imperialism, the influence of modal Afro-American musics which, at the same time, could be seen as offering a potential for critique vis-à-vis the dominant, major-minor musical language; and so on.
These are examples of synchronic analysis: slicing through the relationships obtaining at any one time in the social-cultural formation.
But the field is continuously in movement.
Articulated syntheses have vectorial qualities — not only a weight within the field but also a direction.
Raymond Williams's terminology of ‘dominant’, ‘residual’ and ‘emergent’forms provides a useful way of mapping such qualities (1981:203–5).
In Britain around 1900, for example, it is clear that the forms of ‘high’ music hall were dominant, those of street ballad and indigenous rural song were residual, and those of syncopated dance music (ragtime, foxtrot, and the like) were emergent.
But within the whole network of movement, some moments are more critical than others, and there is a definite rhythm of change.
Gramsci makes a distinction between two levels of structure, the ‘situation’ and the ‘conjuncture’.
‘Situation’ refers to the deepest, the organic structures of a social formation; movement there is fundamental and relatively permanent, the result of crisis.
‘Conjuncture’ refers to more immediate, ephemeral characteristics, linked to the organic structures, but changing at once more rapidly and less significantly, as the forces in conflict within a situation struggle to work out their contradictions.
For Gramsci, these two levels are dialectically inter linked.
But at the same time it is clear that some periods display radical situational change, while others, in between these, are periods of relative situational stability, when day-to-day conjunctural movement assumes a more prominent position in the historical picture (see Gramsci 1971: 175–85).
In this way of analysis, the importance of changes in economic and social relations is retained — particularly at the level of the situation, where homologies, in the sense defined earlier, may be thought to operate — while relative autonomy for cultural and ideological elements is especially noticeable at the conjunctural level, for these elements may change at differing speeds, in differing ways.
In sketching out a music history for the last two hundred years, one can identify, I believe, three ‘moments’ of radical situational change.
These seem to be found in all the developed Western societies, though the dating differs 
First is the moment of the ‘bourgeois revolution’, marked by complex and overt class struggle within cultural fields, by the spread of the market system through almost all musical activities, and by the development and eventual predominance of new musical types associated with the new ruling class.
Conventional music history's delineation of the period through rigid Classical/Romantic periodization or ‘great man’ physiognomies hides a complex web of interactions, as old and new elements were articulated into a variety of patterns and meanings.
In Britain, this moment has several phases during a long and turbulent period from the late-eighteenth century to the 1840s.
By the end of this period, most musical production is in the hands of or is mediated by commercial music publishers, concert organizers and promoters, theatre and public house managers.
For the first time, most music is bought, not made for oneself.
Over the preceding half century, new kinds of bourgeois song, for theatre and home, emerge; new kinds of social dance develop; there is an explosion in urban street song, often using new kinds of tune; the commercialization of traditional (especially Scots and Irish) song begins; new kinds of song from industrialized working-class areas are produced; new kinds of public house entertainments evolve; organized mass choral singing and wind band movements begin.
Along with conflicts between different musical techniques, there are immense struggles over what form music should take and what role it should play: this is as evident in pub, school and street as, on another level, in orchestral concert music, opera, the fashion for virtuoso piano music and the work of the avant-garde composers of the Romantic movement.
By about 1850, the musical map has been drastically redrawn, in the context of the new norms represented by the values of the various fractions of the bourgeoisie.
The period of greater stability — the ‘mid-Victorian equipoise’ which followed has been somewhat more adequately mapped by research than the upheavals that went before (see, for example, Bailey 1978; 1986a; Brat ton 1986; D. Russell 1987; Scott 1989).
The striking feature is the extent of congruence across a range of different musical practices, resulting in a not exactly homogeneous musical field but one clearly dominated by a bourgeois synthesis.
With variants, this relative congruence of musical technique, repertoire and practice stretched across light opera, bourgeois domestic song, the brass band and mass choral movements, and the now more rationally organized music hall; it even penetrated the broadside and orally transmitted song genres of the industrial areas.
Street music was gradually banished, political song pushed into tight proletarian enclaves, and the musical avant-garde characteristic of earlier in the century was either marginalized or assimilated, as brass bands played Wagner and parlour singers juxtaposed Schubert and Schumann with more commercial products.
By the 1890s, the start of a second major situational fracture can be seen.
This is the moment of ‘mass culture’, characterized by the development of monopoly capitalist structures.
National lineages remain important, but as one pole of a tension counterbalanced by a growing internationalization of culture, associated particularly with an emerging American hegemony.
This shows itself both in musical content — the impact of ragtime, jazz, Tin Pan Alley songs, new dance forms, and so on— and in new methods of mass production, publicity and distribution: in short , a drive towards ‘one-way communication’ in homogeneous  markets.
Characteristic symptoms of monopolization can be seen in the reorganization of music hall as early as the 1880s; corporate ownership, national and regional syndicates and chains, and restrictive licensing policies combined to freeze out the small entrepreneur (see Bailey 1986a,passim ).
By the First World War, musical production and dissemination are coming to be concentrated in a new alliance consisting of a centralized publishing system (in New York's Tin Pan Alley and London's Denmark Street), the quickly developing gramophone companies (by 1910 dominated, world-wide, by Victor of the USA and the Gramophone Co. of Britain) and, a little later, the new medium of radio; by the late 1920s, we can add the movie industry as well.
The language of formula and the mass market, already appearing in the world of 1880s British music hall song (see A. Bennett 1986: 9–10), is heard particularly clearly in the United States against the backdrop of the new industrial methods of ‘Fordism’.
According to the song-writer Charles K. Harris (quoted in Hamm 1979: 288), ‘A new song must be sung, played, hummed, and drummed into the ears of the public, not in one city alone, but in every city, town and village, before it ever becomes popular’.
There are thus both economic and ideological reasons why the new musical energies of this period should come from American sources.
As for the avant-garde, we can see the development of modernism as precisely an outraged and deliberately esoteric response to the new drive towards total commodification.
Henceforth ‘industry’ and ‘art’would always be in symbiotic struggle, within popular as well as elite genres.
While there were many conflicts over all the new music (and dance) forms (see, for example, Hustwitt 1983), by the mid-1920s we can see the outlines of a new, laboriously constructed consensus, ‘hotter’ and radical elements squeezed out, new techniques smoothed and assimilated within a musical framework with links back to bourgeois traditions, socially centred on ‘respectable’dancing and home-listening, and on traditional kinds of concert and opera-going (see Frith 1983b; 1988b).
The consensus popular music repertoire of the late 1920s, 1930s and 1940s covers a relatively narrow stylistic spread, bounded by theatre song on the one side, novelty items deriving from music hall and vaudeville traditions on the other, with Tin Pan Alley song, Hollywood hits and crooners in between.
Contesting articulations of musical practices could as a rule now arise only at the level of consumption.
Even within elite culture, where producers (composers) were nominally autonomous, the modernist challenge tended to subside into a conservative ‘neo-classical’ hegemony.
The third moment of situational change begins sometime after the Second World War — most strikingly with the advent of rock 'n' roll — and can be termed the moment of ‘pop culture’.
In this period, against the background of a developing world market, within a ‘global economy’ dominated by multinational corporations, the existing monopolistic cultural formation both confirms itself and, at another level, becomes noticeably fissured, through the development of an assortment of transient subcultures.
There are changes in technology: electronic systems take over from the electromechanical mode typical of ‘mass culture’(just as that had taken over from the purely mechanical production and distribution methods of the earlier bourgeois period, epitomized by music printing).
These create the potential for new production methods — magnetic  tape replaces music scores, the ‘three-chord’ electric guitar puts in question the existing professionalized instrumental skills.
There are changes in relations of production, too, most importantly, the first significant encroachment on music production resources by the working-class young, and accompanying this is the opening up of a new youth market, which is structurally less tied to established class roles than older generations.
This group, with its ‘margin for rebellion’, looks to new musical sources, notably in black American rhythm and blues, many aspects of which are predisposed to connotations clustered around feelings of ‘oppression’, on the one hand, and relatively non-alienated use of the body (potentially subversive of capitalist work disciplines) on the other.
Parallel upheavals occur at roughly the same time in jazz, where modern styles, and, in a different way, the revivalist movement, challenge the hegemony of crooners and commercial dance-bands; and in elite music culture, where the earlier modernist outburst, headed by Schoenberg and Stravinsky, is matched by the iconoclasm of the post-war avant-garde led by Boulez, Stockhausen and C age.
The efflorescence of rock 'n' roll, and of the 1960s rock movements, took place against the background of a new social-historical phase, that of the ‘long boom’, ‘welfare capitalism’ and an ideology of liberal tolerance.
Official permissiveness was seen to be justified as, at both moments, ‘rebellion’ was to a large extent articulated to predominantly safer musical patterns with less subversive meanings.
Demands for greater ‘freedom’ and ‘authenticity’can often be channelled into established stereotypes of rebellion and expression, and thus articulated to the framework of the dominant musical ideology, mediated by a discourse which is organized round notions of ‘youth’, ‘modernity’and ‘pleasure’; the result can be used across the age-range and across classes, securing the interests of cultural reproduction and of liberal tolerance.
By the late 1960s, the new social patterns, technologies and musical styles had been substantially assimilated into a reorganized music-industrial system: a transnational oligopoly of vast entertainment corporations, supplied to some extent by ‘independent’ producers; serviced by mass audience radio and TV channels (with some ‘minority’shows and channels), by a symbiotically pliant music press and by related leisure-products businesses; and directing itself at a series of separate audiences whose distinctness is less subcultural than a creature of market researchers' consumer profiles.
Whether the startling but short-lived explosion of punk rock represented the first sign of a new situational fracture (new production methods; ‘outrageous’ music; independent operations), or the last twitch of the moment of ‘pop culture’(a rerun of rock 'n' roll do-it-yourself amateurism), or a less organic,conjunctural tremor (like hip hop, ‘charity rock’, Bruce Springsteen, Billy Bragg and many more) is difficult to say.
From the perspective of the late 1980s, the latter two interpretations seem more plausible than the first; the terms of the conjunctural negotiations, while by no means monolithic, seem to be set by chart pop, ‘stadium rock’, disco, and middle-of-the-road styles.
It is interesting, however, that Ernest Man Del's model of the stages of industrial capitalism (1975: 108–46), whose sequence of ‘long waves’ seems to correspond to the sequence of ‘situations’described here, would locate our society now in the second half of the current ‘wave’: and such periods are  characterized, for him, by incipient crisis.
But one should not expect such economic movements to determine the details of changing musical practice in any mechanical way.
The link between socio-economic structure and the specificities of cultural and ideological practice is provided by processes of articulation, as we saw earlier; and it is therefore these processes which now require further investigation.
Articulation in practice
The apparent coherence of most musical styles, and of the relationship they have with the societies in which they exist, is not ‘natural’ but contrived; it is the product of cultural work.
Particularly in complex, internally differentiated societies, musical styles are assemblages of elements from a variety of sources each with a variety of histories and connotations, and these assemblages can, in appropriate circumstances, be prised open and the elements rearticulated in different contexts.
Sometimes this is obvious, as when parody (in the widest sense of the term) is used.
At other times it is relatively hidden, smoothed over by extensive cultivation, familiarity and the techniques of what Bourdieu calls ‘legitimation’, only to be revealed when constituent elements are wrenched away and placed in a new setting.
This happens, for instance, when the volkstümlich tunes so popular in early nineteenth-century bourgeois domestic song (where they signify according to romantic conceptions of nation and community) are used by working-class singers for disaster ballads; when sentimental Tin Pan Alley ballad melody is ‘gospelized’ by Ray Charles or Otis Redding; or when the heavy four-four of the quick march (goose step?) is appropriated by the early punk bands as a mode of critique.
The strength with which particular potentially contradictory relationships are held together depends not only on the amount of objective ‘fit’ between the components but also on the strength of the articulating principle involved, which is in turn connected with objective social factors.
John Lennon's ‘Imagine’, so powerful when one is listening to it, may afterwards be quite easily broken down into fairly disparate elements: radical text; rock-ballad melody, harmony and orchestration; singer-songwriter (‘confessional’) piano; soul/gospel-tinged singing.
What is tying these together is an ideal, or to put it more concretely, a certain position associated with some alienated intellectuals in late capitalist society.
This hard-fought-for (and affecting)‘coherence’ lacks sufficient material support (in terms of defined social interests) and ideological legitimacy (or threat) to sustain itself as more than a personal, transitory, hence ultimately sentimental reorientation of the musical traditions concerned.
The dominant sectors of society found no difficulty in tolerating or even nodding approval of its message, a development which reached its apogee when the 1988 Conference of the British Conservative Party bellowed out the song with no hint of embarrassment.
Compare this case with a more collective process of rearticulation.
The American revivalist hymn ‘Amazing Grace’(c. 1800) is an excellent example of the symmetries Maróthy ascribes to bourgeois song (Maróthy 1974).
The words are organized around symmetrical pairs (grace/wretch; lost/found; blind/see) and the tune, at least in its best known version, not only divides into an open/closed  parallelism, through its cadence structure, but within this, the subsidiary phrases form complementary pairs; moreover, the overall pitch contour follows the arch shape typical of this song type (see Ex. 1.1).
There are many ‘folk’ variants of this tune which adapt it to rather different musical traditions.
But the more recent adoption of the tune by British football crowds probably follows the Judy Collins 1971 hit, which retains all the features of the ‘bourgeois’ version.
Now, however, the words become repetitive (just the name of the team).
And a simple change to the tune has radical results.
It is shortened to just the second and third phrases, both of which are cadentially ‘open’, and so what had been a self-sufficient arch shape is turned into continuous, open-ended variative repetition (see Ex. 1.2).
‘Spiritual lyricism’ is transformed into an unending, circling chant of collective support for the team.
It is easy to see how the two versions ‘fit’ typical articulating principles traditionally associated with the bourgeoisie (‘individualism’) and the working class (‘collectivism’).
The football chant articulates its  tradition to the specific interests of team supporters and soccer gangs.
When, within the wider discursive context, it can be related to ‘typical (mindless) working-class collectivism’, it is tolerated; transmuted into the beery conviviality of a pop group like Slade, the culture represented by such chants can be patronized.
But the latent threat deriving from the social power behind such chanting can often be felt, and of course erupts in the panic over ‘football hooliganism’.
It is instructive to apply this analytical perspective to early rock 'n' roll — to Elvis Presley, let us say.
At first rock 'n' roll was generally seen in terms of rebellion : this was viewed positively, by fans and fellow-travellers, or negatively, by outraged defenders of established cultural interests; in any case, it was a new music, set against existing popular types.
Subsequently a more sophisticated interpretation historicized this account, describing what happened to popular music in the late 1950s and early 1960s in terms of the incorporation or co-option of rock 'n' roll into the repertoire of the hegemonic bloc.
But still, the vital point is missing — that rock 'n' roll was internally contradictory from the start: not Just boogie rhythms rough sound, blues shouts and physical involvement but also sentimental ballad melodies and forms, ‘angelic’ backing vocal effects and ‘novelty’gimmicks.
In the case of Elvis, this problem is particularly striking because within the rock discourse he has been widely seen as both the music's first hero and its most prominent backslider.
Most rock critics take this line, seeing Elvis's career as a progressive sell-out to the music industry, a transition from ‘folk’ authenticity (the Sun singles of 1954–5) to a sophisticated professionalism (epitomized by the ballads and movies of the 1960s) in which the dollars multiplied but musical values went by the board.
But in post-war America a pure ‘folk’ role, untouched by commercial influences, had become impossible.
The dissemination of music by radio and gramophone record permeated the whole country and every social stratum.
The performers whom the young Elvis heard and learned from — gospel singers, blues men like Arthur Crudup, Bill Broonzy, Junior Parker and Howlin' Wolf, country and western stars such as Bob Wills, Hank Williams and Roy Acuff — were commercial artists; they, like Elvis himself, did not separate themselves from the whole wash of music that was available.
When Sam Phillips, founder of Sun Records and ‘creator’ of Elvis Presley, said, ‘If I could find a white man who had the Negro sound and the Negro feel, I could make a billion dollars’(quoted in Hopkins 1971: 66), the twin motivations, artistic and commercial, were not separated or separable.
If we look at the music Elvis produced throughout his career, we find confirmation that the ‘decline-and-fall’ view will not stand up.
Elvis's two most notable contributions to the language of rock 'n' roll are first, the assimilation of ‘romantic lyricism’ and second, what I call ‘boogification’.
Both techniques can be found in classic form in his first national hit, ‘Heartbreak Hotel’(1956).
This was by origin a country and western song but its vocal has the shape of a typical blues shout.
Nevertheless the rough tone, irregular rhythms and ‘dirty’ intonation that most blues singers would have used are for the most part conspicuously absent in Elvis's performance; his tone is full, rich and well produced, his intonation is precise, stable and ‘correct’, the notes are sustained and held right through, and the phrasing is legato.
At the same time this lyrical continuity is subverted by ‘boogification’.
As in boogie-woogie, the basic vocal  syncopation and cross-rhythm.
The effect is physical, demanding movement, jerking the body into activity.
Elvis, however, extends the technique.
He adds extra off-beat notes not demanded by words or vocal line, often splitting up syllables or even consonants, slurring words together, disguising the verbal sense (see Ex. 1.3).
Occasionally, a ‘sustained’ note has something like a rhythm vibrato (in triplet rhythm): listen for instance to ‘Although’at the start of the second and last choruses, ‘Now’at the start of the third, and ‘Well’at the start of the fourth.
The overall effect of the boogification technique is, of course, sexy, but it is also a bit jittery and absurd; the sensuality seems almost out of control.
The combination of boogification with romantic lyricism in ‘Heartbreak Hotel’— one element deriving from established Tin Pan Alley technique, the other from the black American subculture — produces a style already, at this early stage in Elvis's career, teetering on the edge of that melodrama into which he was so often to fall.
The articulation of the two together, in terms and in a context set by the values of the new youth culture, epitomizes the overall problematic proposed by this music-historical moment; broadly speaking, we can think of romantic fantasy ‘made young’, ‘given flesh’, made to ‘move’ physically, while conversely an increased corporeal freedom is presented, in line with the experience of adolescent sexuality in Protestant bourgeois society, in a guarded, personalized, even Ironic manner.
The same fusion of techniques can be found even earlier, while Elvis was still recording for Sun.
‘Milk cow Blues Boogie’(1955) is perhaps the best example since the techniques are so well integrated, though Elvis's treatment of the song is at such a quick tempo that the operation of the techniques themselves is less clear than in ‘Heartbreak Hotel’.
The lyrical approach — the rich tone, the singing  through the note, the sustained legato, the controlled phrase-endings — is most apparent for the last line of each chorus.
Boogification pervades the entire vocal, though the quick tempo means there is less scope for accenting off-beat notes, and often the effect is so fast as to be a rhythm vibrato.
The tempo also makes accurate notation harder.
However, Ex. 1.4 gives some typical manifestations.
Both romantic lyricism and boogification not only date back to the beginnings of Elvis's career but also continue to be used throughout its development.
There is no watershed, or ‘fall from grace’.
What we do see, however, is a kind of stylistic specialization.
Songs which integrate the techniques like ‘Milk cow Blues Boogie’(or ‘Mystery Train') in the Sun period or ‘Heartbreak Hotel’ in the early Victor period, become less common.
The techniques tend to diverge, romantic lyricism being channelled into ballads, boogification into a particular kind of rock 'n' roll song which I shall call ‘mannerist’.
Elvis's huge ballad repertoire needs little commentary here, save to stress that it began not with the move to RCA but at Sun, ‘Love Me Tender’(1956) and ‘That's When Your Heartaches Begin' (1957) being preceded by equally sentimental ballads cut for Sam Phillips; indeed, it began earlier — when, as a boy, Elvis was entered for a talent contest at the Mississippi-Alabama Fair, it was the sentimental country and western number ‘Old Shep’ that he sang.
‘Mannerist rock’ is associated most clearly with songs, many written for Elvis by Otis Black well, like ‘Don't Be Cruel’(1956), ‘All Shook Up’(1957) and ‘Please Don't Drag That String Around’(1963).
The techniques of boogification are exaggerated, overplayed, even parodied.
By pushing them into mannerism, Elvis distances himself from their demands, physical and psychological.
In ‘All Shook Up’, for example, the old techniques are still there (Ex. 1.5), but the triviality of the lyrics and Elvis's light, amused vocal tone tell us that this is not serious.
Mannerism is usually seen as an RCA development; but once again we find that it was already developing during the Sun period, notably in ‘Baby Let's Play House’(1955).
Clearly, it is the certain amount of ‘slack’ within the articulative relationships, the fact that the combination of techniques does not fix  any constituent 100 per cent to the others, that explains the possibility of differential development of elements in the mixture — rather than‘changes in style’.
Elvis's importance, then, lies not so much in the mix of elements (blues/country/Tin Pan Alley) which he helped to bring into being in rock 'n' roll, but in what he did with it.
He transformed them — articulated them — into particular patterns.
The only workable categorization of Elvis's music, as we have seen, is not by historical period but by song-type — or more precisely, by apparently self-contradictory assemblages of musical elements as they are mediated by the differential demands of varied songs at various moments.
What does happen historically is that integrated songs become gradually less common through the course of Elvis's career, while the song-types tend to diverge, as the relatively small, well-defined audience of the Sun days gives way to a large, heterogeneous market demanding different types for different sub-sections.
Elvis is all things to his audience throughout his career, but the nature of the audience changes, and with it the nature and range of the articulations of the musical materials.
The unifying factor is Elvis himself — or rather, Elvis constructed in particular categories, acting as embodiments of particular articulating principles, tied to particular sets of social needs and interests.
Without this kind of analytical framework, respecting the complex levels of mediation involved and their relative autonomy, Elvis becomes simply the plaything of naked political forces (rebellious/manipulative); and the fact that the young rock 'n' roller sang ballads from the start, that the older Hollywood star could still sing rock 'n' roll songs and was still respected by rock 'n' roll fans, that his ‘blues’ were ‘romantic’(a kind of fantasy), his ballads often ‘realistic’(given flesh), or that he could make boogification ironic — all this is inexplicable.
The complexity and energy of the early rock 'n' roll moment are probably symptomatic of its position as a manifestation of quite deep situational change.
There is a richness of musical resources — many previously unavailable to a mass audience — and an excitement about new technological possibilities, new social relations and new kinds of musical behaviour which account for the fact that cultural struggle could take place here within musical production itself.
It is instructive to turn, by contrast, to a location which is more settled, less varied in available musical resources, and characterized, apparently, by heavily weighted relations between the class-cultural formations.
Ned Corvan was a song-writer, fiddler and performer in the working-class concert halls and pubs of Tyne side in North-East England during the 1850s and early 1860s; in his final years he also worked in the first of the new kind of music halls, owned by commercially ambitious entrepreneurs and orientated more towards a nationally organized market and production system.
Corvan's career was sufficiently close to the industrial conflict and Chartist agitation of the turbulent 1840s to draw inspiration from them; but, by the 1850s, the musical  culture of most British workers was taking on a less class-specific quality, characterized by the consumption of commercially supplied music hall song, the replacement of old tune-types by newer types originating in bourgeois theatre and drawing-room, and a shift from protest, street music and spontaneous singsong to formalized performance in choirs and brass bands.
Despite strong regional cultural traditions, Tyne side was affected by these developments.
But Ned Corvan, it seems, continued to work for a solidly working-class audience and address working-class concerns.
How did he do it?
He had relatively restricted resources: tunes drawn from rural and urban proletarian traditions and from new bourgeois sources; text-methods, turns-of-phrase and verse forms derived from drawing-room, popular theatre, broadside and working-class entertainment.
Many of the originally proletarian elements had been appropriated and reorientated by petit-bourgeois writers and publishers during the previous half-century.
To rearticulate them back to working-class interests required considerable ideological work .
Yet Corvan ‘established himself as spokesman-in-song for his own class’; his first published song collection was dedicated to his ‘Friends and Patrons’, the ‘Skippers, Colliers and Working Men in general, of Tyne side and Neighbourhood’(Harker 1981: 48).
The first important point to the argument here concerns Corvan's choice of tunes.
There are no newly invented tunes; like almost all proletarian performers at this time, rural and urban, he draws on existing melodies.
But at a time when tunes from bourgeois sources were increasingly popular and when traditional, so called‘folk’ tunes were in decline, certainly in the music hall, Corvan used comparatively few of the former and actively retained many of the latter.
In a study of his four published Song Books , I found that of the forty-two tunes I could identify (four I could not), some 60 per cent are ‘traditional’, mostly of rural origin (the bulk Scottish), while only about 12 per cent come from comic music hall songs and about 25 per cent from bourgeois sources (parlour ballad, light opera).
Furthermore, three of the parlour ballad tunes and one of the comic song tunes contain pseudo-'folk' elements; and two of the ‘bourgeois’ tunes derive from American minstrelsy and have a melodic style similar to that of some Anglo American ‘folk’traditions.
It may be argued, of course, that in themselves these facts demonstrate comparatively little.
‘Folk’ tunes, especially of Scottish origin, had long had a strong presence in the North-East regional culture; and, as in other areas of the country, they had also been taken up by middle-class circles.
But the weight of received connotations is important here.
Given a continuity of working-class usage of such tunes, a sub-stratum of associations in the culture facilitated their articulation towards working-class needs.
Their long-lived presence made it possible for them to act as a kind of semi-permanent critique of newer cultural trends.
Whether that process would take place clearly depended very much on the texts to which the tunes were put, and the way the songs were performed.
Contemporary reports suggest strongly that Corvan's performance style was dramatic, intimate, high in spontaneity and very dependent on audience rapport — as against the more fixed, formalized renderings of the tunes which would be typical of performances in the bourgeois drawing-room or the ballad concert.
As far as texts are concerned, consider ‘The To on Improvement Bill’(Ex. 1.6).
This is an attack on speculative urban development, which has resulted in the disappearance of the open spaces where working-class children used to play.
Corvan seems to draw on the ‘traditional’ associations — the feelings of continuity — clustered around the Scottish tune, ‘Na Good Luck about the House’, to support his nostalgically cast complaint.
Similarly, for ‘Astrilly’, a song about the plight of the suffering pit men, which led many to resort to emigration (often to Australia: ‘Astrilly’), Corvan makes use of the traditional tune, ‘All Around My Hat’, with its history of texts to do with farewell and absence, here transposed from the sphere of love to that of work.
Corvan also uses ‘traditional’ tunes for celebrations of working-class life and characters: again cultural continuity within social change is affirmed, and other claims on these tunes, other reworkings of these traditions, are resisted.
The virtues of the ‘Lads o’ Tyne side' are described to the modal Scottish tune, ‘Laird o’Cock pen' (working-class ‘lairds’, these!)
(Ex. 1.7), and ‘The Factory Lass’ gets a similar tune, ‘Sunny Banks of Scotland’.
All the tunes mentioned so far were, so to speak, rescued from the hands of ‘folk’ song collectors and those of ‘refined’parlour performers; Corvan's texts articulate them to the needs of his class, at a particular moment in its history.
But he also made use of tunes from bourgeois sources — and transformed their meanings in the process.
The tune to ‘Bow, Wow, Wow’ originated in the late eighteenth-century bourgeois repertory of London ballad opera, pleasure garden and harmonic society.
In ‘Jimmy Munro's Troubles’(Ex. 1.8) Corvan uses the banality of its phrasing, repetitions, sequences and harmonic structure to help construct a mock-simpleton persona which enables him to cloak the bite of his  social criticism in humour; he plays at ‘acting the fool’, in tortuous verbal constructions and juxtapositions of the serious and the trivial — just as the ‘Bow, Wow, Wow’ song originally did — but the real problems of railway accidents, rent and ragged clothes turn the joke around.
Similarly, in ‘The Rise in Coals’ Corvan takes the tune of ‘The Mistletoe Bough’, an early nineteenth-century ‘gothic’ballad mixing melodrama and sentimentality, and puts it to words describing a situation of real emotion for working people: a rise in the price of household coal during the coldest weather of the winter (Ex. 1.9).
As an alternative to such subtle rearticulations, Corvan can provide a straightforward send-up.
In ‘The Sunday Morning Fuddle’ the insufferably sentimental parlour ballad ‘Before the Bells Did Ring’is given new words which turn it into a comic epic about Sunday morning boozing, in which the hero ends up so ‘fuddled’he is arrested (Ex. 1.10).
Corvan's achievement, then — with a narrow stock of materials and against a background of retrenchment, in which the bourgeoisie's musical values, like its  money, were increasingly setting the framework of socio-musical relationships — was to articulate those materials to the needs of his own particular audience.
In a clearly stratified society, the interests of this audience were predominantly defined by class.
Horizons were inevitably restricted, the weight of traditions heavy, the invention of new techniques and modes of expression limited.
Corvan's basic method was that of parody: transforming the meaning of a tune through new words (and by performance methods).
Even this kind of intervention in the productive process could not long survive him: the means  of musical production were taken more and more into the hands of large commercial interests, while parody as a method retreated into informal niches in the fabric of working-class life.
The cases of Corvan, and to a lesser extent that of early Elvis Presley, are relatively straightforward to analyse.
In the first, the shape into which the social formation is predisposed to settle, though contested, is obvious and is a powerful influence on the culture; the second — despite an underlying complexity in the cultural relationships — possesses brilliant if temporary clarity arising from its historical position at the beginning of a period of great situational adjustment.
How, though, would the method used here perform if applied to a subject right in the middle of complex situational change, where the social formation and the musical culture are characterized precisely by heterogeneity and seemingly transient affiliations?
A look at some examples of the so-called progressive rock of the mid — and late 1960s may clarify this question.
Within the rock discourse of the time, progressive rock was widely regarded as associated with, indeed as the music of, the ‘counterculture’.
How, theoretically, this connection could be said to work was rarely explained.
There is an argument that the development of rock in the 1960s was determined mainly by intramusical factors — from a desire to explore the technological and musical possibilities of the new conditions of production set up in the rock 'n' roll moment.
How, in that case, could late 1960s progressive rock be specific to the counterculture?
And how would such an affixation cope with the evident fact that the techniques, modes of expression and performers claimed by the counterculture as their own were apparently so easily appropriated by the established music industry interests, and the music spread into every social corner and function?
Another problem is the  sheer eclecticism of progressive rock, both in terms of the variety of sources on which it drew and the range of styles contained within the genre.
By the mid-1960s rock as a whole was hardly monolithic; but progressive rock was a particularly heterogeneous genre (compared to, say, rock 'n' roll, which is fairly tightly defined).
Is progressive rock, then, a single phenomenon at all?
If so, what makes it such?
Is the variety itself significant?
Is it connected with the variety of radical movements actually making up the counterculture?
And how can the use made of elements and attitudes characteristic of ‘legitimate’ musics be squared with the counterculture's ‘oppositionalism’?
A brief ‘reading’ of four diverse but typical recordings will reveal examples of these characteristics — eclecticism, ‘art’influences, technical exploration — together, also, with clear counter cultural references, and thus will make the inner contradiction more concrete.
A comparison of the Beatles' 1967 single ‘Strawberry Fields’ with rock 'n' roll, or early Beatles for that matter, immediately reveals a much greater variety of instruments — woodwind, brass and strings are added to drums, keyboard and guitars — and they have obviously been ‘scored’for: written arrangements creating varied textures have replaced a simple, consistent rock-band texture, produced largely ‘by ear’, ‘in performance’.
Much of the sound has been produced through electronic ‘treatment’.
These two changes — instrumentation and electronic treatment — suggest two points immediately: that this is music created in a recording studio using quite complex equipment and recording techniques (the Beatles had in fact just given up live performance); and that it is music for listening rather than dancing.
This is suggested too by the coda, which transforms the structure of the song and makes use of collage.
The structure is also disrupted by the way the regular phrase-lengths and pulse usual in popular songs are subverted.
In the first phrase, for example, the normal eight bars are stretched to nine.
Throughout the song the rhythm of the vocal follows not the regular periods of dance music but the irregular accents of the words.
The harmonic language has become more complex, less predictable, too.
What does the song ‘mean’?
The electronic treatment suggests ‘abnormal experience’(presumably, so the lyrics suggest, psychedelic): this is achieved through implied contrast with the ‘normal’ timbres previously used in pop songs, which are about ‘real life’(love, dancing, and so on).
The use of collage, together with the irregular rhythms and lurching harmonies, may signify ‘in the unconscious’(which often manifests itself in irrational jumbles of material).
Finally, the heterogeneous texture, the ever-changing relationships of instruments, may on one level simply suggest ‘influence of art music’.
On another, the varied perspectives and changing landmarks may signify ‘a complex landscape’(which, given the other signifiers mentioned, is mental not physical).
Tags has argued that conventional melody/accompaniment textures signify the relationship of individuals (foreground) to their environment (background)(Tags 1979: 123–4; 142–3).
It may be suggested, then, that the shifting perspectives, as instruments zoom into the foreground, then out again, together with the relative lack of fore grounding of the voice, signify the dislocation of the individual's dominant position and of the single point of view.
The (mental) environment displaces the ego from centre-stage — an important counter cultural theme, of course— though it is articulated using, among others, musical techniques familiar in the official culture.
A rather different, and in some ways opposite, trend in progressive rock may be represented by Cream's ‘Spoonful’.
Pieces in this category used a restricted range of basic harmonic and melodic materials, favoured improvisation as a means of building structures, and achieved their most characteristic results in live performance.
Usually they drew heavily on blues traditions.
‘Spoonful’ is a version of a song associated with one of the most celebrated Chicago blues singers, Howlin' Wolf.
Like many Chicago blues songs of the 1940s and 1950s, it draws heavily on the traditions of rural Mississippi blues — evident, for instance, in the vocal (falling shapes, largely pentatonic, lots of repetition of phrases and short motifs, not much ‘tune’, instead close to speech, shouted as much as sung), and second, the use, throughout, of only one chord — a kind of drone.
Other features derived from blues are the use of a rift (the two-note idea which starts the song off and forms the basis of the refrain), the use of call-and-response (between vocal and guitar), and the instrumental styles, especially that of the guitar.
The simple harmonic structure has the effect of freeing melody and form; melodic lines are not constrained by having to fit changing chords and the form is not constrained by a particular harmonic sequence.
This encourages improvisation, and enables the improviser to play at length and elaborately, as in the guitar solo by Eric Clapton.
The building of extended forms over drones or very simple harmonic progressions (often two alternating chords) or riffs was, of course, to become a staple of hard rock and ‘heavy metal’ music, and encouraged the development of virtuosic soloists, especially guitarists.
Thus while most of the blues-derived techniques I have mentioned appear to set the music in opposition to mainstream musical language (including that of many contemporary pop songs), they are developed in such a way as to lay stress on individualistic virtuosity and personal expression, achieved through ‘professional’ mastery of instrumental technique; and this could be seen as at least compatible with the traditions of bourgeois art.
Of course, blues-derived rock was not specific to the counterculture.
It is interesting to compare the style of a recording like Cream's ‘Spoonful’ with that of earlier British rhythm and blues (the Rolling Stones or the Who, for example).
A record like ‘My Generation’ or ‘Satisfaction’states a position : its meanings are collective; Cream extract from this musical language the possibility of individualistic elaboration.
Does the appeal of Cream to the counterculture reside here, in the possibility of spontaneity, personal expression and ‘freedom’?
It can be argued that techniques of drone and repetition are particularly sympathetic to connotations having to do with ‘collectivism’: they play down ‘difference’, privilege the ‘typical’.
By superimposing on these techniques an ideology and a practice of self-expression, Cream's music seems to establish a dialectical relationship between the two, articulating each via the other into a new position — a position, perhaps, of ‘fraternal individualism’
For a third distinct trend in progressive rock we can turn to Pink Floyd, known for avant-garde experiments, often making use of collage, electronics and ‘freeform’ techniques.
In a recording like ‘Astronomy Do miné’, is there are no obvious divisions into the conventional chorus structure of popular song; instead the impression is of a piece composed as a whole.
There is no really memorable melody, and the complex structure and varied rhythms and harmonies suggest this is music ‘for the mind’ rather than a simple pop song for dancing.
However.
there is a basic four-chord harmonic sequence, used as a structural underpinning for much of the piece; in a conventional rock song this might well have been deployed as a rift or worked into predictable phrase-structure patterns.
But here it is ‘covered over’ with collages made up of vocal, instrumental and electronic materials, ranging from pre-recorded effects to improvised solo lines.
This short chord progression, which in Cream or the Rolling Stones might have been foregrounded, is pushed into the background, the joins between its statements are disguised, and links, an introduction and a coda, are added, so that the music seems to flow on continuously.
The effect is that the structural level on which our attention fixes is the whole piece.
Similarly, elements of rhythm and blues phraseology remain (drum techniques, guitar phrases and techniques) but they are subsumed within a heterogeneous mixture of styles.
The elements in this mixture barely seem to hang together; or rather, radical disjunctions are part of the effect.
Similar experiments (free form, electronics, wild improvisation, collage) were taking place among the jazz and ‘straight’ avant-gardes during this period, and Pink Floyd were undoubtedly influenced by them.
And if the diverse references of the materials used in such music do have a coherence, it mainly rests on a kind of formalist and/or surrealist playing with sound-combinations and their mental associations and images, characteristic — in its implied position of social isolation — of almost all avant-garde music in the twentieth century.
This changes the terms on which the music could conceivably be appropriated by the music industry.
At the same time, the references to the rock tradition, especially rhythms, are really all that serve to affix the music to the location of a ‘popular’ audience.
If Pink Floyd's music displays a congruence with avant-garde developments outside rock, then Procul Harum's ‘A Whiter Shade of Pale’(a big hit in the summer of 1967) can stand as an example of a complementary trend: the influence of older art music sources.
The basic materials derive from a harmonic sequence (with melodic elaboration) taken from a cantata by J.S. Bach.
On the one hand, this typifies the interest in rock/classical fusions shared by many progressive rock musicians at this time.
On the other hand, it asks questions about the rock roots of the music: how can such a fusion take place?
What happens to rock techniques?
What does the fusion mean?
The influence is of a particular kind, from a particular source.
Late Baroque music tends to be relatively formulate.
Like rock music, it generally uses conventional harmonic progressions, melodic patterns and structural frameworks, and operates through imaginative combinations, elaborations and variations of these, rather than developing extended, through-composed forms.
It also tends to have a regular, strongly marked beat; indeed, its continuo section could be regarded as analogous to the rhythm section of jazz and rock.
The harmonic sequence I mentioned is used as a rift.
It appears as the instrumental introduction (and two instrumental interludes), it comes four times in each of the two choruses, and it is still going when the song fades out.
In all, there are eleven complete statements (plus the fade).
Structurally, there is nothing else.
The phrase itself is, by rock standards, quite complex harmonically (though to Baroque musicians it was something of a cliché).
The use of a repeated harmonic progression is typical of rock.
However, it also occurs quite often in Baroque music.
There is no conflict here.
We can say, then, that between the two codes involved — Baroque and rock — there are differences but also a relatively high syntactic correlation.
Many other examples of rock/classical fusions fall apart because this element is lacking.
This tells us something about the limits to fusion as an articulative method (as against other methods, such as parody or deliberate disjunction) and about the limits to the expropriation of meaning: some syntactic structures are simply incompatible.
It tells us something also about the weight with which received connotations attach to long-established traditions: it was probably the pre-modern (or at least pre-industrial), and at the same time the quasi-ritualistic motoric-gestural associations clinging strongly to the high Baroque style which attracted the rock group and their counter cultural followers.
Nevertheless, these associations are articulated into a new pattern, and it is the vocal which plays an essential part in that process, in making the song a rock song.
Procul Harum superimpose on the Bach harmonies a vocal whose style derives from soul music.
This influence manifests itself in melodic shapes (largely pentatonic falling patterns, but, unlike, say, Chicago blues, also lyrical, sustained, long-breathed); vocal timbre (rich, open-throated, sensuous); and the use of melisma.
To carry the argument further, it might be suggested that ‘A Whiter Shade of Pale’ adapts the genre of ‘soul ballad’created by Sam Cooke, Ray Charles, Otis Red ding and others; it is rather similar, in fact, to Percy Sledge's ‘When a Man Loves a Woman’.
Once again there is a congruence of codes — from Baroque music and from soul music — but once again, also, the non-congruent elements in each source act to reorientate the effects of the other.
‘A Whiter Shade of Pale’, we might speculate, marks a trend within the counterculture which sees itself as, so to speak, ‘sensuously spiritual’(Bach mediated by soul singing) and is ‘immanently oppositional’vis-á-vis bourgeois culture (rock made baroque).
As this discussion of four songs shows, there are links between the music and elements of counter cultural ideology; at the same time, though, there are many references to mainstream cultural traditions.
There are unifying factors — an ethos of ‘personal’ expression, for example— but equally there is a radical eclecticism of style and method; indeed, it is no easier to determine the limits defining the musical genre than the exact social composition and boundaries of the counterculture.
The subcultural specificity of the songs is hard to establish; all contain techniques which continually threaten to widen the field of cultural reference.
Subcultural ownership of music is very hard to protect.
Within the counterculture, moreover, the response to each of the songs would have been different among different subgroups.
The relationship of progressive rock and the counterculture is thus uneasy and internally contradictory.
Failure to recognize this leads to circular arguments.
For example, psychedelic elements in the musical style — blurred or tinkly timbres, for instance — are typically interpreted as such by reference to a subculture of drug usage; in other words they are defined in this way primarily because hippies said they should be.
A whole group of connotations, arising from our knowledge of the drug culture, then settles on the music.
But this culture has already been defined in this way partially because of the existence in it of this particular kind of music.
The meaning of drug usage is affected by the meaning of the associated music.
The method is perfectly structured internally but has no  necessary connection to anything outside itself; there is no analytical purchase on it from without.
In contrast, blurred or tinkly timbres should be understood in the context of general timbre-codes in popular music (and, more generally, in Western music as a whole).
These codes set limits to meaning —‘objective possibilities’— while at the same time they leave open a space within which the operation of other elements in the music, its context and reception, can pull them into a more specific place in the network of social meaning, in line with the work of the articulating principles involved.
This explains, for instance, how elements of bourgeois ‘art’ music can be rearticulated in progressive rock.
They do not lose the overall parameters of meaning which they bring with them, but the precise meanings these take on are orientated through the effect of the new context in which they find themselves.
Thus, in ‘Spoonful’ the ‘corporeal’meanings of rock 'n' roll rhythms, without being destroyed, are shifted by the complex rhythmic overlays, the instrumental technique, the lyrics and so on, while in ‘Strawberry Fields’and ‘Astronomy Do mine’, the principle of extended forms is reworked, still having an implication of ‘thinking’, but now thinking of a different kind from that suggested by, say, Beethoven.
But this also explains why the music of the counterculture could be so easily co-opted and its radical implications defused.
For the articulating principle of hip pie ideology is, in the final analysis, and despite its potential for opposition, embedded within the ideology of the dominant culture itself (see Clarke et al .
1976: 57–71).
Bourgeois individualism has a long history of subversive bohemian variants; and the struggle for control of the elements of counter cultural musical style was a struggle between different aspects of the same principle.
Cream's ‘fraternal individualism’, for instance, is easily metamorphosed into ‘elitist exhibitionism’(musically, this is the development from Cream to what has often been described as the ‘empty virtuosity’ of many later ‘guitar heroes’); similarly, the ‘thinking’of unpredictable extended forms, given the predictable lulling rhythms and bland timbres of Mike Oldfield, is turned into LP-length ‘easy listening’; the ‘psychedelic sound’becomes exactly that: a fetishized label, isolated from the radical harmonic/rhythmic context it has in ‘Strawberry Fields’, and pinned on to simple Top Ten dance tunes, as a tribute to the middle class ideology of riskless hedonism.
The class-historical location of progressive rock thus had cultural effects which explain its specific meaning and evolution.
What is to be done?
The approach outlined here leaves much still to be investigated.
The discussion has several times strayed into semiological terminology and it has taken the nature of ideology largely for granted; both signification and ideology in popular music demand detailed study.
The relationships between social formation, cultural patterns and musical practice have been touched on, but require more extended analysis.
We need to look more closely at processes of change (and structures of stasis), particularly the roles of the forces and the relations of production.
From the music's political economy to the pleasures it offers (another area for examination), the question of the ‘popularity’ of popular music will continue to  reverberate.
Punk raised this question in a particularly clear form, asking whether, in capitalist society, a really popular music is in fact possible.
The research areas listed above are important not just for themselves but even more for the contribution the results might make to thinking about present and future musical practice.
A historical theory must validate itself against a future whose demand, ultimately, is the redemption of the democratic claim buried within the long struggles for and by ‘the people’
‘It's all over now’.
Popular music and mass culture — Adorno's theory
Music for entertainment…seems to complement the reduction of people to silence, the dying out of speech as expression, the inability to communicate at all.
It inhabits the pockets of silence that develop between people moulded by anxiety, work and undemanding docility…
It is perceived purely as background.
If nobody can any longer speak, then certainly nobody can any longer listen…
Today…[the]power of the banal extends over the whole society (Adorno 1978a: 271–4).
Why Adorno?
T.W. Adorno's polemic against ‘popular music’ is scathing.
It possesses, nevertheless, a striking richness and complexity, demanding to be examined from a variety of viewpoints, notably that of musical production (in relation to general production in capitalist societies), that of musical form (discussed by Adorno in terms of‘standardization’) and that of musical reception and function (which he sees as almost totally instrumentalized, in the service of the ruling social interests).
At the same time, Adorno argues — rightly — that these aspects are actually indivisible, and that it is essential, therefore, to retain a sense of the wholeness of the musical process.
First, though, there is a need to say something more general about Adorno's position, in the context of the approach outlined in the previous chapter — particularly in light of the fact that Adorno evidently had little time for popular music!
Why devote a chapter to him in a book which explicitly encourages its readers to pay attention to this music?
Adorno has many strengths.
He insists — correctly — that the division of the cultural field into ‘popular’ and ‘serious’segments is relatively superficial; it should be grasped as a whole.
In a memorable remark to Walter Benjamin, he stated that ‘Both are torn halves of an integral freedom, to which however they do not add up’(Bloch et al .
1977: 123).
His own view of the way this field is structured posits two contradictory tendencies — on the one hand, music which affirms or accepts the social status quo; on the other, music (of the avant garde ) which refuses such affirmation.
While this approach is problematical, his emphasis on the totality remains important.
It is still far from being accepted.
For the music industry, critics, listeners, musicians, musicologists and students of culture, the primacy of a ‘light'/'classical’ dichotomy is generally still taken for granted.
The previous chapter argued for a conception of music which maintains both the relative autonomy of its techniques and its ultimately social meaning, and which sees these as constructed within a historical dialectic.
In outline, Adorno's general position on music is not seriously at odds with this approach.
Again, the way he applies it to the specific case of popular music poses problems: the utopian promise which, for Adorno, is the mark of great art's autonomy is in his view relevant to popular music solely by its absence, for here, he thinks, social control of music's meaning and function has become absolute, musical form a reified reflection of manipulative social structures; and this moment in the historical process actually represents, in effect, the end of history — the possibility of movement by way of contradiction and critique has disappeared.
Still, by developing a historical materialist theory of musical development which in principle rebuts reductionism, both economistic and formalistic, Adorno's general position opened up new ground, in ways which often remain of value.
At the same time, his specific treatment of the social situation of popular music, by proceeding, in his usual way, ‘through the extremes’, does have the negative virtue of exaggerating real trends; the tendential strategy of the music industry in the period of ‘mass culture’ has nowhere been more incisively presented.
As Simon Frith puts it (1978: 195), ‘Adorno's is the most systematic and the most searing analysis of mass culture and the most challenging for anyone claiming even a scrap of value for the products that come churning out of the music industry’.
The flaws, if such they are, are in the physiognomy of a giant.
Anyone wanting to argue the importance of studying popular music has to absorb Adorno in order to go beyond him.
In doing this, it is useful to bear in mind the historical location of Adorno's writings on popular music.
His approach, in its essentials, was formed by the early 1930s, and he extends it during the 1940s only in the direction of even greater pessimism: cultural ‘totalitarianism’ becomes absolute.
Later writings, despite important musical developments such as rock 'n' roll and the 1960s counterculture, show no significant changes.
Thus Adorno's major contribution dates from a period described in the previous chapter as one of relative situational stability and consensus, when, more than at any other time, the machinery of ‘mass culture’ worked to considerable effect.
His musical examples are always drawn from the repertoire of this period.
In a wider cultural perspective, this was the period too of Fascism and Stalinism, of the apparent collapse of socialist revolutionary possibilities in the advanced capitalist countries, and of the emergence within ‘Western Marxism’ of varied attempts (by Lukács, by Gramsci and by the Frankfurt School, to which Adorno belonged) to adapt Marxist theory in ways which took account of these developments.
Adorno should be read against this background.
Production
Adorno did not write a history of music, nor did he describe his picture of the music-historical field in any great detail.
But his theory of popular music is  predicated on a distinct historical model, itself bound up in a Marxian analysis of the development of bourgeois society, and the main outlines of this model are clear enough.
The decreasing significance of patronage in the nineteenth century and the permeation of musical life by market relations has two dialectically related effects: commodification of musical works and rationalization of the production system are accompanied by a new level of musical autonomy associated with market freedom and a decline of social function.
Music is caught between these two tendencies, and good music embodies both in a satisfying unity, at once affirming the objective movement of bourgeois society and also negating this through subjective critique.
In a sense, the struggle is between developing compositional technique (for Adorno, the most important force of production) and prevailing relations of musical production, which represent contemporary technological, musical and social norms.
Beethoven is the historical fulcrum; in his work the two aspects are perfectly balanced, and the uniqueness of the individual musical idea is organically integrated into a socially comprehensible but freely worked-out totality.
After Beethoven, the two split apart.
Compositional autonomy is closed off in the sphere of avant-garde negation, while commodity musical production takes on an increasingly standardized character, coupling formula and fetishized effect in both ‘serious’ and ‘popular’markets.
Because people like to think that culture is different from other commercially produced goods (‘art’ embodies individual expression), standardized methods and forms are masked to some extent by a show of artisan craftsmanship and by ‘pseudo-individualized’effects.
But in reality the ‘culture industries’ create, control and exploit musical desires, forming ‘a circle of manipulation and retroactive need in which the unity of the system grows ever stronger’(Adorno and Horkheimer 1972: 121).
Any sense of expressive immediacy is an illusion: use-value is replaced totally by value in exchange; autonomy disappears as music turns into nothing more than ‘social cement’(Adorno 1941: 39); production is reduced, in effect, to reproduction.
From the time of the early modernists (Schoenberg and others), only the radical avant-garde has resisted this situation, and that at the price of social isolation and deliberate incomprehensibility: the only way left to refuse the market.
As this suggests, Adorno's theory of avant-garde music has no room for any form of popular music.
For him, the vital aesthetic principle of individuation can now be found only in the esoteric discontinuities of modern art, and is alone capable of subverting the status quo.
On all counts this view will have to be questioned.
But before this, Adorno's whole theory of popular music production, and its historical development, must be subjected to a wider-ranging critique.
Whatever its problems, the force of this theory is undeniable.
In an age when a symphony orchestra can appear in uniforms designed to advertise tobacco industry sponsors, conflating music and cigarettes into a single narcotic (Guardian , 26 March 1984: 13); when in Japan the record companies and the large industrial corporations co-operate to produce ‘image-songs’ which both advertise the corporations and play an important role in the hit parade;’when a small selection of endlessly per mutated pop songs provides the background for almost every social activity; when rhythm tracks on disco records can be behaviouristic ally planned and electronically produced, for maximum precision and  control: one cannot, at this time, avoid the feeling that if Orwell's ‘1984’ever arrives, it might well consist of a continuous Eurovision Song Contest; that the ideal of the music industry would be to turn everything into muzak (Philip Tagg's entertaining account of the way muzak is used to ‘programme’a Swedish office worker's day gives an idea of what this would be like (Tags 1984)).
Similarly, even a brief acquaintance with the dance-band and Tin Pan Alley hit repertories of the 1930s — when Adorno's views were formulated — reveals a level of sameness that is stultifying.
This is backed up by the accounts we have of many aspects of the economic structure of the music business then: the drive for profit, the trend towards monopoly and conglomeration, the conservative appeal to the predictable and universally understood (see for example, Peterson and Berger 1975: 160–4; Laing 1969: 43–5; Sanjek 1988).
As far as the ‘artisan'-producer is concerned, Carole King's picture of institutionalized song-writing in New York in the early 1960s —‘squeezed into our respective cubby-holes…you'd sit there and write and you could hear someone in the next cubby-hole composing a song exactly like yours’(Frith 1983a: 13–12)— fits into exactly the same frame of reference as Abner Silver and Robert Bruce's classic 1939 text, How to Write and Sell a Hit Song, which describes the ‘standard’ forms and techniques, and from which Adorno quotes with withering relish (1941: 17–18).
Adorno, then, is certainly talking about real things.
The problems come when empirical evidence is turned into totalizing theory, tendential strategy into achieved fact.
First of all, there is little doubt that the general political economy of the Frankfurt School, on which the notion of the ‘culture industry’ is based generalizes too much, on the basis of an analysis of only one historical moment 1930s Germany.
Moreover, it overstates the homogeneity of the components making up the ruling structure (the state; the economic units; administrative and ideological apparatuses).
Persistent conflicts of interest, resulting in periodic political and economic crises, bear this out.
Similarly, the importance of class related tensions, both within the ruling alliance and between it and the masses, is underplayed.
What is missed is that alongside an increase in centralized control has been persistent dissent; domination — social, economic and ideological — has been maintained only through struggle .
This is as true of culture industries as of other sectors.
Most accounts make clear not only the trend towards monopoly and control but also the elements of lack of ‘fit’— between institutions (record companies, broadcasters, publishers, and so on), and between functionally differentiated individuals and groups within each institution.
Without an awareness of this it becomes very difficult to explain such phenomena as, for instance, the rise of ‘independent’ record companies in the 1940s and 1950s, and again in the 1970s; the ‘war’between the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) and Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI) in the 1940s; the jaundiced reception by Tin Pan Alley of syncopated dance music and, later, of rock 'n' roll; music-political struggles within the BBC; the often stylistically heterogeneous content of the hit parades; numerous policy arguments between musicians and their record companies; and so on .
Particularly striking examples, as Simon Frith points out (1983a: 146–7, 154), are that some of the ‘most creative uses of the recording studio have also been the most ‘manipulative’ in commercial terms' he mentions Phil Spector, Giorgio Moroder's disco hits and Jamaican  reggae — while ‘in the USA…the most open and imaginative audiences deejays and radio programmes work in disco, the most obviously commercialized musical genre’.
In a study of the French record industry, Antoine Hennion describes how the coexistence of, and tension between, the large multinational concerns, on the one hand, and small producers and independent companies, on the other, are structurally essential to the system's viability (Hennion 1981; 1983).
Similarly, the now standard account of the Anglo-American industry traces a cyclical pattern of continual conflict between conservative major companies and innovative ‘grassroots’ independents and entrepreneurs: breakthrough-assimilation-breakthrough-assimilation.
This would be impossible within the assumptions of Adorno's model (see Peterson and Berger 1971; 1975).
Equally impossible would be an adequate explanation of taste-changes: is it reasonable to account for the advent of jazz, rock 'n' roll, beat and punk in terms of‘pseudo-individualization’ within an underlying process of simple reproduction?
If not, where did these new tastes come from?
What was responsible for their emergence?
Why those changes, and why then ?
Above all, perhaps, there is the point, established beyond doubt, that the creation of hits is not simply a matter of continually plugging into a self-sustaining circle linking producer and customer.
Companies certainly try to control demand, to channel it in known directions, but they are never sure of their market; the best they can do is to offer a ‘cultural repertoire’, to cover a spread of the likely possibilities in order to minimize the risk — and it is this which accounts for the colossal overproduction of records and the large number that make a loss (see Laing 1985: 9–10, 20; Frith 1983a: 92–102; Denisoff 1975: 92–4).
Admittedly, the situation in the 1930s and 1940s was more settled, the institutions more congruent — though even within Tin Pan Alley the Hoagy Carmichaels and George Gershwins were introducing, in however mediated a form, new musical techniques, derived from black traditions.
But one can ask why Adorno did not investigate the origins of swing before so quickly assimilating it to the prevailing Tin Pan Alley dance-band style.
This would have taken him into working-class black dance-halls, bars, churches: more generally, by extension, into the whole network of subterranean currents beneath the bland surface of the metropolitan American musical mainstream.
In the same way, he might have looked at the conflicts between institutions, genres and styles during the 1890–1930 period (for instance, between old-fashioned vaudeville and new syncopated styles; or between the requirements of public dance and private listening), rather than just the more homogeneous synthesis established by the time it ended.
Clearly, to answer Adorno completely would require nothing less than a complete ‘production history’ of popular music from 1890 to the present.
As yet, this exists only in scattered fragments.
What we can say, though, is that the picture which emerges from these is not of a monolithic bloc but of a constantly mutating organism made up of elements which are symbiotic and mutually contradictory at the same time (see, for example, Sanjek 1988; Hirsch 1969; Peterson and Berger 1971; Hardy n.d.; Frith 1978; 1983a; 1988a).
Over and above the nature of the general economic and social developments, the main reason for this is what can be termed the specificity of cultural goods: that is, the fact that ‘music can never be just a product (an exchange value), even in its rawest commodity form; the artistic value of records has an unavoidable  complicating effect on their production’(Frith 1983a: 10).
This leads record companies to treat musicians not as wage-labourers but as contracted ‘artists’ who are paid not a fixed sum for their labour-time but in royalties, in proportion to their success (ibid: 130).
Adorno, we have seen, acknowledges this specificity — indeed, for him it explains the (unfulfilled) potential of jazz and the hangovers of ‘real’ creativity in some Tin Pan Alley songs; but he subsumes it into a theory of ‘false individualization’, designed, in his view, to disguise mass cultural production as ‘art’.
But an empirical recognition that in some circumstances a particular productive force (say, a composer or a performer) may not be wholly homogenized means that such a possibility must be allowed on the level of theory .
Hennion argues that the monopolies need the independent small producer for economic reasons — to maintain a flow of new products and to ensure communication with an active market (Hennion 1981; 1983).
Jon Stratton has suggested that he is needed for ideological reasons too (1983): in Stratton's view, the ‘romantic’ image of the creative artist is no false veneer nor confined to ‘mass culture’, but part of a larger tradition, within which the dialectic of ‘romanticism’and commodification is basic to capitalist culture as such; thus it implicates the ‘individualism’of, say, Beethoven as well as that of pop stars and composers.
If these arguments are valid, they create spaces which the system cannot close off or remove, however much it wants to, and which ensure the possibility of conflicts within the productive forces as a whole.
At times, such spaces are invaded by new kinds of musician from previously untapped social sources.
six Beiderbecke and Eubie Blake, Billy Mayerl and Nat Gonella cannot easily be assimilated, or at least reduced, merely to a preformed role in the machinery of a dominant system of musical craftsmanship, nor can Bob Dylan and John Lennon, Chuck Berry, Bob Marley and Merle Haggard, let alone Joe Strummer or John Lydon; though, equally obviously, they all, in another sense, come to be umbilically attached to that system.
Peter Wicke has argued that the ‘street’ origins of beat music on Merseyside reveal a new sort of collective practice, in which modes of production and levels of musical technique and technology are geared to, and support, an interactive group spontaneity, emphasizing joint composition, arrangement and decision-making (Wicke 1982).
Whether this is too optimistic or not, the phenomenon he describes and he could have added other examples, from Afro-American ‘street-corner’ vocal groups or Jamaican reggae, for instance— is clearly not amenable to an Adornian analysis, based on a dichotomy between a radically fragmenting division of labour, on the one hand, and an integrating individual consciousness, on the other.
On a different level-'professional' rather than‘amateur’ Antoine Hennion's account of studio recording methods emphasizes that a variety of differentiated roles are brought together into a ‘creative collective’: each member has a specific job, but they interact critically and continuously (Hennion 1983).
The aim, ‘to introduce the public into the studio’, is achieved through the ‘working relationships, constituted by mutual criticism…subjective listening…and collective anticipation’ of public response.
In particular, it is the producer's task to have ‘the ear of the public’, thereby representing in the music the feelings and values of ‘a kind of imaginary democracy’(ibid: 160–1, 188–92).
In place of Adorno's search for an authentic individual productive subject in  popular music, we may see glimpses here of new kinds of mass or collective subject.
Adorno disputes the possibility of such ‘committed’ practices, and the nub of the problem here lies in his conception of musical autonomy: for this conception is essentially inscribed within the problematic of bourgeois individualism.
The fact that Adorno's thinking on the question is locked into a model which pits individual subject against reified social totality leads his picture of the social meaning of music to take on a monolithic appearance.
Determined, rightly, to avoid the crude class reductionism of many earlier Marxist approaches to the sociology of cultural forms, he stressed the importance of mediation , but then went further and insisted that music
reflects the class relationship in toto …
Instead of searching for the musical expression of class standpoints one will do better so to conceive the relation of music to classes that any music will present the picture of antagonistic society as a whole (Adorno 1976: 68, 69, emphasis added).
The more completely and clearly music represents the totality , in all its contradictions, the better — the more autonomous — it is.
This approach has two effects.
It privileges the music which Adorno chooses as best representing the contradictory whole — thus alongside Beethoven and the tradition following him other kinds of music (Berlioz, Rossini, Verdi, Elgar, Stravinsky, Eisler, let alone Lehár, Louis Armstrong, Walter Donaldson or Elvis Presley) are inevitably presented as partial , that is to say more socially specific,less autonomous ; it also reduces the possibility of struggle over the specific uses and meanings of musical materials and forms: competing ‘viewpoints’ are dismissed as ‘regressive’or ‘false’.
This is also partly the reason why in Adorno's theory music in a sense takes on too much autonomy, so much as to create a danger of a relapse into idealism.
Since music's function is to represent a contradictory totality, social critique is taken into the workings of the musical structure itself.
Self-negation requires an internally complex dialogue within the musical language, so that the working of ‘musical problems’(in terms of the state of technique) can ‘stand for’ the play of social contradictions.
The picture is of a freely developing microcosm whose internal dynamics nevertheless parallel those of the social macrocosm.
The theory depends on agreement over the nature of technical ‘progress’ at any given time.
But since such progress is conceived as immanent to musical history itself, independent of variants of musical practice, social usage and reception, the theory moves dangerously close to a hypostasis of technique; at the very least it confines the relationship between musical and social structures to the level of the longue durée , since at that level society is ‘encapsulated’ in music, while in between, music's ‘autonomous unfoldment…follows the social dynamics without a glance or any direct communication’(ibid: 206–7), still less putting itself at the service of particular social subjects.
But if it is the case, simply and conclusively, that music ‘must intervene actively in consciousness through its own forms and not take instructions from…the consciousness of the user’(quoted in Held 1980: 83), the baby has gone as well as the bath water and utopian critique begins to look suspiciously like spiritual determinism, autonomy like repression.
As we saw, the historical model on which this concept of autonomy is based has  Beethoven as its fulcrum.
This model, too, raises several questions.
Many tendencies in ‘commercial’ nineteenth-century music which Adorno singles out for criticism —‘mechanical’, formulate composition, for instance, or ‘effects’writing such as that of the piano virtuosi, or the interest in sheer sound — can be traced back, as he himself is aware, to the eighteenth century — to dance music, operatic virtuosity, the early symphonies, and so on .
The argument is that with the Beethovenian ‘advance’ the meaning of such techniques is changed; they are no longer valid because they do not meet the needs of the new historical situation.
But why can they not be reused, redefined, in new contexts —‘effects’, for instance, as ‘shocks’?
There seems no a priori reason why the intellectual collapse of the radical bourgeoisie in the early nineteenth century should necessitate a single line of avant-garde response — rather than a multiplicity of struggles, which, instead of leading irrevocably to extreme Schoenbergian individualism, might, for example, ‘preserve’(that is reuse) older elements, to be rearticulated to the interests of new group subjects if and when they emerged.
That change of historical focus would allow composers who did not so much ‘negate’, as work through the social conflicts of the time (such as Verdi, Elgar, Liszt) to be readmitted to the ‘progressive’ ranks.
Adorno argues that with Beethoven the potential of music is so raised that older assumptions are shattered.
But this could be seen as simply a more than usually coherent version of a familiar Austro-German interpretation of nineteenth century music history, which sets an over-privileged Viennese tradition at its normative centre.
Adorno's preference for ‘immanent method’— analysing and evaluating works in terms of the implications, the immanent tendencies, of their own mode of existence rather than approaching them comparatively — means that, having set his criteria for ‘autonomous bourgeois music’ from his interpretation of Beethoven, he exports those criteria to all music of the period and finds the rest of it wanting.
At the same time, Beethoven himself is a less comprehensive representation of the totality of the social struggles of his age than Adorno pretends; in a way he is just as ‘partial’ as his far more popular contemporary, Rossini.
Indeed, at times Adorno's Beethoven comes close to being a fetish: the image objectifies those musical tendencies Adorno wants to privilege.
The ‘integral’ structures which he idealizes are far less in evidence in late Beethoven — the late string quartets and piano sonatas, the Ninth Symphony: here the formal principle is as much that of ‘shock’as of‘totality’.
Even in earlier Beethoven, works were often performed (with Beethoven's agreement) in unintegral ways: movements were separated, popular sections repeated on request, improvised changes made.
(Adorno's ingenious but unpersuasive attempt to rescue Beethoven from these contradictory circumstances of reproduction relies on a post facto construction of the ‘real’ Beethoven: ‘unity has become clear only today and largely through the efforts of later production in music’(Adorno 1978b: 149).)
Thus the idea of this privileged type of music is a product of the very culture of which the music is part.
Indeed, this ‘autonomous music’ is affixed in its own way to bourgeois culture just as its ‘functional’, ‘commercial’contemporaries are, in theirs.
The very concept of autonomous music, defined this way, is a construct of the culture.
When first developed in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, it was designed — so it could be argued — to neutralize  music's potential political power, bracket off its critical threat in a ‘utopian’ enclave and confine negation to individual statement.
But this mode of autonomy is dependent on this kind of society, for which music takes on specific private, ‘spiritual’, leisure functions.
In what sense, then, is it ‘free’— rather than a different kind of functional music?
Another way of putting this is that Adorno analyses — with great insight — the conditions of a specific mode of musical autonomy but then makes the mistake of reading what is a qualitative change, a historical variant, as an epistemological category; the truth-content of music is seen as directly related to its degree of autonomy of this kind.
But on the level of epistemology all music is relatively autonomous; no sound-structures can be reduced to social, economic or ideological determinants.
Functionality has nothing to do with that; all that different kinds of functionality do is affect the forms which relative autonomy takes.
Adorno, in the grip of German idealism which, from Kant, had reckoned the essence of art to be its disinterested quality, absolutizes a specific musical ideal as the condition of productive musical work as such — at least, under capitalism.
We can now see clearly why Adorno's conceptualization of the twentieth century avant-garde is so narrow: it must meet the criteria established by his theory of autonomy.
In fact, even within these criteria, it has been argued that Adorno wrongly omits some forms of ‘light’ music (Paddison 1982).
In addition to the two avant-garde poles represented for him by Schoenberg and Stravinsky, he has a minor category consisting of music that makes use of materials ‘which fell by the wayside…waste products and blind spots…all that which did not fit properly into the laws of historical movement’; the ‘anachronistic quality’ of this material ‘is not wholly obsolete since it has outwitted the historical dynamic’.
The material is used in a ‘montage-style, which…juxtaposes and cements ruins and fragments up against one another’; as examples he cites Mahler and 1920s We ill.
The result is that ‘the used parts win a second life’(quoted in ibid: 213–14).
While Adorno confines this category to ‘serious’ music, Paddison points out that there seems no reason why it could not include a good deal of avant-garde jazz and such rock groups as Frank Zappa's Mothers of Invention the Velvet Underground, and — he might have added — some post-punk bands.
Even if the musical language is seen as totally shop-soiled, then, it is still possible to rearticulate the fragments.
In a broader perspective, something of an avant-garde role has often been assigned to whole styles or genres in twentieth-century popular music, or to aspects of them.
Behind this, as a rule, stand familiar bohemian images, usually mediated by stereotypes from urban Afro-American culture: the ‘existential’ ghetto hustler-figure, as model for alienated urban man under capitalism, is a familiar one.
It was in this context that the Beats reverenced modern jazz — and the influence of their ideas (not necessarily tied to that specific music) spread widely through marginal counter — and subcultures (see Brake 1980).
Earlier jazz was also often seen in terms of a ‘defence of individualism’(spontaneity self-expression, and so on).
Škvoreck ý's; The Bass Saxophone describes the particularly intense form this has taken under totalitarian regimes — both Fascist and Stalinist — when ‘the ideological guns and sometimes even the police guns of all dictatorships are aimed at the men with the horns’.
Jazz here is ‘about fidelity, about the sole real art there is, about what one must be true to, come hell or high water; what must be done to the point of collapse (Škvorecký 1980: 8, 20); and in Škvoreck ý's; own Czechoslovakia, the persecution in the mid-1980s of the ‘Jazz Section’— which has supported rock and punk as well as jazz — confirms the subversive potency and ‘alternative’ status, still, of this music.
The history of jazz and rock is no less littered with tragic deaths, breakdowns and martyrdoms — from six Beiderbecke and Charlie Parker to John Lennon, Janis Joplin and Sid Vicious — than that of the mainstream modernist arts.
Blues too is commonly regarded as centrally to do with the expression of alienated subjectivity caught within oppressive social structures; in a previous book (Middle ton 1972) I argued that the effects of this are apparent in the musical form itself-in disjunctive structures, an immanently contradictory musical language and a commitment to ‘authentic’ self-expression — and I drew parallels with modernist art.
Blues, of course, has been widely influential, indeed formative, on the development of rock.
In rock too, the ‘refusal of sentimentality’— as Dave Laing calls it — has been seen as a radical subversion of the culture represented by Tin Pan Alley song, and many of the formal innovations of 1960s and 1970s rock have been viewed in quasi-modernist terms (see Laing 1969: 60, 154–60, 176–9).
It would not be difficult to construct a lineage of ‘shock’ within the history of jazz and rock, from the esoteric lyrics and quotations of some Harlem jazz in the 1920s and 1930s, through ‘scat’and ‘jive’, and the ‘noise’of rock 'n' roll, to the calculated unpredictabilities of punk.
An important aspect might be embodied by Baudelaire's characterization of modernism in terms of‘mouvement brusque ’(see Berman 1983: 156ff.).
Interestingly enough, sociologists have noted the emergence of an Adornian distinction between ‘commercial manipulation’ and avant-garde ‘authenticity’within the discourse of the jazz and rock communities themselves (see Becker 1972; Frith 1983a: 52–88; 1988b).
Frith also comments on the importance of an ideology of bohemianism within the appeal of rock in general(1983a: 75–84).
While such simple dichotomies are misleading —all categories of music live in the world of capitalist cultural production, while none can be entirely reduced to it, and a more accurate picture is of a spectrum of possibilities marked by internal conflict — their existence not only confirms the influence of the critique of mass culture in musical practice and popular consciousness, it also indicates that within the premises of such a critique, Adorno draws the net too tightly.
But further, if species of jazz and rock are accepted as potentially ‘authentic’, this knocks a theoretical hole in the approach, for in the recordings of, say, Frank Zappa, Carla Bley or The Art of Noise (the last inspired by Luigi Russolo's 1913 futurist manifesto L'arte dei rumori ) we have examples of avant-garde commodities — a combination which, according to Adorno, is impossible.
Adorno has another small category, that of ‘folklorist modernism’, into which he fits such composers as Bartók and Janáĉek.
He is a bit embarrassed by this category because, despite its ‘archaic’ elements, he finds himself unable to deny its authentic power.
His explanation is partly geographical (these composers, and the ‘folk remnants’ they use, came from relatively ‘backward’Eastern European countries, where such archaic traditions still had valid life) and partly on the grounds that the old materials are reinterpreted through incorporation in the  composers' radically alienated perspective and progressive language (Adorno 1973: 35–6).
It is hard to see why these arguments cannot be applied (in differing proportions) to blues and jazz; to white American country music; to their derivatives (rock 'n' roll, and so on); and to Third World popular musics with links to ‘folk’ traditions (in Latin America, the Caribbean and Africa).
This missing dimension in Adorno's analysis results from the weakening effect of an ethnocentric and culture-centric perspective — and this emerges in other ways, too.
For example, he was clearly insensitive to many specific characteristics of American culture.
He transferred his observations of the commercialization of German ‘light’ music to the United States and found the trends confirmed and amplified in the mainstream music-industry production of the 1930s and 1940s; indeed, he seems to have seen American popular music simply as a historical continuation of these trends, the line running from European operetta, revue and beer hall schmaltz to Tin Pan Alley, Broadway and Hollywood.
He did not look beyond, let alone‘below’, that.
Similarly, he could find no American avant garde, on the model of Central and Western European modernism.
But the American experience had been different in many ways.
The development of industrial capitalism came later and more quickly; there were continuing influxes of working-class immigrants from ‘backward’ parts of Europe; in the South, isolated rural-proletarian and quasi-feudal cultures persisted; the vitality of a ‘popular-bourgeois’culture, embracing workers and higher social strata, continued into the twentieth century, when European equivalents were long dead or distorted into passivity.
The whole net of relationships between community and subculture, class and centralizing monopoly capitalism thus took on a different shape.
For one thing, there was much greater continuity of pre- and early capitalist musical forms.
These were still available to twentieth-century American popular music, as analogous genres were to Bartók and Janáček; but further, they could then become available also to European workers whose own cultural traditions had been much more nearly shattered and who could, by plugging into still vital transatlantic networks, renew or restart aspects appropriate to potential class-cultural formations.
At the same time, late nineteenth-century American petit-bourgeois music culture still retained ‘progressive’ elements, unlike its European equivalent, which by then was mostly intent on hedonistic quiescence; and the active, energetic components of this anti-elitist, common-man tradition (in vaudeville for example) fed through into early Tin Pan Alley song where they formed an uneasy synthesis with the tendency to conservative mass-production stereotypes.
Indeed, if one side of the initial impact of American twentieth-century popular song was its ‘Taylorist’ production-line quality, the other was its thematizing of shockingly ebullient, vernacular, everyday noise .
Adorno's refusal to read such class references into twentieth-century popular music is, of course, the result of his obsession with the category of the individual producer-subject; as we have seen, for him the shocking, the new, the unassimilated can be mediated only by alienated individuality.
But the discussion here has shown that this is far too limited a conception of the productive process, and a more persuasive picture is of a variety of modes, cross-cutting individuals, classes, other groups and mass market requirements.
Indeed, one schema for interpreting the music would be in terms of a continuous struggle to constitute  collective subjects (defined by mixes of class, gender, age, nationality and ethnicity criteria), against both the culture industry's tendential ‘mass subject’, and, equally, the ‘individual subject’ of the avant-garde (or in another sense, of bourgeois memory).
Needless to say, this is an oversimplification; the struggle is partial as well as, always, enmeshed in both the opposing trends to varying extents.
Adorno's recognition of the radical potential of what he called jazz (see, for example, Adorno 1976: 33–4) could have given him the theoretical space for such an approach (it certainly means he has no logical grounds for the theoretical closure he operates, only a self-fulfilling pessimism); but he fails to follow his quest into places where he could have found what he sought, and, more damagingly, he excludes the possibility of any other mode of critique than that associated with alienated individualism.
At the same time, the concept of the unitary individual subject, on which he relies, should come under fire — as it has done in recent years, under the influence of post-structuralist thought.
The idea of the ‘split subject’ provides a way of grasping, precisely, the position occupied by the various human productive forces.
Composers, performers and other productive agents are not either wholly ‘manipulated’ or wholly ‘critical’and ‘free’; their subjectivity — or the positions being continually constructed for that subjectivity — is traversed by a multitude of different, often conflicting lines of social influence, bringing them into multiple, often overlapping identities and collectivities.
Neither for them nor for their music are the simple categories of ‘mass’ or ‘individual’appropriate.
Form
One of Adorno's strengths is his insistence that changes in the circumstances of musical production affect musical form .
His stress on music's ‘social content’ meant that he could never accept the tendency of positivist music sociology to treat genres, styles and forms as so much freely-existing data.
At the same time, this strength brings with it a weakness.
Since, as we have seen, Adorno overestimates the homogeneity of culture under advanced capitalism, he is led to a similar interpretation of popular musical form.
His key concepts here are standardization and — in order to explain the apparent elements of variety —pseudo-individualization .
Basically his argument is that all aspects of musical form — Adorno instances overall structure (the thirty-two-bar chorus), melodic range, song-types and harmonic progressions — depend on pre-existing formulae and norms, which have the status virtually of rules, are familiar to listeners and hence are entirely predictable.
There is no necessary relationship between these schemata and the actual details of a song; the details could be substituted without affecting the essential meaning, while conversely the overall structure does not depend on the details.
Thus the music is ‘pre-digested’: ‘the composition hears for the listener’(Adorno 1941: 22).
In ‘serious music’, by contrast — examples of which Adorno draws, predictably, from Beethoven — the significance of the details and of the totality mutually create each other, with the result that every piece is unique.
An example of the kind of popular song Adorno had in mind — though no doubt he thought of his argument as applying to all kinds — is ‘Down Mexico  Way’, a 1939 hit by the British song-writing team of Michael Carr and Jimmy Kennedy.
This is a typical Tin Pan Alley-style ballad, and like most it uses the thirty-two-bar form.
In this form, the musical structure of each chorus is made up of four eight-bar sections, in an AABA pattern.
(Actually the A sections here are doubled in length, to sixteen bars — but this affects the overall scheme only marginally.
See Ex.2.1.)
Thousands of Tin Pan Alley tunes share this scheme and Adorno is quite justified in arguing that to listeners of the time it would be totally predictable.
Moreover,within the chorus, the identical music is heard three times: it is, to use Adorno's phrase, ‘the same familiar experience’ that is emphasized (1941: 18).
As for predictable harmonies —‘the harmonic cornerstones…emphasize the most primitive harmonic facts’(ibid: 18)— each of the four sections begins and ends on the tonic chord, and in between, complications are minimal: the primary triads (E♭, B♭, A♭ — tonic, dominant, subdominant) are overwhelmingly in charge.
The harmony, then, is no more than a comfortable background; it represents what, as Adorno points out, had come to seem the ‘natural’ musical language.
Similar techniques are at work in the structure of the tune.
Within the A sections, every phrase is based on variants of a single rhythm (etc.).
The opening gesture of the first phrase (‘South of the Border’), itself a familiar tonic chord arpeggio, is repeated sequentially at the start of the second (‘That's where I fell in love’).
The third phrase uses the same device: the second half (‘my thoughts ever stray’) repeats the first (‘And now as I wander’) at a higher pitch.
The fourth phrase is a variant of the first.
Throughout, there are no awkward melodic leaps; everything proceeds smoothly, by arpeggio or by step.
Similarly in the B section (the ‘middle eight’ or ‘bridge’), the first three phrases all use basically the same rhythm, while the melodic shape of the first is repeated almost exactly in the third, sequentially in the second.
Altogether, then, we can say the tune is predictable, not in the sense that without knowing it we are sure exactly what is coming next but in the sense that when we hear the next phrase, our reaction is, ‘yes, I thought something like that was coming’.
We could make the same kind of comment about the lyrics: the predictable rhymes; the clichéd phrases (‘South of the Border’, ‘stars above’, ‘my thoughts stray’, ‘she was a picture’, and so on).
The thirty-two-bar form was pervasive between the wars, but it has remained important since — even in rock.
It is, for example, one of Lennon and McCartney's favourite schemes (though quite often they vary the section lengths).
However, with rock came also a different formal scheme, the ‘twelve bar blues’.
This, together with many variants and extensions to its basic pattern, is now at least as ingrained in the popular musical consciousness as the thirty-two-bar ballad form was between 1920 and 1950.
In a way it is even more predictable, for it not only has a standardized melodic/lyric structure (first phrase: four bars; second phrase: four bars, more or less repeating the first; third phrase: four bars, contrasting or complementary) but also a schematic sequence of (highly ‘primitive’) chords:
Moreover, quite often the third phrase repeats the melodic shape of the first two and frequently there are rifts — often of traditional or clichéd types — in the instrumental accompaniment.
All these aspects can be heard in Joe Turner's rock 'n' roll classic, ‘Shake, Rattle and Roll’(Ex. 2.2), where again, predictability is high, both within the specific song and as between the song and the general characteristics of the genre.
This has not remained altogether true of rock, which to some extent has developed more individual formal patterns, especially in progressive rock.
As we saw in Chapter 1, unexpected chord sequences, irregular phrase-lengths, unschematic structural relationships have all been introduced.
But still, most rock songs are atrophic (that is, the same music, a chorus , is repeated to changing words), and this has its effect even when within the chorus the musical structure  is less standardized.
Still, too, there are generally lots of repetitive and conventionalized elements (rifts, and so on); and still there is a tendency to favour ‘the most primitive harmonic facts’ and standard phrase-lengths.
Moreover, many ‘new’ structural ideas soon evolve into types , with their own conventionalized schemes.
One could distinguish, for instance, the rift song (Led Zeppelin's ‘Whole Lotta Love’);the call-and-response or antiphonal song (the Who's ‘My Generation’); the tension/release song , built on an alternation of narrative or repetition and lyrical release (from Elvis Presley's ‘Jailhouse Rock’ to the Rolling  Stones' ‘Satisfaction’, ‘Sympathy for the Devil’, ‘Jumpin' Jack Flash’, and many others); and a revival of its close relative, the verse-and-refrain song form (probably derived from ‘folk’traditions: many of Bob Dylan's songs are classic examples) Altogether, then, at this macro-structural level it is certainly true that almost all popular music works within the sphere of the known.
Such differentiation of detail as Adorno recognizes he explains as ‘pseudo-individualization’.
A song must be not only ‘familiar’ but also ‘new’— that is, must stimulate attention — and this contradiction is surmounted by introducing  ‘pseudo-individualized’effects (which at the same time, of course , reinforce the ideology of ‘creativity’and ‘uniqueness’necessary for cultural goods).
There are two aspects to these effects, in Adorno's view.
They are a façade: they are confined to the most superficial aspects, and scope for real variety is so limited that they in fact quickly become clichéd, standardized, themselves.
At the same time, they are always heard in relation to the basic framework or expected effect which lies behind them and which they are varying: they are substitutes for the ‘correct’ formulae; they can thus excite but not disturb.
Adorno discusses five categories of pseudo-individualized effects:(1) complicating harmonies, functioning as embellishments of the expected primary chords (in ‘Down Mexico Way’ the diminished seventh in bar 6 and the tune's chromatic passing notes in bars 8 and 10 would be examples; both are themselves clichés);(2) complicating rhythmic effects, such as syncopations, again heard as ‘distortions’of the ‘straight’rhythm (for example, the pattern which begins each phrase in the A sections:, instead of );(3) colouristic and especially ‘dirty’timbres;(4)‘blue’notes; and (5) improvisations and ‘breaks’.
The latter three aspects are interpreted as decorative distortions of ‘legitimate’ timbres, ‘pure’intonation, and the ‘straight’(that is, the written) tune, respectively (note the valorizing adjectives, used by popular musicians themselves, as well as cultural critics).
Certainly, recordings of Tin Pan Alley tunes from the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s contain plenty of persuasive evidence for Adorno's thesis.
Often simple tunes are ‘showcased’ harmonically and texturally, with elaborate introductions, interludes and codas, and clever instrumental interplay; often, too, syncopation is applied rather mechanically and ‘dirty’effects take a clichéd form (for instance grass ‘growls’and glissandos); most dance-band ‘improvised’solos are, as Adorno points out, improvised in only a very limited sense: they use stock patterns and depart very little from the written tune, and then by way of‘spicy’effects rather than inventive melodic construction.
An important part of the arranger's function was to create a band style (hence its ‘image’) and a song atmosphere .
Thus many performances of ‘Down Mexico Way’ used approximations of ‘Latin' rhythms in the accompaniment, just as the basic structure is extended at the end by a ‘sub-flamenco’coda.
Since the 1950s, many of these functions have been taken over by the record producer.
Because of popular music's ubiquitousness and vast scale of production, it has been possible to establish in the collective mind a set of conventional musical ‘colours’—‘Spanish’, ‘pastoral’, ‘cowboy’, ‘blue’, ‘hip pie’, ‘punk’, and so on— and arrangers and producers can simply lift the technical devices needed for these ready-made veneers off the shelf when needed.
Similarly, the ‘mechanized spontaneity’ typical of some late 1930s dance-bands can easily be matched by the artificial excitement and synthetic ecstasy of some rock performances — just as rehearsed ‘improvised’solos are still common.
In a sense anything — even ‘modernist’ dissonance or punk ‘anti-vocal’singing — can become clichéd and pseudo-individual, as many TV commercials testify.
But does what is an undoubted tendency justify Adorno's extrapolation of a monolithic law, today or in respect of the 1930s?
Let us look at another 1930s Tin Pan Alley tune, Jack Strachey's ‘These Foolish Things’(Ex. 2.3).
Its thirty-two-bar form is pretty rigid (though the bridge is only four bars), the A sections, and much of the B section, are based on the Tin Pan Alley harmonic cliché, the circle of fifths, and the tune is full of rhythmic repetition, and melodic repetition and sequence.
That said, there seems to me something unaccounted for; the tune rises above the conventions.
Partly this is the result of the shapely overall curve of the A melody; partly, perhaps, it has to do with the way a certain simple (‘innocent’?)pentatonic inflection (the melody of section A is based entirely on D E F£ A B, apart from a solitary G in bar 6 and the cadence in bar 15) rubs against the ‘romantic’ harmonies, diatonic with rich chromatic alterations.
Similarly, can the foreign harmonies of the bridge be dismissed as a pseudo-individual distortion of an expected D major?
They seem, rather, to function as a disturbance — admittedly small-scale — of the A section's tonal stability; this is a technique derived directly from the nineteenth-century Lied and piano character piece.
As this suggests, the appeal of such a tune could be seen as a ‘leftover’, an ‘echo’ of a bygone era of craftsmanship; and Adorno recognizes the possibility of this — indeed, he acknowledges that it is precisely in popular music that the category of the ‘idea’(a relatively independent, memorable element within a totality, a phenomenon more or less abandoned by ‘serious’music) lives on, and with it a sense of creative spontaneity (Adorno 1976: 34–7).
The music industry term for this is a ‘hook’.
But having allowed these possibilities, Adorno does not accept the implications of his own gesture.
The ‘individualism’ at issue here is, of course, enmeshed in bourgeois categories; but, in its own way, it seems no more ‘crippled’for that than the different but equally ‘bourgeois’individualism of a Schoenberg.
One could carry the critique further and ask why Adorno never examined specifically the Tin Pan Alley songs which break with aspects of the standard conventions — in particular, songs by the ‘Broadway masters’.
Admittedly this repertory is not in exactly the same category as the hit song material; nevertheless it is stylistically and functionally continuous with it.
Here we find songs which use the thirty-two-bar form but fill it with angular melody and tonally shifting harmony (‘All the Things You Are’; ‘Body and Soul’) or with polyrhythms (‘Fascinatin' Rhythm’); we find, too, a song like George Gershwin's ‘A Foggy Day’, which does not use a standard form, boasts a tune consisting almost entirely of leaps, rather than innocuous conjunct motion, and is structured with such  motivic tightness as to be almost serial in method (see Ex. 6.3, p. 184 below).
A theory of standardization must be able to account for such songs; and Adorno's approach surely begins to crack at this point.
A pity he could not have read Alec Wilder's American Popular Song (1972) which, using basically the same musical criteria as Adorno — derived from European bourgeois art music — could have been designed as a riposte to his view of this repertory
As well as the compositional contribution, there is, of course, that of the performer to consider.
Adorno's view of performance is restrictive: basically, he sees its proper contemporary role as no more than faithful reproduction of the composer's intentions.
The ‘spontaneity’, ‘improvisation’ and ‘personalized’interpretations of popular singers he explains in terms of a combination of pseudo-individualism, fake immediacy (part of the false veneer of ‘art’) and the psychological appeal of the ‘star’.
For him, such performers cannot be forces of production in their own right.
But if the moment of performance is considered as potentially an act of composition, a different perspective can emerge.
In Billie Holiday's 1936 recording of ‘These Foolish Things’ it is not too much to say that the melody is recomposed.
The bridge is lengthened to eight bars, the melody ‘stretched out’, altered and given new harmonies.
In the A sections, the tune is more subtly transformed: the basic melodic shapes are still there, for listeners familiar with the original, but they are ‘glossed’, ‘paraphrased’, by changing a few notes here, a few notes there; the repetitions of the original all but disappear.
In addition, one is struck by the importance of such factors as:vocal quality — this is Billie Holiday and could not be anyone else;phrasing — that is , the way she places accents, alters the rhythm, often by stretching out notes so that they sound behind the beat instead of on it, and joins notes together, for example smoothly or with attacked consonants; and pitch inflection — the way she sometimes slides up to or away from notes, hits them slightly ‘off-pitch’, and so on .
These techniques are geared to the interpretation of the lyric.
Thus, they are all particularly clearly in play at moments like ‘heart has wings’(bar 5), where a rhythmic stretching-out makes the voice try to fly, while at the same time it is poignantly connected to earth by a descending glissando on the last note; and the ‘how the ghost of you clings’ phrase, which is given a strikingly tremulous ‘clings’.
Most jazz listeners would regard a recording like this as a unique creation, formed precisely in the tension between received schema (the written song) and the ‘authentication’ provided by concrete realization in a specific moment.
Of course, Billie Holiday is not ‘typical’ of all popular singing.
But jazz vocalism — and with it this kind of tension — has been a strong influence on popular singing, from Bing Crosby and Frank Sinatra down to many recent performers.
And many instrumental solos in popular music owe their form to the same conceptualization.
Even before jazz and rock — in music hall song, for instance— numerous accounts stress the importance of the transforming power of performance, often of admittedly banal material.
Did the decline of performance in European ‘art’ music to the status of ‘mechanical reproduction’produce a blind spot in Adorno's thought here, such that its contribution in popular music was interpreted as mystifying illusion?
This, among other factors, points to the conclusion that Adorno's theory of standardization, which wants to be a total theory, is in fact strictly limited in its  applicability.
It certainly identifies a central tendency in a particular repertory; but it goes on not only to consume that repertory in every aspect but also to gobble up all kinds of popular music.
On a macroscopic level, the problem is that there is no allowance for diversity of musical practice or song-type.
There is no awareness that differentiated practices, related to national, ethnic or class traditions, have survived, nor that historical breaks — for instance, that represented by rock 'n' roll — could be anything other than pseudo-individual.
It is notable that when Adorno mentions examples of songs or musicians (not often), they are always drawn from one narrow band of the spectrum: the hit songs and most popular dance bands (such as Guy Lombardo's) of the 1930s.
When he writes that ‘the jazz audience is split…
The full-fledged technical experts vilify the screeching retinue of Elvis Presley.
It would take a musical analysis to find out whether the offerings to which these two extremes respond are really worlds apart’(Adorno 1976: 13), we know that the question implied in the final sentence has already been answered in his own mind, just as surely as we know that he has not done the musical analysis but simply conflated Elvis and…whom?
Glen Miller?
On the microscopic level, this problem manifests itself in abstractionism.
The lack of analysis of specific songs in Adorno's writings means that it is impossible to know whether he is talking about real pieces or, more likely, ideal types.
In fact, there seems to be a kind of Ur -pop song in Adorno's mind — to which no actual song, however standardized, could totally conform.
But there are problems, too,within the theory of standardization.
Adorno sees the prevalence of conventions and repetitive norms in twentieth-century popular music against the background of a musical tradition — European bourgeois art music of the late eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries — which evolved in a strongly non -schematic direction.
A history which limits ‘progress’ to the sphere of a certain conceptualization of individuality can only see the collective associations of conventions and repetitions as regressive; they represent the manipulative mould of mass society, together with a pseudo-archaism which that society uses to establish its historical credentials.
Standardization is seen in terms of a ‘pseudo-eternity’, a regression to a world of ‘simple reproduction’, ‘a kind of higher-potency feudalism’(Adorno 1967: 123–6).
It cannot undertake ‘the expression of free solidarity’, since, today, ‘only individuals [and individualistic treatment of musical material]are capable of consciously representing the aims of collectivity’(Adorno 1978a: 298–9).
We have already seen how questionable this historical picture is.
Even within the world of mass-produced culture, it is possible to approach the question of standardization differently.
Hennion's account of popular song form accepts, in both words and music, a similar dialectic of the known — clichéd frameworks and transparent effects — and the striking or illuminating detail (Hennion 1983: 171–82).
But he treats the former, unpejoratively, as an aspect of grammatical neutrality and obviousness designed to permit communication to a mass audience, and to represent the everyday context; and the latter not as ‘false’ but as ‘interruptions’of the grammar, relatively autonomous ‘metaphors’, intuitively selected but acting ‘like tiny reservoirs briefly holding the social significations of the moment’.
Here the mass subject is not treated as abstract but takes concrete and variable forms.
In a broader perspective — that of ‘world music’ as a whole — standardization, with its pejorative implications, might be more usefully renamed ‘formula’.
Formulate schemes are common in very many kinds of music (most nineteenth century European ‘art’ music is a striking exception).
Many tunes from European ‘folk’ traditions follow predictable, well-known melodic and rhythmic patterns.
A good deal of Middle Eastern and Asian music (for example, music based on the raga or maqam principle) and of African music consists of pre-existing ideas, schemes, rhythmic and melodic formulae, which are ‘filled’ out in performance.
Obviously this method is highly appropriate for traditions of oral transmission; collectively known schemes provide a basis for the act of performance-cum-composition.
But European Renaissance and Baroque music, usually written down, often works out sets of variations on existing tunes or harmonic schemes, or uses formal and stylistic clichés for structural, expressive or dramatic purposes (in opera recitative and arias, for instance).
And standard structures associated with dance and song, together with characteristic melodic types and rhythmic patterns, survive into the eighteenth and even the nineteenth centuries (symphonic minuets, Viennese waltzes, domestic atrophic songs, Italian opera arias).
Adorno himself notes this — but his historico-sociological picture ensures that ‘since Beethoven’, in ‘good music’ such survivals must, for him, be individualistic ally transformed.
But if, as argued above, ‘popular bourgeois’, proletarian and even pre-capitalist musical traditions have not been totally broken or irreparably damaged, the possibility of links between them and twentieth-century popular music is a real one.
Formula might then work not only as a symptom of ‘mass mind’ and homogenized thought; the ‘people’, condemned by Adorno to inertia while the processes of rationalization work themselves through to their totalitarian conclusion, might find that, drawing on old, collectively used methods, they can act , if only in compromised, ambiguous forms.
Formula can, on the one hand, itself take on a positive significance, and on the other, it can provide a traditionally understood basis for the performance of individual variants (which is what we found in the Billie Holiday recording).
In ‘Shake, Rattle and Roll’, even if it is interpreted as totally devoid of the non-formulaic (far-fetched, once one listens carefully to performance nuances), the collectivizing repetitions can take on a positive cultural significance, in the context of use by young working-class dancers.
Adorno's mistake here is of course grounded in his Euro — and class-centric theory of musical evolution.
(It is notable that he equates the simple, the sensuous, the repeated, with the childish.)
Because he draws his criteria from a particular musical tradition — a ‘music of thought’, characterized by the working out of themes over extended, integrated forms and requiring concentrated, ‘intellectual’ listening — he regards other forms of music as either primitive in comparison or as corruptions of this tradition.
Adorno over privileges elements of musical language which are characteristic of the Austro-German symphonic tradition: integrated forms, sophisticated harmony, tonal tension, and so on.
Conversely, he under privileges aspects which are not characteristic, but which may conceivably be important in other musics: among them ‘sound’, motoric stimulus, nuances of pitch inflection.
At the same time, where the same aspect appears both in his tradition and in others, he interprets it through the ears of the former.
Dissonance, for example, he treats within the criteria set up by bourgeois  art music.
In that tradition, it works in relation with consonance to establish tension/resolution structures, with narrative, expressive or dramatic functions.
Alternatively, in the extension of the tradition by the Schoenbergian avant garde, dissonance is felt to reflect an agonized response to the reified stability associated with (absent) consonance.
In popular music, such functions are either lacking or much weaker.
But Alan Durant (1984: 58–85), in pointing out the historically variative significance of dissonance, has discussed the interpretatively partial nature of these criteria.
In popular singing and instrumental soloing, for example, dissonance often works vis-á-vis the underlying harmonies in a very different way, as an aspect of the variant/schema tension.
Clearly, different criteria are needed to understand this practice.
In fact, it may not always be correct to regard such effects as ‘dissonances’ at all.
Adorno's criteria force him to see, for example, blue notes as ‘distortions’, pseudo-individual embellishments of ‘correct’ pitches; but blue notes may conceivably be part of a different pitch system with its own correctness.
Another effect of Adorno's historical ‘absolutism’ is his undervaluing of performance .
The importance of on-the-spot variation and creation in almost all kinds of popular music (as in most non-European musics) is striking.
And just as the growing dependence of European art music on written scores in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries led to a differential development of certain elements of musical language, so the replacement of popular song scores by recordings has increased the importance of performance, and with it different elements.
But to Adorno, seeing performance variation and realization as a false façade, the decreasing role of the traditional composer-figure and the relative thinness of many popular song scores can appear only as defects.
The extent of Adorno's misunderstanding here is often amusing.
He describes guitar tablature in hit song sheet music as ‘intended for players who cannot read the notes’: ‘musical traffic signals’; and he assumes that the numerous mistakes in the piano scores, for which such sheet music has always been notorious, are consciously planned by publishers, to satisfy the listeners' ‘infantile amateurism’(Adorno 1978a: 290–1).
In fact, of course, such mistakes result from hasty and inexpert transcription from the real music — recordings and band parts — and are symptomatic precisely of the lack of importance of the score; just as the tablature reflects a need to direct the player towards performance , as against the way the abstract symbolism of staff notation is focused on the needs of contemplative written composition.
Such composition, which reached a peak in the large-scale abstract instrumental music of nineteenth-century Europe, coexisted even then with simpler songs and dances.
But functional differentiation of genres seems to disappear in Adorno's picture; all art apparently must aspire to the condition of the most ‘autonomous’.
Yet songs qua songs cannot be the same as symphonies; dances must satisfy certain basic functional requirements.
It is hard to see why these considerations should have changed under mass culture.
Adorno's preferred picture for music listeners seems to be of inert, private critical spirits, without bodies, without vocal sensuality.
Will mankind, even under advanced capitalism, let alone any future more liberated society, ever cease to sing and dance?
Reception
To Adorno, listeners to popular music are far from being private critical spirits, of course; they are a passive mass which is prepared to accept standardized musical forms precisely because it is the product of the same processes as the musical forms themselves.
‘The composition listens for the listener…[both]are kneaded by the same mode of production…[creating]a pre-established harmony…between production and consumption…
The people clamour for what they are going to get anyhow’(Adorno 1976: 29; 1941: 38).
The music at one and the same time offers escape from the banalities of social life and is continuous with them; its twin functions are thus distraction (music as narcotic) and affirmation : ‘accepting what there is…identifying…with the inescapable product’(Adorno 1976: 41; 1978a: 288).
From both points of view, the demands of real listening — to autonomous works — are replaced by functions of psychosocial conditioning; Adorno's most complex typologies of listening behaviour are elaborations of this basic position (Adorno 1941: 32–48; 1976: 1–20).
‘Plugging’, in all its aspects, represents an authoritarian distribution system which produces psychologically weak individuals eager to identify with authority; for such immature personalities, listening can be described in terms of neuroses.
Any musical ‘needs’ apparently satisfied by the music are false, for, as use-value is destroyed, all consumers really consume is the ‘success’they themselves have helped to produce.
As usual, the force of Adorno's argument has to be admitted.
In an age of ‘background music’, listening is often distracted, and popular music is often used as a drug or as a ‘switch’ to trigger preplanned narcissistic ally comfortable sensations or as an instrument of group conformity.
But, again, the argument is taken too far.
In the first place, its validity depends in part on the acceptability of Adorno's theory of musical form — for the (standardized)‘composition listens for the listener’(who becomes equally standardized).
But if this theory fails its claim to universality — as I have suggested — then so, too, does the theory of listening; relative autonomy, variants, contradictions in the musical work allow the possibility of individual response, while repetitive structures, if defined as ‘formulate’ rather than‘standardized’, raise the possibility of still-valid collective meanings (rather than passive mass consumption).
But, even if the musical system were as constrictive as Adorno supposes, could listeners be so unfree?
In other words, can the web binding production and consumption be conceived as drawn so tight as to collapse the two together?
Part of the problem is Adorno's class-centrism and the cultural prejudice it brings.
Thus his social psychology assumes the traditional bourgeois family structure as a norm.
When he diagnoses a crisis in this structure — a tendency to replace paternal authority with external role-models and peer-group norms — this is inevitably interpreted as a crisis in the process of socialization itself.
Whether such a tendency must result in narcissism and authoritarianism, as Adorno believes, is dubious, however; similarly, the traditionally greater dependence on such external sources in working-class communities as compared with bourgeois culture suggests that the effects of modern social pressures here may not necessarily be uniform across classes.
There are hints (no more) in writings by Adorno's colleague Max Horkheimer that ‘out of the suffering…there can  arise a new community…to replace the individualistic motive as the dominant bond in relationships’(Horkheimer 1972: 124), and that, as the family fulfils fewer of the tasks of socialization, this new community would arise outside the family (see Held 1980: 134).
It would be premature to describe the youth groups and subcultures associated with many popular music styles in these terms; but the importance they have assumed in adolescents' development is suggestive — just as the older class-based behavioural models and moral norms of proletarian communities, though weakened and modified, have not been entirely smashed.
Class-linked youth subcultures, such as those of mods, teds and rockers, could be explained as a crossing of both tendencies.
Similarly, Adorno assumes without question the superiority of certain kinds of listening, notably what he calls ‘structural’ or ‘integrative’listening.
Just as he privileges a particular mode of production (focused on the bourgeois composer) a particular kind of musical form (integrated, self-generating) and particular parameters of musical language (those foregrounded by notation), so he privileges the concomitant mode of listening.
But this perspective is dependent on the evolutionist music-historical model criticized above; for Adorno, ‘after Beethoven’ any type of listening other than contemplative cognitive effort is necessarily regressive.
Other listening modes — for instance, those where music is associated with activities of various kinds, the sounds perhaps impinging on muscles, skin, nerves as much as conscious thought processes — have a long and continuous history, however; and, still, as anthropologists have shown, a living ethnography.
If, in popular music, these take on to some extent an ‘automatic’ quality, this should not blind us to the contradictory potentials of such historical continuities.
In the same way, Adorno despatches all ‘amateurism’ and ‘participation’in music culture without mercy.
Whether it be participation through music-making or through response to performance (dance, other body-movement, shouts of enthusiasm, the social paraphernalia of shared fanship, and so on), the increased specialization of musical labour together with mass media distribution, which together deliver ‘high-quality’ professional products into our homes, render all such ‘participation’anachronistic; it becomes an exercise in self-deception since it is manipulated from above by the consumer industries, the fetishistic relation hidden beneath a mask of self-directed activity and ‘spontaneity’.
While do-it-yourself rock, fan-club organizations and dancing-in-the-aisles are certainly not independent of industry interests, such a breathtaking theoretical closure reduces the musical role of the vast majority of humankind to a subservient attempt to match up, as listeners, to the demands of ‘advanced’ producers; Marx's vision of a future with every man an artist certainly seems to be definitively buried, but on a less exalted level, there is once again no attempt to look for the possibility of contradictory meanings in the actual practice of real listeners.
If ‘the active experience of music’(Adorno 1976: 133) is held to take place now solely in the imagination, more ‘functional’ kinds of musical practice can hardly be condoned, still less allowed the possibility that they embody social critique.
This is as narrow a view of critique as it is of musical response (which in fact traverses the entire body, the activity of the ears being just as ‘physical’ as that of the dancing limbs or the sensating nerves).
But Adorno assumes that ‘the process of internalization, to which great music as a self-deliverance from the external  world of objects owes its very origin, is not revocable in the concept of musical practice’(ibid: 133), and so he is bound to consider the ‘functionalism’ of popular music as regressive, explaining it by reference to social-psychological defects.
Against this — or alongside the importance of conscious thought — we must affirm the possibility of practice as critique; the legitimacy (however compromised) of subsuming ‘music’, narrowly defined, within other social activities; and the necessity to consider its effects in relation to the structure of the ‘external [social]world’.
Even in the sphere of bourgeois ‘art’ music Adorno allots the listener a strictly limited role.
It is the dialectically functioning relationship between musicians and listeners which accounts for the state and the viability of the musical language at a given time, and for changes in the language over time.
But in respect of specific works, the listener's role is to measure up to the demands imposed by the work itself, to comprehend what is already present.
Certainly social reception of the work — and in that sense its ‘meaning’— may, in subsequent periods, diverge from that (socially defined) content; but the content still exists, inviolable.
There is no conception in Adorno of listeners coproducing musical meaning directly , at the moment of creation; clearly this has to do with his undervaluing of performance and overvaluing of the written score, as well as with the centrality in his thinking of a relatively narrow, homogeneous musical culture, in which variations in musical interpretation were not significant.
For Adorno, then, the meaning of musical works is immanent ; our role is to decipher it.
When Adorno comes to popular music, as we have seen, the listener's role is subsumed still more within the mechanisms of the work itself — only now active deciphering is replaced by passive compliance.
And it is here that we come to the nub, theoretically, of the problem with Adorno's whole approach to listening Dick Bradley (n.d.) points out that within a Marxist framework production and consumption cannot properly be given the near-identity which Adorno attributes to them.
While Marx presents them as constituents of a unified, continuous process, each nevertheless has its specificity.
Thus consumption represents the individual appropriation of the social product; ‘it has its irreducible moment, that of satisfying a ‘need’‘.
But Adorno thinks that the listener, buying the music commodity and
‘making’ the success but failing to ‘recognize himself in it’, is alienated in the same primary sense as the labourer in relation to the product.
In arguing this he not only collapses the specificity of consumption but also misrepresents the relationship between the ‘individual’ and the ‘social’in Marx's argument, for it is not for the individual consumer to recognize himself in another individual's product anyway, but to recognize the socially-imprinted character and meaning of the product…and so to find in it the satisfaction of ‘need’(ibid: 30).
Moreover, Bradley continues, the specific nature of cultural goods, which Adorno recognizes, cannot be adequately covered by his argument that the apparent use-value of popular music (its ‘immediacy’, its status as ‘art’ and as a repository of ‘human’feeling, and so on) is an illusion which actually functions in the service of exchange-value (it is an aspect of what people buy).
For this argument wrongly denies the existence of any real relationship at all between the  listener and the musical object itself, turning that relationship into an abstract reflection of the laws of the capitalist system, and ‘ignoring…what is irreducibly extra-economic in consumption’(ibid: 48); and this denial depends in turn on an implicitly idealist definition of ‘needs’, against which the satisfactions gained from actual listening can be unthinkingly described as ‘false’.
To put this more concretely, there can be legitimate arguments about the nature, quality and function of a listener's response to the actual sound and structure of, say, an Elvis Presley or Bing Crosby song; what is not legitimate is to move this ‘thrill’, however defined, bodily across the theoretical topography so that it sits wholly under the sign of commodity-fetishism.
On the contrary, Bradley goes on, a properly ‘worked-out view of the specificity of cultural goods…[would recognize]the co-production of meanings which goes with them’(ibid: 47).
For Adorno, though, the audience — indeed, the entire production-consumption process — has become an abstraction, resting on ‘an idealist inversion of the abstract and the concrete’(ibid: 49), in which real historical moments and differentiations of practice have no place.
Once this abstractionist tendency is grasped, the disparities between Adorno's theory and what we see around us are explained.
We can accept the possibility that reception of cultural products is not always as passive as Adorno suggests, that it is often class-differentiated, that consuming subjects are not necessarily unitary conformists so much as sites traversed by conflicting interpretative schemas.
Similarly, it becomes obvious that such reception does not always represent a direct appropriation of the consumer into a pre-given framework but is mediated by other, varied interpretative assumptions associated with other social institutions and values (which may be mutually contradictory).
The growth of user-subcultures takes on enormous importance, and not only those associated with deviant youth groups: the British audience for American Country music, the Adult-Orientated Rock audience, successive rock 'n' roll revivals, swing band enthusiasts, and many others, would repay attention, for often they use mass-media products, perhaps radically shifting the original meanings.
In fact, some recent work stresses the active role of such groups — and of individuals in selecting the group they want to join — either in choosing from among the diverse products available (see Van Elder en 1984), or in asserting exclusivity vis-á-vis particular mass-produced music forms through a process of ‘excorporation’ from the hegemony of industry-defined meanings (as against incorporation into those meanings)(see Gross berg 1984).
It becomes clear, too — especially when studying youth subcultures since rock 'n' roll — that the spheres of work and leisure are not always so closely intertwined as Adorno suggests, the latter simply duplicating the reified forms of consciousness which may be characteristic of the former.
Indeed, very often cultural styles — those of the mods and the punks, for example— have been used precisely as forms of rebellion or critique, in relation to the everyday world of work and consumption (see Hebdige 1979).
As with modes of production and musical form, then, there are altogether many more alternatives and contradictions here than Adorno's totalizing account can allow.
The strengths of Adorno's basic approach — the stress on mediation, on music's social content, on the importance of the systemic nature of the production process, on critique rather than description — are real; and as he works it through, there are many specific insights.
It is at its strongest when applied to production; indeed, one can think of the Adornian picture of a totally administered, homogeneous, determining process as the ideal type to which the industry constantly aspires (though, for reasons discussed above, this state is never actually reached).
For the dissemination and reception of popular music, the approach is weaker, as we have seen.
The imbalance derives from the fact that, generally within his social theory of music, Adorno insists on the priority of production in defining the musical language, determining meaning and moving music history forward.
This may make some sense for the bourgeois ‘art’ tradition (though probably not as much as he thinks) but when the elements of the entire musical production-consumption process become both more unified and interdependent, and more ‘socialized’, it becomes less appropriate.
In the mid-twentieth century, the circulation of musical messages comes to look more like a continuous coproduction process, with inputs at many points.
And contrary to Adorno — the more apparently homogeneous the product, the more important and potentially productive the role of reception, and of the mediations interposed between the two (DJs, peer-group opinion, subcultural appropriation, use-situation, and so on).
Adorno's mistake here seems to rest on two aspects of his position, which in fact turn out to provide the two central explanations for the flaws in his argument.
The first is his use of the ‘immanent method’; the second is his own historical location, or more precisely what we can call his ontologization of history.
These need to be grasped if we are to understand him — and so to make use of him, rather than simply dismissing him as an embittered elitist pessimist.
The immanent method assumes that the ‘truth’ of a work is to be found within the work itself: or rather, it can be discovered by critical confrontation of the work's ideal or concept — what it ‘wants to be’— with its reality.
The problem here, of course, is how to decide what the work's ideal or concept is, and by what criteria.
Adorno's criteria, formed within a close knowledge of a particular musical tradition, tended to be exported wholesale to other traditions.
At the same time, his chief object of popular musical study, the Tin Pan Alley hit,was governed to some extent by those criteria, thus confirming him in his approach, and discouraging any consideration of possible new criteria.
A greater use of comparison , in addition to immanent critique, might have led to a lessening of prejudice, elitism and class — and Euro-centrism.
The importance of the historical location of the formation of Adorno's ideas was mentioned earlier.
Paul Piccone has argued that the relative success of monopoly capital in the 1930s and 1940s in incorporating much of social and cultural life within its own orbit led Adorno to
the ontologisation of the socio-historical predicaments of American society in transition from entrepreneurial to advanced capitalism…with the result that the historicity of this transitional phase was altogether ignored…the dialectic becomes de-historicized to cover the whole of western  civilization…
Consequently, critical theory…becomes purely defensive…
[It]brilliantly captures the Cold War period, the plastic 50s and in general the post-New Deal American society which was rapidly hegemonising most of the world.
It was unable, however, to foresee or come to grips with what Habermas in Legitimation Crisis calls the rationality or planning crisis (Arato and Gebhardt 1978: xviii-xx)
— that is, with the fact that, from the 1950s on, the dominant interests needed, in order to ensure their continued hegemony, to permit a certain amount of ‘free space’ within the rationalized structures for relatively unplanned ‘opposition’.
This space, intended both to obtain the invention of new products, leading to enhanced consumption and profit, and to maintain ideological support, in response to apparent liberalism, allows at least the possibility that permitted pluralism can grow into radical dissent.
Adorno's view made some sense in 1930 or 1940, then; but subsequently, when semi-stasis gives way to more obvious conflicts, its flaws show through.
In the previous chapter, this periodization was described in terms of the ‘moment’ of ‘mass culture’giving way to that of ‘pop culture’.
For musical production, this transition has the effect of revealing with increasing clarity that any would-be homogeneity of industry, form and audience cannot permanently disguise the fact that in reality the form is ‘squeezed out between two conflicting pressures’(Ian Birch all, quoted in Laing 1969: 189)— and this marks its mode of existence as immanently contradictory.
On the level of social meaning, the transition could be seen as associated with the move from a period dominated by the modernist critique of mass culture to the period of ‘post-modernism’.
Adorno speaks from the vantage-point of modernism (though, as we have seen, he arguably gives this too monolithic an interpretation): his ideal is an individual critique, which is negative in relation to society but also constitutes a positive synthesis — an alternative.
The interrelationship of modernism and post-modernism is a matter of some controversy (see, for example, James on 1984).
We can say, though, that with the at least partial collapse of the modernist perspective, there appears to be a certain potency in the post-modernist position, which takes the dominant system as given and proposes as method of critique the fragment : subversion takes the form of ‘ guerrilla activity’ which exploits fissures and forgotten spaces within the hegemonic structure.
An ‘either/or’(to the extent it existed) is replaced by an ‘and/and’, a confrontation between unitary subjectivity and its destruction by an acceptance of multiples and contradictions.
The fragments can have many sources, the past as well as the present.
And, if we can understand and thus make use of Adorno only by historicizing him, we can go beyond him by historicizing his historicism, which reacted to the shocks of Fascism, the demoralization of the Left and the rapid consolidation of administrative capitalism by assuming that past popular cultural traditions had been not merely damaged but shattered, and which asserted a single progressive cultural trajectory, developing from radical bourgeois art (Beethoven's, for example) through to modernism.
There are more helpful world-historical pictures than that one.
For example, Adorno's Frankfurt School colleague, Walter Benjamin, put forward a more optimistic view of the potentials of the productive forces within advanced capitalism; this will be discussed in the next  chapter.
Secondly, there is the attempt by another contemporary, Ernst Bloch, to, as it were, reinvent the category of utopia for Marxism by introducing into the field, for possible reuse, the Erbe — the heritage of the world's pre-capitalist cultural past.
Just as, beyond a certain point, the terms of capitalist political economy (‘development’, ‘progress’, ‘production’) can be rearticulated to the needs of a radically different society only through their transformation in the light perhaps of older ecologies, so, arguably, the assumptions of the bourgeois music tradition can, beyond an equivalent point, be most easily articulated to the interests of a future, more liberated order if critically combined with techniques drawn from older, popular traditions (see Jameson's comments in Block et al .
1977: 209–11).
And if this process can be conceived as relevant not only to a possible future but to processes of critique and struggle now , then to point to the emergence of black American, non-Western and European ‘folk’ elements within mass produced popular music commodities — with however ambivalent results — may be the historically most significant way in which we can put Adorno's critical pessimism in its correct place.
‘Over the rainbow’?
Technology, politics and popular music in an era beyond mass culture
Walter Benjamin
Walter Benjamin shared many of Adorno's basic attitudes; indeed the two men influenced each other considerably.
Benjamin often expressed regret at the passing of ‘traditional’ art and the social ties and functions which had made it possible.
At the same time, though, he was much more open to the ‘democratic’, ‘progressive’ possibilities offered by new technological developments and the changed social context of cultural production.
Partly this resulted from his relative lack of interest in Adorno's theory of mediation by the social totality — for which his colleague criticized him.
This left him free to consider specific factors, relationships and techniques in a theoretically less encumbered (if sometimes dangerously speculative) way.
Partly it resulted from a preference in his subject-matter for concrete cultural and social detail over Adorno's tendency towards abstraction of social process: for instance, he offered something like a phenomenology of the ‘shocks’ inherent in modern city life; he discussed actual and potential production practices within modern media, derived from his enthusiasm for Brecht's ‘epic theatre’; he focused less on the totalities of aesthetic form than on the fluidities of technique, the conditions of production, and the variable nature of reception.
Benjamin wrote nothing about music.
But his arguments can be generalized for all mass cultural forms; indeed, taking more recent popular music developments and music theorizing into account, we can see him at the head — implicitly and sometimes explicitly — of a ‘Benjamin Ian’ tradition, pointing perhaps ‘beyond mass culture’.
Not surprisingly, then, the 1930s debate between Benjamin and Adorno on these subjects (see Block et al .
1977) can be regarded as a touchstone for later disputes, its premises and positions not yet superseded.
In Benjamin's thought (1973a; 1973b; 1973c;), 2 the place occupied by Adornian ‘autonomy’ is taken by ‘aura’(roughly, the mysterious but absolutely unique ‘image’and associations of the individual art-work).
Sometimes he explains the disintegration of aura in the modern world by reference to social changes, but more often he stresses the role of technological developments — especially the new importance, quantitatively and qualitatively, of mechanical reproduction.
This not only affects the distribution, function and meaning of existing works but also stimulates new artistic techniques, new modes of production and new social relationships, shifting art from the sphere of ritual or disinterested contemplation to that of everyday life and political struggle.
Benjamin's most extended analysis of this is focused on film (Benjamin 1973b: 219–53).
But his argument contains ideas which can be applied with striking results to recorded music.
Film technology, according to Benjamin, affects production, form and reception.
Production becomes much more of a construction .
Materials (actors' performances, for example) are edited together, by camera and producer.
They are estranged from the totality; detached, collaborative technique replaces integral, unselfconscious expression.
In the form there is an emphasis on montage or, more widely, a kind of analytical critique of reality, which proceeds via ‘optical tests’(close-ups, different camera angles, slow motion, and so on) to manipulate its material, and, through an ‘unconscious optic’, to reveal or represent details of everyday life never normally noticed.
For recorded music, the pressure towards collaborative, ‘constructed’ manipulation of sound materials in the studio production process hardly needs stressing.
Similarly, Benjamin's description of cinematic form provokes immediate comparisons with the potential of recording and mixing techniques (mike-positioning, rebalancing, dubbing, and so on) for musical ‘montage’ and an ‘analytical’revelation of new sound details and relationships (for instance , Elvis Presley's ‘voice’— that is , the vocal ‘image’we hear on his records — seems to me precisely a product of this kind of process).
At the same time, whether ‘collaboration’always implies ‘critical estrangement’ is, for music as for film, a question to be answered rather than a necessary conclusion from the premises.
Similarly, examples of ‘analytical montage’(the Beatles' ‘Penny Lane’? the Specials' ‘Ghost Town’? the whole aesthetic of ‘scratch’ and ‘dub’?) must be set alongside tendencies to use new techniques to revive an old aesthetic, to ‘mix down ’rather than separate out , in order to synthesize an all-embracing individual vision (Phil Spector?).
As for reception, Benjamin sees the film audience, detached from the moment of production, as being in the position of a critic , identifying with the analytical work of the camera rather than with the experiences of the characters.
The transparency of technique and the ubiquity of the reproductions turns everyone into an expert , hence a potential participant .
At the same time, the film offers itself for ‘simultaneous collective experience’ and the reason why critical and affirmative attitudes can fuse is because ‘individual reactions are predetermined by the mass audience response they are about to produce…
The moment these responses become manifest they control each other’(Benjamin 1973b: 236).
Benjamin explains the fact that film reception seems to be not only critical but also ‘distracted’, the form not only a succession of ‘shocks’ but also a wraparound cultural environment, by means of an analogy with architecture, ‘prototype of a work of art the reception of which is consummated by a collectivity in a state of distraction’(ibid: 241).
Architecture, he argues, has always been assimilated not by attention but by habit .
New tasks for perception can only be carried out in the same way ‘under the guidance of tactile appropriation’(ibid: 242).
Thus in the film ‘the public is an examiner, but an absent-minded one’(ibid: 243).
This approach has enormously suggestive potential for analysis of listening, for  it fully accepts the significance of new perceptual attitudes and situations while by-passing or at least putting in question the usual, too easy Adorn Ian assumptions of passivity.
There are problems, too.
It is clear that architecture is not altogether the same as a film or a song: for instance, both the latter make use of performers — more crucially,stars .
There is a tendency to refocus identification on the ‘personality’ of the star — and indeed Benjamin recognizes the appearance of ‘false aura’.
A second obvious problem is the striking blank where normally we would expect to find discussion of content .
Is content irrelevant to the effects of the new technically mediated forms?
While Benjamin recognized the problem — for example, he discussed Fascist appropriations of the new reproduction technologies — it is doubtful whether he fully accepted its theoretical source: namely his virtual conflation of mass and class.
Indeed, for Benjamin the ‘rise of the masses’ as a historical and cultural theme tends to take the place occupied in most Marxist theories by the revolutionary role of the proletariat.
Sometimes the two slide together uncomfortably, with little attempt to differentiate class groupings levels of consciousness or political motivations.
At other times Benjamin is aware of what is, precisely, the problem here: how to align the potentials of the new technically determined modes of production and reception with a progressive perspective.
His answer is: ‘look at Brecht’(see esp.
Benjamin 1973b: 15–22; 1973c: 1–13; 85–103).
Benjamin portrays the Brechtian drama as taking a traditional ‘apparatus’(theatre) and transforming it through the use of techniques derived from the modern media: montage, interruption, critical quoting of everyday social ‘gesture’.
Theatre becomes an experimental, analytical experience, in which the audience, detached from the narrative (the famous Verfremdungseffekt ), is prevented from identifying, forced to evaluate, to think — hence to participate.
What is interesting is that Benjamin foregrounds technique rather than the traditional questions of form and content.
Thus he slices through the old argument between ‘formalism’ and ‘realism’by inserting what we may call a notion of intervention .
An artist's contribution now, he says, must be assessed by reference to his positioning within the process of production.
Using the methods offered by the new technical media, he must become a self-aware participant in the total apparatus of production.
He must work towards an Umfunktionierung , as Brecht called it — a transformation of the apparatus — which will result in new fusions and relationships between media, genres and techniques, new, more collective production processes, and a new, more participative role for audiences.
Content — however radical — can always be appropriated by the existing cultural powers; for Benjamin, then, cultural politics must become more of a running  guerrilla war, in which any appropriate materials, tactics, techniques and relationships may be used.
The quality of a cultural practice then becomes a matter of its effect , in the moment of its impact.
This certainly offers a fruitful way to see, say, the impact of early rock 'n' roll which one intuitively senses as ‘radical’, yet which from the start, and increasingly as time went by, made use of traditional elements of musical and lyric form and content, and subsisted within the nexus of capitalist production processes.
In that early ‘moment’, rock 'n' roll was an important intervention though carried through at varying levels of conscious awareness.
There were, in the context of the established musical apparatus, new relationships of words and  music, voice and instrument, white youth and black proletariat; new, more collective composition methods; a new involvement of the audience (primarily through the bodies of listeners, but also through a new wave of do-it-yourself music-making).
And these were made possible by the new technical processes (amplified sound, radio transmission of styles across social boundaries, studio instead of written composition, and so on).
Quickly, staff writers and producers took over, rehierarchizing production, reaestheticizing the form and re-placing consumers in their seats; but that first moment was real, and the effects, Benjamin would have argued, must be analysed there .
It can easily be pointed out, by way of criticism, that Benjamin neglects unduly both the effective autonomy of artistic forms and traditions and the power of the actual (capitalist) social relations of production, in the wider society as well as the particular apparatus.
The latter exert immense pressures.
The former, likewise, are not ‘neutral’, are often not easily reorganized or reinterpreted, and are always marked by the objective force of their history and material limitations.
Rock 'n' roll was, for these very reasons, a compromised form from the first.
But if the situation must be represented as a multi-faceted negotiation rather than the simple, voluntary intervention which Benjamin sometimes seems to describe, he did nevertheless offer a way of analysis which speaks the language of the new pattern of determinants characteristic of late capitalist societies.
Another common criticism of Benjamin — made initially by Adorno — is directed at his tendency towards technological determinism — as though the new media can be seen as a direct, unmediated cause and a straightforward good; this, at times, leads to an over-simple historical picture.
He certainly does tend to separate new techniques and technologies out from the total matrix of forces playing on production and reproduction, and to exaggerate their as it were naked power; and he does underestimate the capacity of the capitalist media industries to channel the use made of them to suit their own interests, nullifying radical potential.
His analysis of mass consciousness is over-optimistic, while his picture of a shift from ‘aura tic’ to ‘democratic’art is over-stark.
But if the situation Benjamin describes is too open, its constitutive relationships too direct and insufficiently mediated, Adorno's net, by contrast, is so tightly drawn, its equations so perfect, its circle so complete, that any change, critique or differentiation of meaning or response is all but impossible.
If Benjamin over privileges technique, Adorno does the same to form.
Benjamin's romanticizing of mass experience is matched by Adorno's nostalgia and elitism.
The former's idealistically active audience confronts the latter's picture of passive consumers, which is no more than an abstraction.
Of course, both men are right (and wrong).
In present conditions the question of the end of the traditional conception of art and the nature of its replacement are still open.
The main types of development taking place in the 1930s, and extended much further since, are both an immense strengthening of the possibilities of uniformity and control,and a broadening and democratizing of opportunities.
What we are presented with is a range , from almost completely ‘dependent’ work at one end (exaggerated by Adorno, neglected by Benjamin), to relics of aura tic art and new types of critical practice at the other (the effectiveness and interrelationships of the two a matter of dispute).
But when all qualifications have been entered, Benjamin's position is  important for three main reasons: he took the potential of new media seriously (as Adorno did not); he recognized a new kind of ‘autonomy’ for cultural activity, defined in terms of its status as a practice and an intervention ; and he saw that the new modes of production and reproduction would generate new kinds of perception.
It is for these reasons that his approach seems the more fruitful of the two in understanding the situation in advanced capitalist societies during the last twenty or thirty years, when Adorno's conception of artistic totality, mirror image of an increasingly global, oppressive industrial totality, presents a theoretical cul-de-sac; when, by contrast, we are actually bombarded by an increasingly heterogeneous mix of musical methods and messages, often seemingly cut free from traditions and sources, shifted around at random; when listeners do seem to some extent to have learned, gradually, new perceptual skills, through several decades of habituation, enabling more active comparison of styles, a greater variety of uses and a more ‘ironic’ relationship to the stream of musical products; and when the main opportunities for critique and subversion lie not in head-on ‘romantic’protest but in exploiting temporary spaces, in the cracks and at the margins, within the monolith itself.
If musical politics now involves a constantly shifting ‘war of position’, Adorno helps us to understand the enemy, but it is Benjamin who is more able to offer the tools to carry on the struggle.
Forces and relations of production (I): towards a historical dialectic
Benjamin's approach has been developed further by Hans Magnus Enzensberger.
In a classic article (Enzensberger 1976), Enzensberger argues that in late capitalist societies the media systems, like the structures of social control are ‘leaky’: it is impossible, for instance, to monitor which records are played, how they are used, what is put on a cassette.
Furthermore, the electronic media are by their nature democratic.
Access is easy and universal, and, unlike reading books, needs no great educational ‘capital’; copying is simple; even production is relatively straightforward (anyone can speak, or sing, into a mike).
Equipment is such that it is very difficult to prevent auto didactic ‘tinkering’.
Similarly, ‘information’(styles, source-material, technical skills) from anywhere is easily and universally available.
Moreover, the technology is by its nature reversible: a radio receiver is potentially also a transmitter; a cassette player (sic ) can also record; even a gramophone record can be used as a factor within a new productive enterprise, as the practices of rap and scratching demonstrate.
Even though capitalist organization of the media prevents full exploitation of these potentials, their tendency is to destroy both conventional ideas of history (that is, class-specific ownership of a ‘heritage’) and the concept of the self-sufficient work of art.
In a striking phrase, Enzensberger suggests that ‘artistic productivity reveals itself to be the extreme marginal case of a much more widespread productivity’(ibid: 46).
Even the involvement of the media in what Henri Lefebvre calls spectacle (reality as a permanent theatre of consumer products and images) contains — despite its basis in commodity-fetishism — a potential adumbration of the utopian.
The underlying desire, which it disguises but feeds on, is ‘for a new  for a breaking down of environmental barriers, for an aesthetic which is not limited to the sphere of the ‘artistic’’(ibid: 36–7).
Benjaminian ideas also appear in the work of Peter Wicke and Chris Cutler, this time applied specifically to the sphere of popular music.
Wicke argues that the rise of ‘the mass’ as a cultural phenomenon has qualitative effects encouraging socialization of production, collectivization of reception and a new social and aesthetic meaning to the music itself (Wicke 1982).
And the technical qualities of the mass media play a crucial role in this, becoming ‘an independent constituent…of the total operation of musical production’(ibid: 236) as well as guaranteeing
the mass as the specific social character of the recipient.
Such mass forms of music now exist, less because a large number of recipients have the same musical needs than because these needs become similar (transcending all ethnic, national and social barriers), since the individual here can be a recipient of music only in association with others (ibid: 233).
It is in rock music, Wicke suggests, that this development is seen most clearly.
Here
the reproduction now functions as the original, the live performance is measured against the recording, and technical equipment is seen not as an external aid to reproduction but as a characteristic of the musical original, employed as part of the artistic conception (ibid: 236).
Similarly, ‘the musical reference to a ‘community’, to the great masses of young people behind the music — to the consciousness of mutuality crystallising from it…— is a crucial and distinctive social and aesthetic factor' (ibid: 235).
Easy-to-learn performance and production techniques, together with readily accessible models in recorded form, change the way music is made.
At the same time, listener response is grounded not on individuality — the private feelings privileged in bourgeois art — but on
mass forms of musical practice which are based on the musical activity of many people interacting at the same time and in the same way — forms which structure bodily movements and processes, and which enable bodily experience to become an aesthetically mediated pleasure (ibid: 228).
Interestingly, the musical techniques — modal pitch relationships, ‘motoric’ attitude to rhythm, easily grasped proportional relationships of phrases repetitive/variative structures — can be linked with historical mass music forms and, via Afro-American sources, with African music, in which reference to ‘community’is an ‘intrinsic constituent’(ibid: 235).
But in rock these aspects are given their particular shape by, and centred on, a collectively understood manipulation of amplified sound.
Of course, Wicke stresses, the social meaning inscribed in the music is at odds with the social organization of its production by Capitalist business.
Even so, his discussion of the contradiction between progressive forces of production and reactionary elements in the relations of production arguably distinguishes between rock and the older ‘bourgeois hit’ too starkly, for he tends to play down the survival of older elements in rock production, form and performance, as well as neglecting divergences of social use and interpretation, and differences of content.
Technologically mediated mass experience is not necessarily in itself progressive, and we need to remember the importance of conflict, within the form and the practice, and of a continuous articulative effort on the part of producers and listeners.
Chris Cutler's theoretical alignment with the Benjamin tradition, like Wicke's, is implicit rather than explicit.4 Nevertheless, he clearly echoes Benjamin and Enzensberger in his stress on the democratic potential of electronic media, and on the leading role played by technological developments in general within the changing practice of cultural production.
Indeed, there is again a danger of assigning such developments a too simply determinative role: Cutler refers to the innate qualities of these ‘internal forces’, and the role of the ‘external forces’(the relations of production, together with the accompanying ideological/expressive superstructure) seems to be solely to realize their potential.
With the benefit of his experience as a working musician, Cutler describes the part played by new technology in the growth of cheap, do-it-yourself recording, the rise of independent production and distribution networks, and the increased ease of access to production facilities.
His discussion of the recording process brings out its constructed and its collective qualities.
Because of its potential for empirical testing and manipulation, it privileges group production and obscures the composer/performer boundary.
Because it frees performance from time, assembling it bit by bit, it encourages demystified production: ‘Tape runs forwards, backwards and at many speeds.
It can be cut up and glued together.
Moreover, recording is a medium in which improvisation can be incorporated — or transformed through subsequent work — into composition.
’(Cutler 1984: 287).
What gives this discussion an additional interest, though, is that it is incorporated into an ambitious overarching historical schema, which aims to ‘explain' nothing less than the whole development of world music.
This schema comprises a series of three modes of production, each dominated by a particular medium of reproduction (ear, score, and recording).
Each is associated with a particular social mode: these are ‘folk’ society (a rather unspecified repository for all pre-bourgeois forms); bourgeois society; and (potentially) socialist society (for the potential of the electronic media is seen as coming to fruition only in an egalitarian and classless setting).
There are similarities with the historical model that Benjamin puts forward (‘folk’ epic  bourgeois literature  mechanical reproduction), but Cutler focuses even more clearly on the determinative power of the medium.
Thus, the ‘folk mode’ arises from the processes of oral transmission and biological memory; this means that the relationships between music and musician, musician and community, musical content and collective expression, are direct, non-contradictory and non-alienated.
Composition and performance are the same; anyone can take part; music-making is not objectified into ‘works’ but is the result of improvised variation of collectively owned resources.
Notation is a negation of the folk mode.
It emphasizes the eye, not the ear; it therefore encourages the ‘rational’ calculation of complex, unique structures and effects and the manipulation of hierarchies of textural parts, formal units and performing roles.
It objectifies the work, storing it in tangible  form, and is therefore potentially personal property (and commodity).
It leads to division of labour (between composer and performer, for example), individualism and specialization, and production for a market rather than by a community.
It is obvious, argues Cutler, how suitable these characteristics are for the needs of bourgeois society.
Finally, recording —‘negation of a negation’— returns us to the ear, registering sound rather than notational schemes, turning performers into composers and composers into performers, and necessitating improvisation and empirical collective production.
Thus ‘all the main characteristics of recording echo those of the folk mode’(ibid: 287), though qualitatively transformed (for instance,any sound is available).
However, for the present, these characteristics are largely contained within the stifling constraints of the music industry's commodity forms.
This is very neat — perhaps too neat.
Though Cutler seems to regard the three modes as, in the end, ideal types, in practice his discussion of the relationships between reproductive media and musical practices — which is genuinely important — is presented as an abstract schema.
We get oral transmission as such , notation as such , recording as such: not concrete practices which manifest particular forms of oral transmission, notation or recording.
Thus no attention is paid to the immense variety of types within the modes (figured bass as against Wagnerian orchestral score, for example; or esoteric ritual song, in which accurate memory is vital, as against collective-variative improvisation of epic); or to the fact that many musical practices overreach the extent of a mode (thus, improvisation remained important in much notated European music until the middle of the nineteenth century; studio-based musicians quite often use forms of notation, when it suits their purposes).
The ‘folk community’ is idealized, with no recognition of the huge variety of musical practices (and social forms) involved (think of the differences between the music, and social function, of, say, West African griots , American Indian ceremonial songs and European medieval ballads); in very, very few — if any — of these cases is there no class differentiation (and thus hierarchies, divisions of function, and so on); in none would it be true to say that musical production occurs ‘naturally’rather than as the result of learned skills and conventions.
Cutler tends to treat forces and relations of production as somehow separate and only brought into ‘equivalence’, so to speak, later, when the ‘potential’ of the former meets ‘favourable’conditions in the latter.
In fact, however, the dialectical interplay of the two means that real productive forces only manifest themselves in forms dictated by real social relations.
This is why there are so many forms of oral transmission, notation and recording, associated with different societies, periods and social classes.
There can be non-commodity notated music (eighteenth-century court symphonies; some 1960s avant-garde ‘happenings’) and it can produce non-hierarchical, relatively improvisatory performance (‘shape-note’ singing in the southern United States).
Orally created music can be commodified (performances by ‘traditional’ singers, sold through concerts) and it can assume forms showing certain types of hierarchy and functional specialization (West African drum orchestra music, Balinese gamelan music).
Recording technology can be used to produce extended, unique, individual visions (Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells ); and, with the advent of  ‘portable studios’, a musician can produce a complete piece on tape at home, then teach it to the band, just like a bourgeois composer, rather than entering into collaborative work.
Similarly, while reproductive media certainly impose constraints and channel musical practice in particular ways, they themselves have to ‘negotiate’ with traditions of musical content and practice, which possess a certain level of autonomy and in turn shape the form taken by the media.
Iterative structures common in orally transmitted music survive in notated music (sets of variations; cumulative dance-forms).
Triadic harmony, which may have originated in oral practice (improvised parallel singing), was for good reasons highly developed in notated music but remains fundamental to most recorded music.
There exist performer-composers not only in oral cultures and in recorded popular music but also in the traditions of notated music (Liszt, Paganini, not to mention Scott Joplin and Jelly Roll Morton).
The basic point is that far from media changes giving rise to simple shifts in musical practice, media, content and social relations form a very complex interrelationship which renders any schema based on abstract historical antitheses very questionable.
The problem becomes acute with the transition from notation to recording.
The antithesis necessary for Cutler demands that all residues of bourgeois forms be abandoned as reactionary; at the same time, the new mode also has to ‘echo’ the folk mode (supposedly killed by notation).
Unless its practices are to arise totally spontaneously out of the ‘innate’ qualities of the new media, it is hard to see how this is to occur or what the music will be like.
The problem is solved by an appeal to the ‘folk’ qualities of black American musical traditions, which have played such an important role in the development of twentieth-century popular music.
Slavery and white racism, Cutler argues, guaranteed the survival of a folk mode in the midst of capitalist society — at the same time as subjecting black people, as victims of this society, to an experience enabling them to represent a more general alienation characteristic of life under industrial capitalism.
Their music, therefore, was ‘ready-made’ for the arrival of the electric media.
There is an important kernel of truth here.
Black music was different in many respects from almost all other Western music of the time.
In some of these respects (such as improvisation, or blue tonality and pitch inflection) it was more suited to transmission on recordings than in notation.
And there are senses in which this music can be seen as representing wider experiences, of workers particularly, within twentieth-century capitalist society.
That is a significant conjunction of factors.
But by the late nineteenth century, most black music forms had been deeply penetrated by bourgeois influences: materials and techniques from white sources, notation (used by many black musicians), individualized modes of production and expression.
In fact these forms provide particularly striking examples of the process of struggle — crossing the lines of development of media, content and practice, and relating them to the positions of different groups — which is a more accurate picture of the general history than any simple structure of antitheses.
Cutler's insufficiently dialectical treatment of the forces/relations nexus reaches its biggest problem in his discussion of the recording form itself, which has to be both the ‘ultimate’ musical commodity and to offer creative liberation.
How can its innately progressive potentials be contained in a form which has been  developed through the operation of the market, and which, in Cutler's argument, represents a culture completely external to its users, completely hegemonic (not resistible in present circumstances), and having ‘no need of artistic value…[having]become, effectively, an instrument of class oppression’(Cutler 1984: 291).
The first answer is that the commodity form of commercial recordings has a ‘distorting’ effect and that there is a deeper ‘real content’‘lying behind’the distortions.
The idealism of this approach is obvious, and it is not pursued very far.
The second answer is more developed.
If within commercial music the power of exchange-value is total, Cutler argues, then progressive musicians should work ‘outside’.
This leads to a system of values whose chief criterion seems to be lack of popularity (that is, of commercial success), whose musical politics is governed by a continuous effort to be ‘challenging’ and ‘difficult’so as to outwit the equally continuous capacity of the industry to exploit innovation, and whose approach to production is based on a ‘folk spontaneity’model which sees ‘real’music-making as arising ‘naturally’, independent of the influence of existing codes, roles and practices.
The resulting picture looks strangely like a kind of modernism — a romantic-technological modernism — which ends up valuing innovation almost for its own sake.
Not surprisingly, perhaps, Cutler's lineage of influences includes not only Captain Beefheart, Syd Barrett (of Pink Floyd) and various ‘folk’ traditions but also Schoenberg, Eisler, Varèse, John Coltrane, Sun Ra and Charles Mingus.
What has happened, in fact, is that Cutler has been forced to try and squeeze together a neo-Benjaminian theory of productive forces and a picture of productive relations which is positively Adorn Ian!
This inevitably results in a kind of Adorn Ian modernism, in which ‘progressive’ form acts as social critique, modified by a quasi-Benjaminian view of technical mediation, which ultimately recreates these modernists as a new ‘folk’.
From another point of view, what has happened is that an older Left position, whose model of an anti-commercial, genuinely ‘popular’ culture is ‘folk’music (regarded as a useful source primarily because of its potential for politically progressive lyric content ), has been rewritten with an emphasis on the progressive potential of new, electrically mediated form , and its capacity to recreate community as an ‘echo’of the ‘folk’.
Within musical politics, this is an important move; and it brings with it, as we have seen, real insights into the significance of musical media.
But by pushing the argument into an abstract utopianism, Benjamin's stress on concrete technique , on the needs of the specific moment and the free selection of materials and methods to meet those needs, has disappeared.
Another way of seeing Cutler's position, especially his historical schema, is as a conflation of Marx and Marshall McLuhan; ‘mode of production’ as organizing concept gets mixed up with the Canadian communication theorist's ‘medium is the message’philosophy, in which consciousness, cultural forms and social organization all derive primarily from the effects of the various media.
It is worth taking a brief look at McLuhan himself (1962; 1964; 1967), partly because his ideas have been adopted explicitly by some writers on popular music but also because in the period of his greatest fame (the mid- and late 1960s) some of these ideas sediment Ed themselves into the common assumptions of quite widely, if usually implicitly, held views on culture and technology.
At one level, McLuhan brought together a variety of existing studies of  cultural modes and forms in oral and in literate societies.
He then identified typical elements in each of the two cultural categories, and linked them to the nature of the prevailing communication medium (speech/writing).
Thus, oral culture is said to be full, rich and immediate, and to result in collective social experience, a wholeness of awareness and a mythic rather than linear sense of time.
By contrast, literacy (more particularly print, which carries writing's homogeneous, mechanical, repeatable, linear qualities to an extreme) is narrow, flat, partial, detached, and results in private experience, a single point of view, a split between ‘heart’ and ‘head’, and an ‘objective I, linear sense of time Literacy is linked with the device of perspective in painting, individualism in literature and philosophy, personal expression and rational construction in music; also, more widely, with the development of social uniformity, political centralization, empirical science and assembly-line production.
McLuhan then goes on to argue that the electric media are restoring many of the characteristics of speech: immediacy, aural and tactile rather than visual qualities, ambiguity, multiple points of view, non-linear montage, and collective experience.
This takes place in the context of a ‘retribalization’ process, an emerging ‘global village’.
So far, so good — or at least, it is an arguable case.
There are clear echoes of Cutler, and even, in some aspects, of Benjamin and Enzensberger.
But McLuhan goes beyond the designation of links and proposes that communication technology and culture are related as cause and effect: the medium is the message.
Further, the particular form his determinism takes demands a new epistemology.
For McLuhan argues that the way our cognitive apparatus works is determined by our ‘sense ratio’, the balance between inputs to the various senses (aural, visual, tactile, and so on).
Changes to this ratio are most effectively induced by the operation of media, which McLuhan defines as extensions to the senses.
The alteration in our perception of reality then produces particular social and cultural forms.
Thus, for example, alphabetic writing, and still more, print, is said to privilege sight quite strikingly at the expense of the other senses, and the effects of this on the way we think and perceive reality — through a linear, mechanical, single-point-of-view consciousness — then have the cultural consequences described earlier.
We can disregard the epistemology.
It is never convincingly argued for; the neurological and anthropological evidence renders it very doubtful (see Miller 1971: 92–120); it is patently there in order to support what is ultimately an idealist position, for the half-hidden premise of McLuhan's argument is that there is an ideal human psyche, an essence, which is characterized by balance and interplay of senses, which may once have existed — in oral cultures — but which was destroyed by literacy (a second Fall).
This is in fact a version of the familiar conservative ‘critique of mass culture’, strongly marked by the influence of F.R. Leavis, G.K. Chesterton and McLuhan's own Catholicism, and by his constant search for a reborn ‘organic wholeness’ of spirit.
Nevertheless, elements of this ideology, as well as more general aspects of McLuhan's cultural-historical argument, have penetrated some writing on popular music, sometimes in a fairly unreflective way, sometimes as part of carefully constructed theories.
An example of the former is Karl Dallas's contribution to The Electric Muse (Dallas 1975).
Dallas uses McLuhan explicitly in support of his suggestion that rock is a kind of folk music.
He justifies this  argument not through reference to rock's mass public but because its quasi-oral modes of composition and dissemination result, he says, in collective authorship lose links between musicians and audiences, constant variation of materials, and a spontaneous, ‘Dionysian’ approach to performance.
Also, the electric media (by their nature, regardless of their commercial organization) unify and at the same time decentralize the musical repertory and community, and make possible improvisatory musical styles.
Like Cutler, he sees the historical source as the conjunction of electric media and black American ‘folk’ forms, and, also like Cutler, he insists that the new music is quite distinct from earlier written popular music.
The electronic popular music of rock is so different in form and function from the old print-based pop of ‘moon and June’, and so akin to the old pre-literate oral forms of folk music, that most of the assumptions made today about the relations between the two are misguided, based on theories devised at a time when the complete destruction of folk culture by the industrial state seemed only a matter of time.
Now that the state itself is disintegrating around us, while folk culture goes on from strength to strength, they need to be re-stated (ibid: 95).
The kernel of truth in this is almost washed away by the wishful thinking.
John Shepherd (1977; 1982), by contrast, has used McLuhan to work out a carefully constructed theory.
Broadly, he argues that consciousness, hence cultural forms, are largely conditioned by the media through which reality is perceived and organized.
The ‘worlds’ of pre-literate and literate people, characterized by oral-aural immediacy and wholeness, on the one hand, and, on the other, by what Shepherd calls the ‘industrial world sense’(roughly a synonym for the outlook of McLuhan's ‘typographic man’), are quite different.
Shepherd's description of these ‘worlds’ is much the same as McLuhan's.
Strangely, Shepherd seems to have shown little interest in the effects of the electric media; indeed, his account of the present-day situation assumes an even tighter grip by the ‘industrial world sense’, the system created by literacy and print being generalized as a ‘symbolic-technological filter’ which regulates the processes of communication vital to socialisation and the creation of consciousness’(Shepherd 1982: 149–50).
Having established his basic historical schema, Shepherd goes on to his most original contribution, an analysis of how the two ‘world-views’ are ‘encoded’in music, in each case the musical structures and the structures of society and of social consciousness forming ‘homologies’.
Briefly (leaving out much detail), the oral world-view is encoded through such characteristics as the embedding of music in everyday life; direct, often improvisatory, unreflective composition; use of traditional repeated units; prevalence of monophony; prevalence of pentatonic tonality (which encodes social mutuality); inflected pitch relationships; ‘dirty’ timbres; and irregular rhythmic patterning, often stressing rhythmic interplay.
In music reflecting the ‘industrial world sense’, by contrast, we find consciously manipulated musical structures, individually composed and divorced from social life; developing, through-composed forms, depending on analytic memory; major-minor tonality and harmony (which encode the centralized, hierarchical structure of capitalist society); ‘idealization’ and ‘abstraction’of sound, through  cultivation of ‘pure’timbre and exact pitch; and pronounced regular rhythmic patterns (which, together with the ‘pull’of harmonic progression and the vertical synchronization of parts, encode an objective, spatialized sense of time).
It is obvious how close these are to the characteristics attributed to speech and to print, respectively.
Indeed, as Shepherd points out, the developments that took place in post-Renaissance Western music would have been impossible without music notation, with its propensity for large-scale, visually organized construction, abstraction of symbol from sound, co-ordination of multiple events and voices (through bar-lines, for instance), and ‘spatialized’ chord structures and progressions.
It should be stressed that, as compared with McLuhan's total determinism, Shepherd suggests a dialectical relationship between communication technology and socially constructed consciousness (though how exactly the dialectic works is not clear, and in practice the influence of media is taken as predominant).
Moreover, when Shepherd comes to analyse twentieth-century musics (Shepherd 1982), he tries to see how different musical languages, reflecting different relationships to the ‘symbolic-technological filter’, could be associated with the different social positions of particular groups.
Dispossessed and relatively powerless groups — for example, American blacks or white working-class youths — articulate their various perspectives, as victims, on the dominant reality through musics which accept the basic rhythmic-harmonic framework derived from the tradition of notated music but at the same time work against this in various ways, notably by superimposing on the framework musical techniques typical of oral cultures.
Some of Shepherd's associates have taken the argument further, in various directions.
Trevor Wishart (1977), for example, stresses the abstracting, analytic properties of notation, which reduce the infinity of sound to a small number of discrete, systematically permutational elements, limit our very perception and conception of music to what can be written down and rationally described, and result in an idealist account of the relationship between the ‘real’ music in the score and the performance — an inevitably less than perfect representation.
Wish art goes on to emphasize the importance of the electric media in breaking the hegemony of notation, for they enable us to capture the actual sounds, in all their inflectional complexity — freed from the ‘filtering’ effects of notation — and in experiential rather than spatialized time.
‘The tape-recorder and gramophone have…enabled this new, direct experientially-based musical tradition to extend to millions of young music-lovers, far beyond the realms of any scribal domination and certification of ‘musical competence’’(ibid: 150).
Wishart and Virden (1977) also suggest that in the twentieth century a fundamental opposition between ‘literate’ music styles (from concert music to Tin Pan Alley songs) and ‘oral’styles (quintessentially Afro-American musics, but also popular styles derived from these) is associated with the opposition between those who dominate and control the social system and those who are its victims.
That is, class stratification and musical language stratification can be correlated.
This produces a broadly dichotomous scheme, analysed in terms drawn from work in the sociology of language on the class differentiation of verbal codes.
Thus ‘abstract’ is opposed to ‘concrete’, ‘explicit’to ‘implicit’, ‘elaborated code’to ‘restricted code’, ‘extensional structure’to ‘in tensional  structure’, and these types are taken to be related to differing kinds of social experience mediated or formed by a literate organization of reality, on the one hand, and an oral organization of reality, on the other.
The quintessential form of the latter type is taken to be the blues.
Blues is defined, without qualification as based on a pentatonic, inflectional musical language, hence as antithetical to the functional-tonal language of bourgeois tradition.
Its influence has been spread by the ‘sympathetic’ arrival of the electric media.
Despite the opposition of the dominant culture, the music of those within the culture but not of it, the blacks, found resonance with the experiences of others who felt alienated from the established order.
The black basis of today's ‘popular’ music is the musical expression of a generation in conflict with the values of its elders (Wish art and Virden 1977: 164).
Similarly, while Wish art and Virden want to admit counter-historical trends to the dominant tonal tradition — in what they call ‘genuine folk musics’— these are understood as almost completely separate from and opposed to that tradition.
There is little dialectic, then: on the one hand, there are ‘those who live, in a more or less besieged manner, in a close commonality which divorces itself from the values of the prevailing culture’(ibid: 163); on the other, those who are ‘alienated from the possibilities of an immediate life of the unselfconscious body’(ibid: 157).
The political aspects of this dichotomy have been further pursued by Graham Vulliamy (1976; 1977).
We have here a substantial body of work stressing — to make the lowest claim — the important links between musical media and the structures of society culture and consciousness.
Now the existence and significance of such links is undeniable (though the existence of homologies — as Shepherd describes them — is a different question, which must be left to a later chapter).
Specific media certainly impose limits and constraints, and they channel, even force, production in particular directions.
It is difficult to write down a Jimi Hendrix guitar solo and still harder to play it from such a notated version.
It would be equally difficult to create a Beethoven symphony without notation.
Non-literate music making almost demands repetitive or traditional frameworks, and — as counter-balance?— these stimulate improvised nuance and inflection, yet transcribed into notation, with the nuances missing, it tends to look banal.
Similarly, notation on the one hand, through-composed forms with precisely synchronized rhythmic/harmonic moves, on the other, seem, almost, to imply each other; and the results, in performance, can sound relatively abstract and ‘dead’.
Even in notation, the differences in musical language between orally transmitted ‘folk’ song, printed bourgeois song and recorded rock song come through: they hardly need comment, except to say that they do fit many of the stereotypes of the neo-McLuhanite model (see Ex. 3.1).
The different media regimes, moreover, do have social effects.
Certainly notation encouraged specialization and division of musical labour, stimulated professionalism and gradually reduced the importance of amateurism.
The latter development can almost be taken as an index of the spread of musical literacy.
We know something of the ways in which ‘huskers’ and amateur street performers were progressively controlled and eventually almost eliminated from the cities in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
At the same time, orally  transmitted rural music was declining also, under the impact of urbanization and the industrialization of agriculture.
We can go on to observe that since the middle of the twentieth century there has been a big revival of informal street music, produced in non-literate, often amateur performance and through the public dissemination of recordings (see Prato 1984); this has, of course, gone along with a wave of amateur music-making, centred on the guitar and on non-literate modes of production, whit h in the rock 'n' roll, ski Me and ‘beat group’ periods (the late 1950s and the 1960s) swept across the whole of Europe and North America.
We do not have a complete history of such changes in media and social practice.
But it is easy to map out some of the important ‘moments’(though they cannot always be dated precisely or uniformly across regions and social groups) One would be the take-up, by former illiterates, of broadsides; these had a printed text but, almost always, simply stipulated the use of an orally transmitted tune.
A second would be the spread of printed music into bourgeois homes in the nineteenth century; not surprisingly, the musical language drew heavily on existing notated styles — opera and domestic song.
This was soon followed by the growth of a song-writing industry for music hall and variety theatre.
Bourgeois musical experience was largely privatized and domesticated; working-class musical experience — formerly centred around collectively shared localities (streets, pubs)— shifted to framed public spaces which eventually became constituents of a national and international musical commodity market.
Another important moment is the American music publishing ‘war’ between rival organizations in 1939–41.
The dispute between ASCAP (the Tin Pan Alley songwriters' organization) and American radio allowed a new category of composer (represented by BMI) into the market.
These composers, producing largely in the ‘hillbilly’ and ‘race’genres, often used different methods, codifying or ‘transcribing’what were essentially performances rather than producing prescriptive scores; and their methods suited the needs of the emergent recording industry exactly (see Whit comb 1973: 108–9, 206–12).
When performers in this industry, such as the Beatles, started composing their own songs — sometimes writing them, more often producing them directly, using oral, experimental, collective methods — another significant move had been made; and a second phase in this process may be associated with the advent of relatively cheap, accessible electronic equipment (synthesizers, mixers, rhythm and effects boxes of various sorts), which enable ‘amateurs’ to produce music without playing instruments at all in the traditional sense.
It is thus not easy to refute the idea that cultures and outlooks dominated by oral modes, literacy and print, or electronic media are in many respects distinctive.
And the differences feed through to specific practices like music.
Establishing these broad relationships is one of the real achievements of McLuhan and those influenced by him, and, at a time when he has gone out of fashion, it is worth stressing the importance of the ‘specificity of the medium’.
To follow the argument beyond this level, however, is more problematic.
We have already noted the dangers of abstractionism in considering media modes, and stressed the importance, in the real history, of dialectical interpenetration, resulting in tensions, struggles and compromises between characteristics of different modes, between varying practices in the same mode, and between  media form and musical content.
The important questions are always, first, what form oral production, notation and recording take in this precise situation and second, in what social context it is operating.
For example, it can be argued that between the orally produced blues of the solitary rural Southern black and the equally orally produced collective ‘gospel song’ of black Southern churches there are some rather crucial sociological differences, which typically manifest themselves in clear musical contrasts (secular/religious; personal/group; solo/choral; rhapsodic/iterative; free rhythm/ strong pulse; and so on ).
Orality does not seem to be the most important factor here.
It is, anyway, easy to idealize the ‘egalitarian amateurism’ of oral cultures.
In almost every society we know something about, except perhaps the very simplest, there are individuals who specialize in music or who are regarded as more skilled; in this respect, notation brings about not a total change but an added stimulus, and even without it, there can develop — as in blues or in British ‘folk’ traditions — an idea of particular songs being attached in some way to individuals: ‘that's X's song’.
Similarly, one could argue that the saturation of nineteenth-century bourgeois homes with printed music resulted, in some respects, not in a mass of passive reproducers but in an intensely active music culture, with a high regard for the immediacy of performance and the ‘spiritual’ value of musical communication.
The same may be true in respect of the working classes and mass-produced broadsides.
The commodification and rising class status of music hall song is more easily explained by referring to the penetration of culture by market relations than to the influence of musical literacy; the increasingly extensive and homogeneous market demanded more songs more quickly than oral methods could supply.
But this would also account for the fact that within this system many singers — Marie Lloyd, for instance— retained performing styles heavily influenced by oral traditions; they often did not read music — as, notoriously, the accompanying orchestras had to remember.
Music hall composers too sometimes had little musical literacy.
Felix McGlennon's account — probably not untypical — of his composing methods reminds us that some categories of nineteenth-century printed song originated in quasi-oral ways:
I used to hum a tune and strum it on a child's dulcimer, painfully seeking out the names of the notes.
Then…find a piece of music that ran to the same metre, and with that for my model…divide my ‘composition’ into bars.
Gradually, I acquired a rudimentary knowledge of music, and substituted the piano for the dulcimer…
I can with its aid commit my melodies to paper, and that is all I need (quoted in A. Bennett 1986: 9).
It is important to remember that in one sense, music, being a performed art, always has an ‘oral’ dimension, even when notated; writing a score certainly affects how the music is conceived, but not absolutely, for performance may restore some inflectional, intuitive elements.
Interestingly, Shepherd and his ‘school’ tend to focus their discussion of musical literacy on the extreme representatives of notational abstraction, prescription and calculation, the Austro-German tradition from J.S. Bach through to Schoenberg; less extreme practices would modify the picture and soften the obsession which, ironically, they share with the very traditions in musicology and aesthetics that they attack.
A good example would be the nineteenth-century Italian ‘opera industry’, which, under pressure — musical and social — from the high status in its traditions of sung performance , made relatively informal use of notation (see Rosselli 1984).
This music, incidentally, was a vital influence in British and American bourgeois domestic song, an influence which can in fact be traced right through to the years after the First World War, in such singers as Al Jolson.
Western music as a whole, since at least the late Middle Ages, is best seen as a ‘total system’.
Diachronically there are no simple antitheses; rather there is a continuum with certain quantum jumps, often marked by — among other factors — changing relationships between oral and written inputs or by new kinds of notation.
Examples would be the abandonment in the later eighteenth century of figured bass and of optional parts in favour of completely written-out orchestral scores; and the writing out of vocal ornamentation by Rossini, followed by other nineteenth-century Italian opera composers, instead of leaving it to be improvised — though this did not necessarily mean that singers followed their instructions!
Synchronically the system is characterized by cross-influence; by ‘colonial’ extension (into lower classes, and into extra-European regions) and ‘colonial implants’(American blacks); and, contrariwise, by upward-moving subversion and renewal.
These processes have involved constant interplay between oral and literate sources and techniques in so-called folk, popular and art traditions (see Maróthy 1974).
There is a danger in all McLuhanite positions of a simple essentialism: an intrinsically ‘natural’, ‘healthy’ musicality is corrupted and destroyed by literacy.
And this often results in a simple ‘return’ theory of history in which oral, literate and electronic stages represent an arch shape.
But real (as distinct from potential) musicality is not ‘natural’— it is learned.
And there is a historical progression in musical practice.
This is dialectical, both in the sense that it is marked by many kinds of interplay, as we have seen, and in the sense that at each stage there is retention and extension of existing elements, as well as negation of them.
Thus, in important respects both literate and electronic stages represent (at least potentially) an extension of democratic access to kinds of musical knowledge and creativity — just as both also (potentially) increase consumerist passivity.
Both bring into being an increase in the socialization of production, through division of labour and its necessary co-ordination (potentially alienated, potentially collectivized).
This is not to deny the differences; it is simply to stress both the connections — which link them within what Raymond Williams calls a Long Revolution — and the importance of the word ‘potential’.
This point can help us understand the contradictions within recorded popular music: the fact that there is no simple return to oral techniques; that the record form carries a vast range of content types (including ‘literate’ ballads related to bourgeois traditions); that production methods also differ widely, often using written components as well as‘oral’techniques; that the modern recording studio is actually more suited to producing precisely synchronized rhythms and textures, and complex structural processes, than is notation (as well as being suited also to other things).
We need to know much more about specific cases of production and their effects on musical form.
What differences follow, for example, from the young Elvis Presley starting out from printed song-copies but slowly transforming them in lengthy sessions in Sam Phillips's Sun studio, as against Lennon and McCartney taking mostly orally worked-out ideas to George Martin who then might transform them through literate methods — for instance , the addition of written parts?
We need much more investigation into the exact similarities and differences between oral and recording techniques, and their effects.
Clearly, listening to a Robert Johnson record now, in Britain, is very different from dancing to him playing live in a black bar in Mississippi in 1936; and there are probably consequential differences in the music itself, too (for example, Johnson would at the very least be constrained by the time-limits imposed by the record form — as all musicians, even to some extent on LPs, are; thus, in some ways a Duke Ellington concert, in a ‘bourgeois’ concert hall, using written parts, might turn out a more ‘oral’experience than the same piece encapsulated on a twelve-inch record).
But what exactly are the differences, and the connections?
They can patently not be completely summed up as a ‘retribalization’ by the ‘electric age’.
We can certainly say that in an important sense a record is finished — finite, objectified — in a way that oral performance is not; indeed, in this sense it is, ironically, recordings rather than scores which represent an extreme form of reified abstraction (with the resulting potential alienation of producer and consumer).
The immediacy of musical ‘speech’ is frozen into electric ‘print’, producing an ‘acoustic publication’.
We could argue, then, that recording comes at the culmination of one era as much as at the start of another, and that the blanket concepts of ‘mass media’ and ‘mechanical reproduction’need opening up.
Maybe there is a confusing conflation here of ‘mechanical reproducibility’ and what has been called ‘electronic producibility’: the capacity to transform, extend and decentralize production itself.
After all, the former applies to print as well as recording: the differences between score and record, though startling in degree, are simply in the extent and speed of dissemination, and the degree of mediation, affecting directness of access.
Similarly, as Benjamin found with film, mass dissemination does not guarantee innovative production.
The conjunction between the record-commodity and the new production media is historical but not necessary; it is possible, for instance, to attach electronically produced music to the context of the bourgeois concert, as avant-garde composers have shown.
Given the prevalence of the commodity record form, this distinction will remain, and it provides a more fruitful way of looking at present contradictions than diagnostic analyses of recorded music into ‘oral’ and ‘literate’elements.
In this situation, moreover, the distinction between mass as collectivity and mass as aggregate becomes crucial.
So long as the new productive potentials take this form — which cannot guarantee and may contradict the thrust of the content — progressive, collective effects will depend vitally on the nature of the musical content and on the mode of its reception and use.
The concept of ‘retribalization’, despite its ideological distortions, is referring to something actual (to do with an instantaneous commonality of awareness, and with certain contents and techniques possessing ‘collectivizing’ tendencies and associations; but it obscures the point that the important task is to investigate the precise ways in which these characteristics operate, sociologically and phenomenologically, in differing contexts, social, musical and political.