

ECONOMIC CLASS RELATIONS AND THE SOCIALIST PROJECT
Chapter 3 outlined the development of the impersonal capital as arguably the dominant mode of possession of the means of production in the contemporary British social formation.
Chapter 4 extended the analysis to consider in economic terms the position of the ‘personal sector’ wage and salary-earning employees, and the effects of the saving of this sector on accumulation — the expansion of the salaried strata in particular being, at least in part, the obverse of the rise of the impersonal capital.
Given my concentration so far on the possession/separation issue, and its relation to the circulation process, and given my earlier insistence that economic class relations at the level of possession/separation cannot be conceived as the underlying ‘essence’ of social and political collectivities and movements, which demand analysis in their own right, I am not yet in a position to draw full ‘political conclusions’(the following chapters will take us some way further in this direction).
But although the realm of political forces and their support blocs — the realm of political agency — remains to be investigated, the foregoing analysis of the economic class structure does yield certain implications in terms of what is at stake in socialist transformation.
It will therefore be appropriate to offer in this chapter an account of some of these implications.
It will be argued that the developments of the economic class structure noted in the previous two chapters open up certain opportunities for socialism, but also place certain constraints on what a socialist movement can hope to achieve.
But before investigating these opportunities and constraints it is necessary to outline what one takes ‘socialist objectives’ to be, in broad terms.
Some comments on this score have been made above (in particular, see the final section of the Introduction); for present purposes I can summarise my view of these objectives as follows:
1.
The development of economic planning directed towards the well-being of workers and their families, retired workers and those unable to work, both immediately — in terms of material living standards — and in the longer term (planning of investment in industrial  capacity, social ‘infrastructure’ and social amenities; avoidance of long-term environmental degradation).
This may be conceived in terms of constructing a ‘socialised appropriation’ of the social product and progressively restricting the sphere of commodity production and circulation, and monetary calculation based on profitability (although the elimination of the latter may be an unattainable theoretical limit).
2.
The development of participative popular democracy both ‘at work’ and in a broader social context — in itself a distinction the sharpness of which socialists wish to reduce by such means as Marx's ‘polytechnic’education and the creation of closer links between industry and community.
3.
As an integral condition of democracy at work and beyond, the progressive reduction of social hierarchy in the division of labour , whether this hierarchy is thought in terms of mental/manual labour (Poulantzas), function of capital/function of labour (Carchedi), ‘conception’ versus ‘execution’(Braverman), or in some other way.
Linked with this, also the compression and restructuring of income differentials.
(Although, again, the complete abolition of hierarchy, whether of function or income, may be an unattainable theoretical limit.)
These points are not exhaustive, but they will serve my purpose.
The object now is to analyse the implications of the current structure of economic class relations for these objectives, and therefore also to render more precise the objectives.
I shall consider first the issue of socialisation of production and planning, then address the question of industrial democracy/workers' control at the level of enterprise.
Socialisation and planning
It is a central thesis of Marxism that the accumulation of capital creates certain of the economic conditions of existence of socialism.
In ‘Capital’ Marx wrote that the ‘immanent laws of capitalist production itself lead to ‘the growth of the cooperative form of the labour process, the conscious technical application of science…the transformation of the means of labour into forms which can only be used in common, the economising of all means of production by their use as the means of production of combined, socialised labour’(1976, p. 929).
The concentration and centralisation of capitals (growth and merging respectively) lead to a ‘constant decrease in the number of capitalist magnates’ and increasingly the ‘monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode of production, which has flourished alongside and under  it’(ibid.).
Production, that is, becomes progressively socialised under capitalism, and hence progressively incompatible with the ‘capitalist integument’.
At the same time there also grows the ‘revolt of the working class’, which is ‘trained, united, and organised’ by capitalism itself (ibid.).
In Marx's more ‘deterministic’ formulations these two tendencies —socialisation of production, growth of the working class revolt against exploitation — together guarantee the historical triumph of communism, ‘capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a natural process, its own negation’(ibid.).
I have already argued (Chapter l) that capitalist development does not of itself lead to the political unification of the working class.
Marx's arguments for this position, as elaborated in the ‘Communist Manifesto’, were examined and found to be seriously problematic.
And this discussion will be taken further in the following chapters.
Within the present context, however, I shall concentrate on the question of the socialisation of production.
If capitalist development does not lead automatically to the formation of a united opposition class determined to ‘expropriate the expropriators’, does it not at least lay the ‘economic’ foundations for socialism, constructing a system of socialised production in relation to which capitalist property becomes increasingly inappropriate?
But this question, which Marx answers in the affirmative, is badly posed.
‘Socialisation’ is the problematic concept: for Marx socialisation of production stands in inevitable contradictory tension with capitalism.
We have seen above how he conceptualised the joint stock company as a mere ‘transitional’ form, an unstable half-way house between capitalism and its abolition: this was because the joint stock form represented the socialisation of capital itself, which had to be a ‘self-dissolving contradiction’.
Modern Marxist writers as far apart in other ways as Poulantzas and Cuder et al .
have stressed against this view that there is socialisation and socialisation.
The new capitalism of the impersonal multidivisional enterprises and the financial institutions deploying employees' saving has produced a specifically capitalist ‘socialisation’ of production, embodied in social forms and practices which in many cases will have to be deconstructed before socialism can be developed.
This is a powerful criticism.
It does indeed seem as though Marx's concept of ‘socialisation’ was too general and too poor.
It was linked with a general philosophical theme deriving from Hegel: socialisation within capitalism was the ‘negation of the negation’(Marx, loc. cit.).
As Bachelard (1972) argued for the case of the  natural sciences, general philosophical conceptions can often function as ‘epistemological obstacles’, providing a simple and apparently clear answer where there should be a series of well-defined questions .
In the spirit of this observation, however, it is not enough to argue that Marx's views have been shown to be false by the continuing development of capitalist socialisation.
One must try to locate the precise questions with which to replace Marx's schematism.
Let us therefore re-pose the problem.
Considering the particular forms of ‘socialisation’ which have emerged with the development of the impersonal capital, to what extent do these increase or limit the opportunities for socialist transformation of the economy?
How can socialists develop their arguments and strategies to gain the maximum purchase over the reality of contemporary capitalist property relations?
In what ways can planned and democratic economic forms be presented as a feasible and superior development/transformation of existing forms?
If it is clear enough that capitalist development brings social planning of the economy closer to the realms of possibility than, say, peasant and artisanal production it should also be clear that socialists must pose and answer these questions if they are to intervene effectively in politics.
At the outset it may be noted that the development of large-scale impersonal capitals, integrating purchasing, production and marketing within a multidivisional form, substantially increases the element of ‘planning’ within capitalism.
As Chandler has it, the ‘invisible hand’ of market relations between independent enterprises is progressively displaced by the ‘visible hand’of managerial coordination.
And if ‘planning’ is now possible at the level of the giant enterprise, perhaps straddling several branches of production, then the planning of the economy to meet social objectives is at least‘put on the agenda’: what was only a long run historical speculation in the era of smaller-scale entrepreneurial capitalism begins to look like an economically feasible proposition.
But this general remark has immediately to be qualified, in two important ways.
First, neither the development of the ‘visible hand’ in coordinating ‘vertical’flows from the extraction of raw materials through to final sales, nor the rise of the diversified corporation carrying out a planned allocation of resources between different product divisions, abolishes competition between capitalist enterprises.
In fact, contrary to a persistent theme in neoclassical economics, competition between giant ‘dominant firms’ is often fiercer than the competition between small enterprises in unconcentrated markets: increasing scale  often goes along with the development of a keener rationality of profit.
planning on the part of large-scale enterprises, that is, remains a planning directed towards the production of commodities at a profit, in competition with other large enterprises.
Second, the development of capitalist integration and planning in the pursuit of profit cuts across national boundaries.
The rise of the ‘multinationals’ has received much comment and I shall not go into great detail here.
What is of particular interest is that direct investment overseas by such enterprises has become increasingly important over the post war years (as opposed to portfolio investment, of which British capital has a long tradition), and that this phenomenon is especially important for the British economy.
In 1971 the UK was second only to the USA as a home base for multinational companies; overseas production by British-based multinationals as a proportion of domestic output in 1977 was, at 40 per cent, higher than the corresponding figure for any other national economy except Switzerland; and in 1971 nearly 20 per cent of UK output was produced by overseas based companies.
Both ‘foreign’ multinationals operating within Britain and British enterprises with substantial overseas production facilities can ‘plan’the international distribution of their profit-making taking into account comparative costs, the state and growth rate of national markets and the degree of militancy or subordination of labour.
They can also play off national governments against one another, taking advantage of discrepancies of company law and taxation policy, and governmental competition to attract investment through regional and industrial policy.
The point that capitalist planning is increasingly conducted on an international scale poses problems for the socialist project.
A question must be raised concerning the appropriate level at which socialist planning can take place: can it be national in scope or must it be international?
A lengthy discussion of this issue is beyond the scope of this work but given its importance in relation to the socialist project I shall make some comments.
A useful starting point here is Rowthorn's discussion (1980, Chapter 3).
Rowthorn suggests that the continued existence of large scale capitalist enterprises possessing production facilities in several countries could render impossible the development of planning for social need in one particular national economy, so that a determined left government would be forced to break up such capitals and transfer the possession of the principal means of production to a planning authority at the level of the nation state.
That is, one aspect of the  ‘socialisation of production’ under capitalism — the international capitalist enterprise — would have to be dismantled to permit a socialist ‘socialisation’.
This can be represented schematically as below: The Left government in nation state 2 may be obliged to sever the relations of possession linking the operating units of the multidivisional international firms to their general offices (indicated by crossed arrows) in order to gain control over the allocation of resources within the nation state.
According to Rowthorn, multinational B's operating unit in nation state l might be appropriated by the left government and sold off to help provide funds with which to compensate multinational A for the appropriation of its operating unit in nation state 2 (in order to reduce the chances of direct counter-revolutionary intervention by other states).
There is, however, a further problem here: even if the required ‘nationalisation’ of possession were accomplished, it would not be possible to opt out of the international division of labour with other capitalist economies.
Many of the production facilities currently possessed by international enterprises are integrated within a Europe-wide plan of production.
‘A substantial part of Britain's trade takes place within multinational firms; components produced in one country are shipped to a subsidiary of the same firm in another country, Ford motor cars, for example, are produced on a European-wide basis.
If a foreign subsidiary in this country were nationalised its parent company might refuse to supply necessary components or purchase its output…’(ibid., p. 89).
‘Nationalisation’ of capitalist property does not abolish the real economic interdependence of units of production in different national economies.
Rowthorn's argument is important, in that it highlights an irony of capitalist socialisation.
Traditionally, among British socialists at any rate, ‘nationalisation’ of industry has been conceived as an unambiguously socialist aim.
By transferring the means of production to state ownership, nationalisation represents a broadening of the scope of economic calculation beyond the limited horizon of private profit.
But the type of argument advanced by Rowthorn carries the implication that nationalisation of modern international enterprises represents, in one respect, a restriction of the scope of economic calculation by tying it to national objectives.
If multinational companies were wholly sinister organisations, purely instruments of sophisticated exploitation, then one need not have any qualms about the project of ‘nationalising’ and therefore dismantling them.
But if such enterprises can in part‘justify’ themselves on economic grounds, with regard to economies of scale and of transaction costs, then matters become trickier.
There could be real economic costs involved in nationalisation.
Although it will not do to assume that political developments in different nation states will ever be sufficiently ‘synchronised’ to avoid entirely the problems of advancing the socialist project in one country, or a restricted group of countries, this consideration does point to the vital need for maximum international coordination in the pursuit of socialist objectives.
Given the difficulty of constructing international institutions ex nihilo I believe that this means British socialists must give more serious attention to the opportunities at EEC level.
The chances of successful socialist planning would be greatly increased, and the scope for multinationals to play governments off against one another reduced, if European socialists could make a more effective collective impact on the making of EEC policy and legislation.
So constraints, and opportunities, at the international level are important.
Nonetheless certain advances can be made at the national  level, and given that politics and governmental power are still largely national in scope certain advances must be made at that level if they are to be made at all.
If I have begun by stressing the difficulties connected with the internationalisation of large-scale impersonal capitals, I shall now try to identify certain points d'appui offered for socialist argument by the development of capitalist property relations.
The historic opportunity of investment planning
‘…
There is no doubt that the credit system will serve as a powerful lever during the transition from the capitalist mode of production to the mode of production of associated labour…’
(Marx, 1972, p. 607).
To recall the conclusions of my earlier analysis: we now have a capitalism in which the greater part of the means of production is possessed by impersonal capitalist enterprises — legally distinct subjects employing salaried managerial labour — the majority of whose shares is held by further impersonal enterprises.
And the latter enterprises (financial institutions) have drawn the funds to acquire this equity stake from the savings of the personal sector, that is mainly wage and salary-earning employees.
This veritably ‘socialised’ capitalism may be construed ideologically in a variety of ways.
In the USA Peter Drucker has talked of a ‘pension fund socialism’: the workers, through their pension funds, ‘own’ a large part of private business and profits have become pensions, or ‘deferred wages’, so that surplus value has disappeared.
Sir Harold Wilson has gone along with this view, saying that trade union members control ‘some 50 per cent of the equity capital of the 250 or so biggest industrial companies, through pension fund trustees in the main accountable to them’(quoted in the ‘New Statesman’ 24/10/80).
This amounts to a form of nationalisation, and represents ‘the biggest social revolution we have had in this country’.
Tories such as Sir Keith Joseph put a different slant on the phenomenon, talking of a ‘people's capitalism’ or ‘property-owning democracy’rather than‘pension fund socialism’, but the basic conception is the same: shareholding on the part of the financial institutions which collect personal savings and pay out pensions, annuities or endowments gives everyone, trade unionists included, a stake in the production of commodities for profit.
There is no longer really a ‘propertyless class’ who might have nothing to lose but their chains.
When enterprises plan their production on the criterion of profitability they are only honouring their obligation to their shareholders —— to earn them a reasonable return on their money — and if those shareholders are institutions which are in turn merely trustees of the people's savings…well, evidently notions of class struggle and exploitation must be out of date.
But this ideological construction is highly vulnerable, one might even say feeble.
There has been a real enough change in the form of capitalist property but the notion that the workers ‘control’ industry through their pension funds or life assurance contributions is manifestly absurd.
Most workers have no idea of what is done with ‘their’ savings, even in the case of pension funds which are not farmed out to the merchant banks for management.
They do not know where the money is ‘invested’, whether in British enterprises or overseas, in speculation on property or ‘art treasures’, or in lending to the government to finance unemployment.
All they are interested in — all they are generally permitted to be interested in — is whether they get a reasonable pension at the end of the day.
And the financial institutions, subscribing fully to the ideology of the ‘smoothly functioning capital market’, take it for granted that the best interests of their personal sector customers are served by placing funds where they can get the ‘best’ and ‘safest’monetary returns, regardless of the consequences for productive investment.
So the right to a pension or endowment is a far cry from any power of possession over means of production, or positive influence over the allocation of resources.
This blatant discrepancy between the actual structure of property relations and its ideological appropriation in ‘pension fund socialism’ or ‘people's capitalism’should form an excellent starting point for socialist argument and propaganda at a number of levels.
Workers and trade unions could be encouraged to insist that the management of their massive savings should be made accountable to them, and should be directed towards employment-creating, socially useful investment.
Of course, if the financial institutions were forced to explain themselves we know what they would say.
They have already said it to the Wilson Committee: we are doing our best to preserve the value of the funds entrusted to us, and any attempt to force us to invest in projects offering sub-optimal returns for ‘social’ reasons is an attempt to make us break faith with our customers.
This shows the importance of attacking the ideologies of British financial capital, and in this attack Keynes is a valuable ally of Marx.
Even from the point of view of ‘saver’, let alone‘worker’, conservative/speculative management of funds can be shown to be damaging: savers' interests lie in ensuring that when they retire, or reach a specified age, the pensions, endowments or annuities they receive will support a reasonable standard of living.
But this fundamentally depends on the level of output of the economy when the savers reach old age.
Simply setting money aside now does not in any way guarantee the output of goods and services x years hence to meet the needs of old people; neither does lending money at a profit.
That future output depends on real investment in productive assets now and in the future, while the piling-up of financial assets in excess of real investment can only be inflationary in the long run (a ‘long run’ which is already with us).
So any changes in the financial system which promote a higher level of productive investment will permit a higher living standard for today's savers in the years to come.
Thus far, the effective popularisation of basic Keynesian arguments would help strengthen a socialist case for the social planning of investment as in the interests of workers, both immediately (in terms of employment prospects and living standards)and in their capacity as savers for the future.
From a socialist viewpoint, however, the argument must be taken further than Keynes.
Keynes imagined a socially painless ‘euthanasia of the rentier’ which would be ‘nothing sudden, merely a gradual but prolonged continuance of what we have seen recently in Great Britain, and will need no revolution’(Keynes, 1936, p. 376).
The ‘functionless investor’ would fade away in face of the eminent reasonableness of social planning of investment.
He did not foresee the rise of the new rentiers — the financial institutions collecting workers' savings — yet these are more organised, powerful and ideologically-armed than the old-style rentiers (even they haven't faded away).
It will take a fight, not merely a debate and the passing of time, to disarm the financial institutions and restructure the control over investment funds.
Notice, though, that the socialist case can be advanced on stronger ideological ground than ever before.
Within the British political culture it is rare for workers (even manual industrial ‘proletarians’) to consider the wholesale expropriation of the property of another class as a reasonable political option, but if the financial institutions insist they are only guardians of the people's savings then why should the ‘people’ not call them to account?
This argument will not force the financial institutions to surrender, but it can help to ‘legitimate’ the case for investment planning and develop the popular support which would be needed in the ensuing political battles.
Broad political support will not, of course, be won merely by appealing to the inherent rationality of planning as opposed to the profit-oriented allocation of resources.
Socialists will have to say more  about how such planning would operate: its mechanisms and the criteria employed for allocating resources.
It is a serious lacuna in socialist thought to imagine that the virtues of ‘planning for social need’ are self-evident, that the only grounds for doubt must be vested interest in the workings of the ‘free market’.
It is all too easy to counterpose ‘need’ versus ‘profit’as the criterion for production — in fact it is just the mirror-image of the apologetic proposition that production for profit is essentially the same thing as production for need.
Many people who are not committed to the market mechanism as the ‘best of all possible worlds’ nonetheless feel a justifiable scepticism about planning.
What is to ensure that the allocation of resources is not arbitrary, subject to the sway of ad hoc political pressure?
Even if the planners are enlightened, how will planning actually work?
Marxists have often been reticent on these questions.
This is partly because of Marx's strictures on Utopian socialism.
Marx argued, quite correctly, that any broad change in the property relations of a society would involve sharp political, if not military, struggles and that the course of such struggles could not be legislated in advance according to the blueprints of some would-be social reformer.
He therefore made a radical break with the French socialist tradition of speculation on the details of a socialist society, in favour of developing the real working class movement against capitalism which would work out the ‘details of socialism’ in the process of struggle.
But if Marx's arguments were valid in their historical context, they should not be allowed to block the development of concrete proposals which, although not acting as historical blueprints, could help to more accurately define, and hence mobilise support for, socialist objectives.
So the question is this: if the developing property relations and pattern of financial flows within British capitalism increasingly open up a space for socialist argument in favour of planned investment to benefit both ‘workers’ and ‘savers’(substantially overlapping categories), how is that space to be exploited?
What credible proposals can be advanced to catalyse support?
What means can be used to isolate the implacable opponent of such a change?
As regards the appropriation of funds for the purposes of planned provision, a first point is that the financial institutions could be short-circuited to some extent by increasing taxation of the wealthy.
We have perhaps conceded too much to ‘pension find socialism’: although workers' savings are very important it remains true that income (and hence saving) is highly unequally distributed.
The flow of funds from the personal sector to the financial institutions does not only  represent workers providing for their retirement, but also represents the accumulation of wealth whereby socially privileged strata transmit their cultural patrimony (e.g. saving through endowment policies to provide for private education).
This latter aspect of personal saving could be reduced by instituting a more steeply progressive income tax and/or a wealth tax.
In the long run it may be possible to go further than this, to appropriate in the form of tax revenue a large part of the income which workers would otherwise have put into long-term savings schemes, and to expand commensurately the socialised provision for retired workers (state pensions plus appropriate social amenities).
More immediately, however, this may be politically inopportune, and widely resented as ‘robbing the people of their savings’.
It would be possible instead to preserve the relationship between the financial institutions and the personal sector savers but to alter substantially the deployment of funds by obliging the institutions to contribute to a national investment bank, giving them in return bonds with a rate of return linked to the real growth rate of the economy.
Probably more important than the detail of how a left government could appropriate personal saving, is the question of deployment of the funds.
It is after all the effectiveness (or otherwise) of the socialised deployment of the personal sector surplus which would over time build support for (or resentment against) any such scheme.
If one is to present a credible case for investment planning as a progressive development one has to consider the problems raised by the choice of criteria of operation for a national investment bank.
To start with a relatively easy issue, part of the funds raised could be channelled into public sector investment projects, of which there is presently in Britain a substantial backlog (e.g. modernisation of the railways, energy conservation measures, renewal of urban sewage systems, accelerated house-building programme).
There could be problems of ranking priorities here, becoming more acute as full employment of labour and means of production is approached.
These would best be resolved by a form of cost-benefit which pays close attention to the social ‘externalities’ involved in investment projects, which compares the time profiles of return on projects competing for resources at non-usurious rates of discount, and which does not operate with the technocratic pretension that all factors in an investment decision can be rigorously quantified (i.e. which does not disguise as purely technical questions matters which should properly be open to political debate).
Apart from public sector projects, the more difficult question of  providing investment finds for private sector enterprises also arises.
Of course, if one envisages the nationalisation of all the major enterprises (‘top monopolies’), then the problem becomes internalised within the ‘public sector’, but two points here: first, the present discussion is predicated on the hypothesis that there is a fruitful ideological space within which to argue for socialist investment planning — it does not depend on the (counterfactual) proposition that there is wide popular support for sweeping nationalisation of enterprises.
Second, even if the major private capitalist enterprises were nationalised this would not abolish the problem of allocating resources between the kind of ‘infrastructural’ provision, and social services, which are already within the public sector in Britain and those areas of commodity production which are at present the domain of ‘private enterprise’.
It is widely accepted that one of the main factors contributing to the relative decline and adverse trading position of the British economy is a shortfall of investment in private industry, and socialists cannot afford to be indifferent to this since the employment prospects and livelihood of millions of workers are at stake.
A national investment bank deploying a major part of personal savings would have to find means of channelling funds to private industry, and develop control measures to ensure that the funds are used productively.
When the TUC representatives on the Wilson Committee argued along these lines, the financial institutions poured scorn on them: how can you ‘force-feed’ industry with investment funds?
If capitalist enterprises see the prospect of adequate profits then they will borrow investment funds without any government having to insist, and if they do not see investment as profitable then it is useless to try to force them.
And it is not only the financial institutions which present this objection; it has also been put forward by Cutler et al .
(1978, Conclusion) in criticism of the TUC/Labour left ‘Alternative Economic Strategy’.
In answer to this, there are cases in which the notion of force feeding is very wide of the mark.
The conservatism of the British financial institutions biasses them against ‘high risk’ investment projects which nonetheless may have a strategic importance for the development of the national economy.
INMOS in the late 1970s was an obvious case in point: this enterprise was very willing to invest state funds, but unable to raise sufficient capital privately.
All the same there is a strong argument that low investment in the British economy is not just a matter of funds being unavailable; there is a reluctance to borrow for investment purposes on the part of many enterprises.
So let us examine this problem of ‘force feeding’ more closely.
It  is true that capitalist enterprises will invest only if they expect an ‘adequate’ rate of return on capital.
But what conditions are required for a given investment project to offer such profitability?
Cutler et al .
(1978, Chapters 10 and 11) have argued forcefully that the calculation of profitability is by no means a transparent and unambiguous exercise, and that the method and effects of such calculation can vary between enterprises.
All the same it is useful here to set up a paradigm of the profitability calculation against which to assess the prospects for investment planning, while accepting that there is considerable scope for variation in the actual calculations performed by particular enterprises.
Leaving aside the problems of precise definition of revenues and costs, we can say that the profit accruing to an enterprise equals revenue minus costs.
Most investment projects, however, will involve substantial initial costs and will generate sales revenue over an extended period, so the problem arises of comparison of present costs and future prospective revenues.
The method of comparison which is increasingly accepted as most ‘rational’, at least by large-scale enterprises with sophisticated calculation procedures, involves discounting future revenues (or costs) at a rate of discount equal to the ‘cost of (money) capital’ to the enterprise.
The Net Present Value calculation, for instance, yields a figure of merit for an investment project which effectively shows whether the rate of return on a project is in excess of the compound interest to be paid on the money capital required to finance it.
If the Net Present Value is positive, this shows that an enterprise borrowing funds at the given interest rate would make a profit after meeting interest payments, or alternatively that an enterprise possessing surplus money capital would make a better return on the funds by carrying out the investment project rather than lending the funds at interest.
If a given investment project within the domain of operation of capitalist enterprises were considered desirable as part of an investment plan (to satisfy a definite ‘social need’, to gain export revenue, to develop a ‘growth industry’, to preserve employment) and yet the capitalist enterprises concerned were unwilling to invest then the investment planning authorities would have two broad options: either nationalise the enterprises and force them to invest on criteria other than those of profitability, or ‘distort’ the market to render the project sufficiently profitable to appeal to the enterprises.
Without wishing to rule out the first option I should like to consider the second, to examine the possibilities of indirect leverage over investment decisions.
First, note that there are two general factors influencing the profitability  calculation which could be substantially altered by the institution of a national investment bank appropriating the personal sector surplus and also promoting large-scale public sector investment projects.
On the one hand the cost of money capital could be reduced, by offering funds for projects consistent with the overall investment plan at low interest rates, and on the other the level of aggregate demand could be boosted by the public sector projects.
This latter effect would directly influence the calculations of suppliers of commodities to the public sector, and indirectly influence other enterprises through its ‘multiplier’ repercussions.
In this way, many investment projects which enterprises are at present unwilling to undertake could be made attractive: the cost of capital would fall while the prospective returns rise.
Far from ‘force feeding’, the problem would be to assess selectively the enterprises deserving investment funds.
These effects would be real enough, but it would be naive to suppose that cheap loans and the raising of aggregate demand would render all socially desirable investment projects in the sphere of commodity production sufficiently profitable to make capitalist enterprises come clamouring for public funds.
The closure of the Talbot works in Linwood in Scotland, announced in February 1981, with its resulting localised mass unemployment, is a pointed reminded of the limitations of cheap loans or grants as a means of maintaining the allegiance of capitalist enterprises to given investment projects.
And in this case it seems likely that even if it were not for the depressed state of aggregate demand in the British market, the commodities produced by Talbot at Linwood would not have generated ‘sufficient’ profit for Peugeot.
We have to identify the factors other than usurious interest rates and deficiency of aggregate demand which can make investment projects unattractive to enterprises.
First, it may be that some commodity-producing projects deemed socially useful are unprofitable because the ‘social need’ which they are supposed to answer fails to find expression as a monetary demand on the market.
If the ‘need’ can be clearly justified on social grounds then there is a prima facie case for either altering the distribution of income (if that would permit the need to be translated into monetary demand) or producing the product for social non-commodity distribution (which would presumably involve nationalisation of the enterprises concerned).
The second obvious point here is competition.
The ‘cost of capital’ may be low enough and there may be a strong demand for the type of commodity which the investment project aims at producing, but if other competing enterprises are able to supply the same commodity or a close substitute more  cheaply (or of a higher quality) then the project will not be ‘commercially viable.’
At this point it is necessary to ask on what grounds socialists would wish to see an investment project of this nature (i.e. unprofitable in the face of market competition) supported within the framework of investment planning.
Without claiming to treat the question exhaustively, we can identify some possible reasons.
First the competition may be from ‘cheap imports’.
It is rather too easy to rally chauvinistic backing for the support of industries against foreign competition but nonetheless there may be good grounds for protection.
The ‘cheap imports’ may be the result of an over-valued exchange rate for the national currency.
If that is the only problem faced by certain investment projects then it can be solved fairly easily by an interventionist government willing to regulate international capital flows in order to adjust the external value of the currency (it is upward adjustment of the exchange rate which may be very difficult).
But even if the exchange rate is at a ‘realistic’ level certain industries may still face severe problems of international competition.
In some such cases specific protection, in the form of import controls, subsidies or state purchasing, may be justified on socialist grounds, for instance if the industry is a struggling ‘infant’ with good future prospects (‘good’, that is, in respect of the efficient satisfaction of social need), or even a struggling ‘geriatric’which stands a good chance of reviving its fortunes through a thorough re-investment programme.
And in cases which merit protection, if that is still not enough to induce voluntary investment of funds offered by the national investment bank there is again a prima facie case for nationalisation.
On the other hand there may be industries within the national economy in which enterprises stand to be progressively undercut by their international competitors in the long run.
In such cases protection may be justified in the short term to alleviate the employment effects of a rundown of the industry but long run protectionism would reduce the potential material living standards of the working population.
In such cases there has been a shift in the pattern of ‘comparative advantage’ on an international scale.
Even if this shift is due to the availability of cheap labour power in other countries it is by no means obvious that socialists should support long-run protectionism: it may represent considerable progress for a ‘Third World’ worker to be exploited by capital in the production of labour-intensive commodities rather than by a landlord.
Here there is a good case for devoting social funds to retraining programmes and the development of new enterprises (public sector or  cooperative) on a scale properly commensurate with the problem, rather than trying to ‘force feed’ the industry with investment funds.
I have discussed international competition, but of course there are also competitive pressures within the national economy.
In principle, such pressures could be abolished by means of widespread nationalisation but again even if this had sufficient political support the problem of optimising the allocation of resources would remain.
However unpalatable, socialists have to consider the idea that profitability may function to some extent as an indicator of relative efficiency in the use of resources, especially as between substitutes for meeting a given social need.
Of course, differential profitability may reflect differential exploitation of labour: in this case a left government could intervene to the advantage of enterprises which were less profitable because of less intensive and oppressive working and/or better wages by, for instance , minimum wage legislation or fostering union organisation in the more oppressive enterprises.
Consider, though, a case in which a given enterprise is unwilling to invest because of low expected profitability, yet this low prospective profitability can be traced neither to faulty managerial calculations, nor to foreign competition of a kind justifying protection, nor to the failure of an identified ‘need’ for the enterprise's product to register as monetary demand, nor to internal competition from other enterprises operating a more intensive exploitation of labour.
The ‘bourgeois economist’ would certainly claim that such an enterprise was not using resources efficiently to satisfy consumers' wants and therefore would not merit investment funds and we have to ask whether he would be wrong.
Well, there could still be a case for investment in such an enterprise if it were shown that the lack of profitability was the result of higher costs than competitors stemming from locational disadvantages.
Say, for instance that transport costs are high relative to competitors', but yet if the enterprise were to be run down this would cause large-scale local unemployment.
Then one could argue for stable long-term subsidies to be granted to offset the higher transport costs, recognising that the higher resource cost of delivering the commodities to their consumers should be borne by the state which would otherwise have to bear the cost of unemployment (and which is also in a position to take account of the ‘social cost’ to the community involved).
But if it is not possible to identify any factor such as this, then the economist's verdict is probably correct: the enterprise is socially inefficient.
This may be due to managerial incompetence, in which case the state (having taken over the investment side of the financial institutions' business) could exercise its prerogative as ‘trustee of the people's savings’ to force managerial changes.
This could involve the institution of worker management (discussed more fully in the following section) with access to a state ‘management consultancy’ service.
On the other hand, the low prospective profitability could be due to the enterprise becoming trapped in a clearly sub-optimal line of production, i.e. one in which consumers were simply not willing to pay a price for the commodity  sufficient to cover its costs of production (including the opportunity cost of investment funds expressed in the rate of interest charged by the national investment bank).
This poses a problem similar to that of enterprises being progressively undercut by international competition but where long term protectionist measures are not justified: the best response may be to seek means of re-deploying the workers involved.
The intention behind the preceding arguments was not to examine exhaustively the investment criteria to be employed by a national investment bank with socialist pretensions.
It was rather to identify some of the concrete problems which would have to be faced in any such exercise.
I hope the discussion has this value: it addresses the question of intervention to further social objectives within the system of commodity-producing enterprises and, rather than positing nationalisation as panacea (a theme with a pronounced minority appeal), it identifies certain cases in which nationalisation could be argued as necessary to further social objectives as well as cases in which nationalisation might be of no obvious advantage.
The starting point was the issue of the opportunities offered to socialists by the current form of capitalist property in Britain, and my conclusion is that the socialised deployment of the personal sector financial surplus would permit a greatly accelerated rate of productive investment, yielding dividends in terms of socially useful output and employment, provided that the deployment of funds be carried out according to fairly well-defined criteria of rationality rather than merely in response to ad hoc political pressure.
At present the non-bank financial institutions collect the greater part of the personal sector financial surplus — the ‘surplus income’ which individuals are unable to use to finance real accumulation due to their separation from the means of production — and channel this into financing the government's deficit, acquiring company shares, investing in property or overseas, all under the guidance of a speculative mode of calculation.
Despite their increasing equity stake in capitalist enterprises they provide relatively little new investment finance and for much of the time act as passive  collectors of dividends.
Their mode of calculation has definite effects on industrial enterprises, but they do not generally intervene actively in the determination of company policy.
In contrast, a state investment bank under the guidance of a planning apparatus could make funds available for socially useful investment projects, and where these projects were demonstrably in the interests of working people, yet were not profitable enough to attract capitalist enterprises, the state could either adjust the parameters of the market to make them profitable (not always easy, but the state does have considerable means at its disposal to effect such adjustments) or failing that, nationalise the enterprises concerned, on relatively strong ideological ground.
I believe that by arguing along these lines socialists may be able to raise more popular support than by arguing for ‘nationalisation’ and ‘planning’in the abstract.
Some criticisms considered
I accept that in arguing in this way one must be aware of the general objections which socialists are likely to raise.
It may be argued that these proposals amount to no more than state capitalism.
True enough, insofar as the state provides investment funds for commodity-producing enterprises within this scheme ‘state capitalism’ is an accurate tag.
Only it is not clear that the identification of such a project as state capitalism is damning.
My argument is that state capitalism of the kind outlined above would be a highly progressive development.
It could sustain a more rapid development of the ‘productive forces’ contribute to the greater satisfaction of social needs and produce a high level of employment which would increase the social power of the working class.
In the long term such a state capitalism could develop towards a more fully socialised appropriation incorporating the physical planning of production, as political and economic circumstances permitted.
In this respect, my analysis can be located close to the ‘Alternative Economic Strategy’(AES)— which has been given its most lucid expression by the CSE London Working Group (1980)— in its acceptance of the need for socialists to offer constructive and credible proposals for regenerating economic growth and reducing unemployment even if these appear to fall short of ‘true socialism’.
Apart from the objection of principle that this is merely state capitalism I shall consider three further points.
First, if the foregoing appears to ignore questions of democracy within the enterprise that is only because of the order of exposition.
I fully accept that socialism  is not just about productive investment and full employment, and questions of democratic enterprise organisation are considered in the final section of this chapter which is complementary to the foregoing.
Second, and more substantial, there is the kind of objection to proposals linked to an Alternative Economic Strategy which has been raised by Cutler et al .
Their objection is actually twofold.
Discussing the proposals of Holland and Benn designed to rectify the short-fall in investment in the British economy they make this point:
‘We would argue that these positions which tie socialist politics to the success of a programme of ‘industrial regeneration’ are not a viable basis for socialist strategy.
This is for two reasons: first, these strategies largely ignore the political conditions of their implementation , and second, they fail to answer the question of whether such a ‘regeneration’ is possible and whether, if possible, it can take place under conditions which will be of benefit to socialist politics.
Holland and Benn stake their politics on the prospect of particular outcomes of the practice of management of capitalist national economies' (1978, p. 277).
The first objection, concerning the political conditions of implementation of AES-type proposals, is a telling one.
In elaborating such proposals there is admittedly a strong temptation to indulge in political rationalism: they are by nature proposals which give an important role to action on the part of a ‘socialist government’ or the ‘state’within which a socialist government is installed, yet it is often unclear what such a socialist government would look like, how it might come into being and from where it would draw its mass support.
Likewise it is often not sufficiently recognised that the ‘state’ which would supposedly execute the progressive measures might be very much disinclined to do so and anyway may be the object of considerable public mistrust.
I have attempted to guard against this temptation by qualifying the foregoing arguments, and pointing ahead to the later chapters in which the particular social forces (as opposed to economic classes) active in British society will receive a fuller treatment.
My arguments concerning the broad possibilities and constraints given by the present structure of capitalist property are not supposed to have the status of a ready-made political programme, and in discussing the possibilities for investment planning as a fruitful avenue for socialist argument I make no pretence to have identified the means of conversion of ‘social reason into social force’(to use Marx's formula).
But although I cannot do  so systematically at this juncture some limited anticipatory comments may be in order.
My hypothesis is that there is a space for a socialist argument in favour of investment planning; that such an argument could be presented in such a way as to appeal to organised labour and even to broader strata of the population concerned about employment prospects and their standard of living in retirement; that if organised workers were to support the proposal they could use their union organisation to press for social accountability of their savings funds; and that if the proposals were not linked to a ‘dogmatic’ pursuit of nationalisation they would stand a chance of recruiting some support from the more progressive elements of the state and corporate salariat — those whose technical expertise would be required in any such project, even if it is overlaid with oppressive ‘professional’and ‘managerial’ideologies — helping to isolate, so far as possible, reactionary financier elements.
And one institutional point in this context: it would be crucial in any socialist investment planning project to bypass the control over state finances on the part of the Treasury.
The Treasury is not a reactionary monolith, but the combination and interpenetration of the upper echelons of private financial capitalist enterprises and the Treasury sets up a formidable obstacle to radical change in the management of financial flows.
Even given substantial popular support, a socialist government/movement would have to give very careful thought to the development of a competent planning cadre able to hold its own against Treasury influence.
The latter part of the objection raised by Cutler et al .
i.e. their agnosticism concerning the possibility of a broad economic ‘regeneration’ on terms favourable to socialism, is based on weaker ground.
In expanding on this point they do develop some important arguments concerning the constraints which would face a socialist government attempting to advance an AES (for instance, the problems of ‘forcing’ investment referred to above, and the potential conflicts between such a government and the trade unions, given the need to raise labour productivity in order to develop a tenable trading position for the national economy) yet ultimately their position tends to a form of defeatism.
They set up a dichotomy thus: ‘Rather than scheming as to what a Left-Labour government should do, it is vital to consider the political basis on which such a government will become a possibility.’
They then argue that this means starting at a ‘more basic level’ by considering the following three sets of issues:
‘the political obstacles to advance within the practices of the Labour  Left and the labour movement itself;…broadening the base of mass support, creating institutions and organisations which extend the socialist movement beyond the minority of organised labour;…fighting for specific reforms in the organisation of capital that will create new positions of struggle and control for working people (limitations of shareholders’ and managements' powers, workers' representation etc.) and fighting for reforms in non-commodity areas such as health, education, and welfare that introduce elements of popular administration and control’(Cutler et al .,
1978, p. 283).
I have quoted these latter points at length because I can readily agree with them, and consider them important, but what I find politically weakening is the dichotomy between promoting socialist developments which do not depend on the existence of a socialist government and the stigmatised ‘scheming’ as to what such a government should do.
The point is that working people are bound to be concerned about issues which cannot be tackled effectively without central government involvement, issues such as mass unemployment, inflation, industrial decline, poverty, the social effects of government expenditure cuts.
These are important to a great many people, whether they are perceived in terms of localised effects impinging on their everyday lives or in terms of the national picture which emerges from news media coverage and wider reading.
If socialists aim at the formation of a government as a part of their strategy they must be ready to make their views known on these issues: how to reduce unemployment? how to avoid inflation? where the money would come from to provide better social services?
Granted, if socialists merely develop a list of pat answers to these questions (nationalisation, ‘planning’) while failing to fight for more immediately realisable socialist gains outside of government they will not get much of a hearing, but equally to write off the macroeconomic questions as too difficult to speculate about is to forego the right to contest the policies of a reactionary national government.
At the level of parliament, the news media and opinion poll data, management of the national economy has been the dominant issue in British politics for much of the post-war period and however important it is for socialists to insist that ‘the political’ be given a broader definition, they cannot afford to be silent on so important a concern.
I therefore contend that ‘scheming as to what a Left-Labour government should do’— in the sense of attempting to elaborate credible options for policy at a national level, while recognising the real problems involved — is actually a rather important part of developing ‘the  political basis on which such a government will become a possibility’.
This, in brief, is the framework of political calculation within which I have found it useful to investigate the idea of investment planning as a means of appropriating within socialist argument the changing structure of capitalist property in Britain.
The next section of this chapter will now extend this investigation to consider the complementary issue of the development of democratic forms of control within the enterprise.
Democracy at the level of the enterprise
One of the most basic features of capitalism is the separation of the workers from the means of production and one of the most basic aims of socialism is to abolish that separation, to regulate the allocation of resources and the expenditure of labour time according to the ‘republican and beneficent system of the association of free and equal producers ’(Marx, 1974, p. 90).
It is clear, however, that the socialist abolition of the separation of workers from the means of production cannot take the form of re-establishing the personal property of the individual worker in his/her own means of production on the model of peasant or artisanal conditions.
Small-scale production may have a certain place within a socialist economy but as a general alternative to modern large-scale industry it is merely utopian.
As Marx argues,
‘This mode of production pre-supposes the fragmentation of holdings and the dispersal of the other means of production.
As it excludes the concentration of these means of production, so it also excludes cooperation, division of labour within each separate process of production, the social control and regulation of the forces of nature, and the free development of the productive forces of society.
It is compatible only with a system of production and a society moving within narrow limits which are of natural origin’(Marx, 1976, pp. 927–8).
In the context of large-scale industry, I have already shown that a substantial part of the means of production is the object of possession by impersonal institutions — capitalist enterprises — and the object of socialism must be to reconstruct this impersonal possession in such a way that enterprises both follow a plan of production consistent with the maximum satisfaction of the democratically-constructed ‘needs’ of the working population as a whole, and are open to democratic  participation, on equal footing, of the workers within the enterprise.
The foregoing discussion of investment planning represents an essay in definition of the first of these conditions within the context of British capitalism; I now turn to the second condition, and the relationship between the two.
Following the same pattern as before, I shall approach this in terms of the possibilities and constraints connected with contemporary capitalist property relations.
To begin with a general point of caution, concerning the relationship between socialised economic planning and enterprise democracy: I have claimed these to be complementary features of the socialist project, and in an important sense they are, yet there is an inherent tension between the two which must be faced up to.
This tension surfaced in particularly acute form on the morrow of the first proletarian revolution as the Bolsheviks attempted to construct a system of coordinated workers' control over industry in face of the proliferation of relatively independent factory committees.
As Bettelheim notes (1974, p. 125):
‘The task was not easy because along with the rise in numbers of factory committees each one had a tendency to multiply its prerogatives and to treat each factory as an independent unit of production, the collective property of its own workers, determining by itself production, sales and pricing, while the social domination of the working class over the means of production required that the atomised and contradictory powers of the factory committees be subordinated to a common political end’(my translation A.C.).
We know how this tension was eventually resolved: the exigencies of ‘War Communism’ demanded the abolition of the authority of the factory committee and its replacement by a centralised authority.
We also know the long-term political cost of the suppression of the kind of ‘spontaneous’ workers' initiative represented by the rise of the factory committees.
Of course, the conditions of Russia in 1917 and the following years posed ‘special problems’ for the Bolsheviks, but it must be recognised that the tension between the tendency to treat each factory as the ‘collective property of its own workers’and the need to ensure the subordination of production to a ‘common political end’is in no way unique to the Soviet experience.
Neither can this tension be ascribed to ‘false consciousness’ on the part of workers, ‘failing to recognise’the identity of their own particular interests and the general interests of their class: that line of thought leads to a variety of utopianism with strongly oppressive overtones.
So long as production is  carried on in units of production which have a degree of real economic autonomy and ‘employ’ distinct groups of workers (despite their general interdependence in terms of input/output relations) there will exist real grounds for conflict between particular groups of workers and the ‘social interest’, however democratically the latter is generated.
For instance, where labour is either particularly demanding or is not in itself particularly fulfilling or interesting one could reasonably say it is in the interests of the workers concerned to work short hours and/or work at a relatively low intensity of labour.
Also so long as consumption is not fully socialised (surely an impossibility) particular groups of workers will have an interest in raising their own particular level of consumption.
But both of these points can conflict with the interest of the rest of the working population.
Shorter hours of labour and less intensive working will,ceteris paribus , reduce the volume of output, while raising consumption standards means making a larger claim over available output, leaving less for personal consumption on the part of other groups or for investment and social provision.
This kind of conflict cannot be legislated out of existence.
If this point is conceded, it has important implications for one's view of the future of politics.
Even under ‘socialism’ there will be scope for quite genuine conflicts of interest between regions, localities and enterprises.
It is naive to imagine that all social conflict is ‘class’ conflict at root and that socialist planning can be a wholly harmonious process.
It is therefore wrong to counterpose ‘politics’ under capitalism (i.e. realm of conflict of interests) against ‘administration’under socialism is to find a satisfactory mode of institutionalising conflict Marx and Engels' formulations suggest.
One general problem of socialism is to find a satisfactory mode of institutionalising conflict over the allocation of resources within the context of planning, and minimising the antagonisms it could generate.
This is, however, a long term consideration, given that neither social planning of the economy nor enterprise democracy exists in Britain.
Let us return to the question of the possibilities for enterprise democracy under present circumstances.
I have discussed earlier two salient features of the developing forms of impersonal capitalist property at the level of the enterprise: the increasing scale of enterprises and rising level of industrial concentration; and the increasing adoption of the multidivisional form of enterprise as a means of control over geographically-and/or product-diversified operations.
I shall consider the implications of these points in turn.
1.
The question of scale : Marx identified the rise of large-scale industry  as one of the progressive features of capitalism.
Increasing scale of the enterprise was a necessary condition for the development of the productive forces, and it also (a) put social planning on the agenda and (b) produced an increasingly concentrated and homogeneous workforce.
I have already cast some doubt on point (b), or at least on the political effects which Marx assumed would be consequent on the concentration of labour (Chapter 1), while in the discussion of planning I argued that although point (a) may be broadly accepted it is by no means unproblematic, particularly given the fact that large-scale enterprises increasingly straddle national boundaries.
But what of the potentiating/constraining effects on democracy within the enterprise?
Tomlinson (1980) has developed an interesting discussion of this point in relation to the ideas of Cole (1917), arguing that large-scale enterprises can pose severe problems for enterprise democracy.
Cole had written ‘…it is at least a half-truth that the measure of control he (the worker) will have will vary inversely to the total number of votes, so in the workshop the control of the individual will be real in most cases only if the workshop is small, unless, as in the coal mine, only the simplest and most uniform questions have, as a rule, to be decided’(Cole, 1917, p. 233).
Tomlinson in his commentary argues that this notion need not lead to a simplistic ‘small is beautiful’ position.
‘Instead it can, for example, be based on the argument that any particular agent's capacity to absorb information is finite, and that broadly therefore the smaller the unit to be controlled the greater the likelihood of competence sufficient to make the necessary judgement.
Of course such conceptions do not yield any simple size limit to organisations which can be democratically controlled.
This will depend, as Cole suggests, on the basis of decisions which are pertinent to any particular production process, and is therefore not a simple function of the number of agents involved’(Tomlinson, 1980, p. 170).
Despite this qualification, however, Tomlinson is prepared to argue that ‘smallness of operation in production and distribution is something socialists should generally favour’(ibid.).
Interestingly, this position is backed up by the experience of the Mondragon cooperative enterprises in the Basque region of Spain.
As Campbell (1980, p. 13) has pointed out ‘the Mondragon planners have decided that there is a limit to the number of people able to make  industrial democracy work ‘under one roof’.
They now put this figure at around 400 people.’
If one accepts this point, that effective democratic mechanisms within the enterprise may depend, in many branches of production, on having a relatively restricted number of agents involved in decision-making, then a rather awkward question arises: does enterprise democracy then come into conflict with the exploitation of economies of scale and the progressive development of the productive forces?
Is increasing industrial concentration an obstacle rather than an opportunity as regards this socialist objective?
Perhaps one can shed some light on this by being rather more precise in defining both ‘the enterprise and economies of scale.
First, if the enterprise is defined as the unit of legal ownership then it is clear that enterprises may comprise a number of operating units, plants, sales outlets and so on.
And although the dominant enterprises in this sense have undoubtedly grown considerably in size, by any measure, over the post-war years it is not obvious that the operating units have grown in the same way.
For instance, according to the calculations of Prais (1976) the share in total manufacturing output of the largest 100 manufacturing plants (i.e. single geographical entities, producing predominantly one product) has remained fairly static over the last fifty years.
In some branches of production technical economies of scale have led to significant increases in plant sizes (e.g. process production of chemicals), while in others technical changes such as the development of small cheap electric motors, and the partial displacement of metal casting by plastic moulding, have favoured or at least permitted smaller-scale production.
In Tomlinson's argument, this discrepancy between the marked growth of the dominant enterprises and the relatively static overall position as regards plant size is taken as throwing doubt on the notion that the growth of the dominant enterprises has been based on the exploitation of economies of scale.
Economies of scale are seen as operating at plant level and it is therefore argued that the growth of the multi-plant enterprise reflects narrowly financial considerations rather than any ‘progressive development of the productive forces’.
The implication is that if effective democracy at the enterprise level depends on the existence of relatively small units, there may be a case for dismantling large-scale capitalist enterprises.
As Tomlinson (op. cit .,
p. 167) puts it, ‘building on the technological achievements of capitalism does not necessitate a defence of enterprises on the scale currently common in  capitalist countries’.
I believe that the earlier discussion of the multidivisional enterprise in the USA and Britain (Chapter 3) permits a more differentiated and rigorous judgement.
It is true that the increasing scale of certain enterprises in post war Britain can be traced to speculative financial considerations (primarily among those which Channon identifies as ‘acquisitive diversifiers’), and that many such enterprises have failed to exploit economies of scale and have shown a poor record even in terms of profitability.
But on the other hand many large multidivisional enterprises probably can ‘justify themselves’ in terms of economies of scale and integration, if these are given a broad interpretation.
Tomlinson operates with a very narrow conception of ‘economies of scale’, effectively restricting the notion to cover the technical advantages to be gained by scaling-up a given production process, but the arguments of Chandler, Channon and Williamson enable one to identify other important economic advantages of large-scale integrated enterprises: economies of efficient scheduling of internal transfers; advantages of linking purchasing to production and production to marketing, the latter providing a feedback mechanism for changing the product-specification; economies of ‘horizontal’ coordination of output plans and reduction of wasteful duplication; economies of administration; advantages of technology-transfer.
Different large-scale multi-divisional enterprises may exploit these advantages in different degrees, according to the form and degree of diversification they have developed and according to the particular effectiveness of their management, but the general point here is that these advantages cannot be written off as financial/speculative considerations.
If one takes a broader view of economies of scale along these lines then one must also take a more differentiated view of the large-scale enterprise.
Some conglomerates may be unwieldy economic units with a primarily speculative rationale, which could usefully be dismantled, but the dismantling of other large enterprises (one example: full-line chemical companies) might involve genuine losses in productive efficiency even if plant sizes, and hence purely technical scale economies, are not affected.
Referring again to the Mondragon experience, it is clear that the planners there recognise the economic advantages to be gained from the formation of larger units.
These larger units have taken the form of ‘cooperative combines’ run by nominees from the control committees of member cooperatives.
Since the formation of the first such combine in 1968, comprising six units of production with a total of around 6,000 individual members, the Mondragon planners have made it a recommended practice to group individual cooperatives into such units.
They judge that this form of organisation permits the cooperatives to obtain advantages of scale at the level of administration, coordination and planning while retaining the benefits of relatively small operating units i. e. maximum scope for democratic accountability (Campbell, 1980, pp. 12–13).
The question arises as to what extent such arrangements can provide a model for the democratisation of the multidivisional capitalist enterprise.
2.
The multidivisional enterprise : The tendency of the argument here is the following:if the exploitation of economies of scale on the part of capitalist enterprises primarily involved the development of ever larger units of production, in the technical sense, concentrating progressively larger numbers of workers into massive factories, then there could indeed be a conflict between the wish to retain the benefits of economies of scale on the one hand and the requirements of ‘manageable’ enterprise democracy on the other.
I am, however, suggesting that many significant economies of scale have been realised at the level of the large enterprise comprising a number of units of production rather than at plant, or operating unit, level.
Further, recall Channon's argument that many such multi-unit enterprises in Britain have, over recent years, found the ‘functional’ model of organisation — i.e. the monolithic top-down hierarchy — to be too inflexible and have quite deliberately changed over to a multidivisional form, reforming the managerial apparatus to restrict the role of the general office and permit a greater degree of autonomy for the management of the operating units.
Certainly, examples can be found where the growth of the enterprise has involved the creation of massive technical operating units (in the car industry and the shipyards for instance) but it is not clear that this trend will continue, and in some cases technological change is already undermining the competitive advantage of those enterprises operating very large-scale units.
The prospects may therefore be good for a long-term strategy which aims at both restricting the scale of most operating units and granting them a reasonable degree of operational autonomy in order to make participative democracy a feasible proposition, while developing further the economies of administration, co-ordination, etc. which are at present realised by large-scale enterprises.
This would mean re-examining the current grouping of units of  production into larger enterprises, but the point is that ‘enterprises’, as groupings of operating units, would be reconstructed rather than simply dismantled into small independent components.
This position requires a more differentiated conception of ‘enterprise democracy’.
Democratic mechanisms must be conceived as operating at different levels: within the operating units there may be scope for direct participative democracy perhaps also involving factory committees in close touch with the workforce; at the level of the enterprise, direct democracy would probably be impractical and some form of representative mechanism would be required.
It is not possible to say in the abstract what kind of decisions would be taken at these different levels, or at least not with any precision, since this would depend on the character of the economic relations between the general office of the enterprise and its operating units, and between the operating units themselves, quite apart from the particular forms of struggle at local and national level which would be required to implement any such scheme.
All the same, some general remarks may serve to give this conjecture more substance.
One could argue, for instance, that the conditions of work and the forms of division of labour within the operating unit should be the subject of democratic decision-making within that unit while the general investment policy of the enterprise should be decided at the ‘higher’ level, by means of a mechanism involving representatives from the operating units, central enterprise staff and national planners (assuming, that is , the kind of investment planning referred to above).
Such decision-making at enterprise level could, of course, involve encouraging the development of ‘workers’ plans' from the ‘bottom upward’— only rational planning would require that the implementation of these be considered in the light of broad social objectives.
What is envisaged here is a ‘pincer movement’ for democratising the operations of large multidivisional enterprises and subjecting them to popular accountability.
From ‘above’, a left government could attempt to gain control over the deployment of investment funds, in particular the surplus income of the personal sector, while from ‘below’ workers could struggle for democratic control over the particular enterprises which employ them, breaking down the managerial hierarchies and commercial secrecy of these enterprises.
If the ‘pincers’ were to meet then the space for conventional capitalist ‘management’— i.e. the hierarchal direction of enterprises in the pursuit of profit, recognising some form of responsibility  to ‘shareholders’but not to working people — would be at least severely restricted and at best eliminated.
It is clear, however, that our two ‘pincers’ are not at par.
The institution of national investment planning would certainly require broad and determined popular support, but by nature it would depend on the formation of a socialist government and would give an important role to organisations operating at a national level.
Enterprise democracy differs from this in that (a) workers can begin to fight for such an objective in the absence of a socialist government and (b) it is by nature impossible for even the most ‘socialist’ of governments to develop enterprise democracy ‘from above’.
Any such development depends crucially on popular initiatives and cannot simply be legislated (there are, however, important ways in which a socialist government could help to foster enterprise democracy, by making changes in company law, e. g. turning shareholders into mere bond-holders, granting the right to set up democratic mechanisms where this was approved by the workforce, and by means of preferential funding for democratic enterprises and ‘workers’ plans').
So investment planning and enterprise democracy stand in rather different relations with national politics.
In the absence of a left government, developing the objective of investment planning is primarily a matter of developing ideas, policies and strategies and attempting to win broad support for these.
Developing the objective of enterprise democracy, while it too involves theoretical/ideological activity, can also be a matter of practical struggle.
The following section offers some comments on this point.
Enterprise democracy and industrial democracy
In the preceding arguments I have deliberately used the term ‘enterprise democracy’ to refer to democratic control by workers over the enterprises which employ them, within the context of the socialist project.
Enterprise democracy, that is, was presented as the complement to social planning of investment at a national or even supra-national level.
‘Industrial democracy’ on the other hand is a term which is generally taken to refer to particular practices of management already operating in certain capitalist economies (e.g. West Germany) or specific proposals such as those of the Bullock Committee (Bullock, 1977), practices and proposals which give some role to workers or their representatives in enterprise decision-making, but which are not necessarily linked to the overall social planning of the economy in the  interests of working people.
The problem now is to assess the relationship between enterprise democracy (as socialist objective) and ‘Industrial Democracy’(as object of current struggle and debate).
Broadly speaking, socialists appear to be divided into two camps over this question.
There are those who argue that ‘Industrial Democracy’ as it exists and as it is proposed by Commissions of Inquiry and certain trade unions, is a dangerous diversion.
So long as the broad configuration of the economy remains capitalist, with enterprises producing commodities for profit, ‘Industrial Democracy, is bound to function merely as a means of incorporating workers, representatives into a capitalistic rationality.
Clarke (1977) gives a clear presentation of this view, marshalling the support of Mann (1973) the TUC (1974) and Mandel among others.
His case depends on the constraints placed upon any enterprise attempting to survive in the market:
‘The capitalist market would immediately overwhelm any formal redistribution of authority at the enterprise level:reform of the authority relations of the factory is impotent in the absence of structural reform of the production relations of society ’(Clarke, 1977, p. 364 — emphasis in the original).
Clarke goes on to argue that Industrial Democracy as currently envisaged would actually tend to suppress industrial militancy and weaken entrenched working class resistance to capitalist control, thereby reducing the chances of ‘genuine’ workers' control over production at some future date.
On this view, then, there is a sharp dichotomy between workers' control at enterprise level — as an element of socialism — and Industrial Democracy.
The latter does not offer a route to the former, and should be strenuously opposed as a mere manipulatory gambit on the part of‘capital’.
It would probably be fair to say that views of this kind have been dominant among British socialists from the Labour-left leftwards, but over recent years they have come under increasing criticism, on both theoretical and political grounds.
Let us examine some of this criticism.
First, there has been criticism of the role of the ‘market’ in the theoretical position of writers such as Clarke.
In this position the forces of market competition impose a basically unitary practice of management onto individual enterprises, rendering workers' participation and even workers' cooperatives nugatory.
This view of capitalist management can be traced back to Marx's conception of the individual capitalist as the mere ‘personification of capital’.
As Cutler et al .
(1978) point out, this leads to the denial of any specific effectivity on the part of the management of particular enterprises: each enterprise will function according to a uniform mode of calculation, as a mere ‘aliquot part of the total capital’.
This kind of universalism has been strengthened more recently by the work of Braverman (1974) who argued that ‘Taylorism’ represents the essence of capitalist management, the profoundly anti-democratic invariant to be found within all branches of capitalist production, imposed by the rationality of profit.
It is these conceptions which have come under attack.
Cutler et al .
have argued that Marx's ‘personification of capital’ thesis depends on an untenable conception of the capitalist economy as a rational totality, a conception which obliterates the real distinctions between particular branches of production, markets and enterprises.
Enterprises are constrained by the need to make ‘adequate’ profits, but there is more than one way to make profits and the general constraint of market competition by no means exhaustively determines the calculations of managements.
Tomlinson (1980a) has drawn out the implication that there may be a space to begin to develop democratic and cooperative forms of enterprise management, even given the continuation of the production of commodities for profit.
Cressey and MacInnes (1980) have also contested the determinism of market forces, which they describe as the ‘wicked uncle’ of socialist demonology.
They identify a certain circularity in the classical Marxist view that market competition necessarily enforces the real subordination of labour to capital:
‘Once labour is formally subordinated, then its real subsumption has to follow — it occurs as the realisation of capital's ‘essence’: the ‘inversion’ at the heart of capitalist society imposed by the logic of competition.
Yet such market forces are produced by…the immanent tendencies of capital!’
(Cressey and MacInnes, 1980, p. 17).
Rejecting the conception of the ‘immanent tendencies of capital’, mediated by market forces, imposing a unitary subordination of labour, these writers are also led to the conclusion that it is not futile for workers to contest hierarchical and oppressive managerial structures.
‘Industrial Democracy’ is the site of a potentially fruitful struggle, not merely a manipulatory diversion.
Second, there is the political criticism which can be levelled at the dichotomous view which makes ‘structural reform of the production relations of society’ a precondition for any meaningful democratisation of the enterprise.
The nub of this criticism is that such views give rise  to a kind of political paralysis: everything must wait until the revolutionary moment in which the production relations are transformed; until then labour must play a purely oppositional role, a role which Precludes struggle of a ‘prefigurative’ kind.
It becomes very hard to see how the ‘revolutionary moment’ will ever arise in the absence of struggles to construct alternative forms of social organisation of production which might ‘prefigure’and win support for socialist objectives unless, in a surely discredited formula, oppositional industrial militancy has an intrinsic tendency to revolutionary socialism.
This kind of criticism has been made by the writers mentioned above, and has also been amplified by Rowbotham et al .
(1979).
Taken together, these criticisms have important implications for the question of Industrial Democracy.
‘True’ workers' control will never spring into existence in fully fledged form and socialists must fight, within the present society, for democratic measures which can help to ‘de-mystify’management and raise radical questions concerning the organisation of work and the goals of production, whether these measures involve the accountability of managerial agents or the promotion of workers' plans.
If workers should be encouraged to resist the blandishments of managements offering responsibility without power, in an attempt to ‘regain control by (ostensibly) sharing it’, they should also be encouraged to reach beyond the status of a ‘permanent opposition’ to managerial control.
‘Enterprise democracy’, as the decentralised aspect of the socialist control over production by the associated producers, will never be realised unless workers begin to struggle under capitalism for control over the policy and operations of enterprises, and this means exploiting rather than rejecting outright the kind of ‘Industrial Democracy’ proposals raised by the Bullock Commission, and more recently by the EEC.
This is not to say that such proposals must be accepted at face-value but they should be subjected to specific criticism rather than rejected in toto as merely a device for getting workers to ‘participate’ in their own exploitation.
In later chapters I shall make some comments on the importance of incomes policy in the development of the socialist project.
I shall not anticipate the arguments here, but it is worth pointing out that in a context of incomes policy, struggles over enterprise policy and operations would assume an increased importance: if wage-determination were conducted on a more centralised basis then the focus of collective bargaining at enterprise level would have to change.
The shop stewards movement, contrary to the arguments from some quarters, would not necessarily be demobilised in a context of incomes policy, but would  be able to use its bargaining strength at enterprise level to insist on measures of control over the broader issues of enterprise policy.
This would imply that any particular ‘Industrial Democracy’ proposals which attempted to bypass or undermine the strength of the shop stewards should be resisted, but such particular resistance would be quite different from a total rejection of the supposedly malign effects of accepting any responsibility for the operation of enterprises under capitalism.
Reprise
In this chapter I have been concerned to draw out some of the implications for socialist politics of the analysis of capitalist property relations given earlier.
I have concentrated on two main issues: the possibilities for social planning of investment, by means of a state appropriation of the working class and rentiers' surplus income at present channelled through the private financial institutions; and the possibilities for enterprise democracy in the context of the economic dominance of large multidivisional enterprises.
It has been suggested that these two projects could form a pincer movement to circumscribe the operations of hierarchic managements pursuing the profitability of the enterprises which employ them without regard to the interests of working people, and therefore to reconstruct the impersonal possession of the means of production in the direction of (socialist) social appropriation.
The two projects were seen to have differing conditions of implementation and are therefore unlikely to be synchronised in a ‘revolutionary moment’, but nonetheless they can be seen as mutually supportive: struggles for democratic forms within enterprises may help to build support for broader democratic planning, while a sympathetic government pursuing the latter project could also greatly expand the opportunities for enterprise democracy by means of legal changes and financing.
Government industrial policy could make all the difference between a demoralising defeat for workers' initiatives taken at enterprise level, and the development of inspiring examples of ‘workers’ plans' for socially useful production, popular accountability of management and workers' self-management.
It may be useful at this stage to attempt a schematic synopsis of some of the points raised in the preceding discussion, a map showing certain potentially fruitful sites of struggle.
The diagram below shows certain relationships between economic agents, and enables one to identify some lines of reconstruction of those relationships.
Relation (1) shows the flow of savings from workers.
and rentiers.
This relation could be maintained, or replaced by tax revenue (7) bearing particularly on the rentiers.
Relation (2) represents lending to the government, which could be transformed by a system of compulsory subscription of funds to a national investment bank, which would provide funds on a planned basis for both public projects and commodity-producing enterprises (3 and 4).
Relations (5) and (6) represent shareholding on the part of financial institutions and individual rentiers respectively.
The prerogatives attached to shareholding at present would have to be broken to permit the development of social planning and enterprise democracy.
Relation (8) represents the provision of labour power by the working class.
This relation would have to be transformed in the sense that workers would not merely provide labour power but also participate in the management and planning of enterprises.
While this transformation depends fundamentally on workers' initiatives it could be aided by a government using the financing relation (4) as a means of leverage.
Many important political questions are, of course, left unanswered in this presentation, and it would be naive to suppose they are readily answerable; I have made some qualifications to this effect in the course of the argument.
To reiterate the point, the main concern of this discussion has been to locate certain strategic possibilities, as well as constraints, in relation to the currently dominant structures of capitalist property, or in other words to argue the mutability of the economic class relations of possession and separation from the conditions of production in what one might call a ‘non-millenarian, manner.
CLASSES, SOCIAL COLLECTIVES AND POLITICAL FORCES
Chapters 1 and 2 presented arguments in favour of‘disaggregating’ the classical Marxist conception of social classes.
In place of the attempt to produce a synthetic totalising definition of classes it was argued that an analysis which respects the specificity of economic class relations (defined at the level of property-holding), social collectivities and political forces is likely to be more fruitful.
Chapters 3 and 4 followed this up by investigating the principal forms of capitalist property, with particular reference to the British case, and Chapter 5 drew out some of the political implications of that investigation.
I now turn to the question of social collectivities and political forces.
This question will be approached in two stages: this chapter develops the conceptualisation of social collectivities and the relations between these and political forces, and attempts an historical outline of the development of these relations in Britain since 1945, while the following chapter is a fuller essay in the analysis of the specific relationships between economic class structure, social collectivities and political forces in the period of emergence of Thatcherism and of Thatcher's government 1979–1982.
To expand on the plan of the present chapter: I shall begin by discussing the notions of ‘social collectivity’ and ‘political force’; the relevance of the division of labour to the formation of social collectivities will then be considered; the content of the notions of ‘middle class’and ‘working class’(in the British context) will be explored in this light, and finally I shall offer an overview of the development of the dominant political forces and their constituencies in the post-war period.
Some preliminary definitions
By ‘social collectivity’ I shall mean a category of agents broadly sharing some aspect of culture and orientation to politics, susceptible to organisation into a political constituency of some kind.
This  definition is necessarily somewhat open-ended: the existence of social collectivities will be a matter of degree, and what is more, such collectivities may cut across one another— there will be no unique map of social collectivities such that each agent is a member of one and only one.
Nonetheless, certain collectivities acquire a certain salience or pertinence in relation to the dominant political issues of a given period.
To refer to this phenomenon I shall use the term ‘pertinent social collectivity’.
By ‘political force’ on the other hand I shall mean specifically political parties and movements, or tendencies within these, with explicitly shared objectives.
Another generic term will be useful: I shall employ the term ‘corporate body’ to refer to a formal grouping of agents such as a trade union, staff association, or employer's organisation.
These preliminary definitions of concepts may be given some more substance by considering the relations between them, and also their relations with the concept of economic class.
We have already seen (Chapter 1) how Marx conceptualised the formation of the ‘proletariat’ into an active political force, in the ‘Communist Manifesto’.
In terms of the concepts outlined above we could express Marx's views thus: the economic class of proletarians (propertyless sellers of labour power) will necessarily become increasingly homogeneous in respect of income levels and conditions of life and work; this will result in the increasing ‘non-pertinence’ of social collectivities based on branch of industry, religion, nationality, sex etc., and the increasing pertinence of the social collectivity coterminous with the proletariat itself; eventually as a result of the process of struggle this social collectivity will become organised into a corporate body — the trade union movement — and a political force: the communist movement or party.
In schematic form: The arrows indicate an order of determination which is supposed to operate on a long historical time scale.
Marx clearly did not formally abandon this schema even in his later writings.
In Volume Three of Capital (Marx, 1972), in the tantalising unfinished fragment on ‘Classes’, Marx notes that even in England, where ‘modern society is indisputably most highly and classically developed in economic structure…the stratification of classes does not appear in its pure form.
Middle and intermediate strata even here obliterate lines of  demarcation everywhere’(1972, p. 885).
But immediately the pertinence of this point is denied:
‘However, this is immaterial for our analysis.
We have seen that the continual tendency and law of the development of the capitalist mode of production is more and more to divorce the means of production from labour, and more and more to concentrate the scattered means of production into large groups, thereby transforming labour into wage-labour and the means of production into capital’(ibid.).
I noted earlier that Marx recognised the social and political ‘materiality’ of lines of demarcation other than those of property holding in the ‘Eighteenth Brumaire’: nonetheless what is striking in this passage is that he never settled accounts with the general theory which denied such factors any pertinence in the long run.
Unfortunately the ‘obliteration of lines of (economic class) demarcation’ is still highly material despite the undoubted continuing transformation of ‘labour into wage-labour and means of production into capital’, and a theory which asserts ‘correspondence’of economic classes and political forces as the norm can only block specific politically relevant analysis.
Now, it is in the nature of the critique of this aspect of classical Marxism which has already been proposed that it is not possible to erect an alternative ‘general theory’.
I have emphasised that the relations between economic classes, social collectivities and political forces must be investigated specifically, in a given historical context.
All the same it will be useful to outline some of the more important possible forms of relationship.
For instance:
i)
Political forces may crystallise and channel ‘inputs’ from social collectivities and corporate bodies, in the sense of recruiting personnel from the latter, developing relatively amorphous social ideologies into a focused political project, and ‘processing’policy-recommendations from corporate bodies.
On the other hand, at particular junctures political forces can ‘break loose’ from the social collectivities and corporate bodies which traditionally support them, either in pursuit of an autonomous political project or in the face of intolerable contradictions among the demands of their ‘constituents’.
ii)
Political forces may build (or attempt to build) support for their objectives by fostering the development of certain pertinent social  collectivities (e.g. ‘the nation’, the ‘anti-monopoly alliance’, the ‘revolutionary proletariat’), unifying their own supporters in specific ways while dividing or confusing their opponents.
iii)
The actions of political forces and corporate bodies, within the resistant medium of social collectivities over which they have some influence but which they cannot shape ex nihilo , may either conserve or transform in various ways the system of economic class relations.
The character of this conservation/transformation effect may or may not correspond to the intentions of certain of the forces involved.
Political forces and corporate bodies may be more or less able to calculate the likely effects,ceteris paribus , of the implementation of their policies and demands, and the conservation/transformation effect is anyway likely to appear as the ‘resultant vector’ of non-coherent activities on the part of a whole range of such forces and bodies (although, for instance, dominant positions within a government may give one political force more leverage than others).
Note that economic classes are nowhere in this account presented as ‘actors’.
It would indeed be the exception if the pertinent social collectivities were exclusively formed on economic class lines (even though this may be the plan of certain political forces), as it would be if such social collectivities were to appear on the ‘political stage’ as political forces in their own right.
It should be clear how far from a general theory such remarks take us: to progress any further one must be more specific.
The first step in this direction will be by way of a discussion of the division of labour within capitalist economies, and the possibilities for the formation of social collectivities connected with this.
This problem is selected because of the importance given to the division of labour within modern Marxist discussions of social class and also within more orthodox sociological analyses of class (i.e. ‘occupational classes’).
It will be argued that the division of labour does not determine the pattern of pertinent social collectivities but along with certain other factors constitutes a complex grid of social differentiation within which social collectivities may be formed.
The division of labour and social collectivities
Discussion of the division of labour in Marxist theory has been rendered somewhat opaque by the development of various conflicting terminologies.
I propose to begin therefore with a terminological clarification.
One of Marx's fullest accounts of the various aspects of  the division of labour is contained in ‘Capital’ Volume One (Marx, 1976, pp. 470–80).
In this context he distinguishes the ‘division of labour in manufacture’(i.e. the detailed division of tasks between workers employed by a single capitalist) from the ‘social division of labour’(i.e. the division of social production as a whole into various distinct ‘branches’).
He then goes on to develop a more detailed schema:
‘If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate the division of social production into its main general such as agriculture, industry, etc. as division of labour in general , and the splitting of these broad divisions into species and sub-species as division of labour in particular .
Finally, we may designate the division of labour within the workshops as division of labour in detail ’(Marx, 1976, p. 471 —emphasis added).
What Marx here calls the ‘division of labour in general’, I shall refer to as the division of labour by sectors or by branches , as appropriate.
What he calls the ‘division of labour in particular’, I shall refer to as the division of labour by enterprises , or enterprise-groups , as appropriate.
Finally, what he calls the ‘division of labour in detail’ will here be referred to as the division of labour within the enterprise .
These terminological changes are not made merely for the sake of variety but because I believe the substitute terms convey their meaning more pointedly than Marx's originals.
The main point of potential confusion, however, arises because of the quite distinct meaning attached to the term ‘social division of labour’ by modern Marxist writers.
Whereas Marx often used this term to refer generally to what I have called the division by sectors or branches many recent writers have used it to refer to the division of functions, found within all branches in a capitalist economy, between the ‘exploiters’ or ‘controllers’of labour power and the direct production workers.
In this sense, it is opposed to the ‘technical division of labour’ between different productive tasks.
For instance Balibar (1970, p. 214) writes that the ‘double function’ of the capitalist (at once exploiter of labour power and organiser of production)‘is an index of what I shall call the double nature of the division of labour in production (the ‘technical’division of labour and the ‘social’division of labour).’
This formulation has been taken up by Poulantzas, Carchedi and others.
It usually goes along with the claim that the ‘technical’ division of labour, i.e. the actual distribution of tasks, is in some sense  subordinate to the social division.
For instance, Poulantzas (1975, p.21): ‘it is the social division of labour, in the form that this is given by the specific presence of political and ideological relations actually within the production process, which dominates the technical division of labour.’
I do not propose to employ this terminology.
The notion of the ‘technical’ division of labour is much too poor, and elides Marx's interesting discussion of the different levels and forms of division of labour.
The notion of the social division of labour as employed by these writers will, however, be reconstructed below under the name of division of labour by strata .
Let us now examine the characteristics, and possible effects on the formation of social collectivities, of the various aspects of the division of labour which have been identified.
1.
The division by sectors or branches : This, as Marx points out, is an ancient principle of division.
It can be traced back, for instance, to the rudimentary sexual division of labour between hunting (male) and horticulture (mainly female) in certain ‘primitive’ societies (Terray, 1972, pp. 108–110).
At a ‘later’ stage of social development, this division by branches becomes the basis for commodity exchange between the units of production within the different branches.
For Marx, the further development of this form of division of labour in society appears as a prerequisite of the division of labour within the enterprise under capitalism:
‘Since the production and circulation of commodities are the general prerequisites of the capitalist mode of production, division of labour in manufacture requires that a division of labour within society should have already attained a certain degree of development’(1976, p. 473).
Once established, capitalist commodity production then pushes yet further the division of labour by branches:
‘Inversely, the division of labour in manufacture reacts back upon that in society, developing and multiplying it further.
With the differentiation of the instruments of labour, the trades which produce these instruments themselves become more and more differentiated’(ibid.).
If the division of labour between branches is conserved and extended  within capitalist economies, it can form the principle of a particular kind of social collectivity which cuts across ‘class’ lines and inhibits the formation of class based collectivities.
That is, common interests can be formed on the basis of the branch of production, which in some respects unite wage-workers, managers and employers in a particular branch, possibly in opposition to the interests of wage-workers in other branches.
Witness for example the common front of workers and employers in the textile industry in Britain in 1980/81 calling for import controls, which, although they may be justified, would raise the price and restrict the choice of clothing for other workers.
If one recognises the materiality of the division of production and labour by branches, ii is no good writing off such conflicts as ‘false consciousness’.
The possible divisions between workers considered as car workers, textile workers, railwaymen etc., are not merely the product of a Machiavellian manipulation on the part of‘capital’(although of course managers and politicians may seek to exploit and amplify such divisions).
2.
The division by enterprises : I have earlier remarked on two features of the development of the enterprise in modern capitalism — increasing scale and diversification.
While the increasing scale of many enterprises means that more workers are grouped under a single ‘employer’ it clearly does not abolish the divisions between enterprises, which again can form the basis of social collectivities.
Given diversification, this principle of division can cut across branches of production, adding a further complexity to the social differentiation of labour.
In many cases, identification of workers with the enterprise which employs them may be only weakly formed but again a community of interest may be established at this level, depending perhaps on the degree of ‘paternalism’ of the management, the character of employment conditions in the enterprise, and the degree of craft skill or other interesting aspect of work within the enterprise.
A striking example of the formation of pertinent social collectivities on enterprise lines is found in the Japanese industrial/commercial combines which provide lifetime employment for many workers as well as extensive ‘welfare’ and social services.
As Hirschmeier and Yui (1975, p. 300) remark:
‘It is sometimes held that Japanese would be ideal Marxists considering the importance of group-centredness and the tendency to follow the masses.
But one could argue against this that Japanese groups have nothing to do with classes.
A Japanese  worker at Mitsubishi feels closer to his own manager than to a co-worker at Hitachi.
Of course, there are unions and parties within Japan which cut across enterprise identification, but the point made by Hirschmeier and Yui is that for many workers, for much of the time, the enterprise is a more strongly pertinent collectivity.
3.
The division within the enterprise : As Marx argues, this division of labour is of a different kind from the others.
He takes Adam Smith to task for conflating the division of labour in society with the division within the enterprise.
For Smith, the difference is ‘merely subjective’: the division within the enterprise is confined to one location and can be surveyed synoptically while in the case of the division of labour in society ‘the spreading-out of the work over great areas and the great number of people employed in each branch of labour obscure the connection’(paraphrased by Marx, 1976, p. 475).
For Marx on the other hand the difference is more material: the division of labour between branches exists on the basis of the interchange of products as commodities , whereas within the enterprise the specialised worker produces no commodities —‘It is only the common product of all the specialised workers that becomes a commodity’(ibid.).
The point at issue here is the form of connection between the divided labours:
‘The division of labour within society is mediated through the purchase and sale of the products of different branches of industry, while the connection between the various partial operations in a workshop (or more generally, in an enterprise — A.C.) is mediated through the sale of the labour-power of several workers to one capitalist, who employs it as combined labour-power’(Marx, 1976, pp. 475–6).
The latter is a ‘planned and regulated’ system while the former is established ‘a posteriori ’through the workings of the market.
What Smith's conflation effectively conceals is the authority of the capitalist over his employees, who are ‘merely the members of a total mechanism which belongs to him’(p. 477).
In Marx's view, this ‘total mechanism’ or regulated system of division of labour within the enterprise develops in two stages: those of manufacture proper, and large-scale machine industry.
Within manufacture, the precise form of division depends in the first  instance on the historical precursors of the capitalistic form of production in the given branch of industry — whether the ‘manufacturer’(a) draws together previously separate trades into one workshop to produce a common product or (b) splits up a previously unified craft production process into its component tasks.
But over time a certain common rationality is imposed, as ‘capital’ seeks both maximum control over labour power and its progressive cheapening.
Here Braverman (1974) buttresses Marx's case by reference to the ‘Babbage principle’.
Babbage had argued that one of the main reasons for the cheapness of manufactured articles was
‘that the master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be executed into different processes, each requiring different degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly that precise quantity of both which is necessary for each process; whereas, if the work were executed by one workman, that person must possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and sufficient strength to execute the most laborious, of the operations into which the art is divided’.
In commentary on this principle Braverman claims that it is
‘fundamental to the evolution of the division of labour in capitalist society.
It gives expression not to a technical aspect of the division of labour but to its social aspect.
Insofar as the labour process may be dissociated, it may be separated into elements some of which are simpler than others and each of which is simpler than the whole.
Translated into market terms, this means that the labour power capable of performing the process may be purchased more cheaply as dissociated elements than as a capacity integrated in a single worker’(Braverman, 1974, pp. 81–82).
Alongside the technical advantages of the division of labour noted by Adam Smith (specialised dexterity, time saving, development of specialised means of production) the ‘Babbage principle’ imposes, it is argued, a specifically capitalist form of division.
In Marx's second stage — large-scale machine industry — the craft skill of the worker in handling his tools ‘passes over to the machine’(Marx,op. cit .,
p.545).
This ‘destroys the technical foundation on which the division of labour in manufacture was based’(ibid.), but it does not destroy the advantages which the division  of labour offers the capitalist in terms of controlling and cheapening labour power:
‘Thus although, from a technical point of view, the old system of division of labour is thrown overboard, it hangs on in the factory as a tradition handed down from manufacture, and is then systematically reproduced and fixed in a more hideous form by capital as a means of exploiting labour power.
The lifelong speciality of handling the same tool becomes the lifelong speciality of serving the same machine….
In this way not only are the expenses of (the worker's) reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same time his helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and therefore upon the capitalist, is rendered complete’(ibid., p. 547).
Within large-scale industry, the crippling specialisation of the individual machine-minders is one aspect of the division of labour.
The others are (i) the ‘separation of the intellectual faculties of the production process from manual labour’ and (ii) the division of the workers into ‘manual labourers and overseers, into the private soldiers and the N.C.O.s of an industrial army’.
In Braverman's analysis, this ‘separation of the intellectual faculties of the production process from manual labour’, or division between ‘conception’ and ‘execution’, is taken as the fundamental and enduring feature of the capitalist division of labour.
Already rationalised by Babbage, it was later given its most explicit and systematic expression by F.W. Taylor, whose project was to eliminate the autonomy of the worker by appropriating for management any remaining knowledge or skill involved in the direct production process, to analyse and codify the components of the labour process and thereby to permit the management to lay down standard rules for the expenditure of labour power.
‘Taylorism’ is seen as the quite self-conscious pursuit of what Braverman calls the ‘general law of the capitalist division of labour’, according to which
‘Every step in the labour process is divorced, so far as possible, from special knowledge and training and reduced to simple labour.
Meanwhile, the relatively few persons for whom special knowledge and training are reserved are freed so far as possible from the obligations of simple labour’(Braverman, 1974, pp. 82–3).
Most of Marx's comments on the division of labour are concerned with industrial production, but Braverman sets out to show that the capitalist division of labour between ‘conception’ and ‘execution’is to be found equally in routine clerical work and in fact within any developed capitalist enterprise.
To summarise this conception: for both Marx and Braverman the developed form of the division of labour within the capitalist enterprise is not so much a technical division of tasks — as in early manufacture — but a socially determined structure, reflecting the exigencies of the production of surplus value.
It has a dichotomous aspect, in that most workers are degraded to the status of mere machine minders while a restricted cadre is invested with the scientific/technical knowledge necessary for the development of production.
We see why Marx felt it important to attack Smith's generalised conception of the division of labour, and to insist on the different conditions governing the division of labour between and within commodity producing enterprises.
However, in emphasising the specifically capitalist form of the latter division, both Marx and Braverman exaggerate what they take to be its essential features: rationality and authoritarianism.
Their conceptions can be challenged at two levels.
First, it is not clear that a ‘rational’ capitalist would necessarily wish to subordinate and cheapen the mass of labour to the greatest possible extent.
Other more ‘enlightened’ strategies are possible, and may in the long run prove more profitable.
Second, even if straightforward authoritarianism and minimisation of wages are assumed to be universal features of capitalist rationality, it is difficult to claim that this ‘rationality’ is uniformly imposed in practice as a function of the ‘undisputed authority of the capitalist’(Marx).
The specific claims of Marx and Braverman in this regard have been contested in a number of recent writings.
Lazonick (1979) argues, for instance, that when Marx took the self-acting mule as a prime example of a technology permitting the increased subordination of labour to capital he was in fact relying, at second hand, on the claims made by the machine's manufacturers, and that in practice the mule-spinners held a relatively superior position in the division of labour.
More's study (1980) of skill levels among engineering workers in England over the period 1870–1914 comes to the conclusion that it is not possible to sustain a definite ‘deskilling’ thesis on the evidence available.
Cressey and MacInnes (1980) argue more broadly that Taylor's project of minute and exact control over labour was  actually a failure, and that Braverman's tendency to take Taylor at face-value is a case of confusing the ‘fetish of capital’ for its reality.
Gershuny (1978) provides a counter-example to Braverman's law of job degradation for the majority, by showing that over the 1960s in UK manufacturing industry the proportionate decline in skilled manual employment was significantly lower than the proportionate increase in the ‘administrative and technical’ section of the workforce.
The recent study of US manual workers by Hull et al .
(1982) suggests that technological advance in industry has been associated with reduced job dissatisfaction.
Employees have often found their work with new machines less physically demanding and have often regarded it as more skilled.
Such studies do not settle the issue definitively, but they do bring out the problems facing a simple ‘deskilling’ or ‘degradation of work’thesis.
This kind of qualification is of considerable importance for the problem of the formation of social collectivities.
The sense of outrage on the part of both Marx and Braverman at the crippling effects (physical or spiritual) on many workers of the division of labour within capitalist enterprises is fully justified, but their unitary and rationalistic conception of the total subordination of labour to capital leads them to an overestimation of the role this division of labour must play in the formation of social collectivities: the extraction of any ‘skill’ content from labour for the mass of workers; the homogenisation of ‘simple labour’in all branches of production; the cheapening of labour power; increasingly intolerable oppression —these tendencies are bound to overwhelm any secondary differentiation of the workers by branch or by enterprise and lead to the formation of a revolutionary proletariat.
But the division of labour within the enterprise is not a juggernaut which crushes out all trace of ‘skill’ or peculiarity in the wage-labour of each and every branch of production, and neither can the ‘capitalist’attain the Taylorist ideal of total control over labour.
Homogeneous ‘simple labour’ is not inexorably established as the norm for wage-labour in capitalist economies, and by the same token it is not inevitable that a uniform structure of division of labour within enterprises will progressively undermine any ties of social identification other than those of ‘class’.
While not inevitable, it is however clearly possible that a broadly common position within the hierarchical division of labour forms the basis for a corporate body or social collectivity embracing workers in different enterprises and branches.
I refer to this below as the ‘division of labour by strata’.
4.
The division by strata : This concept refers to the broad division among all employees of capitalist enterprises (and state apparatuses) into different hierarchical categories, in respect of character of labour power (more or less skilled/qualified), role within the functioning of the enterprise (autonomy/restriction of work, control powers, access to information), and conditions of employment.
If the division of labour within the enterprise were as (tendentially) uniform as Marx and Braverman suppose then there would be little problem in specifying this ‘division by strata’: it would simply be the paradigmatic division within the enterprise (mass of simple labour, restricted cadre of intellectual workers and N.C.O.s) writ large.
If on the other hand the form of division of labour within enterprises is not homogeneous then the concept of ‘division by strata’ must be more nebulous and approximate.
We may talk of such categories as ‘professionals’, ‘managers’, ‘technicians’, ‘foremen’ and ‘manual workers’(and sub-gradations of these), but we have to recognise that these terms do not have homogeneous referents, and the degree of real social distinctiveness and cohesiveness of these categories may be highly variable.
Despite the emphasis placed on this aspect of the division of labour by Marxists and non-Marxist sociologists alike, it cannot be said that the division by strata forms the ‘naturally’ pertinent basis for social identification in capitalist societies.
It is now possible to draw together the comments made above on the various aspects of the division of labour.
The divisions by branches and by enterprises, within the enterprise, and by strata, form a grid or matrix of differentiation within which social collectivities may be formed, collectivities whose political pertinence is not given in advance, but is always constructed in historically specific ways.
Let us take just a few examples of strongly formed collectivities with a broadly socialist orientation to illustrate the point.
First, Bologna has argued that the remarkable political vitality of the International Workers of the World (IWW) can be traced in part to the character of the American proletariat which it organised, in the early years of the twentieth century, as a ‘mobile proletariat…completely against identification with any task or skill’(Bologna, 1976, p. 72).
In this context the IWW could ‘exploit the extraordinary level of communication and coordination allowed by a mobility-based struggle.’
In a lyrical passage Bologna describes the ‘absolutely original type of agitator’ which the IWW succeeded in creating: ‘not the mole digging for decades within the single establishment or proletarian  neighbourhood, but a type of agitator who swims within the stream of proletarian struggles, moves from one end to the other of the enormous American continent and calculates the seismic wave of the struggle…’(ibid.).
In this case the weakness of the division of labour between branches or enterprises as a principle of social collectivity, on account of the substantial movement of US workers, both geographically and in and out of various kinds of work, is a condition of existence of a strongly formed radical proletarian collectivity cutting across branch or enterprise lines.
On the other hand, the British National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) has developed as a strongly formed collectivity in a very different way.
The sources of its solidarity and strength lie in part in the continuity of tradition in the (relatively closed) mining communities — the opposite of the mobility of the proletariat organised by the IWW.
The NUM is firmly based within a definite branch of the division of labour, although it cuts across enterprise (i. e. colliery) boundaries and although its political interventions often find an echo in other branches.
The contrast between these two cases should warn us against generalising propositions which make either fluidity and mobility of the working class, or tradition and community within particular branches, into uniquely favourable conditions for socialist organisation (the first is perhaps Bologna's temptation; the second appears to be the temptation of the work done under the auspices of the ‘History Workshop’).
A third contrasting example of collectivity can be found in the Scottish Trades Councils in the latter part of the 19th Century, which formed a much stronger focus for working class politics than national trades unions at that time.
Here a collectivity was developed on a regional or local basis, drawing together workers from the various trades, rather than in a national body for the members of a single trade.
Fraser (1978, pp. 1–2) explains this by reference to the particular position of Glasgow within the Scottish economy:
‘The stress on local autonomy arose fairly naturally from the structure of the Scottish economy.
Glasgow had a dominating position, both in population and in concentration of industry.
Clydeside workers were unwilling to accept decisions emanating from Aberdeen, Kirkcaldy or wherever, or to subordinate their own needs to those of other parts of the country.
As soon as any efforts to form national unions were made, they came up against the imbalance between Glasgow and the rest of the country.’
The local Trades Councils were nonetheless able to organise quite  effectively around demands for city improvements and municipalisation of utilities, campaigned against excessive salaries for local bureaucrats, and had an important role in discussing and pushing for parliamentary reform.
Here the principle of collectivity cut across trade and enterprise boundaries, but did not surmount what Marx called the ‘territorial division of labour’ between regions.
These examples show something of the variety of ways in which social collectivities can be formed, ‘within’ some aspects of the division of labour grid while cutting across others.
But the stress so far on the division of labour is somewhat one-sided.
The matrix of social differentiation which can form the basis for collectivities includes other dimensions, such as parentage, region, religion, income level, form of housing tenure.
Where these latter principles of differentiation are coterminous with certain aspects of the division of labour (and with each other), the chances of formation of a politically pertinent collectivity within the ‘division of labour grid’ may be increased (e.g. ‘working class’catholics in the west of Scotland as a traditional Labour Party support-base); where they cut across the division of labour the chances may be diminished (the difficulty of developing ‘class’politics in Northern Ireland).
The ‘working class’ and ‘middle class’as social collectivities
I have built up a conception in which the agents belonging to a given economic class (defined at the level of property holding) may be distributed in various ways into more or less strongly formed social collectivities of various degrees of political pertinence.
It is not possible or useful to provide an encyclopaedic account of the collectivities existing ‘within’ the economic classes in Britain but this section pursues the analysis of two rather broad and vaguely defined, yet nonetheless politically and culturally important, social collectivities: the ‘working class’and the ‘middle class’, as these terms are used by ‘ordinary people’and formalised by sociologists.
This analysis is necessary to an understanding of politics in Britain, and yet it is too often dismissed by Marxists, at least implicitly, as irrelevant.
The kinds of theorisation of classes discussed in Chapter 2, theorisations concerned with demarcating the working class and the new middle class/ new petty bourgeoisie on Marxist criteria, do not address the problem of assessing the importance of the ‘classes’(broad collectivities, in my terms) which are taken to exist in particular social formations — the ‘classes’ which are (more or less consistently) recognised by the  people as such, and to one or other of which many people regard themselves as belonging.
There can be no presumption that these collectivities correspond to the classes of Marxist theory (however conceived), and where they fail to correspond it will not do to reject them as unimportant.
I am not arguing that there are no uses for a conceptual demarcation of classes quite distinct from the demarcations present within popular ideology — on the contrary, I have used such a demarcation in previous chapters — but I am arguing that the latter demarcations have a real importance and should not be dismissed as merely ‘subjective’.
We may begin by considering the meaning which the notion of ‘class’, and the ‘working class'/ ‘middle class’ distinction in particular, has within popular ideology in Britain.
Here one has to rely on the indices produced by survey techniques, which do not provide ambiguous definitions and which are open to a variety of interpretations but which nonetheless do provide a starting point for analysis.
One important qualification here is, however, that answers to survey questions are variable over time and the fullest surveys available are now somewhat out of date: one must be alert to the changes since the late 1960s when the surveys of Butler and Stokes (1974) and Townsend (1979) were conducted (these form the basis of the following discussion).
Nonetheless, one can get some useful mileage out of the 1960s surveys, before moving on to an historical account.
A first question is the extent to which some notion of ‘social class’ is pertinent to people; whether it forms a part of their everyday conceptual apparatus.
Here the variability of survey responses immediately becomes apparent.
In answer to the question ‘do you ever think of yourself as belonging to a particular social class?’
Butler and Stokes got a 50 per cent positive response in 1964 and a 43 per cent positive response in 1970.
With a rather different question Townsend's survey team in 1968–69 found around 80 per cent of respondents willing to assign themselves ‘spontaneously’ to a social class.
In both cases, however, it was clear that among those respondents who thought in terms of‘class’ the most common designations were ‘working’and ‘middle’.
Further, with a little prompting (i.e. respondents presented with a standard list of classes and asked to place themselves) the overwhelming majority of respondents were willing to assign themselves to the ‘middle’ or ‘working’classes or some sub-division of these.
If quantification is risky, it does at least seem that the two-class, middle/ working conception is quite deeply rooted in popular ideology.
When questioned on the basis for class determination, however, Townsend's  respondents were not surprisingly rather vague: ‘Way of life’ came first among the principles which Townsend offered, followed by family and occupation, with money and education also being mentioned.
Interestingly but not surprisingly, a higher proportion of men than women took occupation to be the principal factor determining class.
If the popular conception of ‘class’ does not involve any rigorous or well-elaborated notion of class determination, it is of interest to examine whether people's self-assignation correlates strongly with certain ‘objective’features of their economic and social location.
It is often assumed that what I have earlier called the ‘division of labour by strata’ is the prime objective content of the British ‘class’system but there are severe methodological problems in investigating this hypothesis, since the schemas proposed for the classification of occupations are not actually independent of the phenomenon to be explained.
Occupational classifications, from the Registrar General's of 1911 to the Hall Jones scale (Hall and Jones, 1950) and all its variants, involve some kind of ranking by ‘prestige’ or ‘standing in the community’.
They are therefore nearer to being attempted systematisations of popular ideology than objective scales which could be used to explain that ideology.
As Townsend (1979, p. 371) aptly remarks of the ‘grading’ of occupations ‘the whole procedure is…a mixture of presupposition and the partial representation of social perceptions.’
It is interesting, however, to see the extent to which occupational classifications fail to ‘correspond’ with self-assigned social class.
Two examples of this are shown, in Tables 6.1 and 6.2.
What is clear from these comparisons is that ‘occupational status is not the only factor which individuals consider when assigning themselves to a given ‘social class’.
For instance, nearly 30 per cent of the men in Townsend's sample in ‘managerial’ occupations regarded themselves as working class, and at the other end of the scale 20 per cent of Butler and Stokes' ‘unskilled manual’workers regarded themselves as middle class.
What one finds is a continuum extending from top to bottom of the occupational scale; the ‘lower’ on the scale, the lower the proportion identifying as middle class and the higher the proportion identifying as working class.
But there is one ‘break’ in the continuum, in that there is a relatively sharp rise in the proportion of ‘working class’identifiers when we reach the ‘manual’occupational categories.
I argued earlier that there are problems in attempting any rigorous theoretical definition of the ‘manual work/mental work’, or ‘manual/non-manual’, distinction but all the same this classification, conceived as a socially constructed principle of division, has a certain social validity, as least as it applies to male workers.
‘Manual’ workers within the British classification, although their precise work situations may vary quite widely, have in general considerably less job-security and less access to various benefits provided by employers than ‘non-manual’workers.
Despite this, it is worth noting that in Townsend's sample 31 per cent of men assigning themselves to the middle class had ‘manual’ occupations, and 25 per cent of men assigning themselves to the working class had ‘non-manual’occupations.
A fuller account of the factors active in people's class identification would no doubt have to consider income, wealth, housing tenure, education, style of consumption, social origins, family and local  connections.
For some groups, for instance, it is clear that a relatively high income, and the style of consumption which accompanies that, can induce a ‘middle class’ self-identification despite having a ‘manual, occupation.
Butler and Stokes found that income level was particularly important in individuals’ self-image by class for their occupational groups III, IV and V (for the meaning of these see Table 6.2).
The particular importance of housing tenure has been noted already: Townsend found that among respondents renting council accommodation only 20 per cent rated themselves as middle class while among owner-occupiers 40 per cent did so.
It seems likely that the spread of owner-occupation may undermine the ‘working class’ identification of some ‘manual’groups.
It is not being suggested here that the various factors bearing on class identification are totally independent variables.
The correlations between occupational status, income, educational opportunity and attainment have been well-established (see for instance Westergaard and Resler, 1975), and it can be politically important to stress these systematic connections when opposing the notion that ‘class inequality’ is disappearing.
It is clear that individuals in the ‘higher’ occupational groupings are far more likely to have high incomes and to be owner-occupiers than those in the lower groupings, and it is also clear that children of higher category parents have a much better chance of extending their education beyond the minimum, and of qualifying for higher status occupations themselves (Goldthorpe, 1980, Halsey et al .,
1980).
Nonetheless, these linkages are not so tight that one can read off class self-identification from the hierarchical classification of occupations, in any of its variants: there is an area of overlap between manual and non-manual earnings; many manual workers are now owner-occupiers; many individuals in the higher occupations have come from manual backgrounds.
The general point here is that ‘class’ as a cultural phenomenon in British society, as a form of broad and loose social collectivity, is not only quite distinct from the classical Marxist conception in which classes are defined on the basis of property relations — neither is it reducible to the sociological conception of ‘occupational class’.
In fact it is futile to search for a rigorous definition which will ‘correctly’ locate the division between the ‘working class’and the ‘middle class’in Britain.
It is more appropriate to regard these social collectivities as based on what Wittgenstein called ‘family resemblances’.
Wittgenstein (1968, pp. 31–32), exploring the philosophy of language, posed the question of what was common to all the things which we call ‘games’:
‘What is common to them all?— Don't say: ‘There must be something common or they would not be called ‘games’’— but look and see whether there is anything common to all .
For if you look at them you will not see something that is common to all , but similarities, relationships, and a whole series of them at that…
I can think of no better expression to characterise these similarities than ‘family resemblances’; for the various resemblances between members of a family…overlap and criss-cross in the same way.’
The same might be said of the individuals in Britain considering themselves members of the ‘middle class’: there is not an essential characteristic common to them all, which could be discovered by theoretical reflection.
At this point it will be useful to take the measure of the dislocation between the economic classes defined on the basis of capitalist property relations and the working class and middle class collectivities in Britain.
First, the ‘working class’ in Britain may be seen as a subset of the economically defined working class (i.e. wage and salary earning employees separated from the means of production), although it probably also includes sections of the petty bourgeoisie (in the strict sense of small-scale producers and traders employing their own means of production and labour power) who regard themselves as ‘working for a living’.
The ‘working class’ collectivity is, in a sense, centred on manual industrial labour, at least for the adult male members of working class families, although (a) by no means all people who consider themselves working class are employed in that sphere and (b) a not insignificant minority of people employed in that sphere do not consider themselves working class.
The British middle class, on the other hand, includes large sections of the economically defined working class (especially salaried employees) as well as sections of the petty bourgeoisie proper and sections of the ‘individual bourgeoisie’(i.e. personal owners of means of production and employers of the labour power of others).
These are the two basic ‘classes’; in addition there is the ‘upper class’, which designation is generally restricted to the hereditary aristocracy and rich rentiers.
To look at the matter differently, one could say that the members of the economically defined working class in Britain are divided between the ‘working class’ and ‘middle class’collectivities, with this division depending on a range of factors including place within the division of labour by strata, parentage, education, home-ownership, and income.
In a sense, the paradigm (male) member of the ‘working class’ will be a manual industrial  worker, born of a father who was also a manual industrial worker, with minimal education, living in rented accommodation.
The paradigm ‘middle class’ employee on the other hand will have some kind of ‘white-collar’job, will come from a non-manual background, will be educated beyond the minimum and will expect his or her employment to have the trajectory of a ‘career’, and will own a home.
The fact that such consistent ‘paradigm’ cases are becoming increasingly rare (this will be discussed later) explains in part why there is no clear boundary between the ‘classes’.
We have seen that the social collectivities often known as ‘classes’ in British society are reducible neither to economic classes in the Marxist sense nor to the sociologists' occupational classes.
We have also seen that these collectivities have a considerable pertinence within popular ideology.
I shall now examine the relationship between these collectivities and politics, first by a further reference to the surveys of the 1960s cited earlier, then by developing a broader historical perspective.
‘Class’ and politics: the partnership surveys of the 1960s
In this section I shall consider two aspects: the broad question of the relationships, within popular ideology, between ‘class’ division and the political, and the narrower question of the relationship between ‘class’, party affiliations and voting patterns.
The work of Butler and Stokes, and other subsequent research within the same analytical framework, has shown that ‘middle class’ and ‘working class’identification have a considerable relevance as regards support for the two main political parties in Britain.
The same research also shows, however, that the ‘class’ basis of support for the parties is now weakening significantly, and that even at its peak this phenomenon fell a long way short of the Marxist conception of political ‘class consciousness’.
Let us examine these points.
In a 1963 survey, Butler and Stokes found that among those with a ‘middle class’ self-image and who also considered themselves partisans of the major parties 79 per cent were Tory and 21 per cent Labour supporters.
Among ‘working class’ identifiers 72 per cent were Labour supporters and 28 per cent Tories.
The correlation between ‘class’ and party support is even more striking if one considers subdivisions within the broad classes, with the self-confessed ‘upper classes’showing 100 per cent Tory allegiance and the ‘lower working class’showing 77 per cent Labour partisanship.
Within the six ‘occupational  status’ categories (see Table 6.2) the pattern of partisanship was also quite clear, although in fact at the ‘manual'/ ‘non-manual’divide there was a clearer break in terms of partisanship than in terms of‘class’identification, as can be seen if Table 6.2 is compared with Table 6.3.
The discrepancy between ‘working class’ identification, which showed a relatively continuous rise across the occupational categories and Labour partisanship, which displayed an abrupt rise from class IV to V is ascribed to the somewhat ‘anomalous’position of the class IV (lower non-manual) individuals: in this category there was a majority of ‘working class’identifiers, yet also a majority of Tory partisans.
In all the other occupational categories, however, identification with one class or other carried with it a tendency to identify with the ‘corresponding’ party.
These correlations, while of interest, do not tell us much about the political substance of the ‘class'/party link, but Butler and Stokes pursued this further by soliciting ‘free’ responses concerning the reasons for identification with one or other party.
These responses could be organised under four general headings: first, those showing an appreciation of politics as a domain of representation of opposed class interests; second, those viewing politics in terms of a ‘simple representation of class interest’ without any elaborated notion of conflict of interests; third, those showing a simple ‘cultural partisanship’without any definite conception of class interests being involved; and fourth, those seeing no ‘interest-related’or normative class content in party support.
The results of this categorisation show that the bulk of ‘working class’ labour partisans viewed politics in terms of the ‘simple representation’principle (i.e. Labour was ‘out to help the working class’; working people vote Labour ‘because it's their party’), although a quite substantial minority reckoned in terms of opposed class interests (39 per cent).
Among ‘middle class’ Tories on the other hand, a substantial majority (65 per cent) took the fourth view, thinking in terms of ‘national interest’, ‘competence’and so on rather than in class terms.
This latter result is only to be expected: the Tories have assiduously  cultivated the image of the defender of the ‘national interest’ as opposed to the supposed trade union ‘sectionalism’of the Labour Party, and militant ‘class conscious’organisations within the middle classes have never made much headway (John Gorst's ‘Middle Class Association’for instance).
What is perhaps more surprising from a Marxist viewpoint is the restricted provenance even among working class Labour supporters of a developed conception of politics as ‘class conflict’(let alone any revolutionary conception of the possibility of an alternative social order).
The very names of the ‘classes’ in Britain are symptomatic here: ‘middle’and ‘working’.
The ‘middle class’ designation logically implies a three-class model, featuring an upper class, yet as Townsend noted ‘practically nobody claims to belong to such a class’(1979, p. 374).
If the ‘upper class’ is generally reckoned to be marginal or vestigial and the two principal classes are seen as ‘middle ’and ‘working’then it is clear that the British ‘class system’of popular ideology is not equivalent to a ruling class/dominated class dichotomy.
‘Working class’ people may wish to see their interests favoured over those of the ‘middle classes’but they are unlikely, in general terms, to see this conflict as a struggle to displace a ruling class.
I have taken these surveys from the 1960s as a useful starting point.
They provide quite a full ‘snapshot’ of popular conceptions of class, and of the class/politics relationship, some of the elements of which remain relevant today.
But to progress any further one must consider the ‘class'/politics relationship in Britain in a broader historical context.
To remain with Butler and Stokes for a moment, these writers argued, in the book based on the results of their survey, that the pattern of party support is the result of three distinct processes: the physical replacement of the electorate through birth, coming of age and death; the formation of enduring party alignments on the basis of religion, class or long-term issues; and response to immediate events and issues.
On the basis of this schema it can be argued that the high-water mark of class/party correlation in the 1960s, registered above, was not so much related to the current policies of the political parties, as to the ‘delayed’ effect of the social conditions of the interwar depression years and the substantial shifts within popular ideology and political alignment during and immediately after the second world war.
From 1945 until the 1960s the replacement of the electorate strengthened the ‘working class’ support for the Labour Party, but at the same time the current basis for such an alignment was weakening:
‘The newer cohorts entered a politics that was dominated by the  class alignment and divided their loyalties along class lines more completely than did their elders, those who had entered politics half a century before.
But the new cohorts felt much less keenly the social conditions from which the class alignment arose in the first place.
Moreover, the social evolution of Britain, as well as certain political factors, tended to weaken the class alignment in the electorate as a whole and not only in the young’(ibid., p. 193).
A fine illustration of Althusser's conception of ‘differential temporality’, and the impossibility of reducing historical time to an ‘essential section’!
(Althusser and Balibar, 1970, Pt.II, Ch.4).
This quotation points us towards an historical account of both the ‘social evolution of Britain’ and the ‘certain political factors’which have weakened the ‘class’alignment in British politics.
The intention here is not to construct a full history of the post-war period but it will be necessary to examine some of the main developments in the class/collectivity/political force relationships over the post-war years, even at a cost of some over-simplification, in order to establish a basis for the fuller discussion in the following chapter of these relationships under the Thatcher government.
My scope here is necessarily limited, and I propose to concentrate on the relationships between the political parties and the social collectivities which have furnished their support blocs.
The remit which I set myself is to examine in outline the ways in which the political parties have both responded to and helped to shape the pertinent social collectivities in Britain over the post-war years, and how the activities of political forces have been constrained by, and have served to maintain or transform, the economic class relations of British capitalism.
Class and politics since the war: an overview
I have already mentioned that the decisive electoral victory for the Labour Party in 1945 reflected a substantial shift of political and ideological alignment in the later years of the second world war, a radicalisation of which Calder (1969) gives an eloquent account.
It is clear that by 1945 there was widespread popular support for the extension of state welfare provision, for a measure of nationalisation of industry and ‘planning’ and for a governmental commitment to the maintenance of full employment.
Much of this consensus, at least nominally, cut across party lines: Beveridge, who formalised the project of ‘welfare’ expansion, was a Liberal; the 1944 White Paper on  employment policy was produced under the war-time coalition; Butler's educational reforms were also decided in 1944, but many people thought that the Labour Party was more likely to live up to the promise of reform.
Butler and Stokes argue that the main source of new electoral strength for Labour in 1945 was the mobilisation of manual workers who had grown up in homes without a long tradition of participation in electoral politics.
However, the reformism of this period did not appeal only to manual workers, and among men of the 1945 cohort of voters middle class electors were in fact more likely to be Labour than working class electors were to be Conservative.
I shall not enter into a detailed discussion of this Labour government, its programme and effects, but it should be noted that over the years to 1951, as more and more of the party's electoral pledges were realised, there occurred what is  often interpreted as a ‘weakening of commitment’ of both party and people to ‘socialism’, and a progressive exhaustion of the political impetus for social and economic change.
In 1946 the mines were nationalised with the vigorous support of the miners after sixty years resistance by the coal-owners, and shortly afterwards the petty bourgeoisie of the medical profession were organised into a National Health Service.
In terms of‘class struggle’ this was perhaps the high point of the government's achievements.
It is particularly notable that neither in the mines nor in the other industries nationalised at that time was there any substantial movement towards workers' control.
‘Management’ remained in place, only now it was responsible to a government-appointed Board of Directors and ultimately to Parliament, rather than to shareholders' representatives.
The Labour leadership was sceptical about workers' control, indeed Cripps is reported as having said ‘I think it would be almost impossible to have worker-controlled industry in Britain even if it were on the whole desirable’(Coates & Topham, 1975, p. 60).
But it would be quite wrong to ascribe the failure to take socialist transformation further at this stage by establishing workers' control in the nationalised industries to ‘betrayal’ on the part of the parliamentary leadership.
As Nina Fishman (1980) has pointed out, despite the undoubted idealism and enthusiasm of committed trade unionists in these industries there was considerable reluctance among NUM members to go over to the National Coal Board, to run ‘their’ industry.
There was also a reluctance to attempt the transformation of the unions which would have been required to turn them into instruments of workers' control, since this would clearly have introduced an element of responsibility which was foreign to the previous practice of trade unionism, and would have meant taking on board the awkward problem of reconciling, within a reconstructed union framework, the interests of workers in the given nationalised industry and the interests of working people as a whole, as regards the running of that industry.
Some miners wanted to take up this challenge, but there was not sufficient determined popular support to make the break with a more conventional trade union practice.
Further, at the ‘macroeconomic’ level, the fiscal and monetary management of aggregate demand gradually displaced physical planning as the favoured mechanism for control over the economy (this shift is charted quite precisely by Budd, 1978).
Again, this did not so much represent a ‘betrayal of socialist ideals’ as a response to the evident absence of any developed thinking on the part of socialists as to how ‘planning’should be conducted in a peacetime economy, without the overriding and generally agreed common objective of victory in war as the guiding principle and without the continuation of ‘dictatorial’direction of labour.
Meanwhile the Conservative Party was regrouping its forces after the defeat of 1945, building up better-organised and larger constituency parties and reorganising its ideology.
In 1947 the party's ‘Industrial Charter’, a result of the work undertaken by the Conservative Research Department under Butler, registered the Tories' acceptance of the ‘welfare state’ and the ‘managed economy’.
In the 1950 election the Tories' share of the vote recovered significantly, with Labour losing support among the middle classes of the southern suburbs in particular, although the Labour Party could still rely on enthusiastic working class support (the turnout at the 1950 election was the highest ever).
Between 1950 and 51, however, the ‘political exhaustion’ of Labour became more apparent.
The nationalisation of iron and steel-making was one of the few ‘socialist’ measures remaining on the party's agenda.
Further, the acceptance of the need for rearmament connected with the Korean war on the part of the parliamentary leadership led to a damaging split within the party, with Bevan and Wilson resigning over Gaitskell's budgetary measures designed to pay for the arms.
Finally the sterling crisis resulting from the surge in imports induced by the rearmament programme provided the occasion for the expiry of the administration.
In the 1951 election campaign, Labour was on the defensive, trying to arouse fears of Tory warmongering and mass unemployment, while the Tories promised more housing and less taxation.
In the event Labour received marginally more votes than the Tories, in an election in which the two parties took a larger share of  the total votes than ever before, but because of the geography of electoral support in relation to constituency boundaries it was the Tories who gained the majority of seats in Parliament and formed the next government.
Labour support tended to be concentrated in already safe seats while the Tories swung many of the southern marginals, as many of the managerial, professional and small business strata registered Tory votes where they had previously voted Liberal or not voted at all(Bonham, 1954).
It would seem that by this stage there was relatively little ‘class content’, in Marxist terms, to the rivalry of the main political parties.
Cleady the majority of working class voters saw the Labour Party as ‘their’ party and wished to see it remain in government, while the majority of middle class voters supported the Tories, but in neither case did the party or the ‘class’have a radical and distinctive programme for the transformation of social relations in Britain.
The Tories had broadly accepted ‘Attlee's consensus’, although Churchill was already critical of ‘socialist bureaucracy’ and ‘loss-making nationalised industries’and his party promised a further relaxation of wartime controls on workers, consumers and private capital; the Labour leadership had basically achieved what they had set out to achieve in the initial round of nationalisation and formation of the National Health Service and had no new radical project to present to their working class supporters, while the broader ‘labour movement’in the country was not unified around any radical demands for further government action.
If there was still a profound cultural divide between the parties, related to the social collectivities which furnished their support, there was little corresponding clash of definite ‘class projects’ for social development.
Tory government 1951–64
Once established as the party of government in 1951, the Tories benefited greatly from the subsequent rapid development of capital accumulation and rise in living standards in Britain.
From 1951 to 1955 manufacturing output rose 14 per cent, car production 87 per cent and steel production 21.5 per cent .
Apart from in 1952 employment grew continuously and unemployment rarely rose above 300,000.
Real personal disposable income rose 15 per cent over the period.
The marked improvement in the terms of trade for Britain over the early '50s permitted a rise in real wages despite a decline in Britain's exports, while a substantial inflow of American direct private investment  helped to boost capital accumulation.
In the chemicals and electrical engineering industries multidivisional enterprises such as ICI and Associated Electrical Industries carried out large investment programmes — the chemicals industry stimulated by the removal of German competition during and shortly after the war combined with a world shortage of chemicals, and electrical engineering stimulated by the rapid growth of electricity generation under Citrine (Shonfield, 1958).
The industrial expansion of the period was reflected in the sectoral division of labour, which showed an increase in the proportion of the workforce in ‘secondary’(industrial) employment from 39.7 per cent in 1948 to 41.6 per cent in 1951 and 42.2 per cent in 1956 (Gershuny, 1978).
The fears raised by Labour in the 1951 election campaign therefore remained unrealised, and the Tories were able to approach the 1955 election, following Churchill's replacement by Eden as prime minister, with considerable confidence.
The Labour Party was deeply divided — principally over foreign policy and rearmament, issues on which the Bevanite left was fighting a losing battle against the alignment of Britain with the USA, without mass popular support — and was unable to present its supporters with a convincing programme.
The manifesto, ‘Forward with Labour’, left the direction of putative advance vague in the extreme.
By early 1955 the result of the forthcoming election seemed a foregone conclusion and this was reflected in a substantially reduced poll in which the Tories increased their parliamentary majority.
Following this election victory, however, Tory fortunes were more mixed: Butler's electioneering budget, with substantial tax-cuts, rebounded as imports rose sharply and the exchange rate of the pound came under pressure, forcing the introduction of ‘stop’ measures; Eden's popularity waned rapidly even before the ignominy of attempted intervention at Suez in 1956, which then shook the ‘Great British’imperial ideology that provided a pole of attraction to Toryism for sections of all classes in society.
In 1957 Macmillan inherited the leadership of an unpopular government, lagging behind Labour in the opinion polls, but the policies pursued over the years to 1959 managed eventually to retrieve the party's position: Macmillan's nuclear ‘defence’ policy seemed at the time a plausible way to reclaim the status of a world power on the cheap; the formation of EFTA was negotiated; Macmillan sacked the deflationary Chancellor Thorneycroft and substituted Heathcoat-Amory who instituted another convenient bout of pre-election tax cutting.
Prior to the 1959 election the Tories carried out a highly expensive campaign, by previous standards, backed up by a business campaign against Labour nationalisation plans.
Labour, vilified as likely to spoil the Tory prosperity, remained a weak and uninspiring political force.
Despite the disarming of the Bevanite left with Bevan's shift of position on nuclear weapons, unity was not forthcoming under Gaitskell's leadership.
The left called for more nationalisation; the ‘traditional’ right wing of the party argued that this ‘needed more research’and conveniently forgot about it, while the new ‘revisionist’current represented by Healey, Jenkins and Crosland saw public ownership as irrelevant and raised ‘equality’as the prime goal of socialism — a position formalised in Crosland's ‘Future of Socialism’in 1956.
The document ‘Industry and Society’ adopted by the 1957 party conference reflected a compromise with this ‘revisionist’tendency.
The continuing failure of Labour to present a distinctive alternative to the Tories was indicated strikingly in the opinion poll finding that 40 per cent of electors believed it made no difference which party was in power.
Lacking more substantive arguments for voting Labour, Gaitskell promised an extravagant ‘electioneering'-type budget if returned to office, a ploy which the Tory leaders were able to ridicule despite the fact that they had started that particular game.
So in the 1959 election Labour support ebbed further and the Tories’ parliamentary majority was again increased.
This run of Tory election victories over the 1950s prompted the speculation at the time that the Tories had managed to establish themselves as the ‘natural party of government’.
It was suggested that increasing ‘affluence’ and the growth of the ‘middle class’meant the decomposition of the social base of the Labour Party (e.g. Abrams and Rose, 1960).
The right wing of the party took this to heart: Gaitskell talked of the need to shed Labour's ‘cloth cap’ image and attempted to ditch the famous clause four of the party constitution, the charter for nationalisation, as an electoral liability.
The latter gambit failed, since many in the party who were sceptical of the benefits of further nationalisation saw the removal of clause four as an unnecessarily provocative step, ‘removing Genesis from the Bible’ as Harold Wilson put it.
Besides, the Gaitskellite strategy for Labour was more deeply problematic: if the implicit criterion for political acceptability was resemblance to the Tories, what was there to convince voters that Labour was preferable, and what was there to motivate the party activists to build support?
The standard left response to the kind of argument put by Gaitskell was that the party should be ‘more socialist’ and would thereby gain more working class support, but it is not clear that the left opposition within the party had a political project which  could have commanded mass popular support among the working class in the 1950s.
The foreign policy issues on which the left fought were of great importance to the activists but of relatively little salience to the mass of the working class, while nationalisation had faded in popularity — quite understandably, given the failure to develop a popular democratic alternative to conventional managerial practice in the nationalised industries, and to develop a coherent set of criteria for allocating resources with which to counter the charge that they were ‘inefficient loss-makers’.
The propaganda onslaught by the Tories and private business interests must have helped to discredit nationalisation, but this cannot be the whole explanation.
Even Bevan reckoned that if the Labour Party were to campaign on a programme fully reflecting the aspirations of the rank and file party activists ‘we could say goodbye to any Labour government being elected again in Britain'.
Fortunately for the Labour Party, the position of the Tories as the party of government was less secure that it appeared to be in the late '50s.
First of all, it is useful to make a distinction between the party's parliamentary majority and its share of the popular vote.
We have already noted that the Tories received fewer votes than Labour in 1951: although they increased their share of the vote in 1955, this share was actually falling by 1959.
The party's greatly increased parliamentary majority in ‘59 masked a decline in popular electoral support as the Liberal Party enjoyed the beginnings of an electoral revival.
In fact over the 1950s the Tories never won as much as half of the popular vote, and were never more than a few percentage points ahead of Labour — percentage points which are nonetheless crucial within the British electoral system.
It is clear that the Tories enjoyed fairly solid electoral support from the ‘middle classes’, but given the relative numerical strength of the ‘classes’ in Britain, this was never enough to win an election, and a substantial minority of the working class provided around half of the Tory vote.
As Butler and Stokes pointed out, the replacement of the electorate was working against this kind of ‘cross-voting’ as more cohorts from ‘working class'/Labour homes entered the electorate, but evidently the Tories managed to counter this trend.
This maintenance of a working class Tory vote sufficient to return the party to office can be thought of as having two components: first the reproduction of relatively stable social collectivities having a principle of identification outside the conception of ‘class’ which prompted most ‘working class’people to vote Labour, and second a more conjunctural conversion of voters.
In the first category one can group, for instance, the  traditional Toryism of the working class in mid-Lancashire, in an area of high home ownership; the traditional anti-Irish protestant Tory vote in the cities of Liverpool, Manchester and Glasgow, where the Labour Party had become identified with Catholicism; and the weakly unionised workforce of the West Midlands engaged in small and relatively paternalistic businesses.
Certain of the policies pursued by the Tories during the '50s served to strengthen such stable ‘non-class’ social collectivities.
Particularly important here was the shift in housing policy from Bevan's overriding emphasis on council housing to Macmillan's stress on ‘private enterprise’ and owner-occupation, fostered by the extension of local authority mortgages.
There is strong evidence from Butler and Stokes' surveys that housing tenure over-determines party support, in relation to‘occupational class’: in council housing only 51 per cent of those in occupational classes I-IV with a partisan self-image were found to be Tories, as against 76 per cent in owner-occupied housing.
Conversely, in owner-occupied housing 42 per cent of those in classes V and VI had a Tory self-image as against 28 per cent in council housing (Butler and Stokes, 1974, p. 109).
This correlation is not of course self-explanatory but three plausible connections can be identified: the differential formation of ‘class self-image’ in the presence or absence of property-owning; the rational calculation of self-interest on the part of the occupants of the different forms of housing, with regard to the tax and rent policies likely to be pursued by the parties; and the flow of political information within the cultural milieu of the residential area.
At the same time as the evaluation of housing tenure was strengthening one base of working class Tory support, however, certain other bases were being eroded, for instance paternalistic relations within industrial enterprises were in many cases being undermined by the growth of industrial concentration and rise of large multidivisional enterprises, and the development of trade unionism within these.
To move to the more ‘conjunctural’ factors in working class support for the Tories: it is not plausible, in retrospect, to ascribe all the votes necessary to the preservation of Tory government over the '50s to stable and definite ‘Tory’social collectivities.
In addition, the Tories recruited crucial marginal support on two major grounds which affected the mass of the electorate: the continuing ideology of Britain's imperial greatness and the rapid increase in national prosperity.
And as the 1950s ended time was running out on both of these scores, as became increasingly evident during the later years of Macmillan's premiership.
As regards‘imperial greatness’ or ‘world power status’, the Tories made a brave job of trying to patch this up after Suez but in the early '60s Labour leaders were able to ridicule the so-called ‘independent British deterrent’which had run into the now familiar conflict between resources available and military pretensions; the attempted re-orientation of British trade towards Europe was ignominiously thwarted by the rejection of Macmillan's application for EEC membership; the process of ‘decolonisation’was becoming increasingly uncontrollable and chaotic as many British-established federations of post-colonial states fell apart.
As regards national prosperity, the ‘stop-go’ cycle of populist tax-cutting budgets followed by balance of payments crises and deflationary measures to protect the exchange rate was becoming increasingly vicious.
Heathcoat-Amory's election budget was followed in 1960 by the ‘stop’ measures of credit restriction and high interest rates.
Selwyn-Lloyd, installed as chancellor in ‘61, continued the deflation but this time added a ‘pay pause’ designed to counter wage inflation.
This pay policy, for which there had been no attempt to establish wide political support, bore particularly hard on certain groups of relatively weakly organised workers such as nurses, teachers and hospital workers whose case commanded considerable public sympathy, and when the deflationary measures had checked the run on the pound trade union antagonism to the government remained.
The unions refused to co-operate in Selwyn Lloyd's National Income Commission, and the chancellor continued to pursue deflation in 1962.
The emerging competitive weakness of the economy was demonstrated by the fact that while the deflationary measures pushed unemployment up sharply over the winter of 1962–63, the balance of payments remained in deficit.
With the replacement of Selwyn Lloyd by Maudling, Tory economic policy changed back to ‘go’ again, this time with the spurious rationalisation that fiscal expansion would of itself produce a virtuous circle of increased growth of GDP, increased productivity, increased exports and a further increase in growth.
The game was up when the resulting record deficit on the balance of payments current account was registered, and well publicised by Labour, before the 1964 election.
It became possible to argue that although the GDP had undoubtedly continued to grow under the Tories, and more rapidly than in Britain's past, the jerky ‘stop-go’ process was helping to weaken the relative position of the British economy on the world market, a position which bad become exposed with the dismantling of the imperial trade preferences and the progressive liberalisation of world trade after  Bretton Woods.
Further, the ‘excessive’ commitment to military expenditure (by the standard of other capitalist national economies) was diverting resources away from much-needed industrial investment.
Labour in the 1960s
With the ground shifting beneath both ‘imperial greatness’ and unproblematic prosperity the Tories' electoral bloc showed increasing signs of weakness.
It became evident that the Tory success of the '50s had owed more to the ‘conjuncture’ of that decade and less to an irreversible shift in class/political alignment than had been thought earlier by political commentators such as Abrams.
It was not obvious, however, that Labour would be the main beneficiary of this change.
It was the Liberals, under Grimond's leadership, who picked up many of the disaffected Tories in the by-elections of 1962 and ‘63 — a party with a less strong ‘class’ identification than the Tories or Labour.
But over 1963 and ‘64 the Labour Party made a comeback as a distinctive and relatively unified political force.
Wilson succeeded Gaitskell as leader and proved himself a much more astute politician, able to make considerable capital out of the scandals of Macmillan's last years (the Profumo affair, Rachmanism).
Also a rather ‘contingent’ factor gave Labour a political windfall: Macmillan's controversial selection of Douglas-Home as his successor.
This both demoralised the Tory ‘progressives’ such as Powell and McLeod (who denounced this selection as a victory for the ‘magic circle’of Tory politics) and gave Wilson a golden opportunity to campaign against the Tories as an anachronistic party out of tune with the ‘realities of modern Britain'.
This was somewhat ironic since within the Tory Party as a whole the early '60s saw a marked decline in the proportion of Eton-educated aristocratic MPs and a rise in the proportion of the ‘professional middle classes’ and career politicians, but with the fourteenth Earl of Home as figurehead, Wilson's charge seemed plausible.
The obverse of Wilson's attack on the ‘grouse-moor’ Tories was his promotion of the Labour Party as ‘modern’and ‘scientific’, as poised to release the ‘technological revolution’.
This gambit, drawing on the rapid growth of the science-based industries such as electronics, chemicals and nuclear power over the previous years, proved a successful means of unifying the party.
As Sked and Cook (1979, p. 215) put it,
‘Wilson had provided the Labour Party with exactly the right means to revive itself.
For science not only offered the movement an image  of modernity which it had recently lacked; it also provided a vocabulary with which Labour's traditional divisions could be obscured.’
The rising ‘middle class technocratic’ element in the party could believe this to mean that Labour would support modern managerial private industry while the left could imagine it meant the nationalisation of profitable growth industries in the name of state-sponsored technological advance.
Along with‘science’, ‘planning’ was an important catchword in building a support bloc for Labour.
Again, this had some appeal both to the industrial managers of the Federation of British Industry, who had called for ‘planning’ at their 1960 conference as a way out of the damaging ‘stop-go’cycle (Jessop, 1980), and to the party activists for whom ‘planning’meant increased government control over industrial enterprises.
The kind of planning which the FBI had in mind —‘indicative planning’ involving the gathering and exchange of information on the development of the economy and the improvement of co-ordination, rather than the formulation and compulsory implementation of a central plan — had already been attempted under the Tories with the formation of the National Economic Development Council (NEDC) in 1962 but had effectively remained subordinated to conventional stop-go demand management practice: Labour promised a form of planning which would be ‘purposeful’and ‘effective’, which would ‘have teeth in it somewhere’(Budd, 1978, Chapter 6).
If the ambivalent Wilsonian ‘science’ and ‘planning’programme was useful in obscuring divisions within the Labour Party and among its supporters, it could not provide a basis for a determined and purposeful popular political movement.
In fact, even in electoral terms there was only a modest revival of Labour support from 1959 to 1964 (from 43.8 per cent to 44. l per cent of the vote).
Labour's rather narrow parliamentary majority in 1964 was chiefly an effect of a slump in Tory support and continuing electoral revival of the Liberals (who received over 10 per cent of the vote for the first time since the war).
Once installed in government, however, the Labour Party embarked upon an energetic legislative programme including the establishment of the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) under George Brown with the remit of formulating a national plan, and the Ministry of Technology under Cousins, a leading light of the leftward movement in the trade unions since the '50s; the repeal of the 1957 Rent Act attacked by Labour as a ‘landlord's charter’ and associated with ‘Rachmanism’; the development of comprehensive education; the  development of regional policy in an attempt to alleviate the relatively high unemployment and slow growth of the depressed areas of the UK dependent on declining industries; the 1965 Trade Disputes Act, which gave union leaders full legal protection from actions over breach of employment contract; and the Redundancy Payments Act.
This activity was quite widely popular, with the exception of the changes in trade union law which had only minority support.
Despite the use of fiscal deflation in the attempt to maintain the exchange rate of the pound, and the difficulties experienced by the new National Board for Prices and Incomes in controlling inflation, which led to a slump in Labour support in mid-1965, Labour's electoral support had increased markedly by 1966.
A main theme of the Labour campaign was ‘planning’(The ‘National Plan’ had been published in late 1965), along with an expansion of the state educational and medical services.
Also, interestingly, Labour was trying to claim for itself the new Prospective owner-occupiers with a promise of low interest mortgages for low income earners.
As for the Tories, Heath had replaced Douglas-Home as leader in the party's first leadership election in ‘65, and was campaigning on the basis of EEC entry, Trade Union reform and reduction in direct taxation.
Heath, ‘the grocer’, showed the Tories in a truer light than Home had done, as an increasingly ‘middle class’(as opposed to aristocratic) party.
Possibly because of this the party forfeited some of its patrician appeal to its traditional supporters.
At any rate, the party's share of the vote continued its slide, giving Labour a large parliamentary majority.
Despite this electoral success for Labour, the years following the 1966 election showed up starkly the inability of this government to hold together a determined support bloc which could accomplish substantial social and economic changes.
Cracks appeared in the ‘planning’ and social expenditure programmes, and in the relations between the parliamentary Labour Party, the trade unions, and the party activists.
The ‘National Plan’ was first to go.
This exercise had never had much substance: the government had carried out an ‘Industrial Inquiry’ by questionnaire and had collated the results concerning investment trends, production, manpower requirements, expected exports and imports and so on, then used this as a basis for formulating some ambitious forecasts of growth to 1970.
Given that previous periods of rapid growth had been brought to a halt in the face of escalating deficits on the balance of payments, largely because of the  high marginal propensity to import manufactured goods, the improvement of the balance of payments figured prominently in the plan.
But the plan's ‘Check List of Action Required’ in this regard (HMSO, 1965, p. 17) was hardly adequate to produce a rapid improvement, and in many cases the ‘action’was deferred: ‘studies will be made, industry by industry of ways of increasing exports’; ‘Plans will be made, industry by industry, to save imports’(ibid.).
This could mean a lot, or very little, depending on the urgency of the ‘planning’ and the effectiveness of the control mechanisms in the hands of the government.
In practice, the central feature of ‘indicative planning’ was that government had no effective control mechanisms over private capitalist enterprises.
As Jessop argues:
‘…
The indicative voluntary nature of planning in this period expresses a fundamental problem at the heart of state intervention in Britain.
For, whereas organised labour has considerable ‘veto’ power at the point of production and monopoly capital has considerable scope for international mobility, the ‘social partners’of government in the management of the economy are weak, decentralised, and fragmented’(Jessop, 1980, p. 41).
The TUC is a relatively loose confederation of craft, general and industrial unions; there was no single peak organisation representing the management of industrial enterprises until the formation of the CBI, sponsored by the Labour Party, in 1965.
This means that even if the government, the TUC and CBI were able to agree on a particular course of development of the national economy ‘the state and the social partners alike are unable to enforce compliance with such a plan at the micro-level’(ibid.).
If the DEA was unable to organise rapid growth in conjunction with a stable balance of payments, then one of the objectives had to give, and in 1966 it was the growth target which was abandoned.
Leruez represents this as a misguided political choice: ‘Yet again, as under the Conservatives but in even more striking fashion, the defence of the pound was put above expansion’(Leruez, 1975, p. 179).
The assumption here is that if the pound had been devalued earlier on this would have made it possible to adhere to the growth path of the plan, but in the light of the comments made above this view is open to doubt: it gives the plan more credibility than it merited.
Further, if the pound had been devalued in 1964 or 1966, it is likely that the trade unions would have resisted the cut in real wages which devaluation implies, as they did after 1967.
Both the 1965 ‘plan’ and devaluation can be seen as technocratic measures, equally inadequate to abolish the competitive weakness of the UK economy — a weakness which is inscribed in its industrial structure, and the slow growth of productivity which is linked to the development of social relations within enterprises as well as the shortfall of investment.
In the absence of both the ‘political will’ and the social forces which would have been required to go beyond the merely ‘indicative’and technocratic attempt to alleviate the balance of payments constraint, the Wilson government used the only effective levers at its disposal to maintain the external balance: the old standby of fiscal deflation; incomes policy, to hold down both labour costs of British firms and consumer spending on imports; and then eventually devaluation of the currency which, although it did not abolish the trade constraint, at least temporarily pre-empted speculative pressure on the pound and brought a period of increased price competitiveness.
None of these measures, of course, were popular with Labour's political constituency.
Deflation put a brake on the much-heralded planned growth; the application of wage restraint lost the government the support of the union leaders such as Cousins, Scanlon and Jones as well as many union members; devaluation, as Callaghan pointed out in orotund fashion prior to his resignation as chancellor, involved ‘a reduction in the wage levels and the real wage standards of every member of the working class of this country’.
By 1968, the TUC and the Labour Party conference overwhelmingly opposed the government's wages policy and, ironically for the government, this policy was helping to provoke strikes which were damaging the balance of payments.
The damage to internal party, and party/union, relations was carried a stage further with the abortive ‘In Place of Strife’ proposals of 1968/9.
These were Wilson and Castle's response to the ‘ unofficial strike problem’ which had been building up over the '60s but had acquired particular prominence in 1968 with the publication of the Donovan Commission's report.
This ‘problem’ reflected the increased power of the shop stewards movement in a macroeconomic context of sustained relatively full employment and an industrial context of increased concentration of labour in the mass production of standardised commodities, and was probably exacerbated by the restriction of real wages over the late '60s: it was by no means unique to Britain.
Donovan had taken a fairly low-key approach, refusing to accept the view (promulgated by the CBI) that legal restrictions on unofficial strikes would achieve the desired industrial peace, but Wilson and  Barbara Castle convinced themselves that penal sanctions were necessary and justified, and in accordance with public opinion.
Wilson had borne a personal grudge against ‘politically motivated’ militants ever since the seamen's strike of 1966 had spoiled his incomes policy and the attempted revival of the balance of payments upon which he had staked so much of his credibility.
For Castle and others, unregulated shop-floor militancy marred the rational, state-controlled Fabian landscape.
But although ‘In Place of Strife’ was in accord with majority public opinion, it was certainly not in accord with Labour Party and union opinion, and although that in itself has not always blocked the parliamentary leadership, this time it became obvious that sufficient Labour MPs would reject the proposals to make it impossible to establish them as law.
Wilson and Castle had to back down, but not before the credibility of the leadership had been further dented.
The struggles over incomes policy and trade union legislation were part of a more general worsening of relations between the Labour Party, organised labour and the ‘intellectual left’ over this period.
As regards Labour's traditional connection with the industrial working class, this was being called into question by the changing social composition of both the parliamentary party and the constituency organisations.
In 1945, 50 per cent of Labour MPs and half of the cabinet had come from a ‘working class’ occupational background, but by 1970 the proportion had fallen to 25 per cent of MPs and one out of twenty-three in the Cabinet (Butler and Stokes, 1974).
This shift went well beyond the general decline of the traditional working class in the electorate (discussed below) and reflected the increasing selection of ‘more educated candidates’ with ‘administrative aptitudes’under the conditions of electoral competition, and within the dominant technocratic conception of politics, which had held sway since the rise of ‘Butskellism’in the mid '50s.
At constituency level as well, relations between the party and its traditional supporters were breaking down.
Hindess (1971) analysed this in detail for the case of Liverpool, and although the detailed studies of other areas which might support a definite generalisation were not carried out, it seems plausible that a parallel evolution was taking place in other city Labour parties.
The core of Hindess's argument concerns the differential orientation to politics according to the definite zones of living conditions within the city.
Within the ‘middle class’ zones of owner-occupation of housing, politically active people tended to see politics as an arena for establishing the broad outlines of policy; the ‘details’of execution of policy could be left to suitably  qualified experts and were not really the business of politics.
On this view, politics provides the background or environment within which individuals pursue their own ‘chosen’ careers, living in their own ‘chosen’houses.
The material conditions of life support a marked separation of the personal and the political.
Within the ‘working class’ zones such as council estates, by contrast, this separation of the personal and the political is less tenable.
If people have very little choice in matters of housing then the details of planning and the execution of policy become very important, and are not just to be left to the ‘experts’.
The government is experienced not merely as providing background amenities against which individuals pursue their choices, but as an external constraining and coercive organisation.
There is an unavoidable personal involvement in the consequences of political decisions and therefore the details of policy execution are, or ought to be, ‘political matters’.
With the decline of private rented accommodation and growth of public housing programmes these orientations, and the political demands connected with them, became progressively more differentiated, and this differentiation was reproduced within the Labour Party.
‘Middle class’, owner-occupier, Labour activists pursuing a more ‘humane’ and ‘equal’society by means of general legislative change confronted ‘working class’council tenants deeply concerned with the ‘parochial’and ‘trivial’issues arising from their everyday interactions with state apparatuses.
And in this confrontation, the evolution of the parliamentary party strengthened the hand of the former:
‘…in general, the pressures on the Labour Party from the institutional environment towards the increasing bureaucratisation and centralisation of decision-making, the employment of and dependence on, specialists and the emphasis on professional administration, have been entirely consistent with the basic orientation of party activists in the middle class areas’(Hindess, 1971, p. 140).
This process analysed by Hindess runs deeper than disagreement over policy .
The ‘middle class’ activists did not necessarily support all the actual policies of the national party, but what they did support was the form of policymaking , and the right of the leadership to make policy.
If this analysis is correct, then although many ‘working class’ people continued to think of the Labour Party as ‘their’party in some vague sense, it was actually losing contact with their day-to-day political concerns and subsequently losing active working class support at a local level.
As regards left intellectual radicalism, the party was also losing its attraction, especially for the young.
The Wilson government had supported the expansion of the universities following the Robbins Report, but the radicalism which the universities harboured in the late '60s was not generally translated into active support for Labour.
Hardly surprising, since one of the main components of that radicalism was opposition to the Vietnam war, and although nominally defeated at the party conference in 1967, Wilson's basically pro-US stand defined the party's position in the eyes of many young radicals.
Also, of course, the ferment in the universities was in part a revolt against the technocratic role which they had been assigned in the Wilsonian scheme of things.
It must be said, however, that despite the forfeiture of much active and committed support among the industrial working class and the intellectual left, popular support for the Labour Party, as registered by the opinion polls, had not collapsed by 1970.
In April and May Jenkins' style of fiscal management was widely approved, and a Labour election victory was widely expected.
Part of the explanation must be that many of those who were deeply disappointed by the government's record and lack of ‘Socialism’ still regarded the party as the lesser of two evils.
But apart from this, two other points have to be considered.
First, the banal but important point that things were not that bad over the 1960s for the mass of the electorate, so that those Labour voters who had neither expected not desired revolutionary socialism had no real reason to feel betrayed.
Despite the successive sterling crises, deflationary fiscal packages and wage restraint, real personal disposable income per head had risen by around 12 per cent from 1964 to 1970.
By the end of the period, paid holidays were longer, life expectancy had increased, accidents at work were reduced and the public services had been expanded considerably (although as Townsend has argued the benefits of this expansion went disproportionately to the ‘middle class’).
The second point, which requires a more lengthy discussion, concerns the changing social composition of the electorate.
The reduction in active and committed Labour support has to be seen in the context of a more general weakening of the ‘class'-party alignment, a tendential replacement of solid electoral support (for both main parties) by more volatile behaviour.
The polls before the 1970 election may have registered broad support for Labour but as the election result itself showed this support was conditional and unreliable.
Schematically, there are two sides to the weakening of the ‘class'-party link, the specifically political and the sociological.
So far I have mainly stressed the directly political side of the weakening of active Labour support (i.e. the policy, performance and organisation of the Labour Party).
It will now be useful to consider the other side of the issue, and in the following section I shall examine the changes in the division of labour and social collectivities which help to explain the general weakening of ‘class'-party associations.
The division of labour and social collectivities: changes in progress over the 1960s
One can get a first indication of these changes from the statistics on the division of labour between sectors of the economy.
Table 6.4 shows that there appears to be a turning point around 1960: before then manufacturing employment, and the broader ‘industrial’ employment, had been growing faster than overall employment, whereas over the period 1960–64 (which, taken as a whole, shows a rapid growth of overall employment) the manufacturing and industrial sectors showed only a marginal growth of employment, therefore accounting for a declining share of the total.
Of course, neither the ‘industrial’ nor the ‘non-industrial’sectors were homogeneous in this respect.
From 1954 to 1960 the net expansion of industrial employment was the result of rapid growth in sectors such as chemicals, mechanical and electrical engineering, vehicles, paper, printing and publishing, and metal manufacture, set against decline in shipbuilding, textiles, clothing and footwear, and mining and quarrying.
From 1960 onwards the relative decline reflected a slower growth of employment in the ‘growth industries’ and an accelerating decline of the ‘traditional’industries.
Equally, the relative expansion of the non-industrial sector was uneven, with a net decline in transport and communications, with growth in the distributive trades tapering off from 1960, and with both ‘Insurance, banking and finance’ and ‘Professional and scientific services’showing an accelerating growth of employment over the period.
Following the trends further, we find that over the decade 1961–71 manufacturing employment began to decline absolutely (employment in 1971 was 95 per cent of the 1961 level), while the faster-growing non-industrial sectors accounted for a substantially increasing proportion of the workforce.
The composition of this ‘tertiary sector’ expansion is shown in Table 6.5.
Again, the pattern is uneven.
The workforce in distribution began to decline with increased concentration in retailing, rationalisation and    the development of larger stores.
The financial sector showed particularly rapid growth, connected with the growth of financial transactions implied by the vast expansion of saving and borrowing (analysed in Chapter 4).
The ‘professional and scientific’ category also grew rapidly, reflecting the expansion of both professional services for business and the development of education and the NHS in the state sector.
The ‘miscellaneous services’ sector declined in importance, reflecting a switch in popular expenditure patterns — away from cinemas and theatres and towards television; away from domestic help and laundries and towards domestic appliances; away from transport services and towards the use of private cars.
Finally, the workforce in public administration showed a marked rise, connected with the expansion of public expenditure programmes and the development of state apparatuses concerned with industrial consultation and intervention.
As regards the decline in employment in manufacturing, mathematically speaking this is equal to the growth rate of labour productivity in manufacturing minus the growth rate of output from that sector.
The decline can therefore by thought of as, broadly, the result of the pursuit of higher productivity (in face of declining profit rates and the weakening competitive position of British industry on the world market) in a context of constraint on the growth of output.
The balance of payments provided such a constraint, of increasing tightness over the 1960s.
More specifically though, the sharpest decline in employment in manufacturing within this period came in the later 1960s, with the ‘shake-out’ associated with the merger boom and the accompanying ‘rationalisation’of enterprises' activities, a process which was in part stimulated by fiscal deflation and in part actively sponsored by quasi-state agencies such as the Labour government's Industrial Reorganisation Corporation.
The discussion above relates to the relative expansion of various forms of non-industrial employment (division of labour by sectors).
There is, however, another aspect to the changing composition of the workforce over the 1960s: a shift in what I referred to earlier as the ‘division of labour by strata’.
Tables 6.6 and 6.7 give two views of this shift, considering different time periods and employing different classifications.
Table 6.6 shows the growth rate of certain major ‘socio-economic groups’(the official nomenclature) over the decade 1961–1971.
Note that it is confined to males only, but includes retired people as well as those economically active (relevant to the composition of the electorate as a whole).
The contrast between the rapid growth of the ‘professional’ and ‘intermediate non-manual’groups (as well as the ‘employers and managers’category where the growth is slower but the starting point higher) and the decline of not only the ‘manual workers’group but also the ‘junior non-manual’, suggests a substantial change in the balance of these strata among the male population, and reinforces the idea of a decline in the ‘traditional’male working class.
Table 6.7 has a different focus, dividing the employed workforce according to form of payment as well as by strata (for the salary-earners) and sector (for wage earners).
It also gives some indication of the pattern of the sexual  division of labour as it was developing in the late 1960s.
The importance of the salary/wage distinction goes beyond the mere periodicity of payment, since broadly speaking it correlates with the ‘staff'/ ‘worker’ demarcation, with salaried employees generally having higher ‘status’, greater continuity of employment and greater access to benefits such as pension rights.
It is therefore interesting to find such a marked increase in salaried employment even over this five-year period.
As can be seen from the table, the fastest growth of salaried employment was in the (male-dominated) managerial grades and the technical and professional grades (which were rather more open to women).
Salaried clerical labour showed a small proportional increase, along with a reduction in the proportion of male employees.
As would be expected from the previous discussion, the main decline in wage-earning employment came in the (male-dominated) industrial sector, while the non-industrial wage-earning category, which includes a substantial majority of women, showed a slight increase.
The overall picture which emerges from the various statistics considered is that of (a) a sectoral shift from industrial to non-industrial employment, plus (b) a shift in the balance of the ‘status’ categories of employment, towards salaried employment in the various managerial, technical and professional grades in particular.
Further, these shifts took place in the context of (c) a change in the sexual division of labour as a higher proportion of women took up (at least part-time) paid employment: both non-industrial waged employment, and salaried clerical labour are sectors where a substantial majority of employees are women.
If the combined effect of these rather complex changes in the distribution of social labour between sectors and strata was to reduce the size of the ‘traditional’ industrial working class, it was also to render the ‘traditional’British conception of the middle class more problematic.
As Raynor (1969) noted, the first use of the term ‘middle class’ in Britain was probably in the early years of the nineteenth century (Raynor quotes the Oxford English Dictionary's date of 1812), and it was during the nineteenth century that the ‘middle class’developed into an identifiable and vocal, if rather vaguely defined, social collectivity.
In the early period, the designation ‘middle’ marked out an intermediate place between the industrial proletariat and servant classes on the one hand, and the landed and financial aristocracy on the other — a place occupied not only by the rising industrial and commercial bourgeoisie, but also by the traditional professions and the civil servants, clerks and school teachers.
Ever since then the term ‘middle class’ has continued in widespread use, but its referent has  undergone radical changes.
At the ‘top end’ the peculiarly British mutual accommodation and interpenetration of the bourgeoisie and aristocracy has licensed an extension of the term ‘middle class’until there is only a vestigial ‘upper class’against which to draw a contrast, while at the same time there have been successive waves of new recruits which have enlarged the base of the ‘class’: the new groups of professionals, managers and technical experts which expanded from the latter half of the nineteenth century onward with the development of capitalist industry and trade; the more recent expansion of salaried employment in education, research, health, social welfare, administration and planning.
As Raynor (1969, Chapter 2) argues, the ‘middle class’ was never homogeneous (in particular it has never been equivalent to Marx's ‘bourgeoisie’), but nonetheless its degree of heterogeneity has been greatly increased over the post-war years, and the shift in the distribution of social labour analysed above has accelerated this process.
The fissures between the employers (large and small), the self-employed, and the rentiers, and between these categories and the ‘salariat’ of employed professional, managerial and technical workers, have been added to by the fissure between the private sector business salariat and the more newly expanding public sector salariat, so that the notion of the ‘middle class’has virtually reached bursting point.
The ‘middle class’ designation has retained some validity for so long, covering such disparate socio-economic categories, largely because of the remarkable tenacity of the amalgam of cultural values which characterised the nineteenth century middle classes: part bourgeois (thrift, independence) and part acquired from the aristocracy and gentry (respectability, ‘gentlemanly’behaviour).
But this ideological cement began to crumble with the accelerating influx of people from working class backgrounds into new non-industrial and salarian positions, and the development of ‘white collar unionism’.
It becomes less and less feasible to equate the relative contraction of the industrial proletariat with the relative expansion of the ‘middle class’.
There are two analytically distinct points at issue here: first, the nature of the social positions which have been created by the expansion of non-industrial employment and the relative expansion of technical and administrative employment within industry, and second the recruitment of agents to fill these positions.
As regards the first point, I have suggested that the ‘tertiary sector’ expansion has increased the heterogeneity of non-manual/industrial positions within the division of labour.
Particularly important here is the expansion of the public sector salariat connected with the ‘welfare state’.
This  category, in contrast with the business salariat, owes its existence to the social democratic expansion of state services under the sign of an ideology of state-sponsored social improvement, and is therefore less likely to subscribe wholeheartedly to the traditional middle class values of personal independence and responsibility, or to go along so readily with the middle class complaints against ‘wasteful state spending’ and ‘excessive taxation’.
Further, as Jenkins and Sherman (1979) point out, the public sector has been a relatively fruitful domain for ‘white collar’ union organisation since the early years of the present century.
Aside from the development of a public sector salariat, however, there is also the point that many private sector salarian posts have been ‘routinised’ in the search for cost-effectiveness, eroding the previously valued autonomy of the middle class occupations (Braverman's analysis of clerical labour, Oppenheimer, 1975, on professionals, Crompton, 1979, on insurance clerks), and providing conditions under which union organisation could be developed.
This development has introduced a definite tension between the (still widespread)‘middle class’ aspirations of many salaried and non-industrial employees, and the forms of collective organisation and action which have been employed to defend their economic position.
As argued earlier, I do not consider it useful to debate the significance of these phenomena in terms of an essential theoretical designation of the new strata as either ‘new working class’ or ‘new petty bourgeoisie’(although I have argued that in terms of property relations alone they are working class).
But what is of interest in the present context is the particular ramifications of these developments within the British social formation, i.e. the weakening hold of the ‘middle class’ designation within popular ideology, and of the middle class/Tory nexus.
As regards the second point (the recruitment of agents to the salaried and non-industrial positions), the investigations conducted by Goldthorpe (1980) are of considerable interest.
Goldthorpe shows that, contrary to the ‘closure’ and ‘buffer zone’theses, there has been a very substantial recruitment of males from manual working class family backgrounds into even the ‘highest’strata of salaried employment.
This does not reflect a radical social openness or free circulation of agents between social positions, since the offspring of the higher occupational grades still have a much greater relative chance of ending up in those grades than people from lower occupational backgrounds, but all the same it represents de facto social mobility on a large scale.
Given the rapid expansion of demand for managerial, technical, professional and administrative labour, it was quite  impossible to restrict recruitment to the offspring of the existing middle classes.
Writers of a Marxist persuasion have often denied the importance of social mobility as a factor in class analysis.
Within the English tradition of radical, ‘Marx-influenced’, sociology the tendency has been to concede that social mobility is in principle important (large-scale mobility would make a difference to one's analysis), but to deny that really significant social mobility has taken place.
According to Goldthorpe's study, this denial is just empirically wrong.
Poulantzas, on the other hand, characteristically refuses to debate on the empirical ground of ‘bourgeois sociology’ and denies that any degree of social mobility could have a material bearing on the Marxist analysis of the class structure.
Contrary to the ‘bourgeois problematic of social mobility’, he avers,
‘…it is clear that, even on the absurd assumption that from one day to the next, or even from one generation to the next, the bourgeoisie would all take the places of workers and vice versa, nothing fundamental about capitalism would be changed, since the places of bourgeoisie and proletariat would still be there, and this is the principal aspect of the reproduction of capitalist relations’(Poulantzas, 1975, p. 33).
If one takes this as a statement obliquely concerning the Marxist political project, it has a certain validity, in that it brings out the difference between Marxism and ‘meritocratic’, or social-democratic notions of ‘equality of opportunity’: the Marxist project is not merely to allow access to the privileged classes for the most ‘able’ individuals from all sections of society, but to transform the class structure (to eliminate private possession of the major means of production and hierarchical management, and to institute a democratically socialised appropriation).
But otherwise, Poulantzas' assertion is bizarre; the social and political consequences of his hypothetical periodic interchange of classes (e.g. in terms of the constitution of political parties and their constituencies) would be incalculable, and certainly ‘fundamental’.
Surely we can maintain that the existence of social mobility does not undermine the Marxist critique of capitalism, without feeling obliged to insist that it is really of no consequence.
Marx, although he did not have a great deal to say about the movement of individuals between classes, did on several occasions note the possible effects of such movement.
For instance, his remarks in the ‘Eighteenth Brumaire’ and in correspondence with Weydemeyer, relating the ‘immaturity’of the American working-class movement in the mid 19th century to the ‘flux and interchange’whereby American proletarians were able to convert themselves into independent self-sustaining peasants.
Or, in his discussion of the banking and credit system, this interesting passage concerning the ability of individuals without their own capital to borrow funds and set up businesses:
‘Although this circumstance continually brings an unwelcome number of new soldiers of fortune into the field and into competition with the already existing individual capitalists, it also reinforces the supremacy of capital itself, expands its base and enables it to recruit ever new forces for itself out of the substratum of society.
In a similar way, the circumstance that the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages formed its hierarchy out of the best brains in the land, regardless of their estate, birth or fortune, was one of the principal means of consolidating ecclesiastical rule and suppressing the laity.
The more a ruling class is able to assimilate the foremost minds of a ruled class, the more stable and dangerous becomes its rule’(Marx, 1972, p. 600–601)
But even without Marx's imprimatur , it would still be clear enough that large-scale movement of individuals between positions in the social division of labour, inter- or intra-generationally, can have important consequences for the formation of social collectivities and the development of politics.
In this regard, it is relevant that the ‘places’ created by the expansion of non-manual/salaried employment were in many cases filled by the sons of manual wage workers, providing them with an avenue for social advancement, rather than, say, by more rapid breeding on the part of previously privileged strata.
Goldthorpe argues that in the British case the effects have been strikingly asymmetrical: the expanding upper occupational strata show a low ‘demographic homogeneity’(i.e. a low proportion of members whose fathers were members of the same stratum or class), while the manual wage-earning classes, dwindling in size, show a very high level of demographic homogeneity: there has been little pressure for recruitment of manual workers from beyond the ranks of existing manual workers' families.
For the ‘middle classes’, then, heterogeneity of social origin must be added to heterogeneity of socio-economic position as another factor tending to render problematic any clear ‘class’ designation (or in other words tending to reduce the degree to which the term ‘middle  class’identifies a pertinent social collectivity).
For the manual working class the pattern of mobility has had a double-edged effect, on the one hand increasing the possibility of ‘social advancement’(although this remains slim for men who have passed their mid-20s), while on the other reducing the influx of people from other backgrounds.
One should beware the temptation of ‘reading off’ from the high demographic homogeneity of this category any necessary political homogenisation (a temptation to which Goldthorpe appears to give way).
The manual working class may not be divided by social origin, but it remains divided by industry, region, housing tenure and other factors, which are not politically irrelevant.
Equally, however, the substantial de facto mobility out of the manual working class has not dissolved its traditional collectivist propensities, at least so far as trade unionism is concerned.
This mobility probably helped to ‘legitimise’ and stabilise the hierarchical structure of social relations, and to promote the ideology of individual career advancement, but it by no means terminated the struggle for collective advancement.
Party politics once more The starting point for this discussion — of the changing division of labour by sectors and by strata, and of the social pattern of recruitment of individuals to the positions within these divisions — was the condition of party politics as the 1960s ended, and in particular the position of the Labour Party, which had forfeited the active support on important sections of its ‘traditional’ partisans yet had not apparently suffered a collapse of electoral support (as indicated by opinion polls before the 1970 election).
I suggested that the latter point could be explained in part by reference to the change in the social composition of the electorate which had been in progress over the '60s.
This suggestion can now be justified.
If serious strains were emerging within Labour's main traditional active support bloc, the expansion of the salariat and accompanying transformations within the ‘middle class’ were also tending to undermine the ‘middle class'/Tory axis.
The proportion of the electorate having a strong partisan identification was on the decrease, and the electorate becoming more ‘volatile’.
Electoral studies of the period show that an increasing number of people were making their support for one or other of the main parties conditional upon the calculation of ‘rational self-interest’ or ‘governmental competence’, rather than basing their voting upon a ‘class reflex’.
The net effect was that while Labour's electoral support did not collapse, it became less deeply rooted, and more liable to be swayed by conjunctural influences.
In 1970, Labour identification was not necessarily tied to support for the party's ‘traditional’ concerns, or at least the concerns of the left-wing: only 39 per cent of Labour identifiers were in favour of nationalising more industries; only 40 per cent did not believe that trade unions had too much power; and although 60 per cent were in favour of spending more on social services this represented a marked decline from the 89 per cent recorded in 1964 (Crewe et al .,
1977).
In this respect, the opinions of the parliamentary leadership were not dissimilar to those of the majority of Labour supporters, but this congruence does not invalidate the claim that Labour's substantive and definite electoral support bloc was on the decline, and was being replaced, at least at the margin, by a more conditional and circumspect form of popular support.
In 1970, Wilson appealed to be judged on the government's record, on its competence in dealing with ‘the country's problems’ and in particular the balance of payments.
If it is true that the publication of figures showing a deficit shortly before the election was a significant factor in Labour's ‘last minute’ loss of support, it is surely fitting — a case of Wilson being hoist by his own technocratic petard.
The irony is only compounded by the fact that in retrospect those trade figures turned out to be misleading and only a statistical ‘blip’.
One can get a further perspective on the development of the class/politics relationship in the period of the Wilson government by asking the question of whether matters could have turned out very differently, and in particular whether a ‘socialist alternative’ was there for the taking.
Consider Glyn and Sutcliffe's epitaph on the period:
‘Between 1964 and 1970 the Labour government tried to serve two masters.
It would not challenge capitalism, so it tried to support it; but it could not make its policy acceptable to the trade unions on whom it depended.
Such contradictions are bound to beset a working class party in power, if it does not oppose capitalism, but tries instead to make it run more efficiently and more humanely’(Glyn and Sutcliffe, 1972, p.213).
The problem with this conception is that neither ‘capitalism’ nor the ‘working class’are preconstituted masters which it is possible merely to ‘serve’.
The Labour government 1964–1970 did not abolish capitalist relations of production in Britain, for sure, but it did not merely serve  a pre-defined capitalist class interest either.
Social and economic relations were modified in a whole range of ways over this period, some of them to the advantage of the working class.
Of course the government did not ‘challenge capitalism’ outright in the sense, for instance, of attempting massive nationalisation under workers' control.
But what precisely would it have meant to ‘serve the working class’ over this period?
Did the industrial militants in the car industry and the docks, the union leaders disaffected by incomes policy and the council tenants by the local state apparatus, the left intellectuals in the universities, add up to a social bloc capable of achieving sweeping changes in Britain's insertion within international economic relations and the relations of production in the domestic economy, even if the Labour leadership had wished to lead such a movement?
I doubt it.
Beynon points out that the militancy in the car industry had no clear political issue:
‘the slogan ‘the mines for the miners’ meant something.
That no similar slogan has come from the car workers is important, and is tied up with the fact that ‘the car plants for the car workers’ makes no sense to the lads who work on the line.
They hate the car plant in a way that the miners never hated the pit.
They can see no obvious salvation in the nationalisation of the car industry, be it under workers' control or not’(Beynon, 1975, pp. 318–9).
Hughes (1960) noted what he called ‘a failure of initiative and imagination on the part of trade unions’ concerning workers' control in the nationalised industries generally, a ‘failure’which was not really made good over the '60s.
In the universities, anti-imperialist students were discovering Marx but generally had little of substance to propose as regards the development of the domestic economy, or at least little which found a resonance among the masses.
If the Labour Party had announced, in 1964 or 66, its intention to ‘oppose capitalism’ fundamentally and had explained what this was likely to involve in terms of dislocation of international trade and payments (even Callaghan's mildly redistributive budget of 1964 was enough to cause a run on the pound), and the onus which would have to be placed on the trade unions in running industry, given the likely non-co-operation of many among the managerial strata, it is quite implausible to say they would have been elected to office.
They would undoubtedly have alienated much of their ‘middle class’ support, and would not have won over any working class Tories.
That would have  lost them the election, even supposing that such an announcement would not also have alienated any working class Labour supporters.
This is not to whitewash the actual political practice of the Wilson government, or to deny any element of political contingency.
The feasible political choices confronting Labour could doubtless have been handled in a way which would have produced greater benefit for working people, and lost Labour less active support.
Only this: it is misleading to suggest that a socialist alternative qualitatively different from the actual record of 1964–70 existed in potentia and merely went by default, on account of a failure of political will.
Health and after
I have argued above in terms of a discrepancy between Labour's electoral success in 1964 and more particularly 1966, and the failure of the party to hold together a decisive social bloc capable of accomplishing radical change in a socialist, or even a Croslandite, direction (a failure which was not, however, merely a matter of will).
But if the Wilsonian rhetoric went well beyond what Labour was able to achieve, Heath's ‘mandate’ for change was even flimsier than that of Labour in the '60s.
In the 1970 election the Tories received the votes of 33.2 per cent of the electorate (as against 36.4 per cent for Labour in 1966), and although this was enough to give them a safe parliamentary majority, it did not reflect massive and determined popular support for the ‘Selsdon’ programme of trade union reform plus ‘rolling back of the frontiers of government’(the promised direct tax cuts were popular, but that does not prove much).
Butler and Stokes' surveys even suggest that part of the electoral swing to the Tories was for no more substantial a reason than the belief among some electors in the ‘circulation of the parties’, i.e. the sentiment that ‘it's time the other party had a go’.
The discrepancy between the Heath government's pretensions, and presumed mandate, and its actual powers can be shown up by considering, first, the famous ‘U turn’ and second, the circumstances of its electoral defeat in 1974.
The U turn
The intentions of this government in the ‘Selsdon’ phase are well known: to regenerate a profitable, fast-growing, internationally competitive British capitalism by creating ‘incentives’(direct tax cuts), outlawing the ‘disruptive’activities of industrial militants, and reducing state ‘interference’in the workings of the market: no more support for ‘lame ducks’; no more detailed quantitative restriction on credit; no more incomes policy.
These policies were fairly soon in disarray, for a number of reasons.
Relations with the trade unions deteriorated rapidly, as could only be expected.
Heath was attempting to break with the politics of accommodation, the ‘triangular system’ of government/union/employer consultation which had been growing up at least since the war.
Wilson had tried this first, with ‘In Place of Strife’, but fortunately for Labour these proposals had never reached the statute book since union opposition was internalised within the party.
The Tories had no such mechanism for demonstrating in advance the unworkability of their Industrial Relations Act.
As Middlemass (1979, p. 443) remarks of the Act, the TUC ‘could hardly have accepted such a reversal of the terms of politics as they had been understood for a generation.’
Having chosen confrontation with the unions the Heath government went down to important defeats: the resolution of the miners' strike by the Wilberforce Report in 1972; the official solicitor's intervention to free the ‘Pentonville Five’ in the context of demands for a general strike, after which the Industrial Relations Act was virtually a dead letter.
If the ‘labour movement’ was not in a position to enforce a socialist alternative on the Labour government between 1964 and 1970, it was well able to resist Heath.
Two factors bolstered this resistance.
In the first place Heath's break with the previous ‘Keynesian’ consensus on macroeconomic policy (in the minimal sense of nominal adherence to ‘full employment’as a policy-goal) was less than complete.
So when unemployment approached one million in early ‘72, following fiscal deflation in earlier budgets, the government went for reflation by means of substantial tax cuts — a course of action which had the full support of most economic commentators including the ‘Times’.
One of the effects of this reflation was a huge surge in imports and a record trade deficit, but it did also restrict the growth of unemployment.
My point here is that a further rapid increase in unemployment might have weakened the unions' power of resistance (one can draw a comparison with the Thatcher government), but playing according to rules which prohibited blatant mass unemployment tied the government's hands.
A second factor weakening the Heath government's attempt to dictate to the unions on the basis of its ‘mandate from the nation’ was the rather agnostic attitude taken up by large employers.
The CBI, and large companies in particular, refused to use the new powers of the Industrial  Relations Act for fear of stirring up even more trouble, leaving them for smaller maverick employers to exploit, and discredit, in highly contentious situations.
The strident anti-union bloc of small businessmen, outraged sections of the middle classes, and probably also elements of the non-union working class, was not a sufficient counterweight to organised labour, given the tendency for the management of large enterprises to stand above the fray.
Aside from the policy of confronting union power, other aspects of the Selsdon programme were under severe strain by 1972.
The non-intervention policy with regard to‘lame ducks’ was effectively abandoned with the politically inescapable rescue of Rolls Royce and Upper Clyde Shipbuilders, and the 1972 Industry Bill marked a return to the kind of industrial policy which had been evolving over the 1960s with the formation of NEDC and IRC.
Two other areas of the market were also to succumb to ‘intervention’.
In the case of wage bargaining, the Tories had earlier ruled out incomes policy but as inflation accelerated, following the boom-induced rise in world commodity prices and the downward ‘float’ of the pound on the foreign exchanges from 1972, Heath imposed a statutory pay and prices standstill.
In the case of the financial system, the Heath government had been sympathetic to the Bank of England's ‘Competition and Credit Control’ proposals of 1971 which, while incoherent, promised more freedom of market competition.
It was not long before the effects of this ‘freedom’, in the form of rampant property speculation and massive growth of the money supply, forced the government into re-imposing restrictions on the volume and direction of credit.
Heath was even led to castigate, in his famous phrase, the ‘unacceptable face of capitalism’, and to berate industrialists for failing to take up industrial investment opportunities.
As a result of these multiple features in the attempt to implement the Selsdon programme the government was forced away from its original ‘free market’ radicalism into what Middlemass (1979) has called the ‘politics of crisis avoidance’.
But despite the various aspects of his ‘U turn’, Heath had by this stage burned his boats, so far as the re-creation of a ‘corporatist accommodation’ was concerned.
Despite the imposition of price controls, his government could not win acceptance for its pay restraint policy on the part of the TUC.
When confronted by the miners' pay claim in 1973, well in excess of the government's stipulated maximum, Heath therefore reverted to the doctrine of the national mandate.
The miners' strike was presented as a direct challenge to the authority of the government, and was made  into a sticking-point beyond which the government would not be pushed.
Here was a sectional interest dictating to the democratically-elected representatives of the people, and since it had proved impossible belatedly to accommodate that sectional interest through the mechanism of ‘tripartism’, it had to be challenged.
Hence the election of February 1974, to answer the question of ‘Who governs Britain?’, in the context of a state of emergency.
The election of 1974
The results of the February election provide an interesting commentary on the state of the nation after four years of Heath's rule.
Heath was calling for a decisive mandate to put the unions in their place, but the most striking feature of the results is that they offered no party any decisive mandate whatever.
For the first time since the war, the two major parties each received the votes of less than 30 per cent of the electorate.
Compared with 1970, the Liberal vote nearly trebled: at over six million, this vote represented more than half of the votes going to each of the main parties against little over a sixth in 1970.
In Scotland, the nationalist vote doubled relative to 1970.
In terms of parliamentary representation, Labour — although receiving less votes than the Tories — became the largest single party; the Tories had five seats less than Labour; the Liberals, with their geographically diffuse support, were grossly ‘under-represented’ relative to their share of vote, having only fourteen seats; while the Scottish Nationalists, benefiting from the concentration of their vote, increased their parliamentary contingent from one to seven.
Labour, as the largest party in this first ‘hung Parliament’ of the post war years, formed a government, but parliament remained dominated by the prospect of another election.
What can we read in this voting pattern, in relation to the political developments in the preceding period?
First, there is the point that Heath signally failed to get his popular backing against ‘union blackmail’.
The 29.5 per cent of the electorate who did vote Tory under the circumstances of February 1974 must have known what they were doing — contesting the ‘unconstitutional claims of the disruptive sectional union interests’— but they did not form a sufficiently large social bloc.
Too many potential Tory voters were scared off by Heath's dangerous practice of confrontation, and also bewildered by the effective abandonment of the brave ‘Selsdon’ ideals in other respects.
(The Selsdon-type beliefs, that the trade unions had too much power and  that public spending was too high, remained strong among the electorate.)
As Middlemass (1979, p. 445) puts it: ‘As in 1944–45, employers and managers in a sense detached themselves from the dangerous appeal to the nation, over the heads of the nine million voters who were also affiliated to the TUC’.
The CBI, which had been vocal enough in calling for ‘curbs on unofficial strikes’ in the late '60s, was alarmed by the massive popular resistance to the Heath government's stand, and its leader Campbell Adamson suggested that a Tory victory in February ‘would not solve Britain's problems’.
If the Tories' supporters in 1970 had liked the sound of anti-union radicalism, a significant number had decided by 1974 that it threatened to bring the house down around their ears.
Second, there is the question of Labour support.
The resistance to Heath on the part of the union movement clearly had mass support, but equally clearly this resistance movement was not able to constitute itself, as it were, into a hegemonic political force capable of securing a workable parliamentary majority through the Labour Party and imposing a radical alternative course of social development (it was much less able, of course , to constitute itself as the nucleus of an alternative state power in an extra-parliamentary manner).
The Labour vote suffered a double slippage.
On the one hand the party lost ‘middle class’ support, so that a higher proportion of its votes came from the working class (i.e. manual workers) than ever before.
But at the same time the party received the votes of a smaller proportion of working class electors than ever before since the war.
Only 44 per cent of manual workers voted Labour, as against 25 per cent for the Tories, 14 per cent Liberal, 3 per cent Nationalist and 14 per cent abstaining 24 (the abstention rate among the electorate as a whole was considerably higher).
The gains for the labour movement in the shipyards, at the power stations and on the streets were not therefore translated into electoral support for the Labour Party, on a broad enough basis.
Too many electors evidently wished to reject the terms of Heath's question, wished for neither Heath-style confrontation nor a politics dominated by trade union power.
Neither did the remaining reduced core of electors identifying with the Labour Party subscribe with any unanimity to the proposals of the party's left wing, which were designed to capitalise on anti-Heath radicalism and extend it in an anti-capitalist direction.
According to studies cited by Crewe et al .,
(1977), 50 per cent of Labour identifiers supported more nationalisation of industry, 61 per cent were in favour of spending more on social services, and 44 per cent did not believe  that trade unions had too much power.
Opinion poll findings of this kind raise a problem.
Marxists too often tend to take a cavalier attitude towards the findings of such polls — anything which people ought not to think, according to socialist ideology, is regarded as the product of ‘media manipulation’ and cannot really be people's own considered view.
But this is just the mirror image of the bourgeois view that whenever workers take a militant stance this must be due to manipulation by agitators, and again does not reflect people's considered judgement.
Each view is essentially contemptuous of popular judgement, relying on the idea that people are dupes, unable to form their own ideas and easily swayed by press magnates/communist agitators.
But if one rejects this view and credits people with a capacity to judge matters for themselves this does not mean that one should take an uncritical attitude towards poll findings.
These findings are products with definite conditions of production.
Pollsters generally face people with questions in the abstract and in this situation may elicit responses different from those which people might give when faced with an issue of direct practical concern to themselves.
For instance people may express themselves against the trade unions in general terms, yet support the claims submitted by their own union on their behalf.
And insofar as the media do ‘mould’ opinion their influence is probably greater the less the issue is one of direct practical concern.
People are not merely dupes, but are more likely to accept uncritically a line which is constantly propagated by the media if it doesn't touch them personally; otherwise they are more likely to insist on making up their own minds.
Either way, the low level of support for left Labour policies and the trade union movement (in general terms) which is indicated in the findings cited above, is of real importance.
That is, to the extent that the responses were the result of critical reflection they clearly show that left policies were lacking in credibility and attractiveness, yet insofar as the responses represented an uncritical carrying over of the ‘media’ line this would seem to suggest that the concerns of the left failed to strike the masses as of immediate practical importance; the left policies cannot have appeared to meet the practical needs of the working class, or else the Labour identifiers polled would not have been content to reiterate the media line with regard to those policies.
I believe, therefore, that it is not implausible to infer from these findings that a substantial fraction of Labour voters reckoned merely that the party would be able to form a more competent and moderate government, and would be better able to defuse the crisis, although one should not discount the continued existence of a ‘class reflex’ vote  owing little to any elaborate political calculation.
Then there is the question of ‘third party’ support.
The main development here was the spectacular rise in electoral support for the Liberals, and for the Scottish National Party.
To take the Liberals first, it had been a commonplace of political analysis over previous years to regard the Liberal vote as largely a product of temporary disillusion with the Tories following on periods of Tory government, as a protest vote.
Certainly there was good reason for erstwhile Tories to protest in 1974, but the scale of the Liberal revival suggests that something more fundamental was involved.
I argued earlier that profound changes in the division of labour by sectors and by strata had been tending to unsettle the ‘working class'/ ‘middle class’ partition of the population in certain respects, over the 1960s.
These trends continued in a broadly similar pattern over the Heath years (continuing decline of manual employment in manufacturing and expansion of the salariat accompanied by continuing social mobility) so perhaps one can understand the revival of the Liberal Party (with its relative lack of symbolic ‘class’ connections, and lack of political ‘dogmatism’) as reflecting this trend ‘de-alignment’as well as the conjuncture of 1974.
That is, the evident polarisation on the plane of government/organised labour relations was dislocated from a reduction of ‘class’ polarisation as regards the political perspectives of an important section of the electorate.
As for the other main intruder into the parliamentary arena, the support for the SNP at this time was a more complex phenomenon.
I cannot analyse it fully here, but shall attempt a few remarks.
First, ‘nationality’, ever since the union with England, had continued to exist as a basis of collectivity in Scotland: in Scotland's distinctive cultural patterns and traditions, distinct legal and educational systems, distinct administrative apparatus, and industrial structure.
Only the political pertinence of that collectivity was variable, and for much of the time its pertinence was low.
That the SNP managed to exploit nationality — to make it politically pertinent — in 1974 must be seen against the background of Scotland, and West Central Scotland in particular, as one of the relatively ‘depressed regions’ of the United Kingdom.
Pressure from the STUC and the Scottish Labour Party over the 1960s had helped to channel considerable regional aid to Scotland, which partly reversed the country's relative economic decline (Begg and Lythe, 1977) but did not eliminate high unemployment, and at the same time brought recognition of a ‘Scottish dimension’ to economic policy.
Then in the '70s the development of North Sea oil off Scottish  shores provided the nationalists with a populist gambit of major proportions: the prospect of an oil-rich independence helped to bring together elements of the nationalistically-minded middle classes (who furnished most of the leadership) with certain sections of the Scottish working class (who voted SNP in considerable numbers).
But if the support for the SNP was, like the Liberal vote, a substantially ‘cross-class’ phenomenon it cannot so easily be categorised as a flight from ‘class’as pertinent social collectivity, since it must be recognised that the ‘national distinctiveness’of Scotland is overdetermined by the differential balance of classes in Scotland as opposed to England.
Even though the official ideology of the SNP posited a technocratic non-class Scottish national politics (Hyslop, 1979), many of the party's supporters were reckoning in terms of cutting adrift from Tory England; settling accounts with the ‘Tartan Tories’ could come later.
To return to the fortunes of the government: between February and October, the minority Labour government settled the miners' strike and abolished the Pay Board.
In July compulsory wage restraint was ended, but the Price Commission was retained.
The immediate industrial crisis had been resolved, but inflation, which had been substantially boosted by the rise in world oil prices, continued to accelerate, and the discrepancy between price rises of 8 per cent and wage rises of 16 per cent over the six months stored up an acute problem of squeezed profitability.
The ‘social contract’ arrangements, whereby the Labour leadership hoped to secure voluntary wage restraint in exchange for the repeal of the Industrial Relations Act, food subsidies, a rent freeze and other measures, were developing in somewhat shaky manner.
In October the decision was taken to go to the polls in an attempt to get more decisive support for a Labour government: more popular authority and a workable parliamentary position.
The net effect of the October election was to give Labour the narrowest of parliamentary majorities (four seats) but in terms of the popular vote the question of mandate was hardly resolved.
Between February and October the Labour and Tory votes both fell, and Labour's parliamentary success was merely the result of a greater slump in the Tory vote.
In fact, the SNP was the only party to pull out a higher vote in October.
Labour was in government and had to make the best of it, but the party was with a less numerous support bloc than even the Selsdon Heath of 1970.
Labour 1974–1979
The Labour government sought from the start to construct and hold together a support bloc around the theme of a ‘social contract’, and I propose to organise my account of the development of political forces in this period around that same theme.
To start with the lowest common denominator, all sections of the Labour Party could agree that the object was to cement a good working relationship between the government and the trade unions, and thereby also to secure widespread political support, to develop a hegemony which would contrast sharply with both the Heath phase and the bitterness and disillusionment which followed compulsory wage restraint and ‘In Place of Strife’ in the late '60s.
Beyond this, however, the ‘social contracts’ according to the left and according to the parliamentary leadership diverged markedly.
Let us first consider the social contract according to the left.
For the left, the social contract was to be intimately connected with the industrial policy which had been taking shape under the auspices of the National Executive Committee over the early '70s.
This originally developed from critical reflection on the failure of ‘planning’ over 1964–70, and on the Italian model of state enterprise, Stuart Holland's ‘The State as Entrepreneur’(Holland, 1972) being an influential contribution.
In the context of the mobilisation and assertiveness of organised labour under Heath's government, the industrial policy proposals became charged with a stronger element of workers' control which was seen as an essential component of the ‘planning agreements’ to be made with large enterprises, and vital to their enforcement.
These proposals were embodied in the NEC ‘Action Programme’ of 1973, and then also in the party manifesto of February.
As Prior (1980, p. 3) summarises:
‘The policy in these documents centred around industrial policy with a call for the creation of a National Enterprise Board, which would by selective nationalisation and investment establish a state presence in all major manufacturing sectors, and for the use of planning agreements to achieve a new degree of worker involvement in company planning.’
Prior further claims that union support for such an industrial policy was a central plank of the social contract, which therefore ‘represented the first British attempt within a framework of parliamentary  democracy to build in a process of extra-parliamentary mobilisation around the policies of a Labour government’(ibid., p. 4).
As is clear in retrospect, however, the radical industrial policy of the Labour left failed, at this time, to provide the focus for a hegemonic movement, either in the Party, the unions or beyond.
That this was due not merely to right-wing and civil service sabotage is clearly recognised by the left MPs who were most involved at the time.
Michael Meacher and Frank Field have stressed that only a limited circle of people were actively involved in formulating the industrial policy proposals, and that beyond this circle, understanding of the proposals was rather minimal.
Meacher has said of the unions:
‘If they had been involved in the kind of ideas that led to this distinctive industrial policy of '73 –'74; they would have demanded as a quid pro quo for the successive incomes policies of 1975–6–7 the other side of the social contract, that these various aspects of industrial policy and worker participation in its various forms should be implemented’(1980, p.7).
In a similar vein, Stuart Holland noted that ‘it takes time to win the intellectual appreciation by some trade unionists that these policies would be useful and to achieve that gut reaction by trade unionists that they are absolutely essential.
And that process certainly didn't happen’(1980, p. 20).
Holland also accepts in retrospect that the left damaged its prospects in this regard by hitching its industrial policy to opposition to the EEC, so that the pro-EEC verdict of the 1975 referendum reduced the credibility of the left generally.
Holland argues that withdrawal from the EEC was not an essential component of the strategy for the domestic economy, since the EEC member-countries are,de facto , able to pursue a wide range of industrial policies.
For the parliamentary leadership of the Labour Party, the notion of a ‘social contract’ was never tied to an industrial policy of the kind which the left envisaged.
If there was not much coherent intellectual opposition to the left's proposals, this by no means signified tacit support but rather a belief that the pressure of ‘realities’ in government would soon dispel the fancies of opposition.
This much is plain from Harold Wilson's comments:
‘Sub-Committees and Sub-Sub-Committees (of the NEC) had produced grandiose proposals for nationalising anything and pretty nearly everything.
In the more difficult political conditions in which  a Labour leader has to operate when in opposition, appeals for restraint were less likely to be effective…’
(Wilson, 1979, p. 29).
Or again, the left's Department of Industry White Paper produced in 1974 is described as a ‘sloppy and half-baked document, polemical, indeed menacing, in tone’(ibid., p. 33).
Wilson was particularly pleased when, in the re-drafting of this document at his behest, the section on planning agreements was ‘cut down to size’ and it was made plain that the NEB would have no ‘marauding role’.
On the Wilsonian view, the social contract was primarily an arrangement ‘between government, industry and the trade unions, on the basis of mutual sacrifices to reach agreement on a strategy to curb rising prices’(ibid., p. 44).
Part of the ‘price’ was to be redistributive fiscal policy, and policy aimed at producing increased industrial investment, but as regards the latter aim the NEB was conceived as a state merchant bank, a broker in the tradition of the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation rather than a ‘rogue elephant’wreaking industrial havoc on the basis of leftist dogma.
Far from being an instrument of struggle against the prerogatives of private capital, and the multinationals in particular, the contract was to provide a means of national reconciliation.
The power of the trade unions was to be recognised, and channelled into a realistic programme of social-democratic reforms, thereby defusing, rather than exploiting, the aggressive industrial mood.
When articulated in this way the Wilsonian social contract appears very close to what Sir Ian Gilmour (1978) has claimed is the essence of true and wise Toryism: the avoidance of ‘dogma’; the balancing of opposed social forces; the concession of reform where reform is due in order to hold together a ‘national’ constituency (despite the fact that Gilmour viewed the 1974/75 legislative programme as a dangerous concession to sectional union interests and a threat to the constitution — true Toryism is only recognised as such well after the event!).
In his memoirs, Wilson makes no bones of placing himself in the line of succession of Baldwin, Churchill and Macmillan.
It was, of course, the latter version of the social contract which predominated, despite continuing dissent on the part of the left of the party and certain of the unions.
Initially, at any rate, it was not without genuine benefits to the unions and the working class — the changes in labour law and the reform of pensions in particular.
It could not otherwise have achieved its conciliatory aim.
But over the years from 1974 the project of incorporation of union power within a consensus of ‘national’ dimensions was very severely tested.
Two points are of particular importance here.
First, the external conditions were extremely unfavourable, given the record trade deficit generated by the ‘Barber boom’ and added to by the subsequent massive rise in oil prices.
The trade deficit had to be either financed or reduced: the former course meant courting the international financial institutions with their implicit or explicit power of veto over domestic policy, while the latter meant either fiscal deflation in excess of the deflation of demand already induced by the OPEC financial surplus (in paradoxical combination with cost-inflation) or setting up stringent import controls.
Since import controls on the necessary scale were regarded as out of the question, a precarious combination of international borrowing and expenditure-restriction was embarked upon.
Second, also connected with the dual impetus of the Tory boom and the oil-price rise, inflation was accelerating rapidly over 1974–75.
The ‘threshold payments’ scheme introduced under Heath before the oil-price rise — a scheme supported by the then Labour opposition — was tending to generate a runaway wage-price spiral, but since prices were to some extent constrained by continuing state controls there was also a severe squeeze on company liquidity, with its threat to employment.
Under these circumstances some kind of pay restraint was a clear political necessity, not merely to placate ‘capital’ domestic or international but because millions of workers and their families were fearful of the consequences for their livelihood.
(The apparent failure of the left to recognise this was one reason why the left's economic programme lacked a mass following.)
These related constraints at the international and national levels left the government with very little room to manoeuvre, and selling corporate peace under the given conditions stretched the Labour leaders' powers of statesmanship to the utmost.
Grudgingly and haltingly, the trade unions were brought into line on incomes policy without any actual government diktat , and with increasingly little being offered in return, by means of emotive appeals to the national interest.
Meanwhile international loan finance was secured, but the inflow of funds to London had the effect of holding the exchange rate at a level which, given the British inflation rate, made British enterprises increasingly uncompetitive and hence worsened the corporate liquidity position.
Then in 1976 when the sterling bubble burst the constraint took another twist, with a falling exchange rate helping to boost the inflation rate and depress real wages.
If one interpretation of the social contract was that it promised the development of the ‘social wage’ of  state benefits and services in exchange for sacrifice on the side of wages and salaries, this became increasingly problematic after the government turned to the International Monetary Fund to help finance the balance of payments and bolster the pound.
The IMF could offer secure finance, in contrast to the holders of short-term sterling balances, but it could also exact a price.
It is well known that part of the price of IMF finance was curtailment of the government's public expenditure plans, which was to increase the tension between the party leadership on the one hand and the left and the unions (particularly in the public sector) on the other, over subsequent years.
What is less clear, however, is the extent to which the IMF was shoulder-charging an open door in this respect, that is, whether Labour leaders had already lost their faith in public expenditure.
The theme of public expenditure is obviously of great importance to the development of politics under the subsequent Tory government, and will be discussed more fully in the following chapter, but some comments at this stage are in order.
The main point here is that not only did the Labour leaders reject the left's version of the social contract with its new emphasis on a radical industrial policy, but also they increasingly came to question even the Crosland/Fabian/ ‘Keynesian’ version of socialism, so that their politics in the latter half of the 1970s became more and more of a mere holding operation — mere ‘government’lacking any social purpose with a broad popular appeal.
The questioning of public expenditure was an integral part of this process.
In the mid '70s public expenditure was under attack for a variety of reasons.
The Institute of Economic Affairs had for a long time been polemicising against the extension of state activity on the grounds that it restricted choice, led to dependency and reduced the motivation to work, and fostered economic inefficiency in comparison with‘private enterprise’.
These arguments had not at first cut much ice with social democrats, but two further ideological strands came to prominence in this period which helped to put the advocates of social progress through public spending and ‘welfarism’ onto the defensive, or even convince them of the folly of their ways: the monetary theory of inflation, and the ‘too few producers’thesis of Bacon and Eltis (1976).
The first of these strands, taken up vigorously by many economic commentators in the press and the City, undermined confidence in the ‘Keynesian’ approach to demand management and employment policy by suggesting that in the ‘long run’government deficit-financing merely led to higher inflation and was impotent to control employment.
Its intrusion into the thinking of the Labour leadership was  registered in Peter Jay's speech for Callaghan at the 1976 Party conference.
The second strand, the Bacon and Eltis thesis, took up a theme which had long been forgotten by all but Marxist economists, the distinction between ‘productive’ and ‘unproductive’labour.
It was argued that the non-commodity producing sector of the economy (‘non-marketable’ in Bacon and Eltis' terms) and the public services sector in particular, was pre-empting resources from private commodity production, and the manufacturing sector in particular .
This was the basic reason for Britain's poor investment record and profitability, and what was needed was the release of resources from the unproductive areas in order to rebuild the productive base.
This influential view suggested that social democracy in the mixed economy had to reculer pour mieux sauter : it was necessary to call a halt to the expansion of public sector service expenditure to allow an industrial regeneration, which would then, at some later stage, permit social objectives to be given priority again.
Once these views were accepted by the Labour leaders, the social democratic cupboard was bare.
Callaghan, Healey and company could only ‘govern’: holding the line against inflation through incomes policy; bemoaning the ‘intolerable’ level of unemployment; waiting for an expansion of world trade to lead a recovery and for North Sea oil to give room for manoeuvre on the balance of payments.
The Labour left, meanwhile, did not manage to mount a convincing enough case for its ‘alternative strategy’(the far left had no half-way credible strategy to propose), while the trade union movement was not united in pushing for any positive quid pro quo in exchange for wage restraint, having rejected the Bullock proposals for Industrial Democracy, but was increasingly tugging for a return to ‘free collective bargaining’.
If this makes it seem inevitable that Labour's electoral support should slump, it has to be pointed out that, according to the opinion polls, Labour might well have won had an election been called in 1978.
From a socialist point of view the government was barren, yet incomes policy and fiscal restraint were beginning to produce their intended effects and the expansion of world trade was benefiting the economy.
In the third and fourth quarters of 1978 the annualised rate of increase of the Retail Prices Index was only 6.8 per cent and real incomes were rising again following the sharp falls of 1976 and 77; unemployment, while still very high by post-war standards, was beginning to fall from its peak in 1977 and job vacancies were on the increase; the balance of payments current account showed a substantial surplus.
Further, the political alternatives on offer were far from inspiring.
The ‘Economist’, in March ‘78, doubted whether Thatcher could ‘forge a new majority of the right’ and reckoned that her ‘crusade to balance the books and roll back the government’was not finding much popular resonance.
In fact it took a series of political blunders on Callaghan's part to spoil Labour's chances of being re-elected,faute de mieux , as the responsible and sober ‘party of government’: the seemingly endless postponement of the election while the party's parliamentary position crumbled, requiring the prop of transparent chicanery; the unenforceable wishful thinking of the 5 per cent pay limit, the last straw for the unions.
Even if the media did inflate the ‘winter of discontent’, even if Callaghan was unlucky when the Scottish National Party chose to commit political suicide in revenge for the failure of Labour's devolution proposals, by supporting the Tories' ‘no confidence’ motion in the Commons, Callaghan's procrastination and the effects of his autocratic dealings with the unions were surely the main factors weakening the credibility of Labour between 1978 and 79.
The scene was set for Labour to lose (more than for Thatcher to win ) the election of May 1979.
Reprise
My object in this chapter has been to provide a transition between (i) the analysis of economic class relations, in the sense of possession of and separation from the means of production, and the strategic opportunities for the socialist project connected with the current forms of these relations, and (ii) the politics of taking up these opportunities in modern Britain.
I began with some general considerations on the division of labour and social collectivities, then offered an account of the development of political forces and their support blocs over the post-war years.
In the latter account I have described a situation in which the major parties each have a reservoir of virtually guaranteed electoral support, based on the traditional connection between the parties and the two ‘classes’ of British society (which I have termed ‘social collectivities’to distinguish them from classes defined at the level of property relations), the ‘middle class’and the ‘working class’.
On the other hand, these ‘core’ support blocs have never been sufficient to ensure either party a parliamentary majority, and although they are still important they have been increasingly eroded at the margin, in part because of the changes in the division of labour which have loosened the hold of the ‘two-class system’within popular ideology.
It appears that an increasing number of people are calculating their political support on the basis of the plausibility of the parties as governing parties, asking whether they seem to have the answer to the ‘country's problems’(whether these be inflation, unemployment, taxation, law and order, trading position or whatever) rather than voting, and engaging in political activism, on the basis of a deeply-felt class identification.
The consistent appeal of the major parties to the ‘nation’ and their attempt to project an image of governmental competence (and also to brand their rivals as incompetent) has both reflected and reinforced this trend among the electorate.
At the same time, however, the parties have found it increasingly difficult to build and sustain popular confidence in their capacity to ‘solve the country's problems’, as these problems have become more acute and intractable.
Consider in this light the succession of governments in the post-war period up to 1979.
Labour from 1945 to 1950 pushed through a programme of social and economic reform which was widely popular, although bitterly resisted by sections of the professional middle class and industrial bourgeoisie.
By 1950 the party was able to win a second general election with an increased vote.
Then when Britain's political geography gave the Tories a parliamentary majority in 1951 they too were able to sustain popular support in more than one election.
Popular participation in electoral politics began to flag after 1951 but arguably this was because most people felt less urgency as regards political change; there was no strong and deep-going popular reaction against the government.
The economic class relations of British capitalism were sustaining rapid accumulation, and in this respect the rise of the large-scale impersonal enterprises discussed in chapter 3 was particularly important.
The emergence and expansion of new industries provided relatively full employment and made available a whole range of new consumer goods, while real disposable incomes rose fairly steadily.
Meanwhile, tax revenue was sufficiently buoyant to sustain an expansion of social service provision.
Despite all the shortcomings of British society in this period from a socialist point of view, and the alarming prospects raised by nuclear armament, it has to be said that capitalism was ‘too successful’, in developing the productive forces and meeting popular aspirations, for political forces supporting a radical transformation of social relations to make much headway.
And of course British capitalism was by this stage a very different capitalism from that of the inter-war years: a social formation in which the organised working class, as organised in the trade unions, was at least consulted and listened to by governments as a matter of course, and in which the  major political forces took for granted the obligation to minimise unemployment and to preserve and expand the welfare state.
By the 1960s, however, the ‘success’ of the existing social formation was beginning to be called into question in various ways.
We have seen how Labour made its re-emergence as a governing force in 1964 on the basis of a need for sweeping ‘modernisation’ and planning, pulling together a support bloc spanning the left and managerial technocrats, and how the expectations raised in the early Wilson period were substantially frustrated.
The popular endorsement of Labour in 1966 was the last time to date that the party in government has been re-elected.
Thereafter, in 1970, 74 and 79, the governing party has been rejected without however any great surge of popular support for the alternative party, at least by the standards of earlier years.
It is appropriate here to step back from the detail of party politics and to attempt to draw out in general terms the conditions producing this weakening hold of governments over popular support.
First, ever since the war governments had willingly taken responsibility for the management of the national economy and by the late 1960s it was clear that this ‘management’ was becoming much less successful: inflation and unemployment were emerging as serious problems and the balance of payments position, upon which Wilson laid such stress, was increasingly precarious.
But can we go ‘deeper’ than this and pinpoint the conditions of existence of these problems?
The trading position of the British economy is one crucial factor here, not only as expressed in the ex post trade balance but also in the constraint posed on expansionary demand management.
The conditions producing weakness in this respect are highly complex but at a risk of oversimplification one might say that the balance of payments constraint reflects a relative ‘industrial ossification’ of the British economy — a failure to restructure and reinvest on a sufficient scale to maintain the position of the national economy on the world market.
Behind this there are two interlocking sets of causes, the relative conservatism of British capital and the strongly entrenched defensive position of the British working class.
As regards the first set of causes one can point to the conservative/speculative behaviour of British financial institutions (discussed in chapter 3); the failure to develop fully the advanced multi-divisional forms of capitalist enterprise; the continuing low social valuation of ‘industry’ relative to the ‘liberal professions’; and the relative paucity of commercially-relevant research and development.
The effects of these factors included a low level of investment, or  at least a low efficiency of investment, and a lack of ‘dynamism’ in industrial management.
That, however, is only one side of the picture.
On the other side is the organised working class: by the end of the 1960s, after a long period of relatively full employment, the trade unions were in a strong position both in terms of wage bargaining and in terms of the defensive ‘veto power’ which they were able to exercise over changes at the point of production seen as threatening workers' interests.
The competitive weakness of the British economy was truly overdetermined: even if the financial institutions had been more disposed towards promoting industrial investment, even if managements had been more competent and imaginative, the restructuring of industry would still have run up against the formidable defensive conservatism of the organised working class.
Governments over the '60s and '70s, as I suggested earlier, have not had the capacity, even when they have had the will, to launch a frontal assault on the organised working class and force through a radical restructuring in spite of its resistance.
But at the same time the leadership of the organised working class has had neither the imagination nor the capacity to attempt to force a radical restructuring of the national economy on working class terms.
To schematise, the British working class has not been ready to run the risks of attempting to constitute itself as the ruling class, of putting forward concrete proposals for working class control over industry and finance and fighting seriously to achieve them.
Whether any alternative leadership could have gone further in this direction in the 1960s and 1970s is an open question, but I have argued that it is not useful to conceive of the record so far as merely one of ‘betrayal’.
The problems of the British social formation were sufficiently pressing to demand at least rhetorical radical solutions from the parties (Wilson's ‘planning’, Heath's ‘free market’), and governments' failures to match their promises were of sufficient concern to the people to breed a serious disillusionment with party politics, yet I submit that for most people of all classes the problems were not considered so urgent as to demand a really radical questioning of existing social relations, with all the risks that would entail.
The parties in government have not found the social forces with the potential of making revolution (or counter-revolution) pressing to be shaped and led.
Labour governments have been able virtually to ignore the demands of the left without provoking massive popular protest (albeit at a cost of running down the party's membership and activist support) while the Heath government found that its  tough anti-union stance, however much in accord with‘public opinion’, was unworkable, with the electorate recoiling from its practical consequences.
In a word, governments have made themselves unpopular with their manifold ‘failures’, those failures are traceable to their basic failure to restructure the social relations of British capitalism, and yet there has been no social force with the ‘will’ and capacity to enforce any radical restructuring against the opposition which any such move must encounter.
There has been a kind of stalemate in the class struggle which has placed governments in the position of tackling deep-rooted problems with technocratic instruments of strictly limited effectiveness: they have held the line on the balance of payments by means of periodic deflation, which has not really solved anything; they have periodically checked inflation and attempted to rebuild industrial profitability by means of ad hoc incomes policy but have been unable either to maintain popular support for such policies or to push forward to a comprehensive planning of prices and incomes, investment and consumption.
Against this background, the magnitude of the political problem facing the socialist project becomes apparent.
In chapter 5 I outlined some of the major objectives which seemed feasible given the constraints and opportunities posed by the development of capitalist property relations, under the two headings of investment planning and enterprise democracy, recognising the importance of a ‘left government’ in relation to these while admitting that the conditions of formation of such a government were another matter.
In the light of the discussion above, it is possible to present the objectives of investment planning and enterprise democracy not merely as desirable from a socialist point of view, but as potential means of tackling the basic problems reflected in the sorry history of party politics since the '60s: investment planning as a means of breaking through the conservative/speculative mode of calculation of the financial institutions and restructuring industry; enterprise democracy as a means of transforming the ‘veto power’ of the working class into a positive influence over the direction and management of enterprises.
Not a complete programme by any means, but necessary and crucial components of a restructuring on socialist terms which would break the stalemate.
Nonetheless, the politics of support for such a transformation of economic class relations are complex and problematic.
Some of those on the left have assumed that there is an inherent socialist majority in Britain which has failed to surface only because successive Labour governments, in pursuing a policy of managing rather than opposing capitalism, have never  given that majority its political cue.
But on the basis of what I have said in this chapter concerning the formation and power of governments, this comforting view is not plausible.
Governments can mount a radical and effective challenge to the existing social formation only if they have definite, credible proposals commanding the active support of a substantial social bloc, a hegemonic force spanning a whole range of social positions (as Labour did in 1945, for all the weaknesses we can see in retrospect).
And the problem is that the left, inside and outside the Labour Party, and the trade union movement, have not yet measured up to that historic requirement.
To imagine that the Labour leaders could have thwarted and de-mobilised such a force for all these years is to attribute to them superhuman powers.
Without doubt, the construction of such a hegemonic bloc for socialist objectives must involve winning the support of many people who regard themselves as ‘middle class’ or of no class, many who have never considered themselves socialists, many who are not members of trade unions, by colonising and re-defining the notion of the popular or national interest (while avoiding chauvinism and the opportunistic erasure of real social differences).
If this is the general challenge, it is always faced under specific historical conditions.
The following chapter presents a contribution, in the spirit of Marx's ‘Eighteenth Brumaire’, to the analysis of the ‘specific historical conditions’— the particular relationships between economic class structure, social collectivities and political forces — leading to Thatcherism, and under the Thatcher government.
For it was of course Thatcher from the right, and not the left, who seized the initiative in attempting to break the stalemate of class forces and carry through a radical restructuring of the British social formation.