

Editorial
Men have always painted women.
Nude or clothed, the female figure has been at the centre of debates about the genius in art.
In fact, throughout the entire history of art, as told by our cultural institutions, the creative male artist has been judged by his ability to portray woman.
Talk of the sensual, the erotic, was so often seen in relation to the female body.
But, if women's bodies have always been at the forefront of discussions about painting and sculpture, it was women's bodies seen and portrayed by men that were dominant.
The familiar story of the artists' model (female) sitting for hours, days, even weeks on end, for a (male) artist, has brought us some of the great ‘nudes’ in art history.
This issue of Women's Art Magazine turns to the body.
Lynda Nead's article focuses on images of the female nude which, she argues, has been regarded as the ultimate test of artistic skill, the supreme subject for the truly creative artist.
Behind this picture lies another story, the story of women artists denied access to the nude in art schools.
To Alison Yarrington, writing about the ‘sensuous’ in fin-de-siecle sculpture, an examination of the human figures of Antonio Canova sheds light on more recent sculptural interpretations of the body although he was very much the product of the patriarchal system of the day.
Rarely seen as professional participant, she believes woman as subject was the essential means of attainment of the male sculptor.
In the post-war period, art history began to focus on the body.
All kinds of difficult questions began to be asked and in the early heady days of the women's movement the body came in for close scrutiny.
In art theory and practice the body was seen as an important site for struggle, interpretation and analysis.
More recently, the body debate has tended to centre around photography and media representations specifically those pertaining to race and sexuality.
But successive generations of women artists have searched for a specifically non-representational (or abstract) way to talk of the body.
Remember Judy Clark's minimalist pieces — which include ‘body scrapings’— bought by the Tate Gallery.
We hope that this issue of WAM will open up some of these controversies, contemporary and historical.
On a lighter note, if the ‘body’ got David Mellor into trouble, we now have a new Minister for Culture (called National Heritage).
It is interesting to note that when John Major reshuffled his Cabinet and appointed Timothy Renton as Arts Minister,The Sunday Times reported that the creme de la creme of the art world heaved a sigh of relief — thank God someone of ‘our sort’, instead of that grammar school boy David Mellor.
‘Renton's very definitely a man I can do business with’ Peter Palumbo, chairman of the Arts Council was reported to have said, after a preliminary meeting.
‘I remember him from Eton’.
Maybe it wasn't the body after all that led to Mellor's downfall.
Good luck to Peter Brooke, our new National Heritage Minister.
Oblique Glances
Rosa Lee on the contemporary gaze and the work of Bridget Riley
‘In 1986 she stops over in New York for an exhibition and at the same time visits two postmodern ‘simulationist’ painter, Philip Taaffe and Ross Bleckner, in their studios.
Having disrupted the balance of her pictorial space by introducing a dynamic diagonal, she finds herself moving into an unknown area.
The demands of her painting require increased concentration——’ Robert Kudielka, Bridget Riley, Paintings 1982–1992
Purity, harmony, truth, authenticity: such qualities have become pretty suspect in this postmodern post-Thatcher era.
There has always been the suspicion that values applied in cultural and moral spheres were far from impartial.
The ‘genderless norm’— purporting to speak for the whole of humanity — has once and for all been revealed as eminently qualifiable, if not downright specious.
Feminists have always been quick to point out the double standards which operate at virtually every level of discourse.
Neologisms such as‘pluralism’, ‘simulationist’, ‘relativisation’, ‘problematisation’ imply a world in which certainty has been cast into abeyance.
We are however grateful that this postmodern ‘crisis of authority’ has allowed for re-readings and even re-writings of modernist art history.
In the context of such revisions, the relevance of Bridget Riley's work for a younger generation of artists is far less clearly documented than the impact and integrity of a singular vision , culminating in the bodies of work currently on show at the Hayward Gallery.
In the biographical note quoted above, this ambivalence is perhaps most clearly highlighted.
The inclusion of Bleckner and Taaffe, enunciated sotto voce , a mere footnote in a Bridget Riley monograph, is ironically reminiscent of the silence which up until recently would have greeted the work of women artists.
There are no clues in the text to suggest what kind of exchange might take place.
Perhaps Kudielka simply feels their quotation of sixties ‘Op’ is nothing if not entirely warped, that they have reduced the formalism of artists such as Riley or Vasarely to the merely formulaic.
In short, that they have appropriated a look, a style, and imbued it with no more than a vacuous narcissism, a barbaric bricolage mirroring a generation lost cynical ironic gestures and strategies.
But far be it for us to shed crocodile tears over the bruised egos of our male counterparts.
What is important today is the different ways in which that previous imbalance has been disrupted, a given order brought to task, re-evaluated, counteracted.
Having said that, I must admit to a vested interest since my concern with Riley's view of work by contemporary artists, and the dismissive nature of the term ‘simulationist’ is allied with a desire in my own work to somehow examine more keenly the principle foundations upon which notions of ‘abstraction’are laid.
This is a project which is currently being pursued by contemporary women artists who, unlike Bridget Riley perhaps, do not believe that art is necessarily free of gender: ‘in order to discover what is retrievable from the abstract project, we must subject it to an interrogation that is neither submissive nor cynical’.
The redefinition — or even refusal — of the categories of either representation or abstraction proposes a rupturing of the secure fabric of binary logic.
This process, whilst seemingly disruptive, is more akin to unravelling or undoing a complex structure in order to better understand its make-up, but in doing so to express differences in terms of juxtapositions or comparisons, rather than seeking a unitary, univocal dimension based on hierarchical values.
Bridget Riley Major Rowan Gallery
For Bridget Riley the concern with disrupting the balance has been an enduring effort in the course of her work, now spanning an international career of over 30 years.
Emerging in the swinging sixties with her dazzling black and white, hard-edged yet curvilinear canvases, she is recorded in the history books as one of the precursors of what  came to be known as Op Art.
Riley's aversion to this categorisation (in common with most artists about their work) has been well documented.
Far less celebrated is the fact that she was the first contemporary British artist to win the international prize for painting at the Venice Biennale in 1968.
She was also the first woman painter to achieve this status.
(One wonders how much the latter has a bearing on the former, notwithstanding the fact that Riley herself is adamant that being female has not been an issue in her career).
Twenty one years ago.
in 1971 she was the first contemporary artist to have a major retrospective at the Hayward Gallery, curated by Bryan Robertson.
In the gap between that first Hayward retrospective and the current show of paintings from the last decade, Riley has had significant exhibitions in many countries, including two major touring shows.
It is curious to note that her name remains nevertheless associated with the ‘bright young things’ of the ‘decadent’sixties and early seventies.
This was also, significantly, the time of the resurgence of the women's movement, when terms like sexual revolution (now quite rightly reviled as exploitative and naive) abounded alongside hip notions of Op Art, mind-bending or  psychedelia .
Perhaps such oversights have more to do with the fact that we would prefer to forget.
Perhaps it all has something to do with those mind-bending drugs.
Collective amnesia is far more prevalent in this culture than we would pretend.
Most of all we want to shelve the things which might cause us the slightest discomfort.
Bridget Riley in her studio
In terms of her painting, Bridget Riley, by all accounts, is not afraid to question her motives.
Where this is concerned she seems positively ruthless.
Kudielka's essays abound with notions of sacrifice , and this is a pivotal ingredient to the works currently in the Hayward exhibition.
Here we are given an insight into the painterly decisions —sacrifices — to which artists often feel driven .
As Riley states categorically: ‘I threw out notions of what the result should be.
I crossed the vertical register with a strong diagonal, upsetting the balance of the canvas.
That gave me time.
I could work against those directional forces, counteracting them through colour and rhythm.
Evidence of the radical shifts which were beginning to disrupt the vertical stripe format of her paintings emerged in the selection of works Riley made in 1989 as part of the National Gallery's series,The Artist's Eye .
Subtitled ‘The Colour Connection’ she chose paintings by Titian, El Greco, Veronese, Rubens as well as Poussin and Cezanne, demonstrating an admiration and understanding of the tradition of painting which some have surprisingly considered surprising.
Crucial to this ‘connection’ is the way in which colour introduces ‘problems of plasticity’, as Riley terms it, and acts to disrupt the unifying narratives (whether mythological or religious) represented in the paintings.
Speaking of this phenomenon in relation to her choice of Titian's ‘Bacchus and Ariadne’, Riley explained: ‘By plastic I mean that which hangs between the cognitive reading of an image and its perception.
If one looks at the painting there is clearly a gap between the mythic illusion which one can ‘read’ and the immediacy of the sensations one experiences through the sense of sight.
The content of this web is as removed from the arcane quality of the myth as it is superior to mere decoration’.
By analogy, Riley's paintings could be seen as operating within similar parameters: the coincidence of colour with a certain geometrical ordering re-enacts the function of myth.
Alluding constantly to the primacy of sight yet revealing all the while the fugitive, chimeric nature of apprehension, the paintings remain firmly suspended in visual paradox.
Spectral Multiplicities
‘Whatever you see never exists simply and solely by itself, as an isolated sign or symbol, but by playing its part within a context in which relatedness as such is of the first importance’.
Bridget Riley,The Artist's Eye .
The diagonal constructions employed in the paintings she selected at the National Gallery and their use as a formal agent aiding and abetting the organisation of colour is what Riley emphasises and announces in her own work of this period.
The shift from ‘Burnished Sky’(1985) to ‘Gentle Edge’ 1986), the first of the ‘zig’paintings on show at the Hayward necessitates a reciprocal and radical adjustment in the viewer's approach to the work in the exhibition.
The vertical ‘stripe’ paintings at the entrance to the show produce a vibrating, pulsating effect akin to astigmatism.
Chromatic bands vie with each other, jostling impatiently for attention.
Whether this intense effect is tempered by the use of black bands (as in ‘Achaian’, 1981, ‘Luxor’ and ‘Rose Rime’, 1982 enhanced by substituting lilac for white (as in Coxcomb, 1984), or augmented by dispensing with ‘neutral’bands altogether (‘Saraband’, ‘Burnished Sky’, 1985), the overall sensation is one of extreme pitch.
Very frontal.
It is as if an invisible force field is keeping us at arms length.
The eye begins eventually to see pockets and spaces within the greys, the whites, the after-images of after-images of vibrant, sumptuous colour: the bands then begin to buckle and warp, blend into each other; a kind of visual melt-down occurs as the retina tries to encompass this searing tension.
The gradual breakdown of the stripes into the prisms or facets of the work since 1986 appears to excite the retinal far less, introducing a spatial dimension which is glimpsed as a fluctuating presence in the previous series of paintings.
It is this ‘spatial’ potential of colour — what Riley refers to as plastic — which has superseded the previous emphasis on the chromatic; colour serves to counteract the potentially conflicting space of the oblique construction.
In ‘Ease, Into Place and Grow Accustomed’(1987), the steamy blinding oranges, sonorous azure blues and the more synthetic, interior quality of an intense billiard-table green hint at the ways in which colour operates simultaneously on the one level as pre-verbal, as bodily sensation or perception, and on the other as a sign or symbol which modifies or disrupts a system or construction.
Colour both shatters the possibility of an overdetermining unity, yet through the distribution of coloured masses allows for the somewhat antagonistic oblique spaces of these block-like fragments to be transposed.
In these more recent paintings we become aware of both a shifting architectonic harmony and a sense of movement, or transition.
A sort of heat haze, as opposed to the intense burning sensation of the stripe paintings, emerges as if we are looking through a veil or over a great distance at flat lands.
In ‘Certain Day’(1989), and subsequent paintings, the gaps or configurations of coinciding hues become less apparent, the structure is more closely-knit, regularised and austere.
Colours still advance and recede, spaces open and close; they even appear to cross or curve majestically into one's visual field, but at a more languorous pace.
Definitely more of a passacaglia than a jive.
Flat, geometric, linear, Riley's paintings propose a hermetic space firmly separated form any other.
They seem to lay claim to being purely of the mind's eye, a manifestation of pure objectivity.
Yet the infinite variation of colour and hue — their associative nature — reveals the paradox which finally determines the questions these paintings raise.
As a compact and multi-functional element colour denies verisimilitude, implying the ethereal, whilst simultaneously reminding us of the world of concrete phenomena.
Oblique References
‘Riley's attachment to the great plein air colourists strengthened her resolve not to rely on any kind of external reality.
If Monet and Cezanne had to retreat to the edge of abstraction ––why should it not be possible to do the reverse, to develop a relationship with nature from working within abstraction itself?’
Kudielka,Bridget Riley, Paintings 1982- 92 .
‘The most resistant and decisive discourse within modernism’, abstract painting, despite its coming-of age, is gradually being redefined to encompass a range of diverse media and approaches which are no longer limited to the strict confines of paint on canvas.
The questions today revolve not so much around the oblique references made by postmodern appropriation, an approach which reduces art history to a lexicon.
The very conceptual systems which inform our perceptions need to be scrutinised.
Whilst Riley speaks specifically of the primacy of sight, her paintings constantly allude to states at the limits of meaning.
They reveal precisely what cannot be expressed through the closed categories of language or encompassed by the gaze alone.
The blurring of boundaries between direct and mediated experience, between notions of abstraction and so-called ‘external reality’ reveal alternative possibilities which, as with the revelations of peripheral vision, may only be sensed or intuited.
In his catalogue introduction Kudielka describes Bridget Riley walking on the hillside in the hour before dusk when the colours are released from the domination of the sun.
It is to that ‘twilight zone’ that we should direct our attentions, waiting and watching on as the edges waiver, become indistinct, and blend.
Until finally, sure enough, whole new configurations begin to erupt.
1
Shirley Kaneda ‘Painting and its Others’,Arts Magazine , summer 1991; see also Rosemary Betterton,(dis) parities , catalogue for touring exhibition
2
Riley in Robert Kudielka,Bridget Riley: Painting 1982–1992 , catalogue to current exhibition at the Hayward Gallery.
On a more personal level, Riley has said: ‘The game is the same but the stakes are higher for women ––You need time to reflect, you are alone essentially, and I knew that I couldn't give the  time and thought to bringing up children or caring for another person on an intimate level.
I would have found that too painful, I would have had to sacrifice them too much’.
3
Rosalind Krauss talks about the function of myths as furnishing the possibility of maintaining two opposing or contradictory points of view ‘in some kind of paralogical suspension’(Grids, in The Originality of the Avant Garde and other Modernist Myths , The MIT Press, 1987)
4
Shirley Kaneda,op cit 
Rosa Lee is a painter and lecturer
Modern Mythology
The female nude exposes the artist as alchemist argues Lynda Nead
The latest in the Tate Gallery's series of ‘Crosscurrents’ exhibitions examines the subject of the painted nude.
The display includes 24 works from the collection of the Tate Gallery, spanning a period of 160 years.
The purpose of the exhibition is to take the works out of their conventional contexts within the museum's main galleries or store and by placing them in a new, thematic context to raise different issues and ideas.
As such,The Painted Nude is, indeed, a suggestive display, even if the debate which it stimulates seem to be more a result of accident than intention.
The exhibition is not simply a display of painted nudes (and there are only four examples of the male nude); rather, as the introductory text tells us: ‘All were painted with the nude model directly in front of the artist’.
In some cases, the accompanying wall texts give details of the sittings:, the model for Euan Uglow's ‘Zagi’(1981–2) sat for five hours a day, five or six days a week, during a period from Easter 1981 to Easter 1982.
The model for William Coldstream's ‘Reclining Nude’(1974) sat regularly for two hours, every Thursday morning from 10 September, 1974 to 13 January, 1976.
Details such as these reinforce the ideal that the object before the viewer is a record of an actual and sustained encounter between the artist and the model, as opposed to being drawn from the artist's imagination or from reproductions.
Given the centrality of this theme of the life study, the question which is raised by the exhibition but which is left unanswered is, how does if affect the viewing/appreciation of the image?
How does the fact that the painting was executed directly from the unclothed model alter our understanding of it; does it add to or detract from the value of the final exhibited work?
But perhaps it is best to take a few steps back and begin with the preliminary question: why an exhibition of the nude?
To a degree, the nude may be understood simply as an artistic genre like any other, comparable to landscape or still-life and with its specific conventions and traditions.
In most respects, however, the nude is un like those other genres and appears to have a particular and symbolic importance within the history of western art.
Within the dominant traditions of art criticism, the nude, and now we must also specify the female nude, has been regarded as the ultimate test of artistic skill, the supreme subject for the truly creative artist.
The production of the female nude involves a kind of alchemy, the transmutation of the base matter of flesh into the transcendent forms of high art.
The artist is the alchemist who performs this transformation, creating pure form and spirit out of the earthly desires and corporeality of the female body.
The ideal female nude is thus seen as a triumph of form and expression; a realisation of qualities which are believed to be intrinsic to the female body.
As Kenneth Clark states in his classic study The Nude : ‘[Artists]have found it easier to compose harmoniously the larger units of a woman's torso; they have been grateful for its smoother transitions, and above all they have discovered analogies with satisfying geometrical forms, the oval, the ellipsoid and the sphere’.
The female nude has been conceived as an expression of fundamental principles of order and design.
But it is never simply a formal abstraction, for the female nude is also seen as a testimony to feelings, traces of desires which, whilst they cannot be allowed to dominate, are never entirely absent.
The claim that the works in the exhibition were made by study from the living model recalls these perceptions of the nude as purified form and sublimated desire.
The painted and sculpted surfaces of the exhibits are loaded with cultural significance.
So an exhibition of the female nude is unlike other thematic or genre-based displays; claims may be made for it which would be seen as inappropriate in relation to other kinds of subjects.
As the  board at the beginning of the exhibition states: ‘Paintings of the nude have, in the past, aroused both controversial and moralising responses.
They hopefully now no longer shock but instead remind us of our own humanity’.
In this attempt to homogenise the audience, the display stakes a grand claim for the images displayed.
Furthermore, it sets out the proper responses to the exhibition and precludes others as illegitimate and inappropriate to the subject.
Certainly, these images no longer shock, but, if controversy and moral discourse is entirely abandoned, how then can feminism articulate the problematics of the representation of the female body within dominant pictorial, curatorial and critical practices?
Perhaps the controversy which is so thoroughly evaded in this exhibition needs to be reintroduced.
David Bomberg and Richard Michelmore ‘Reclining Nude’
One of the earliest pictures in this display is ‘Candaules, King of Lydia, Shews his Wife by Stealth to Gyges’ by William Etty (exh 1830).
Here, the female nude is historicised, incorporated within a classical narrative in which the king exposes hiss wife's body to his bodyguard.
Historical subjects such as this were the most critically-acclaimed in the academies and official exhibitions of the 18th and 19th centuries.
History paintings had to be grand and didactic, with subjects drawn from the Bible, classical mythology and history.
The historical development which the exhibition unfolds is one which begins with the female nude masquerading as history and moves on to the abandoning of these supplementary narratives in favour of the representation of the body for its own sake, for its intrinsic formal qualities and expressive potential.
Although it is true that the authority of istoria declined within the period covered by the exhibition, it would be more accurate to say that the development of the female nude demonstrates the substitution of classical mythology by a different kind of modern myth, replacing gods and heroes with the modern artist.
As feminist art historians have shown, modernist art history has posited a highly specific image of artistic creativity; one that is synonymous with a particular kind of male sexuality.
The act of applying paint to canvas has been charged with sexual significance which becomes particularly intensified when the subject concerned is the female body.
In the female nude the painted surface and the body become ciphers for each other and every stroke and layer of impasto may be read for traces of desire.
For this reason alone, something has to be said about the predominance of the female nude in European art from the mid-19th century.
This ratio is reflected in the exhibits at the Tate Gallery and, although the rarity of female nudes by women artists is remarked upon, the implications of these statistics are entirely ignored.
The female nude has to be understood as positing not only particular images of femininity but also specific conceptions of masculinity and artistic creativity and both of these aspects are embodied in the artist/model relationship which is celebrated in The Painted Nude .
The exhibition repeats the familiar images of the model as wife, mistress, friend and, above-all as muse, whose singular goal is to inspire the great work of art, the masterpiece.
This modern myth has recently been reworked in Jacques Rivette's film La Belle Noiseuse (France, 1991) which explores, over four hours, the relationship between an artist and his young female model.
The eroticisation of this relationship is a familiar trope, not only in art criticism but also in other and more popular forms of writing and visual culture.
As the author of one anthology of drawing remarks: ‘In modern times the best drawings of the nude have flowed from the bedroom; or even from the sofa…
These are perhaps the most rewarding circumstances in which the artist can work from the nude, since they presuppose a fulfilment of relationship and consequently a relaxation of atmosphere.
And this is most important.
There should be the least possible tension between the artist and his subject.
(For this reason it is easier to draw women after one has loved them.
Most full-blooded  painters would agree with this I think!)’
Lucien Freud ‘Standing by the Rags’, 1988–9
This is the myth in a nutshell and its presence is invoked in the exhibition simply by the reminder that the paintings were executed with the nude model directly in front of the artist.
In other works, the pictures represent a record of the highly eroticised and mythological meeting of the artist and his model.
The exhibition text coyly notices: ‘Some artists acknowledge that the close presence of the model brings an added tension to their work’.
But in the context of the modern cultural mythology of the artist/model relationship, this statement simply begs further questions and plays on the frisson of sexuality activated by the exhibition.
The objects on display in The Painted Nude are full of quotation and convention.
A number of the pictures place the model in the traditional pose reclining on a bed or sofa.
Coldstream's Reclining Nude’ cites Manet's ‘Olympia’and David Bomberg's ‘Nude’(1943) it is pointed out, borrows from Sickert's Camden Town series, c1910.
What is not remarked upon, is that Sickert's work represents a corpse, possibly the victim of a sexual murder and it is this particular setting which may be the source of Bomberg's imagery.
The work by Sickert which is included in the exhibition is ‘Hollandaise’(c1906) which, we art told, may be a reference to the fictional prostitute in Balzac's Gobseck (1830).
A complex set of references and cross-references begins to emerge in which the figure of the prostitute plays a critical role; the female nude is thus mediated by cultural tradition and quotation, as well as particular conceptions of femininity and female sexuality.
The modern female nude is regarded as an honest and intimate genre which reveals more of the artist's own personality than any other subject.
It has been described as pictorial autobiography, even confession: ‘a description of self in the form of the other’.
Interestingly, the exhibition identifies two paintings in particular as possessing this quality of intimacy: William Nicholson's and Victor Pasmore's portraits of their respective in which the intimacy of the marital relationship, it is supposed, finds direct pictorial expression in the paintings themselves.
This quest for ‘truth’ is also enacted in the interpretation of the nudes themselves.
Not only is there the assumed rejection of surplus narrative already referred to but there is also the search for the truth of the body.
Works by Sickert and Vanessa Bell are singled out for their frank appraisals of the ‘plump’ figures of their models and this tendency reaches its climax, according to the terms of the exhibition, in Lucien Freud's painting depicts the female figure resting against a pile of rags, used by the artist for cleaning his brushes.
The rags bear smears of the same pigments that are used in the depiction of the body, which is itself rendered with heavily loaded and encrusted paint.
The model is shown as part of the studio accoutrements, apparently discarded on the heap of rags.
Here, the metaphorical relationship of skin and painted surface is complete and the female nude becomes an embodiment of the act of painting itself.
The Painted Nude is an exhibition which, through its juxtaposition of images, continually raises questions and problems concerning art and representation.
Sadly, it chooses to evade these issues rather than to confront them.
Lynda Nead lectures in the History of Art Department at Birkbeck College, London and is the author of The Female Nude: Art, Obscenity and Sexuality , Routledge, 1992
I Figure I'm A Woman
From Canova to Wilding, Alison Yarrington examines the ‘sensuous’ in fin de siècle sculpture
In the current exhibition,Traces of the Figure ,(City Museum & Art Gallery, Stoke-on-Trent) contemporary works — sculptures, videos and photo-works by  are on display.
The rationale for this programme, selected by Ian Vines, is the provision of points of reference which arise between two very different phases of artistic response to the traditional focus for the sculptor, the human figure.
The majority of works were produced in the dying years of two centuries, our own and that which preceded it.
Reverie, Myth and Sensuality: Sculpture in Britain 1880–1910 , running concurrently with Traces of the Figure , brings together 30 works which represent the movement in sculpture which is also now known as the ‘New Sculpture’, a categorisation which follows Edmund Gosse's articles that appeared in the Art Journal during 1894.
Such a juxtaposition of two manifestations of the ‘new’ in fin de siecle art is intended to stimulate debate.
As John Glaves-Smith in his introduction to the catalogue of the exhibition asks: ‘Can there  be any point of contact?’, an open question which nevertheless demands close attention.
Any putative point of contact in visual terms resides both in the themes which are represented and the means by which these are conveyed; both in terms of the process of production and the iconography.
Take for example the allusive references to the human body found in Helen Chadwick's ‘Nostalgie de la Boue ’(1990) which takes on added resonance due to the visceral nature of the imagery: ‘boue ’ is mud but also the mud of the unregenerate body that both Bakhtin and Foucault believe the bourgeoisie censor out of culture.
Throughout history women has always been construed as being in close contact with the earth.
For woman as maker and subject, earth has particularly strong associations.
Pandora, the first woman of Greek myth — as described by Hesiod — is made out of earth; at Zeus's command she was fashioned out of clay to be the instrument of divine retribution.
In her chapter ‘The Making of Pandora’ in Monuments and Maidens Marina Warner has explored the myth in detail and cites From Zeitlin's analysis of Pandora as imitating ‘both divine and bestial traits…
Artifact and artifice herself, Pandora installs the women as eidolon in the frame of human culture, equipped by her ‘unnatural nature’ to delight and deceive’.
In many ways Warner's chapter may be used as a starting point for an exploration of points of contact between the two exhibitions at Stoke-on-Trent.
Pandora both separates and brings together the old ‘new’ and the contemporary.
As the subject of Harry Bates's statue of 1890 she is transformed and re-made by Rose Garrard, as the generative point of her reworking of the myth of the first woman in the videos Tumbled Frame(1984) and Pandora the Bringer of Gifts (1982).
Garrard's recent work ‘Blue Construction: Given’(1992) again is a paraphrase and re-statement of the earlier sculpture and forms of vital crossing point physically and referentially between Bates's pristine marble figure of the kneeling girl as an embodiment of the generic feminine and Pandora located ‘in the frame of human culture’.
Both exhibitions are concerned with that representation of the figure which is meant to evoke an awareness in the viewer of subtlety and process, of the deceit of the eye in which, Pygmalion-like, we knowingly participate.
It is in this context that we find the constant reference or allusion to ‘sensuality’ or the ‘sensour’: an agenda for the analysis of either sculptural production or viewer-response, and in particular the question of how this description of works produced across distinct periods may be attempted.
Helen Chadwick ‘Nostalgie de la Boue’, 1990
Bates's ‘Pandora’ epitomises the end of a tradition of representing the figure in sculpture which emphasised the need for a beauty of surface (high finish coupled with high quality materials) combined with elevated subject-matter.
In this respect his art and that of the New Sculptors differed little from the earlier romantic neo-classicism of a sculptor like , whose work would nevertheless have been decried by the same practitioners as cold  and outmoded.
There is, however, a lot to be gained from a consideration of Canova's response to the human figure both as a starting point for the investigation of sculpture where ‘dream, myth and reverie’ are cited as key notes of interpretation, and an investigation of nuances of meaning which the application of the words ‘sensual’or ‘sensuous’may have when applied to sculpture, an art form which after all is made and largely understood through touch.
Canova's work, like that of Bates, was the product of a patriarchal system in which woman was rarely seen as a professional participant.
Women as subject was however an essential means of attainment of the ideal for the male sculptor.
in her pivotal essay Woman, Art and Power has described how in: ‘This complex of beliefs involving male power, naked models and the creation of art receives its most perfect rationalisation in the ever-popular representation of the Pygmalion legend: stone beauty made worm by the worming glow of masculine desire’.
How much more pertinent is this observation when applied to sculpture rather than the two-dimensional illusionism of painting.
There can be little doubt that Canova's art deserves the description of ‘sensuousness’.
The organisation of the major exhibition recently staged at Venice revealed the consistency of his extraordinarily deft manipulation of surface effects.
In some cases, such as the Hermitage's ‘Hebe’(1805), Canova employed touches of colour, either directly through the introduction of the gilt bronze ewer and cup, or suggestively by the slightly mellowed surface of the flesh (a yellow tinge which has now disappeared).
It was, however, not these controversial surface colour applications upon which his reputation was based, but the almost painterly effect of the chisel with which he made an equivalent to human flesh and hair out of hard, cold marble.
It was an art which was understood to transcend nature through the adherence to the ideal and was praised by influential theoreticians such as Quatremere de Quincy.
The intricacy of the Paris ‘Cu[id and Psyche’(1793) or that of the Geneva ‘Venus and Adonis’(1794) are essays in what Hugh Honour in his catalogue contribution describes as ‘a meditatively deliberated art of controlled sensuality which demands a reciprocally calm and considered response’.
Contemporary commentators did not always note such rules of restraint.
:, who on seeing Canova's ‘Paris’ in Florence in 1813, exaggerated the idea of the ‘creative’and sexual role of the sculptor's touch: ‘The chisel is the last tool that comes to mind, for if statues could be made by caressing marble rather than by roughly cutting and chipping I would say that this one has been formed by wearing down the surrounding marble by dint of kisses and caresses’.
Canova's work, with its delicacy of surface effect, invites close scrutiny, as the subtle modulations of surface were after all best understood, according to contemporary practices, by examination at close quarters by candlelight.
It is not therefore surprising that, for the most puritanical of neo-classicists, reactions such as Cicognara's work which seduced the viewer away from what was considered ‘true’ or ‘correct’in modern art.
Alison Wilding ‘Into the Dark’, 1986
By the end of the 19th century the nude or partially draped figure was still of central importance to sculpture, and the arena in which the sculptor's skill and intellect would be measured.
However, the archaizing and more abstract beauty of Canova's response to the figure had been subsumed beneath the increasing demand in all areas of art for a greater naturalism in representing the human form.
The sanctifying veil of the ideal as described in 1822 by the 6th Duke of Bedford with reference to the ‘Three Graces’ as shielding them form ‘the glance of impure desire’and ‘the contagion of sensual love’was thus lifted, or at least became more transparent.
The means by which this could best be ‘contained’ in British sculpture, without contravening demands for an aesthetic which was essentially morally healthy and incorruptible.
The dilemma which arose from the modern sculptor, was summed up by Marion Spielmann in British Sculptors and Sculptors of Today (1901)‘The present aim is to give life without actual realism — a suggestion of reality shrouded in poetry and grace…our artists understand that if the figures are to be more like the human form the statues must be unconscious of their absence of drapery as though they were symbols — which indeed they are’.
This ‘embarrassment’ already identified by Christopher Ricks in connection with Keats' poetic references to women, was not an evasion of the sensual but a deliberate avoidance of direct reference, a coyness that actually intensified erotic readings and one which may be said to dominate British sculpture during the period 1880–1910, particularly in its representations of women.
Lamia, the subject of George Frampton's sculpture of 1899/1900 which is one of the most important pieces at Stoke-on-Trent exemplifies this evasiveness.
Taken from Keats' poem ‘Lamia’, the tangibility of the three-dimension form may be explored and encountered by the eye directly, unlike in the poem where the reader experiences the presence of this dangerous serpent-woman through the richness and description of the writing.
In the sculpture it is difficult to determine what stage of metamorphosis this shape-changer has reached as it fits no equivalent  passage in the poem.
It must be said that the catalogue entry here is slightly misleading in the desire to rebut the idea that this represents a ‘femme-fatale’.
This is a negation of the threat contained within the beautiful physical form of Lamia which the reader knows is redolent with destructive force.
The anxiety with which modern woman — the ‘new woman’— was viewed in the last decade of the 19th century and the early years of the 20th century is central to an analysis of these images presented by the New Sculpture exhibition; this is not so much the over-emphasis upon the image of the ‘femme fatale’ which Glaves-Smith decries in the catalogue, but those ‘clear gender constructions’which he maintains are ‘far more subtle’(although it is unclear from his text just what these constructions might be).
Although the tenseness of Gilbert's male statuettes differs from the idealised figures of the neo-classical era, the active dominant ‘heroic’ role of men found in William Hamo Thornycroft's ‘Teucer’(1881) and the modern ‘Mower’(1884) changes little.
By contrast, the image of woman does undergo a transformation within the aesthetic of the New Sculpture.
Remote and closed-off from the spectator, woman is often depicted in a state of reverie or dream, inert rather than physically active.
This allows the viewer to gaze upon the body, but does not allow access to the more troublesome reality of the dream of reverie which is taking place internally — this is certainly the case with Toft's ‘The Spirit of Contemplation’(1899/1990).
Mackennal's ‘Circe’(1893) here on view in its reduced form as the over life-size bronze is in the National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne, is a far more active and dangerous image.
Highly theatrical in its use of gesture to suggest woman's power over man to reduce him to his baser instincts,(evidence of which is found in the entwined figures on the base) it also refers to the dream-state.
The more directly threatening stance of the sleepwalker or that of the hypnotist differs from the remote glance of Lamia, but there is once again the unseen threat of the woman as shape-changer and enchantress.
It is interesting to notice that Lamia and Circe are represented as physically mature women, so different to the pubescent bodies favoured by Onslow Ford.
The exhibition has brought together a well-chosen and representative selection of the art which Susan Beattie did so much to bring to critical attention with the publication of her book The New Sculpture in 1983.
It is unfortunate that the male-domination of the profession of sculptor to which Glaves-Smith refers in his introductory essay remains intact, with no work by a woman on display.
Beattie herself drew attention to the contribution of women sculptors such as Gwendolen Williams, Ellen Mary Rope and Ruby Levick, particularly in the production of statuettes, an art form crucial to the aesthetic development of the New Sculpture.
In some ways Traces of the Figure redresses this balance and demonstrates the strength of the contribution of women like Chadwick, de Monchaux, Garrard, Galloway and Wilding to British sculpture of the late 20th century.
Whilst the ambiguity and allusiveness of late 19th century sculpture was firmly rooted in the representation of the human figure the (point of contact between the two exhibitions) which acted as a metaphor for emotion, that of Chadwick or Wilding goes beyond that so that the human body is alluded to indirectly, as a train of associations rather than direct mimetic referent.
This introspection must be seen as the opposite pole to Canova's universalism and provides new insights into the terms ‘sensuous’ and the ‘sensual’today.
Traces of the Figure; sculpture, video and photo-works and Reverie, Myth, Sensuality; Sculpture in Britain 1880–1910, City Museum and Art Gallery, Stoke-on-Trent until 29 November, Cartwright Hall, Bradford 12 December-7 March, 1993, Antonio Canova, Venice and the Gipsoteca, Possagno 22 March-30 October, 1992
Alison Yarrington is Senior Lecturer in History of Art at the University of Leicester
Faceless Femme Fatales
Louisa Buck unearths Surrealist women using bodies as source and subject
Of all the movements in art history, none has such an ambivalent relationship with the female body as Surrealism.
‘The problem of women is all that is marvellous and troubling in the world’ sighed Andre Breton in the second Surrealist manifesto of 1929; and just as the predominantly male membership saw woman as their muse, the fueller of their fantasies and liberators of their imaginations, so they used her body as a vessel and vehicle for their wildest and often dark plumbings of the subconscious.
‘A woman is beautiful to the extent that she most completely incarnates the secret aspirations of man’, wrote the poet Benjamin Peret in his Anthologie de l'Amor ; and whether in the work of Magritte or Masson, Max Ernst, Dali or most chillingly of all, Hans Bellmer, the female form appears distorted, dissected, feathered, bound and strapped to machines, she rarely even wears a face.
Inevitably this role as mascot-muse-mannequin posed problems for the ‘free and adored’ women who wanted to participate in the movement, not as ornaments, but as artists.
Yet this did not stop women artists coming to Surrealism in large numbers throughout the 1930s.
In spite of its violent assaults on the female image, Surrealism's emphatic anti-academicism and dedication to an art of the interior struck a sympathetic chord in a repressive era when women were demanding the right to work and vote.
Their position may have been ambiguous, but at least they were allowed to participate.
‘My position was one of timid and humble listener…’ said the Spanish painter Remedios Varo, speaking for many of her Surrealist sisters, ‘I was together with them because I felt certain affinity’.
What they found liberating was Surrealism's sanctioning of an art based on personal reality; and in their quest to express this interior landscape these women went directly to source: to their own bodies.
The female form — or imagery directly related to the female anatomy — is therefore as ubiquitous in Surrealist paintings by women as it is in those by men.
However, the preoccupations are inevitably very different.
The male Surrealists used the female body to express an idea, whereas for the women artists it was a very concrete reality.
Instead of projecting their own imaginings onto the forms of faceless archetypes, women surrealists tapped into their subconscious by taking their own bodies as source and subject matter.
The routes into this source of inspiration were as various as the practitioners; but whether the result was Frida Kahlo's overt self portraiture, the fantastic fusions of myth, dream and autobiography produced by Leonor Fini, Dorothea Tanning and Leonora Carrington, or the more oblique stylisation of body parts presented by Ithell Colquhoun, Eileen Agar and Meret Oppenheim; again and again the art of these pioneering women traced out a personal terrain which centred around their own physicality.
Frida Kahlo ‘Henry Ford Hospital’, 1932
At times the self image presented by these women in their paintings seemed to dovetail with Surrealist expectations.
Just as mainstream Surrealism made  a point of emphasising the intuitive powers of women, and delighted in portraying her as an earthbound sorceress, so many women artists also presented their image as subject to the cycles of nature and magical forces.
Leonora Carrington and Leonor Fini portray the female as a sorceress, her body combining with animals, planets and the earth itself, while Frida Kahlo repeatedly showed her own body rooted (sometimes literally) in nature.
But whereas the male version of Surrealism presents an image of woman as a being controlled by her childlike vision and magical powers, a priestess who is a powerless conduit between the known and unknown, in the work of woman Surrealists the female is in tune with, and at the helm of her powers.
Even when she shows her body agonisingly engulfed by external forces, Frida Kahlo's direct gaze out of the canvas and into the eyes of the viewer leaves no doubt that the use of her body as raw material is a very deliberate strategy, and that her immersion in a greater universe is a source of strength, not weakness.
The gender divide in Surrealist art becomes especially marked in its attitude to, and treatment of, the erotic nude.
It is significant that very few women used and abused the male body in the way that their male colleagues manipulated female flesh, indeed it is rare even to find a male nude among the work of women surrealists.
Only Ithell Colquhoun in the grotesquely castrated and labelled forms of her ‘Pine Family’ of 1941 wreaks specific revenge on the serial mutilation that dominates the work of her male counterparts, and on the occasion that Leonor Fini paints a male nude in her ‘Chthonian Divinity Watching Over the Sleep of a Young Man’the female deity hovers above his vulnerable body with an ominous vigilance that is far from passive.
But overall, it was by turning to their own bodies that women artists could free themselves from surrealist stereotypes.
Leonor Fini underlined this concern when she painted her friend Leonora Carrington in a breastplate and sensible skirt, not a fetish object but a woman warrior and a ‘true revolutionary’, released from cliches of femininity.
Ithell Colquhoun ‘The Pine Family’, 1941 oil on canvas and, below, Frida Kahlo ‘The Broken Column’, 1944
Other women surrealists  preferred to distil their visual language from the forms of the body.
‘The intellectual and rational conception of life has given way to a more creative interpretation’, wrote the British Surrealist Eileen Agar in 1931, ‘and artistic life is under the sway of womb-magic’; and Agar give expression to this ‘womb-magic’ in the foetal and embryonic forms which play a central part in paintings such as‘Family Trio’or ‘The Autobiography of an Embryo’where fluid shapes float across the picture plane to be captured in a net of geometric planes.
But while biomorphic forms are widespread in Surrealist painting and sculpture produced by either sex, in the paintings of Agar, Colquhoun or the Danish artist Rita Kernn-Larsen, the shapes manage to have multiple readings and echoes in the rest of the natural world, while also leaving no doubt as to their true origins.
Ithell Colquhoun wittily alludes to this bodily provenance in the fleshy fissures of ‘Scylla’, painted in 1938.
There is nothing oblique about the labia-like rock formations and pubic seaweed of this extraordinary painting, and with Colquhoun's characteristic subversiveness ‘Scylla’ can be interpreted equally convincingly as a pair of phallic forms, arising from an aquatic leafy crotch.
Colquhoun painted ‘Scylla’ in the year before she officially joined the British Surrealist group, and she left the movement in 1940.
Such a fleeting allegiance was common amongst Surrealism's female associates: Frida Kahlo never joined up at all, and she spoke for many of the women who where connected with Surrealism when she declared that Breton and his circle ‘thought I was a Surrealist, but I wasn't.
I painted my own reality’.
For a great many women artists, Surrealism gave them an invaluable springboard into their own imaginations, but it did not provide an environment in which they could flourish.
Surrealist theory may have set great store by sexual experience with women, but it made virtually no provision for the female experience per see , and so it was up to women artists to reinvent their own forms of femininity.
Often this was easier after they had severed their links with the movement.
Leonora Carrington, Leonor Fini and Meret Oppenehiem are amongst the many whose development as serious artists only took place outside Surrealism.
‘No more tyrants and victims, no more the fevered alterations of that demon-star which sponsored the births of de Sade and von Sacher-Masoch; but the hermaphrodite whole, opposites bound together in mitigating embrace by a silk worm's thread…
Oedipus will be king no longer but will return to Colonnus.
The new myth, the myth of the siamese twins will make of him a forgotten bogey.
‘Ithell Colquhoun thus spoke for future generations of women artists when in 1943 she stressed the need to escape from gender barriers.
In works such as‘Scylla’ Colquhoun's use of the female body as a means to escape rather than emphasise sexual distinctions foreshadows the work of artists such as Helen Chadwick and Cindy Sherman who emphasise the multiple, uncategorisable self.
The author Jeanette Winterson provides a maxim for female artists past and present when she says: ‘We don't want men to package us but we must have the freedom to describe ourselves’.
Louisa Buck is a critic and author
Bodies of Knowledge
Central to any redefinition of feminine culture are the new ways of looking at our bodies.
Hilary Robinson traces the changing mood
Women's bodies have been a focus of attention through the women's movement at the different points in its history.
The politics of representation are of fundamental concern to the movement, even if we interpret both words —‘politics’ and ‘representation’— as widely as possible.
The unwritten and unwritten laws and conventions about who represents us as women in our social, governmental and legal structures, and who has a hand in shaping those structures, amount to a set of understandings about where women's bodies can actually be, how and where we become visible, and what the attitudes towards that visibility will be.
Just as the Black Power and civil rights movements in the USA during the 1960s focused on where African Americans were allowed to be, either by legislation or through convention, so too a crucial aspect of feminist thought is concerned with whether women are allowed to have a proportionate and equitable bodily presence in ‘our’ parliament, council buildings, unions, in the media as journalists, and throughout the hierarchies of all workplaces and organisations — including, of course, in the galleries and the pages of art magazines.
Closely linked to the issues concerning this form of representation and visibility are the attitudinal issues — the attitudes towards women in such positions, and our own attitudes, as women in those positions, towards our positions and towards other women.
Representation is again crucial: ‘representation’ as the word might be used in a studio: as visual (or verbal) imaging; how we choose to represent ourselves and how women are represented.
Feminism has insisted that such issues are deeply political; representations, through imagery of women, are formed, understood, accepted, altered and compromised through a series of processes that are every bit as ideologically based as the electoral system.
Automatically, women's bodies are again to the fore.
Their visibility or otherwise, the ways in which they are coded, policed, censored, constructed, praised or punished, the ways in which and levels at which they are represented as engaging with the viewer, and the contexts in which women's bodies are placed in images and how images of women's bodies are then distributed and consumed — all this adds up to a subtle politics of the representation of women's bodies.
John Berger's exercise in Ways of Seeing of swapping the sex, while maintaining the body language and expression, of images of man and woman, remains a valid and simple kick start to an analysis of the politics of the representation of gender — whether Cadbury's flake ads, Boucher's ‘Miss O'Murphy’, fashion photography, or the House of Commons…
Rose Garrard ‘Tumbled Frame’, 1984 video work commissioned by C4
From the re-emergence of the women's movement in the late 1960s, the development of women's thinking and activity about these matters has found a corresponding development in the work of women artists, and particularly in the ways in which women represent women's bodies, whether their own or those of others.
Women are so utterly used to working with their own bodies: we are trained to do so from the first time we wear pink-for-a-girl, and a concentration upon the significations of our physicality is encouraged to a far greater extent than is the case with boys and men.
So, when it comes to the very physical activity of making art, many women turn to their own bodies or images of women's bodies as a vehicle for making images, for making meaning.
Additionally, to image women's bodies can be a very direct way of making visible, of literally claiming space, and of contradicting other representations of women's bodies.
From the late 1970s the debate around the imaging of women's bodies was furthered, particularly in the UK and New York, by the work of those artists and theoreticians who wished to remove the body of woman from view while instead concentrating upon notions of femininity, replacing the bodies of a women as sites which produced struggle, with womanliness as a named site of struggle.
Interestingly, this work drew to a large extent upon the highly-theorised use of psychoanalysis and deconstruction; it emerged around the same time that the feminist anti-pornography movement, on a grassroots and activist basis, was also seriously problematising our culture's sight of women's bodies.
Also concurrent with this was the establishing of a mode, or even tradition, of working for feminist artists, which involved using their own bodies (although with widely varying intentions and political positions)— either producing images, or through performance or video.
It was an incredibly rich time for woman artists with the whole area of debate around the body and representation opening up.
Oddly enough, however, it was also a highly confusing time, as the debate — in this country at least— took place at arms length.
People seemed to separate into camps, or to be misrepresented under labels —‘deconstructionists’, ‘essentialist’, etc — and the crossover of information and ideas which could possibly have been so fruitful seemed instead a potentially explosive exchange.
The debates side-stepped into discussions of desire in some areas, maintaining some political divisions between women and creating new ones, while the strongest artworks which imaged women's bodies came from those for whom visibility was still a fundamental issue, particularly black women.
As we move into the 1990s much of the most interesting and challenging work by women is returning to the body with a new found confidence.
But what we are seeing now is the fragment of the body, the body experienced minutely; we get an art by women that insists upon bodily experience as the subject for the work, as the process by which the work is made and as the process through which it is experienced.
To engage with works by artists as diverse as Genevieve Cadieux, Annette Messager and Laura Godfrey-Isaacs, to name but three, is to highlight three aspects of bodily experience.
Because they are highlighted, so too is the gender specificity of the body and the bodily experience — the constructions of the body that go to make it male or female.
Although some of this work may be informed by certain theoretical readings — Irigaray, Cixous, Kristeva, Judith Butler, or some of the work by  Italian feminists on the mother-daughter relationship — there is a real sense in which these artists could be said to be producing theory visually.
Where this might lead us in terms of political thought remains to be seen.
Possibly, after what might be described as puritanical streaks through the 1980s, and after the theorising of desire and the occasional turning of the body into a no-go area, there is a need to explore pleasure — in the artist, the artwork and the audience; the pleasure in that three-way encounter.
If this is the case, then it will have to be a pleasure informed by the work of the 1970s and 1980s, by the theoretical work, by the activist work, by the knowledge of AIDS, and so on.
Anything less would be to return to representations of our bodies which do not belong to us, and which are produced in other languages than our own.
Hilary Robinson is a lecturer in the Department of Fine and Applied Art at the University of Ulster, Belfast
Bodyrites
Janice Cheddie on the self portraits of Chila Burman
Within western culture the body of the racial ‘other’ is inscribed as the locus of a dangerous, violent, predator, exotic and perverse sexuality.
A body that exists within the discourses of pleasure and domination — a sexuality of fear and fascination, that western culture has sought to subjugate and dominate.
The black female body, within racist iconography is reduced to the sum total of its sexuality: defined as exotic, knowing and promiscuous.
A key element in these processes of subjugation and domination has been the classifying and defining of racial and sexual difference, through the use of the photographic anthropological gaze (referenced most recently in the Benetton advertising campaigns), the photograph within these discourses is posited as a document of empirical truth.
These ‘other’ for signs that signalled its ‘innate physical, mental and moral inferiority’(David Green ‘On Foucault’in Ten 8 No 14).
The recent ‘self portrait’ work of multi media artist Chila Burman, positions the image of black female body as a site of resistance, construction and contradiction, challenging the representations of the black female body, within western culture.
Burman uses representations of the self to examine questions around race, gender and sexuality.
In Chila Burman's self portraits, the body of the Asian woman is located as being irreducible to simplistic and one-dimensional racist stereotyping, whilst simultaneously challenging the idea of an essential racial and gender identity outside representation.
Burman's self portraits position the construction of racial and sexual identity as a process that is crafted and fluid within the process of representation.
Burman's manipulation of the photographic image questions the idea of the photograph as a document of the empirical reality, revealing ‘an image of oneself’.
Seeking to resist the use of the photograph as a tool of surveillance and classification of racial and sexual difference, Burman positions the body as one that is  constantly in the process of production.
Within the self-portraits, the photographic processes become tools whereby the artist is able to mould and form her own images.
The artist's body emerges actively resisting and struggling against the racist iconography that surrounds the imaging of the Asian woman.
Burman's photographs reclaim the image of the Asian woman, moving the image away from the object of the defining gaze, towards a position where the Asian woman/artist becomes the subject of display.
Her self portraits construct a femininity that resists the racist stereotype of the passive, exotic Asian woman, imprisoned by her male patriarchal culture.
Rather the Asian woman becomes the maker and definer of her own image.
Femininity becomes a fun, liberating force rather than oppressive force, allowing Burman to constantly challenge the viewers' preconceptions of Asian femininity.
Using all available means, make-up, earrings, hats, jewellery, framing, colouring of the skin and hair — the key signifiers of racial difference, in an array of vibrant  psychedelic colours — Burman emerges, chameleon like, with new and differing images of her racial and sexual identity, while remaining recognisable and knowing.
The ease with which Burman moves between the multifarious and diverse femininities of Asian and western cultures, challenges the notion of the Asian woman ‘caught between two cultures’.
For Burman femininity is a site for constructing racial and sexual identity, allowing the Asian woman to construct and define her own forever-changing self-image.
The self Burman presents to us is that of the postmodern subjectivity, fractured, fragmented, multi-layered, vibrant and dynamic.
Burman resists notions of the ‘self-portrait’ as a revelation of the ‘real hidden’self, hidden under the facade of everyday interaction.
Burman positions the body and the self image as one that is constantly being fashioned and remade.
Janice Cheddie is a researcher and lecturer, based in the Art, Design & Communications Department of the University of Sunderland
Chila Kumari Burman ‘Fly Girl Watching The World’, mixed media
Exhibitions
Down and Burnt Out
Althea Greenan goes on a walkabout around central London galleries
As I arrived at the recent show of Eileen Cooper's drawings at the Benjamin Rhodes Gallery after visiting the controversial (read media-hype) show,Strange Developments , at the Anthony d'Offay Gallery, I could not help but find great comfort in the sheer generosity of spirit with which these big drawings greet you.
Although the sensually expressive quality of soft media-conte, pastel and charcoal is usually hard to resist, it has a tendency to lend images, ‘a spurious intensity and generously masks ineptitude’, as Deanna Petherbridge points out in her catalogue essay The Primacy of Drawing .
I felt, however, that there was more to this seduction than met the eye, since genuine invention informs drawing after drawing.
This is the first show of Cooper's dedicated exclusively to this medium that I have ever seen and it impresses me as providing the ideal means for her to achieve that tenuous balance between coy decorativeness and crude primitiveness which she uses successfully to convey the psychological weight of a figure's gesture.
It is this quality which has moved writers to describe her work as mythic: she speaks for us all through an interpretation of her personal experience that makes use of the universal image of the naked human body.
But Cooper's figures also possess a larger than life boldness due not so much to childlike innocence but to the kind of confidence we imagine Eve and Adam had before the Fall, However, she is not confronting us with an easily gained optimism nor do her disembodied heads, upturned women and mild impassive eyes really evoke a vision of dream.
Hers is more a process in which drawing  distils the raw stuff of daily emotional trials.
She records triumph and tenderness, loneliness and that impulsive desire for independence, all of which must help motivate the development of her art that continues despite the demands of motherhood.
This collection is the result of spending 10 months experimenting with different papers, allowing the image to be worked out ‘in an organic way’ as she describes defying the confines of the papers’rectangle by rearing and adding and building up to works with dimensions reaching over four foot.
Paradoxically these works gain in subtlety of gesture and meaning as they gain in size.
In contrast, the gigantic photographic images depicting what the curator Jeffrey Deitch has called our Strange Developments act to bludgeon what is assumed to be our jaded sensibilities, but more obviously demonstrate the burn out of a certain faction of the mid Atlantic artworld, curators and buyers.
Although some of these artists were ostensibly chosen because they ‘represent and unprecedented artistic engagement with sexuality’, I suspect that anyone vaguely aware of the extensive debate led by feminist critics over the last 20 years will find nothing new with these male artists who are still (and sometimes, literally) stuck in a rut with their same old penis/penetration/ejaculation (even if it is into a barrel) view of sexuality.
Kiki Smith ‘Untitled (Hanging Woman)’, 1992
It also seems somewhat inevitable that the collective impression of the work of the women artists included, Janine Antoni, Rachel Evans, Cindy Sherman and Kiki Smith, would have to be a suitably sour comment on the degraded position occupied by the female body in popular culture.
Janine Antoni gave a performance (which took place on the opening night and can be viewed on video) in which she immersed her hair in that inky mess familiar to so many women as hair-dye and proceeded to use her loaded as a floor mop, covering the surface of the gallery floor with the stuff.
Although she could not resist adopting a dancer's grace for the performance, the mocking allusion to the demeaning domestication of women was clear enough, though this theme has been treated with far more wit and poignant effect by other artists (notably Bobby Baker).
Both Kiki Smith and Cindy Sherman chose to depict the effective violence which the body of a woman suffers under the male gaze.
With her large photographs of articulated manikins contorted to display their  manikin — genitalia and plastic joke-shop breasts, Cindy Sherman attempts to make her male audience uncomfortably aware of the de-humanising nature of the western male's fragmented erotic view of the female body.
But despite the fact that this series of photographs is considered in New York to be ‘the perfect comeback to Jeff Koons’ pornographic photo-paintings of himself and his wife having sex’(Roberta Smith in the International Herald Tribune , their powerful reading as  angered response does not come across as it should, nor has it been encouraged.
Although the Koons' work is also being shown in Strange Developments , Sherman's work was not given a similar position of prominence, nor even hung in the same location as Koons', as if the exhibition organisers were emphatically hoping to avoid any challenging comparisons.
The work of Antoni (who is known by a more provocative performance/installation work in which she used chocolate, lard and lipstick to re-enact the bizarre aspects of self-degradation which vanity, through the affliction of eating disorders, can arouse in the obsessive modern woman) also suffers in this exhibition by being reduced to a small video screen.
The result is that the shock of these artists' social criticism is defused.
For the work of Sherman this show may only confirm the suspicions already held by many that, with the kind of success she now enjoys after the Saatchi purchase of her notorious nude self-portrait, her intention is less than subversive and takes shrewd advantage of the fruits of sensationalism Saddest of all however is that, within the context of this show, the nightmarish images of her latest offerings succeed better at making the female viewer feel the full impact of the implied degradation.
In contrast, Kiki Smith does not succumb to the convenience of de-humanising the female figure in order to express her protest, if not horror, as Cindy Sherman has lately chosen to do.
Even her work ‘Untitled (Skin)’ in which features of her body are displayed in small life-size fragments across a grid, achieves a telling intimacy.
These fossil-like impressions of flesh-forms convey a chilling vulnerability not shared but enhanced by the metal material which they now permanently impress.
Notwithstanding the welcome opportunity to see the work of this distinguished artist, I was left with the depressing realisation that when one compares the contribution of the women artists with that of the men one sees that the women artist has had to deny herself the luxury of exploring and depicting those ‘strange developments’ that exploit humour as well as horror, and which ultimately liberate artist and viewer alike.
Even within the brief of this show which seeks to explode middle-class self-complacency and achieve a healthy honesty, she couldn't depict the female figure as whole or intact, except as a limp doll, the life drained out of her (Kiki Smith's ‘Untitled: Hanging Woman’) without risking the distortion of the image's meaning by entrenched male viewpoints, let alone explore the nature of the weirdness of mundane middle-class ‘feminine’ deviance.
In the company of work on offer here, the woman artist still finds herself on the defensive though she is laudably engaged in what Roberta Smith calls, the creation of ‘a new kind of aesthetic back-talk’.
Carole Hodgson's show of sculpture and drawings at Flowers East explored the theme ‘Distant Voices, Still Lives’ evoking introverted darkness in the drawings and a louder sense of resolution in the sculpture.
The graphic work and the sculpture interpret the ‘voices’ and ‘stillness’in largely unrelated ways as the artist employs each medium to discover and disclose different aspects of what, to use one of her titles, lies ‘Beyond the Mirror’.
This artist differs from the others reviewed here in that she has not used a gendered figure in her drawings and has given form to the contradictions of intuitive emotion and insight in non-figurative sculpture.
The larger pieces show a surprising link with her drawing which is not borne out by the smaller more elaborate pieces cast in bronze.
She succeeds in imparting a sense of depth to the larger forms with her use of layered wax and cement.
The overall result is to recall the layered effect of those rock formations which eternally hint at massive earthly movement, and yet the sculpture ‘speaks’ very much of human scale.
These impressions are confirmed by the drawings which share this sense of inner movement verging on turbulence.
I came away with the feeling that work such as Hodgson's, which begins to transform the rough material of personal experience and emotion into a universal, achieves an enduring self-sufficiency which work that is essentially referential cannot.
Like advertising, it relies on the viewer's instant recognition, while trying to shock the same viewer out of this automatic reaction.
As Sherman's work had demonstrated — and she is joined by the legion of other women artists who also seek to assert their right to make use of their naked figures in their work — this in an obstinately difficult strategy to adopt where the female body is concerned.
Eileen Cooper ‘Choices’, 1991 charcoal on paper
Althea Greenan is an artist and writer
Marooned in our own Glamour
Val Williams
Seen against the peeling walls of hotel rooms, Bettina Rheims' models are oddly positioned between glamour and abandonment.
The photographs have all the encoded language of fashion iconography, yet seem to wish to express some more personal aesthetic statement.
Looking at these lush images, the viewer is given a number of clues towards the photographer's intention.
Alone in their deserted rooms the models are both victimised and glorious.
There are suggestions both of imprisonment and refuge; women marooned in their own glamour, yet struggling to free themselves of its oppression.
Photography like Bettina Theims' is always difficult to appropriate.
Seen in this gallery context it invites us to view it as an individual's response to a constructed drama.
Seen within photographic historiography as a whole, it becomes construed as photography with a precise market.
Purveying a hard-edged glamour which commonly perceives itself as dangerous and experimental, Rheims' work has a heavy gloss of decadence which momentarily obscures the polemic of the photographs themselves.
At their most powerful, Rheims' photographs have an audaciousness which goes beyond the contrived scenarios which are presented in much of her work.
Bettina Rheims ‘April 1st, Paris’ colour Cibachrome
A young woman in a spotted dress exposes her breast in a surprised and friendly way, while another, gawky and perplexed, lies on a primitive bed as if wondering why she is there.
In these photographs, one feels there is some real communion between photographer and photographed.
There is an unconsciousness in this work which is effective and enigmatic.
Perhaps the greatest problem which Rheims' work presents is its consciousness of the supposed audience, for this is photography created for a specific market, and one which takes its thrill seriously.
Like Helmut Newton before her, Rheims has experimented with those visual devices which seem to suggest pornography and danger, but which end up suggesting only titillation and glamour.
To succeed fully with this photography the viewer must be made more fully aware of the risky nature of sexuality and exposure, must go beyond the gloss.
Val Williams is a critic
Rewriting History
Liz Crossley reports from Berlin on a show where women tell the stories
The Martin Gropius building is an imposing brick block, which stands on what used to be one of the borders between East and West Berlin.
It is one of the best exhibition sites in Berlin, East or West, which makes it even more extraordinary that the current exhibition,Profession without Tradition , is taking place there.
It all started with the idea of re-establishing the archive of the Verein Berliner  Kunstlerinnen (Association of Women Artists in Berlin) which was destroyed during the second world war and developed into a journey of discovery, which has reached this point with the following achievements: 1200 women artists on record; many works discovered; the archive set up; a profusely illustrated catalogue (in fact the word catalogue does not give an idea of the range of articles contained in it since it covers the history of women artists in German-speaking countries, to art-business oriented articles, to facets of the history of the association, followed by a chronological development of the association and a full catalogue of the works on show, divided into sections, as they are in the exhibition); a dictionary with short biographies of 1200 artists and 700 friends of art called Kathe, Paula und der ganze Rest — Ein Nachschlagewerk (Kathe, Paula and the rest of the bunch!— A Reference Book), which has caused something of a stir; and of course, finally, the exhibition showing the works of 70 of the members and guests of the association over its 125 year life, which includes 250 works loaned by 100 institutions and individuals.
And all of the project was financed by funds from the national lottery!
How's that for a gamble?
How will the journey go from here.
What is envisaged?
The association was closed to new members from the time that this project became public, but now membership will be opened again: I imagine there will be considerably more interest in membership than prior to the event.
This would then fulfil the aim of revitalising the association, which consisted of 30 women four years ago.
The archive is not open to the public at the moment as there is not enough funding for staff and technical equipment, but it is hoped that this will soon be overcome.
Visibility and consciousness of women artists' works will have been raised once again and, with the availability of printed material, documented for further work.
So what is the VBK?
When did it start and why?
It was The Association of Women Artists and Friends of Art in Berlin, an association of women artists, who banded together for the first time on 13 January, 1867, to overcome some of the structural obstacles to women artists.
These included creating some kind of social security for women artists and making available to them a basic training.
Their motto was ‘help through self-help’.
Up until 1945 its members came from all over Germany and abroad.
Meret Oppenheim 1982
They provided loans and grants for artists in need from May 1870, in 1885 they offered a pension programme and, in 1910, a medical aid programme.
One of the most important things the VBK did was to start a privately-run school of art for women in 1868.
When one considers that the official State Academy of Arts did not allow women to study there until 1919, one can imagine how many women were given the chance of becoming professional artists by the mere existence of this institution which attracted tutors of the calibre of Karl Stauffer-Bern, who taught Kathe Kollwitz.
The initial programme included drawing anatomy and perspective and was later enriched by the addition of a life-drawing class, considered to be an absolute essential for the training of the professional artist, but totally out of the question for a woman artist.
In this way the school removed yet another barrier to professionalism.
By introducing a programme for the training of drawing teachers in 1871, the school opened up a vocation to women: a vocation through which they could attempt to have  more secure incomes.
The other important contribution that the association made was to establish a bi-annual show, a show which became the talk of the art scene in the city to such an extent that the members could look forward to their work being seen, in the prestigious rooms of the Academy of Arts, written about and even bought by the cultural who included the Kaiser,(his taste was somewhat shaky, but he was the Kaiser).
It is difficult to imagine such an exhibition being taken so seriously by the art world today.
The women friends of artists were vital in the organisation as they raised its profile and raised funds and were important in securing the existence of the VBK.
From 1891 to 1911 the association bloomed.
It became a part of the official women's movement and was able to push for the rights of the professional woman artist.
And, from 1911 to 1919, it secured its position as the women artists' association in Germany, it got funding from the state, became fully accepted as an association, and continued its activities for furthering the professionalism of women.
With the fall of the monarchy, the friends of women artists and the support of the crown were lost and it was essential to reconstitute the association.
When the academies opened their doors to women in 1919 the association changed its curriculum to offer preparatory courses, the drawing teachers' course was closed and for a while they placed emphasis on the trade-oriented forms, like book-binding which was also started later at the state school.
In the mid-twenties it closed altogether but reopened towards the end of the decade.
Two important exhibitions re-established the reputation of the association at this time:The Women of Today in 1929 and The Child in 1930.
Lotte Lasestein ‘Boy with Motorcycle’, 1929
As with all groups in Germany many question marks hang over its existence during the Nazi period.
The VBK was put under state control and Jewish members were made to give up their positions in the association as early as 1933.
In 1935 they had to leave altogether.
Aryan woman artists who were not accepted by the Reichskammer der Bildenden Kunste, could still be accepted as special members, but would not be allowed to take part in the exhibitions.
As a result of these measures, the membership dropped from 230 in 1934 to 107 in 1942.
Though one might think that all those who left must have been in agreement with the National Socialist ideology, there appear to have been artists of all persuasions who remained members.
Käthe Kollwitz, who was an honourary member from 1940 to 1943 and Oda Schottmüller the resistance fighter who was killed by the Nazis in 1943 retained their membership.
The Reich bought from members and supported the association to such an extent that in 1942 they celebrated their 75th anniversary with a big exhibition of German women artists!
Hannan Hoch ‘Roma’, 1925
After the war Allies ordered that all associations be dissolved.
The group reformed and had their first exhibition in 1949.
Between 1956 and 1960 the association had to fight for the right to  enter the Big Berlin Exhibition as a separate group.
They call the next phase, 1963 to 1986 ‘The association between tradition and stagnation’.
In 1964 they revised their articles of association and became registered but the main aim remains that of representing the interests of women artists.
The group has also continued to be represented at some of the major group exhibitions in Berlin.
Financially it was somewhat shaky, but the will of Eva Maria Marcus created a fund for the support of women artists in need.
Now they are aiming for a new lease of life and further development.
In 1989 they formulated it thus: The aim of the association is ‘to make known the tradition of professional women artists and the importance of their work in history, in the present and the future, in both German and international art circles’.
Today the situation is complicated.
There are now a number of other women artists groups here in Berlin and in Germany.
Of these GEDOK, which is comparatively young, being only 65 years old, is probably the most important.
The VBK and GEDOK do not see themselves as being in competition.
Indeed many of the present members of the VBK are also members of GEDOK.
But the biggest difference between these two groups is that GEDOK is open to all women artists: writers, musicians, composers and all kinds of visual artists.
Both organisations have encouraged younger women to join them in the eighties and nineties and there is some indication that their membership is on the increase.
Profession Without Tradition aims to show the history of the VBK in a relatively small selection (10%) of works by their members.
Familiar names are there from Paula Modersohn-Becker, Gabriele Münter, Marie Lourencin, Käthe Kollwitz, Charlotte Berend-Corinth, Hannah Höch and Jeanne Mammen to the contemporary members, Giesela Breitling and Elvira Bach.
One of the strengths of the show is that care has been taken to select relatively unknown pieces by the better known artists, I was particularly pleased to see the two big charcoal drawings form the early work of Paula Modersohn-Becker and the series of eight lithographs by Charlotte Berend-Corinth of Anita Berber in her erotic costumes.
But, I felt rather disappointed by the show.
I would have liked to have seen, rather than read, a clear image of the full membership of the association of the various periods.
I wanted to know how many different styles were represented at any one time?
What was the dominant style?
What did best artistically and financially?
The full story of the history of VBK is yet to be uncovered.
Liz Crossley is an artist living and working in Berlin
NEWS FROM THE WOMEN ARTISTS SLIDE LIBRARY
Pauline Barrie
By the time this issue of the magazine is published the exhibition of prints,Impressive Women , at the London Print Workshop, will have finished and the supportive programme of talks come to a close.
This new collaboration has successfully presented three different practical workshops, an active creche with a artist experienced in print making, and an open exhibition representing 45 women artists which we hope will tour.
The talks embraced a wide range of speakers and subjects.
From the highly personalised work of Alexis Hunter and Maggie Jennings to the business of print making by Sylvie Turner and an introduction to women and print making by Pat Gilmour (who introduced us to the innovative work of June Wayne).
The second series of educational talks have now begun at WASL on Monday afternoons.
Both ‘Women's Art Practice’ and ‘Approaches and Ideas’, have been designed by WASL in collaboration with Birkbeck College, London.
These short courses which began early in October, provide an invaluable opportunity to view and discuss The Women Artists Slide Library's collection on women artists and their work.
These will be followed by ‘Criticism, Black Women Artist’ which runs for six weeks from the beginning of February.
Looking critically at the practices and processes of black, women artists, this course will concentrate on contemporary women of colour in the UK, their social relationships in the light of their gender and class.
The course will draw extensively on the Women of Colour index at WASL.
During the course of this year WASL has been celebrating its ten years of public service.
We have successfully launched three new publications and will be presenting a fourth,Feminist Art Criticism , next year, in collaboration with the Scarlet Press.
This publication will carry all the conference papers from our Feminist Art Criticism conference held last June.
But we began the year by releasing Networking International , a one-off information publication in collaboration with the Women in Arts Project at the Arts Council.
Still being distributed throughout the UK and abroad,Networking International has been a real source of information as well as opening up opportunities for women artists.
Contemporary Women Artists, a new colour microfiche is now on its second print run.
It focuses on painters: it covers more than 200 artists and features six works selected by each from their slides held in WASL's archive.
It is unfettered by selection procedures, by individual likes or dislikes or by notions of fashion or quality.
It is the biggest visual production ever printed on the work of contemporary women artists in this country.
The colour microfiche is accompanied by a catalogue detailing each image and statements by all the artists, many of them written specifically for this publication.
On 5 November there will be a special launch of the International Women's Art Diary, 1993 .
Presented by the Women Artists Slide Library, published by Open Letters, it contains 44 images of work from the archive, 26 in colour and 18 in black and white.
It is a new A5 size printed in three different languages to directly appeal to WASL's growing European network.
We will be carrying a report in our next issue of the magazine on our AGM (24 October) and on our forthcoming exhibition to be held at the 181 Gallery in Hammersmith, west London this December/January.
This year's AGM of the IAWA was held in Madrid from 28–30 September.
It was accompanied by an exhibition of work selected from the various groups of IAWA held at the Sala de Exposiciones de la Comunidad de Madrid.
These events were organised by the present controlling committee of IAWA which for 1992–3 has consisted of President Eva Ursprung (from Eva and Co); Lotte Hendrick, acting secretary; with supportive assistance from Reni Hofmuller and from Eva & Co.
The funding was organised by Brigitte Schafer from Frauenkulturhaus in Frankfurt who managed to raise funds through the Green Party in Germany in order to pay all the European representatives to attend.
This was a wonderful opportunity to continue to network European wide and the WASL representatives have brought back a good range of catalogues and information about new women artists groups for the archive.
As part of its role as a current member of IAWA, WASL will be sending a number of slides of member's work to Eva & Co for selection for a forthcoming exhibition in 1993 in Graz.
The theme of the exhibition will be ‘communication’ with an emphasis on time-based work, radio art and installation.
If you would line any further information on these events please write directly to:..
The Women Artists Slide Library will be closed to the public from Wednesday 23 December until Tuesday 5 January 1993.
We wish you all a happy Christmas.
The poster for the 1992 IAWA exhibition held in Madrid in September