

Contributors
CHARLES GLASS, who writes about the LA war zone (page 100), lives in Ireland and is a part-time roving foreign correspondent for ABC News.
He is the author of Tribes With Flags and Money For Old Rope .
Clearly undismayed by the havoc he encountered in LA, he plans to return there this summer for a holiday with his children.
LAURA THOMPSON writes regularly on sport for Esquire and this month reviews Linford Christie (page 62).
It is a little-known fact that Laura owned a greyhound at the age of eleven.
It was called London Lights and won several races at White City.
As far as we know, no other Esquire contributors can make this claim.
She is staying at home this summer because she says she doesn't make enough money to go on holiday.
JOHN SESSIONS describes himself as an actor, comedian and writer, in that order.
He is currently working on a series of six half-hour comic monologues for BBC2.
This summer he will be holidaying with the same friends with whom he shared his Holiday in Hell (page 50), although their destination this time is in the South of France.
He is quietly confident that there will be no problems this time.
JOANNE GLASBEY joins Esquire this month as Resources editor.
A former consumer editor of Time Out for six years, more recently she co-produced a series of documentaries on British business culture for the BBC.
Joanne says she hates shopping but loves buying things.
She is holiday in Gers, a very exclusive part of France, but would much prefer to be going to Tobago.
JON RONSON, who writes about The Secret World of Sex (page 76), lives in Manchester and specializes in life's stranger corners.
He is a columnist for Time Out and appears regularly on Radio 5.
He recently met a man who claimed to be able to kill birds by shouting at them.
This summer he is going to American in the hopes of meeting Darlene from Roseanne .
DUNCAN CAMPBELL is the crime correspondent of The Guardian and the author of That Was Business, This is Personal , a study of the changing face of professional crime.
In his first piece for Esquire, he writes about the strange case of Lenny McLean (page 88).
He is often confused with another Duncan Campbell who writes about state secrecy and whose Inland Revenue demands he sometimes receives.
We rang Duncan to ask where he was going on holiday, but he had already gone away.
Finally, congratulations to our contributing editor, GEOFF DYER, whose book about jazz,But Beautiful , has gained him a Somerset Maugham award.
As Geoff explains on page 53, his life is nothing but one long holiday.
SMART
Eight Pages in the Life of the Culture
Film
ALTMAN'S REVENGE
The Player hits Hollywood
BY GREG WILLIAMSl
Whatever artistic medium you care to name, the sweaty toil of creation is far more interesting to the artist than to the audience.
Moviemakers just love movies about moviemakers.
So it comes as no surprise to learn that the new film by veteran director Robert Altman —The Player — has been the most talked about movie in studio parking lots and Beverly Hills brasseries this year.
There are three reasons for this: first, because it is a fine and original piece of cinema; second — and most remarkably — because it is a heart-felt acid attack on Hollywood; and third, because it marks the return to form of one of cinema's greatest living directors.
Altman has always operated on the margins of the industry.
This sense of the maverick is coupled with a talent for making complex, lyrical films which possess the depth and artistry that is thought to be the sole province of European and art house directors.
From the seamless opening shot — which lasts eight minutes and has no cuts — the themes and characters of The Player are laid before us with masterful skills as Altman glides and circles the camera around a studio car park, catching snatches of information and fragments of conversation (a film is being pitched with the description ‘Ghost meets The Manchurian Candidate’.
It is clear that we are witness to a deeply sardonic vision of an industry that, despite its sugar-coated exterior, is both corrupt and cannibalistic.
Tim Robbins plays Griffin Mill, a young, fast-track movie executive whose career comes under threat when another young Turk arrives at the same studio.
He is also receiving death threats from a screenwriter whose work he has snubbed.
Mill sets about resolving the situation in a way that causes him to become embroiled in a world of sex, violence and corruption.
Robbins stars along with Peter Gallagher, Greta Scacchi and Cynthia Stevenson.
But this isn't the half of it.
Altman has imported half of Hollywood's ‘A’ list to put in cameo performances — Nick Nolte, Jack Lemmon, Cher, Anjelica Huston, Burt Reynolds, Susan Sarandon, Lily Tomlin, Jeff Goldblum, Andie MacDowell and Mimi Rogers.
Notably, Bruce Willis and Julia Roberts play themselves in some of the most crucial scenes.
It's a measure of the esteem in which Altman is held that many of the close to 70 stars who appear were willing to commit themselves to a project which so ruthlessly satirizes their very existence.
But, like turkeys looking forward to Christmas, industry heavyweights queued up to be part of the action.
Warren Beatty is reported to have called Altman to ask why he wasn't asked to take a role.
Much admired for his technical skills — such as his use of overlapping dialogue — Altman has never produced a box office hit  other than M*A*S*H , in 1970.
Other work, such as McCabe and Mrs Miller ,The Long Goodbye , and Nashville , although warmly received by the critics, failed to perform at the box office.
As his Hollywood stock plummeted, Altman became increasingly estranged from the mainstream of Hollywood.
He burned his bridges, and, working solely on small-scale projects over which he had total control, descended into drink and drugs.
But his marginalization from the Hollywood jungle proved to be his redemption.
Producer David Brown optioned author Michael Tolkin's novel and approached Sidney Lumet to direct.
Unable to afford Lumet's fee.
Brown approached Altman, who pounced on the opportunity.
The result, although dark and satirical, is a joy to watch — hilariously funny and unremittingly scabrous.
The reaction within the industry has been almost totally favourable—an irony which cannot have escaped Altman, who gave wry smile as he received a standing ovation at Cannes this year and the prize for Best Director.
He has triumphed by attacking a system that sucks the marrow from the body of the industry to leave only the flab and gristle of tired ideas.
Altman strips away the pretence and mythology to expose the film industry as precisely that; a business like any other, dedicated to the pursuit of profit.
Appropriately enough,The Player looks set to make a lot of money.
ON RELEASE
My Cousin Vinny Even Joe Pesci's considerable talents can't quite lift this mildly diverting comedy about two New York kids accused of a murder they didn't commit.
Night on Earth Another road movie from cult hero Jim Jarmusch — but this time the vehicle is nothing more romantic than a taxicab.
The Rapture ‘Instead of doing heroin,’ someone tells born-again Christian Sharon (Mimi Rogers) in Michael Tolkin's directorial debut, ‘you're doing God.’
In a big way too: Sharon awaits Judgement Day, confident she will be saved.
She's in for a surprise though.
Music
ANGEL DELIGHT
Delicious dance music
DEEE-LITE HAVE BEEN much heralded as the progenitors of Nineties attitude.
A multicultural trio featuring a former textile designer and go-go dancer from Ohio (Lady Miss Kier Kirby), an exiled Russian hippy (Super DJ Dmitry) and a Japanese technology buff (Jungle DJ Towa Towa, they emerged from the underground labyrinth of New York club culture in 1990 and scored the pop hit of the summer with ‘Groove is in the Heart.’
Their début album,World Clique , was devoured by dance élitists and rock snobs alike.
A Day-Glo hybrid of house, P-funk, bug-eyed techno, Sixties psychedelia and Seventies disco,World Clique gave face and personality to a dance scene that was in danger of suffocating from anonymity.
Listing their influences as butterflies, chaos theory, virtual reality,Blade Runner and Blue Velvet , Deee-Lite were a celebration of Seventies flamboyance, late Eighties neurosis and Nineties positivism.
Their high-kitsch varnish was offset by an overwhelming urge to educate.
Interviews were peppered with New Age buzz-words and swamped with the kind of ‘Save the World’ fervour that has earned globe-trotting polymaths like Sting and Peter Gabriel universal derision.
‘I can understand why we were accused of being vague and naïve,’ says Miss Kier.
‘We realized that, lyrically, we had to be more specific this time in terms of our politics.
‘We discovered a lot in the last year.
We even found out the answer to love.
We woke up in the middle of the night and, for a few minutes, we knew that love is everything.
Then we realized that we believe in lust as much as we believe in love.
Deee-Lite is for the bedroom as well as the dance-floor.
We believe that people should have safe sex as often as possible.
If they choose to have sex to Deee-Lite records, all the better.
‘The concept for the last album was based around the idea that, if we're going to use music to stop the destruction of the world, we need to look outwards.
World Clique was an invitation to all the inhabitants of the planet to come together to respect all cultures and to aspire to better days.
It was a dialogue between all living things.’
‘If people choose to have sex to Deee-Lite records, all the better’
Their new album,Infinity Within , is another turbulent marriage of the sublime and the ridiculous.
The Deee-Lite canvas has been stretched even tighter, allowing them to twist the dance beats of the last two decades into ever more kooky shapes.
‘With this new album, we're acknowledging that, if your're going to look outwards, it's also important to look within yourself to find out exactly what you, as an individual, are doing about all this destruction, whether it's political, social or environmental.
There was all this talk of positivism.
Our music is a joyous celebration of life.’
Deee-Lite are presently involved in publishing a dictionary of 200 Deee-Liteful Words which will also include addresses of environmental groups and human rights organizations.
They also plan to donate a percentage of profits from future projects to Greenpeace.
Meanwhile, there's talk of Miss Kier starring in a remake of Roger Vadim's late sixties sci-fi romp,Barbarella .
Also, the trio have just been offered the chance of following in the footsteps of The Osmonds and The Jackson Five by allowing themselves to be made into a Saturday morning TV cartoon series.
‘There's something appealing about the idea,’ admits Miss Kier, ‘but we know that we'd be censored.
Saturday morning cartoons aren't really the right vehicle for what Deee-Lite want to say.
Anyway, the three of us have been seen as cartoon characters for a number of years.
We've always been outcasts and we never thought we'd be accepted.’
HOLIDAY LISTENING
Some recent releases to take away
Skin — Ephraim Lewis (Elektra).
Fine début from Sheffield-based singer-songwriter.
Lewis fuses a blend of soul, jazz and rock to haunting effect which may well make him the hottest new talent since Seal.
Good Stuff — The B-52s (WEA).
America's foremost party terrorists follow up the phenomenally successful Cosmic Thing with another set of loony tunes.
Despite succumbing to a mild bout of New Ageism, their goofily infectious sense of humour is still in good nick.
The Best of The Rest — The Pogues (WEA).
A companion to their recent Best of , this compilation gathers up sixteen songs from the ruins of their turbulent eight-year career, from the glorious shambles of their rudimentary punk-folk anthems to their later, less convincing, forays into more exotic territories.
Heartbeat — Ryuichi Sakamoto (AVL).
Now a resident New Yorker, Japan's most acclaimed musician/composer returns with a compelling album of understated dance grooves and cinematic soundscapes.
Outernational — Billy MacKenzie (Circa) Another comeback for one of pop's most errant talents.
MacKenzie's five-octave voice has been subdued into a cool, torchy moan.
Veering between epic pop and clever soul pastiche,Outernational  may be his most assured release since 1982's Sulk .
Books
SHUT UP AND LISTEN…
…to black women writers
WE HAVE BECOME so guilty about our reading habits that sooner or later there will be some kind of counselling service available.
Maybe someone will provide a 24-hour 0898 number which we can dial when we can't sleep at night for thinking about the copy of Milan Kundera's Immortality lying untouched on the bedside table.
Part of a reviewer's job nowadays is to listen to confessions.
When I explain that I read books for a living, people launch into a frenzy of apologetic explanation: ‘I don't have the time!’;
‘I just read rubbish on the tube!’;
‘I read so much at work that when I get home I just want to watch Jeremy Beadle!’
Reviewer forgive me, for I have sinned.
Even those who do read quality writing may have cause for self-flagellation.
What, for example, are men supposed to do about books by women?
And what are they supposed to do about books by black women?
The problem here is twofold.
First, there is currently an unhealthy fear of being seen with anything that might be perceived as ‘right on’(the Eighties may be over, but many of its less attractive characteristics are still very much with us).
And secondly, books by black women force (white) men to shut up and listen — the very position in which we are reputed to feel least comfortable — because we have nothing to contribute.
The writers that men have been reading recently (Nicholson Baker is a prime example), on the other hand, ask us to participate in their creation and observation; we are invited to share the joke, and thus made to feel important.
There are no jokes in two new novels by black women writers.
Thulani Davis's excellent fictional début, 1959 (Hamish Hamilton, £8.99), is about black defiance of American segregation laws in the small southern town of Turner; Marsha Hunt's Free (Hamish Hamilton, £14.99) is set in 1913, some 40 years after Grant accepted Lee's surrender at  Appomattox and brought about emancipation.
Thulani Davis describes policemen setting dogs on black women and children campaigning for the right to buy a cup of coffee at the local Woolworths, and educated black men being asked to abandon French courses at university.
‘Negroes cannot learn French.
Your race is not suited to it — you see, your lips are too big to pronounce it.’
Marsha Hunt (author of the hugely likeable Joy ) has a tiny black child watching the rape and murder of his mother, herself the product of an unbalanced relationship between a woman and her owner.
Hunt's Free is richer and more ambitious than 1959 in some ways, and less successful in others.
Her large supporting cast never really comes to life, and she allows too many strangely unfocused interruptions to her narrative flow.
But the central relationship between Teenotchy, a young black stable lad, and the delicate English lord who falls for him, is fresh and complex, and she teases the ironies out of the set-up with understatement and wit.
Reading these two books is a serious and problematic business, and if you're looking for a bit of post-modern frivolity then you'd best slip something else into your holiday holdall — Sebastian Faulk's new novel.
A Fool's Alphabet , say, in which events are narrated not chronologically but alphabetically according to place.
Marsha Hunt and Thulani Davis have no need for this kind of artifice.
They have stories that need telling as opposed to a plot that most of us have never heard before and which make us feel uncomfortable.
And where's the fun in that?
Well, there isn't any, really.
I could try recommending the calm, warm, wise voice of Davis's twelve-year-old narrator.
Willie Tarrant, I suppose, or the tragicomic scene in Free , where Teenotchy tries to grasp the point and the structure of conversation with a white man.
But sooner or later you're going to come up against something unpleasant that you don't really want to think about, and you'll end up feeling outraged and impotent and guilty…
But you may also just find, as I did, that the experience of shutting up and listening is extraordinarily refreshing.
HOLIDAY READING: Paperbacks to take away
The Van — Roddy Doyle (Minerva, £4.99).
The third and best of the Rabbitte family trilogy that began with The Commitments is an essential read for anyone with fond memories of Italia ‘90.
Funny and moving.
City of Quartz — Mike Davis (Vintage, £7.99).
The best urban deconstruction since Jonathan Raban's Soft City , this is a beautifully articulated explanation of the meaning of LA.
You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again — Julia Phillips (Mandarin, £4.99).
More West Coast blues.
Julia Phillips was the first woman to win an Academy Award for Best Picture; this is a satisfyingly poisonous portrait of her life and times.
Seventh Heaven — Alice Hoffman (Virago, £5.99).
Simply beautiful and completely enchanting story set in Long Island in 1959.
If you only ever buy one Virago book, make it this one.
Toujours Provence — Peter Mayle (Pan £5.99).
Just kidding.
Art
ONE OF BRITAIN'S most successful sculptors, Barry Flanagan, has been putting his steroid-injected bronze hares through all sorts of paces since 1979 — they leap, dance, box, bat, bowl, pose, cavort.
Altogether about 100 have been cast, using half a dozen basic formats, ranging in size from two to fifteen feet.
Nimble, quick-witted, playful, pugnacious, slimline, devious, wild at heart, Flanagan's hares were much more in tune with the dashing entrepreneurial spirit of the Eighties than Henry Moore's corpulent corporate monoliths, which were the accepted sculptural logos of the Fifties and Sixties.
As Yorkshire is the homeland of Henry Moore, and the exhibition is sponsored by the Henry Moore Foundation, one suspects that Flanagan's work will have the Father of British Sculpture turning, twisting, and perhaps even somersaulting, in his grave.
JAMES HALL Barry Flanagan is at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park, Bretton Hall, near Wakefield, exit 38 of the M1, from June 17 to August 30.
‘Hare on Ball and Claw’, 1989–90
Media
MILE HIGH READING
Inflight mags take off
BY MARK EDWARDS
‘IF THE NEC WERE an animal,’ it says in AirTime , Birmingham European Airways' inflight magazine, ‘what would it be?’
Good question.
We might just as easily ask: if inflight magazines didn't exist, where would we read about speed skating?
Or where would we get such solid advice about packing?
‘Don't,’ suggests an article in Airtime , ‘take three pairs of shoes, if you can get by with two.’
As someone who doesn't fly that often, I welcome such advice from travellers.
Even though, by the time I read it, it would be too late.
Airtime goes beyond packing to offer general time management advice: ‘Don't,’ it says, in that authoritative tone it likes to adopt, ‘clutter your memory with non-consequential facts.’
I won't.
It's already full of inconsequential ones.
Mainly gleaned from Airtime .
Journalists have always had inflight magazines to kick around.
We can dismiss inflight editorial wholesale, slag off any other editorial we don't like as belonging to an inflight magazine, and just generally have something to feel superior to.
That matters.
It's always sad when a figure of fun, an easy target for a laugh, disappears into oblivion.
Mike Yarwood's career dipped as Heath's and Wilson's did.
And those who have made a career out of making fun of Maxwell may think that they can continue to do so; but it's just not funny anymore (allegedly).
It's worrying, then, to find a half-way decent inflight magazine.
(‘Half-way decent’ in this lowest common denominator-dominated field means the same as the word ‘revolutionary’applied to an ad campaign, or ‘epoch-making’used to describe a rock album.)
Virgin Atlantic's Hot Air is a bit of all right.
There are photos in here of the kind that win awards, articles that you would want to read even if you didn't have to take your mind off the fact that you might, you know, at any moment…
One article alone — by Emily Gwathmey on the architecture of American cinemas — was worth the price of admission to the May/June issue (although, of course, there is no price of admission unless you're only flying to read the magazine).
For too long, inflights coasted along in a crappy state for several reasons: first, the implicit assumption that if you wanted your duty-free goods sold on board then you took an ad in the mag (so, if you're making money anyway, why bother to make it good?); second, the mags didn't even have to compete for ad budgets with proper media, since duty-free is usually handled by a separate division with a separate ad spend; and last, nobody cares if nobody reads it.
But Hot Air also benefits from being published by John Brown Publishing, the company behind Viz .
In fact, so diverse is this market, that having four titles probably makes John Brown the biggest inflight publisher in the world.
Brown's empire is a bizarre mix: as well as Hot Air , there's Britannia's Skyscene , Sabena's Passport and Aeroflot's wittily titled, um,Aeroflot .
But Hot Air is the gem.
Even the sections of obligatory information about travel, landing and inflight entertainment are worth a look.
In fact, even the Japanese language version of these is worth a look, if only for the few English words that remain obstinately untranslatable and stick out glaringly among the elegant Japanese characters.
Now, everybody knows that Japanese kids learning to write have to absorb six million characters.
But even this number, it turns out.
isn't enough to cope with the concept ‘Put Me in Your Mix’.
You'd read ‘Hot Air’ even if you didn't have to take your mind off the fact that you might, you know, at any moment…
WAIT IN LINE
Think carefully before reading on.
I am about to impart knowledge to you that you will never be able to forget.
These days, between the end of an ITV show and the beginning of the commercials, you can sit through up to six programme promotions in a row.
And, now I've said that, you'll notice every single one.
A few years ago, there was nothing but a brief ‘coming next’.
Now, with up to 60 seconds of trailers, advertisers and ad agencies are beginning to get angry.
This is because they pay a premium rate to be ‘first in break’, on the basis that more people are still watching (prior to making the tea, or whatever), and that they're still watching more attentively.
Now advertisers want to know why they're still paying this premium to be first, when being first means that they're actually fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh.
Style
PACK MAN
What to take on a two-week break
PACKING IS NOT MY forte.
Of course, over the years I've got it down to a fine art.
I make lists.
I make several lists, filtering out every stage those things I can, if pushed, do without — the aqualung, the white tie and tails, the Trivial Pursuits.
But even with only the barest essentials, the list is as long as my arm.
Packing is all about that ‘just in case’ item.
Just in case the local chieftain decides to throw a grand party in your honour.
Just in case there's a typhoon.
So you end up taking a whole pile of clothes, most of which invariably amount to little more than ballast.
Wear your city brogues with bare feet and people will think you mugged someone
A ruthless check-list avoids many of those things you just won't wear.
Even if yours is not a beach holiday, you shouldn't need much.
T-shirts and polo shirts are infinitely preferable to ordinary shirts, since knitted fabrics crease less and absorb more moisture than wovens.
They are easier to iron — assuming, of course, you are taking an iron.
Buy the shirts large and have a few for variety.
If you are taking woven shirts, get a loose fit and straight hems so you can wear them outside your trousers.
The trousers should be loose cut too — even baggy — to get the air circulating.
Cotton and linen are ideal summer fabrics because they are light, airy, easy to wash — and quick to dry.
You're not likely to need anything really formal, but a soft casual jacket in linen, a linen/viscose mix or super lightweight wool is worth taking a long.
It can function as a blazer should you fancy a posh restaurant or club.
And as it takes up little room, tie is also a good idea, ‘just in case’.
On holiday you might like to give your feet a rest and not wear socks.
But some shoes require socks.
Wear your city brogues with bare feet and people will think you mugged someone for them.
You won't need sensible work shoes anyway so leave them at home — they deserve a holiday from your feet.
Deck shoes, either in leather or cloth, are good alternatives — smart enough for any eventuality.
Plimsolls or espadrilles are useful too.
Practicality and comfort are prime holiday concerns, and protection is another.
We know about Sun Protection Factors and UVA, but the simplest sun blocker — the hat — is generally forgotten.
The panama hat, in the finest woven straw, is the most classic version and a worthwhile investment.
If it is a true panama, it will collapse and roll up for easy packing in its own cylinder.
You don't want to have to think of anything during your two weeks of bliss and, where possible, sartorial rules should be forgotten — up to a point.
The only rules that matter are practical ones that respect local sensitivities.
A T-shirt, flip flops and thong are not respectfully dress in which to visit the icons in that little chapel on the hill.
A Ruthless check-list will spare you an over-packed suitcase
HARDY TALKS SENSE
Sir Hardy Amies on getting dressed for bed
NATURE GAVE US A wonderful night shirt.
It is called skin.
Sensitive to caresses, it is susceptible to cold.
Caresses can keep you warm — even hot — but heating goes off everywhere in the small hours.
So one must not reject pyjamas.
Of course, they have their social functions.
Breakfast as a guest in a house or hotel really requires a covering for the knees.
You might keep a pair in silk for this.
For sleeping there is nothing better than cotton.
Luxury would be to have a freshly laundered set every night.
Cotton can be brushed to feel like flannel and yet not be so hot.
This for winter.
For summer, very fine cotton, called voile, is extremely pleasant.
I have very clear ideas about dressing gowns.
Silk, particularly of the brocade type, is very unsatisfactory.
It talks to you as you move.
This is irritating when you are alone and disturbing if you are not.
Wool is the only thing for the comfort of warmth, and most desirable is cloth which contains cashmere.
It will be in upper-class colours, for sure.
I don't think bedroom slippers are the footwear of lovers.
They also look frightful by the fireside.
Better to bring house slippers to the bedroom: thin leather soles and leather or velvet tops.
I have no experience of night shirts.
I don't think they would keep my knees happy in bed, and out and about I think I would find myself worrying if my skirt was the right length.
Last Word
PERIOD PAINS
The unchanging face of the nostalgia movie
BY GILBERT ADAIR
Gangster glamour: Albert Finney in ‘Miller's Crossing’(1991)
IT WAS IN THE LATE Sixties that the expression ‘nostalgia movies’— and its more subtle French equivalent la mode réto — first gained currency.
Movies had always been made about the past, of course, if not so very frequently about that immediate past whose primary unit of measure is the decade rather than the century; but it was probably Visconti's The Damned in 1969 that inaugurated what were to be the definitive parameters of a new filmic style.
Until The Damned , the medium's powers of ‘period’ evocation had been virtually monopolized by the indolent, affluent charms of the belle époque .
By setting his move in the Thirties, and by turning that ambiguously seductive decade into what might be called a laide époque , Visconti discovered a necessary, hitherto unremarked fact about movie nostalgia: that it functions best when directly linked either to the history of the cinema (as in The Damned , Helmut Berger's Dietrich impersonation) or history in the cinema (newsreel footage, for example).
Although it was itself of a rather fetid awfulness,The Damned prefigured almost all of the conventions of the nostalgia movie: the fusing of public history with a private, intimate drama; the ubiquity of ‘decadence’ and deviant sexuality; the scratchy suggestiveness of ‘cheap’popular music on the soundtrack; the transformation of the past into a glittering art deco exhibition of costume and design; and the constant reference to movie mythology.
That was, as I say, in the late Sixties.
But if one no longer hears too much about the nostalgia movie, it's not because the genre has disappeared, but because its visual tics and tropes have so infiltrated the cinema's textures that no one now feels the need to make any specific allusion to it.
Hollywood filmmakers have become so slavishly dependent on old movies for their narratives that more and more new movies are having to assume the textural trappings of the past.
And, since even rétro fashions evolve, the current rage would seem to be in equal measure for the gangrenous glamour of the Thirties gangster movie (Miller's Crossing, Dick Tracy, Bugsy ) and the clammy high-mindedness of the Sixties political biopic (JFK, Ruby , Spike Lee's Malcolm X , Danny de Vito's Hoffa ).
Nothing has basically changed, however: the mimicry of bygone styles remains just as immaculate as in Visconti's work, not only in costumes and hairstyles, in sets and shop-fronts, but down to that surprisingly potent signifier of the recent past, the typeface (as in all those beguiling un-period credit titles).
Yet nostalgia movies pose a curious question of cinema sociology: what precisely will their posterity be?
In 50 years time, will Miller's Crossing , say, look like a film of the Thirties or (if only by virtue of its licence in matters of sex and violence) like a film of the Nineties?
And in 500 years, when the distinction between twentieth-century decades will have become a mere specialist detail (as is the distinction, for most of us, between the 1840s and the 1850s)?
Although Dicken's Barnaby Rudge was a historical novel, set several decades before the period in which it was written, few modern readers are capable of distinguishing it from the author's non-period writings.
Similarly, and rather hauntingly, in 2492 the Coen Brothers' Miller's Crossing of 1991 and Raoul Walsh's High Sierra of 1941 are likely to strike all but the specialized eye as absolutely contemporaneous.
Bogart in Raoul Walsh's ‘High Sierra’(1941).
In 100 years will anyone know the difference between this and a Nineties rétro movie?
Modern Times
‘The memories were coming back.
They were there all the time.
I was falling apart’
A victim of sex abuse describes the emotional aftermath
HE RANG ME AT the office one afternoon.
He said his name was John and that he'd been sexually abused as a child.
He wanted to know if I was interested in doing something on it in the magazine.
I wasn't sure what to say.
I told him to write down everything that had happened in a letter and send it to me.
I had a feeling it would be the last I heard of him.
Then his letter arrived.
Two and half pages of dense, single-spaced type.
He said he hoped that I would publish it ‘as I know that people in general don't understand the long term effects of child sexual abuse’.
But his letter posed as many questions as it answered, so I rang him up and asked him if he was willing to come and see me.
A week later he arrived at the office together with his wife Linda.
I closed the doors and switched on the tape recorder.
He spoke for one and half hours and barely paused for breath.
What follows is John's story.
Parts of it may seem distasteful, even shocking, but the sad fact is that there are many others who have suffered far worse degradations.
Some of them may be men like John, forced by their male pride and their self-image to suffer in silence.
Such men are invisible to social workers and statisticians and their numbers cannot be estimated.
All we can know is that no matter how much or how little they may have endured physically, the emotional damage is probably still with them.
It lingers on.
It ruins lives.
I'm 36 years old and a bricklayer by trade.
I've been married for sixteen years.
I met my wife when I was seventeen and she was fifteen.
We have three children — two boys, aged seven and twelve.
We live in Northamptonshire.
To the outside world, we look like the perfect couple, the perfect family.
Up until a year ago, I liked to think we were.
Now I'm not so sure.
Things happened, things which I had no control over, and they triggered shocking memories of my childhood and the sexual abuse I suffered.
I tried to suppress them, but instead more memories came back to me.
Slowly but surely they began to fill my every thought, until it reached the stage where I could no longer cope with daily life.
It started with a young girl being killed in our town.
Before she was killed she'd been sexually abused.
It shook me up and I went to see a social worker who was visiting our local family centre, but that just made things worse.
I asked her what made people do things like that, and she told me that 99 per cent of men who've been abused turn into abusers.
It made me think I was going to abuse my own kids.
Suddenly, I became very wary, especially at bath times, when I'd refuse to dry them like I used to.
I'd say: ‘You can dry your funny bits now.’
I tried to make a joke out of it.
I tried to make a joke out of it.
That's part of the character I am — I use humour as a protection.
Then I found out my kids had been going into someone's house and coming out with money.
It scared the life out of me.
My earliest memories of being abused are of going into a neighbour's house when I was five or six and getting money for what he made me do.
So I immediately assumed that this was what was happening to my own kids.
It turned out that my suspicions were unfounded, but all the time my memories were coming back.
They got bigger and bigger and they were there all the time.
I couldn't shift them, even at work.
Sometimes I managed to block them out for a while, then something would happen to trigger them back — a comment or something on TV.
I was falling apart.
I knew I had to tell my wife what was happening, but I didn't know how she would react.
I was worried that she might shut me out and that our marriage might break up.
Then one night I told her.
We were in bed — probably the worst place, but when you've got three kids it's the only place you can talk.
There was no emotion in my voice, that's how it is with people who've been abused, you talk about it as if you're just calmly stating a fact.
But I didn't tell her everything at first, I just told her about the first two instances.
Then a week later my wife told me that she'd been abused by her brother.
That's when I told her the rest.
That I'd been abused by my brother too.
I don't know when it started, but my first memory of it was when I was about sixteen.
We were living in Surrey at the time and I was sharing a double bed with my brother, who's five years older than me.
My younger brother and sister were in the same room, sleeping in bunk beds.
I remember waking up in the middle of the night with a big smile on my face, feeling really pleased with myself, thinking that I'd just had a wet dream.
Then I felt my brother's hand slipping away from me.
From there it went on to him making me masturbate him.
I never spoke.
I didn't know what to say.
I just stayed silent and kept my eyes closed.
It only ever happened at night.
In darkness and silence.
At the time, I was an apprentice electrician in a factory.
I was working with a guy who came from Manchester.
He was in his thirties and he was like a hero to me.
I looked up to him, he was the big brother that I should have had.
I trusted him.
He was my friend.
Then one day all of us on the maintenance crew were watching a blue movie.
The inexperienced little seventeen-year-old that I was, I got an erection.
The next thing I knew all the others started chasing me.
I ended up in one of the rooms in the roof and the man I thought was a friend grabbed hold of me and started masturbating me.
I couldn't believe it was happening.
I struggled, but he was a tall man, well-built.
Eventually I fell on my knees and called him a fucking bastard, and he just laughed.
You might say that it wasn't such a terrible thing, but it's not the actual abuse that matters so much.
It's the emotional effect it has.
After my wife and I had shared our experiences, it was a crazy time in our lives.
It should have brought us closer together, but instead it was like we didn't know each other any more, as if we were complete strangers.
The worst part was the anger.
I was really angry about what had happened to her and I used to take my anger out when I was in the car, driving really dangerously.
I was scared I was going to kill myself.
And the anger came out during sex.
Most of the time I was able to keep control of my emotions, but when we had sex the control loosened and the anger started to come through.
On one occasion I had a panic attack.
My heart was racing, my breathing was erratic, I thought I was going to blow up inside.
I wasn't in control of my body.
My attitude to other men has changed significantly.
The stereo-typical image of a building worker is of a hard macho man who doesn't care about other people's feelings.
He's strong and doesn't show pain and certainly doesn't cry.
But most of them are just hiding behind the image.
That's how I used to act, until I realized it was just a sham and I decided that it was time I was honest with myself.
I'm unemployed at the moment, but I could never go back to being a bricklayer.
Neither my wife nor I trust men in general, even men we both know quite well.
Being unemployed and a house owner put even more stress on our relationship.
I was in a cauldron of financial uncertainty and insecurity.
My bank manager wanted me to take out what he called a consolidation loan to keep up my mortgage repayments, which meant borrowing something like £6,000.
I'd been through the trauma of losing a house once before and I knew how demoralizing and degrading it is.
I didn't think I'd be able to keep my sanity or my family if it happened again, but there was no way I was going to let him make me sign for a loan I didn't want.
I went to see a debt counsellor and she agreed to come to the bank with me.
It was a make or break meeting and I was scared that I might end up getting violent — I was bunging it all up, trying to keep my mind balanced.
When we left the meeting, I should have been punching the air with joy.
I'd got everything I wanted.
The debt counsellor said that as long as I paid all the money I was getting from Social Security for the house, they couldn't take it away from us.
I should have been really happy, but instead I felt a depression come over me.
Even after I'd told my wife the good news I couldn't hide my depression.
I couldn't understand what was happening to me and I began to sink deeper and deeper into the pit.
I went to see my therapist and he kept talking about the bank manager.
I was thinking, ‘What has this got to do with the bank manager?
This is abuse-related.’
And then I made the connection — it was power .
I'd felt powerless when I was abused as a child and I'd felt the same powerlessness with the bank manager.
I broke down and cried for fifteen minutes.
For the first time I was in touch with my deepest emotions.
The therapist said: ‘If there was a little boy sitting there in front of you, what would you tell him?’
I said I'd just tap him on the shoulder and say: ‘It's all right.’
But I was lying.
If it had been me there as a kid, I'd have wrapped my arms around him and smothered him, that's how strong the emotion was.
For two weeks afterwards I cried more than I had done in my whole life.
I was drawing these pictures in my head of walking across a tightrope and falling into a chasm.
You've got to go down into this bottomless pit before you can pick yourself up again.
I was crying because of what had happened to both of us, which was so sad and pitiful.
They talk about ‘being in touch with the child within’ and that's what it was like.
Like being a kid again.
I think I just needed a kick up the backside.
It's OK to grieve or to feel sad, but not for 24 hours a day, which is what I was doing.
I want to help other people now.
The way the media cover abuse, they tend to sensationalize events, but the emotional effect is much worse than the actual abuse.
Or it certainly has been for me.
And I think it's a lot more common in men than is actually reported.
It's just a lot more difficult for a man to admit he's been hurt by another man.
There have been a lot of ups and downs.
The fact that both Linda and I were abused makes it worse because I want to help her, I want to comfort her, I want to care for her, but by doing that I've got to forget about what's happening to me.
It's hard to admit sometimes I just can't help Linda if she's dealing with something that only she can deal with.
And even though I know I'll be there to support her, I can't do anything to help her, and for a man to admit that to himself is really hard.
Not long ago, I confronted my brother with what he had done to me.
His excuse was that he'd been ‘exploring his sexuality’.
I asked him why he had to explore it on me.
Afterwards I started to feel sorry for him, then I snapped out of it.
I don't care how he feels or what he's going through is his fault as well.
What he did, and what the others did, changed my life.
‘The way the media cover abuse they tend to sensationalize events, but the emotional effect is much worse’
Politics
If sending in the bombers or trained assassins is out, what else does that leave?
John Simpson on the problem with Saddam
THE LAST TIME I WAS IN Baghdad I was sitting in the bar of the famous, and famously dreadful, Al Rashed (‘It is more than a hotel,’ say the advertisements, though they don't tell you in what way), drinking with a senior government official.
There was no light apart from a guttering candle, because the war had ended only a month or so before and the electricity supply had not been restored.
The official was a friend of mine, and had done me some good turns over the previous few months; most of which time I had spent in this same hotel.
Now he wanted me to return the favour.
He looked around from force of habit, but the spooks from the Mukhabarat were too disorganized and demoralized to pay any attention to a couple of middle-aged men crouched over a whisky.
‘You must ask the Information Ministry to let you go down to the south, so you can see for yourself what the bastards have done to our people, and tell the world about it,’ he said, ‘Please, John.
I'm asking you this as a real favour.’
He shut his eyes and nodded his head, as though willing me to do it.
There was a certain irony here.
‘The bastards’ were Saddam Hussein and his men, and ‘our people’were the Shiite population of southern Iraq.
When I finally received permission to travel south, we went to the two holiest cities of Shia Islam, Kerbala and Najaf. and found that the buildings there, gorgeous in their gliding and intricate mosaics, had been terribly damaged by the loyalist troops of the Iraqi army when they finally defeated the Shiite uprising in March 1991.
Western attention was mostly directed towards the Kurds, who rose up against him at the same time, but the greater threat to Saddam and the heavier loss of life was Shiite, Not Kurdish.
The extraordinary thing was that the man who was begging me to go and tell the world about this was expecting at any moment to hear that he had been appointed to one of the most senior jobs in the Iraqi government.
He will not be the only person at that level in Iraq who feels a powerful grudge.
Almost everyone has something against Saddam.
Take the case of another very senior figure.
Some years ago his brother was accused of plotting against Saddam.
The Mukhabarat demanded he sign an affidavit accusing his brother of all sorts of other crimes and saying that he had always been a traitor at heart.
The official agreed and signed.
His reward was that he was the only male member of the family who was not obliged to form part of the firing squad.
Everyone else, from the father to the uncles to the cousins, was lined up in front of the brother and given a gun.
Behind them stood a line of Mukhabarat men, with orders to shoot anyone who failed to fire or aimed off.
Saddam has desecrated the holiest sites of a fierce and unforgiving religion
Saddam is surrounded by yes-men, because if you don't say yes you end up dead.
This is the man, after all, who says he can tell whether someone will betray him before they know it themselves.
Many who are with him on a daily basis support him because he is their only hope.
Part of his technique for staying in power has been to ensure that all the people closest to him get their hands bloody by sharing in the hangman's work; he calls it ‘democratic execution’
If Saddam is overthrown — when Saddam is overthrown — everyone close to him will go too, and it's unlikely to be a gentle business.
It's in their interests to put off the evil moment for as long as they can.
Yet there are others, on the fringes of power, who see him quite often at meetings of the government, at the very few moments when he shows himself to carefully selected groups of people, or when he travels from place to place.
Anyone who comes into close contact with Saddam is very carefully vetted, of course, and they never know beforehand when or where he will turn up.
But it is fair  to assume that every time he sees people outside his own immediate entourage, there will be some among them who have a deep desire for vengeance.
Suppose you were in charge of the CIA, or the British Secret Intelligence Service, or Mossad: what would be your best way of getting rid of Saddam?
For the CIA and the SIS, simple brutal murder is out.
They aren't in the assassination business any more.
Mossad is different, but it's fair to assume that if it hasn't been able to put someone into Iraq to kill Saddam, then it's next to impossible to do so.
He has always been paranoid about his personal security.
A highly intelligent and beautiful French television journalist, Christine Ockrent, came to Baghdad to interview him some months before the United Nations deadline for withdrawal from Kuwait.
She and her colleagues were held in complete seclusion for 24 hours while their equipment was searched.
Every part of every garment they wore was examined; and finally, they each had to wash their hands in some special, stinging solution to ensure that they could not administer some dreadful poison to him when they shook hands.
Even her rings were taken from her.
There is unlikely to be a Day of the Jackal in Baghdad, therefore, Iraq is a closed society, and no hawk-faced marksman will get far if he tries to stalk Saddam.
Two of my colleagues from the BBC did, it is true, succeed in smuggling an entire satellite telephone system (complete with dish) through Iraqi customs shortly before the war began, and there are plenty of guns in private hands which can be bought; but the Mukhabarat are everywhere, and it would be impossible to find out where Saddam was going to be at any given time.
He informs his head of security only a few minutes before he wants to go somewhere, not trusting even him.
Interestingly, though, it seems that British and American agents have been roaming Iraq.
Men from the SAS and Delta Force infiltrated a number of towns and cities during the war, and Saddam Hussein himself told several of his visitors that the SIS (or M16, as it is often called) had sent in three Pakistani agents to attend the Islamic conference which Iraq summoned a few days before the UN deadline.
Their task, Saddam said, was to pinpoint the buildings in Baghdad which were to be attacked.
It has been impossible to verify this, but one American source told me he had heard there were no American agents inside Iraq now, but that there were three British ones.
Attempts were made during the war to bomb Saddam's convoy, and the American attack on the Al-Amariyah shelter, which resulted the in the deaths if up to 300 women and children, seems to have been ordered because a high intensity of walkie-talkie traffic was detected at the shelter.
The Americans assumed it meant that Saddam was there.
In fact the victims were mainly the families of senior military officers and the Ba'ath party officials, and the walkie-talkies were being used by the drivers who took them to the shelter.
An air attack now on Saddam's convoy or his bunker would be very difficult unless it were part of a general air-strike to punish his refusal to follow UN Security Council resolutions.
He is anyway unlikely to live in his bunker nowadays.
It is sited beside and underneath the Al-Rasheed hotel, which explains why some nondescript buildings around the hotel — the conference centre for instance, were hit so often during the war.
The conference centre contained one of the main entrances to the bunker.
A direct hit on the Al-Rasheed was ruled out because of the western journalists there.
At night-time we noticed that the most sophisticated anti-missile systems which Iraq possessed would be brought silently into the derelict yard behind the hotel, manned by figures who were dressed in black and wearing black balaclavas.
People who visited Saddam's bunker told me afterwards that it was like an underground city.
You drove down a slope to a depth of 50 or more feet, and found yourself in a spacious area which was brightly lit.
You were greeted by senior Iraqi officers who would take you through a maze of corridors to a communications centre where Saddam himself would be sitting and following the progress of the war.
Communications, security and the maintenance of the entire complex were in the hands of Russian officers under contract to the Iraqi government.
They had refused the instructions of their government to return before the war.
Such evidence as there is indicates that the Russians are still in Baghdad.
They have nowhere else to go.
If sending in the bombers or the trained assassins is out, what else does that leave?
Probably the best yet least clear-cut alternative is to let the hatred and anger of those around Saddam follow their course.
In this sense he is like Mrs Ghandi, who as India's prime minister ordered the attack on the Sikh Golden Temple and was later murdered by her Sikh bodyguard: having desecrated the holiest places of a fierce and unforgiving religion, Saddam's life is potentially in danger from every Shiite he comes into contact with.
It would do the people of Iraq no good at all for the West to step in and take Saddam away from them.
For generations they have been led to believe that Britain and America secretly pull the strings in their country.
This induces a feeling of helplessness and engenders a belief in hidden explanations and conspiracy theories.
The most prevalent conspiracy theory in Iraq nowadays is that the West never wanted to get rid of Saddam and were actually on his side, helping him to flush his enemies out into the open.
The theory goes that the Americans were worried at the thought of Iraq breaking up into its component parts, and decided it would be safer if they left Saddam where he was, and even helped him to become stronger.
The Shiites thought they were doing what President Bush wanted when they staged their uprising in March 1991.
But when he did nothing to help them and they were defeated by troops loyal to Saddam, they decided the West no longer supported them.
If the outside world really wants to get rid of Saddam, it can forget about sending in the hired killers.
All the British and Americans need to do is convince the Shiites of Iraq that they now realize they were wrong not to come to the aid of the Shiite uprising.
It is then possible that the Shiites will do the rest.
They reminded me of the passengers on board a hijacked plane, forced to fly to some destination they didn't want to go to, yet unable to get out of their seats to do something about it.
If the passengers were encouraged to deal with the hijackers themselves, it would be better for their own self respect and for everyone else.
Sporting Life
The Big Man for the Big Event: Hugh McIlvanney outside Wembley
His muscular prose at its best has the rhythm of a boxer pounding the heavy bag
Stan Hey explains why Hugh McIvanney is the best sports writer in Britain
FOR SEVERAL YEARS the Observer magazine ran a contentious but entertaining feature entitled ‘The Expert's Expert’, in which a straw poll was conducted among a particular craft or profession, in order to discover the unchallenged master.
That the magazine never got round to asking who might be the ‘Sports Writers' Sports Writer’ seems like an act of wilful self-effacement, given that the overwhelming winner would have been their own man, Hugh McIlvanney.
Unanimity could not necessarily have been guaranteed, the world of sports writing being as prone to subjective whims and self-protecting egos as any other field of creative endeavour, despite its genuine air of rough-hewn camaraderie.
But even the fiercest dissenter would have been pushed to leave McIlvanney out of the frame.
Certainly the people I got to know during my fifteen months on the sports circuit for the Sunday Correspondent readily confirmed my own impression that McIlvanney is the best in the  business .
Sure, there were specialist writers on individual sports who were of unimpeachable quality, but when it came to the Big Event, or the Big Interview, McIlvanney was the one whom we read with both pleasure and despair — emotions generated by the pride at being in the same trade as the main, and by the realization of his supremacy.
It was somewhat surprising, then, that McIlvanney felt uneasy being approached for this profile, apparently for fear that he might be invited to ‘pontificate, when I really don't think I have that much to say’, It sounded like false modesty, but after he'd relented, I remembered the long-standing ‘pin-down’ policy employed to prevent hubris in sports writers.
By tradition, we are tucked away in remote corners of the newspaper buildings so that sensitives and high-minded types are spared the expected loutish behaviour and visceral exchanges which pass for banter.
At the Correspondent , the sports desk was placed in a windowless alcove, barricaded in by knitting copy-takers, and subjected to terrifying experiments with an air-conditioning unit.
His choice for our meeting of the Garrick Club, that temple of self-regard for actors and political journalists, therefore seemed a touch bold, but the need for what he described with a smile as a ‘tranquil interior’ was a fair enough alibi.
On the day we finally meet, the A-Team are out in force — Amis senior at sweeper, John Mortimer at inside left, Max Hastings wide on the right.
In such company, British sports writers are inclined to feel like lads invading the pitch.
Almost by reflex, McIlvanney and I take a corner table, and open up on the safe territory of swapping recriminations about our country's lack of respect for the trade.
More than half a dozen British Press awards as ‘Sports Writer of the Year’, and four Sports Council tributes embracing both ‘Best Sports Feature Writer’ and ‘Best Overall Sports Writer’have gone to McIlvanney, yet he glumly agrees with my own feeling that we still have a distance to go before achieving respectability.
He recalls that in 1981, when he ‘crossed over’ to become the first, and so far only, sports writer ever to win the ‘Journalist of the Year’Award, Colin Hart, a sports columnist with the Sun , approached him and said ‘Congratulations Hughie, you've just struck a blow for the Toy Department!’
Yet sports writers in America have managed to establish a long-standing tradition of literary credibility — Hemingway, Lardner, Gallico among many others.
‘I don't think they, or the likes of Norman Mailer and Budd Schulberg ever felt that they were slumming when they wrote for the sports pages,’ says McIlvanney.
‘Writing was writing.’
That this is McIlvanney's own creed is without doubt.
It's clear not just in his work, but also in his demeanour.
He has a gravitas that has not just been put on like a flashy waistcoat, nor indeed a Garrick Club tie.
It's natural, and stems from his attitude to his craft.
McIlvanney was born in 1934, and was brought up on a public housing estate in Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, in what he himself calls ‘a left-wing family’.
At sixteen, he won a speech-writing contest at his school, which was judged by the editor of the local paper, the Kilmarnock Standard , who also remembered the poetry young McIlvanney had submitted.
He offered him a job on the paper.
I'd had a few notions about being a journalist, but I think that if I'd had Latin I might have stayed on and tried for an academic career.
As it was, my brother William (the novelist and poet) was the first in our family to get to university.
If I ever have a dig at him now he says: ‘Christ, you've read the same books as I have!’ and I say: ‘Yeah but you've got the licence to prove it.’’
McIlvanney went on to work on the Scotsman as a news reporter and feature writer, though with his passion for football and boxing, the attraction towards sports was inevitable.
In 1962, he landed an inside job on the Observer sports desk and moved to London.
With encouragement from the paper's enlightened sports editor Clifford Makins —‘he was a widely read man with respect for The Word, who believed that sports writers who are insular are doubly boring’— and a chance opportunity to write a boxing piece, McIlvanney was on his way, armed with Makin's almost religious guidelines.
‘He used to say that the first obligation as a sports writer was not to be in the least boring; that you had to try and retain the excitement of the event in your writing — without taking liberties with the truth or manufacturing drama.’
This was a time when British sports coverage was being obliged to shed its amateur gentleman ethos.
McIlvanney therefore was ideally placed to reflect the changing relationship between sport and society, bringing an invigorating attitude an new, direct style of writing to bear, as ‘play’ suddenly got serious.
His muscular prose — at its best it has the insistent rhythm if a middleweight boxer pounding the heavy bag — with its imaginative flourishes, was perfectly suited to the age which brought us the utterly modern talents of George Best, Rod Laver, Jack Niklaus, Jim Clark, Pele and Jackie Stewart.
Above all, it found its perfect vehicle in a man whom McIlvanney still asserts to be ‘the most exciting, moving and important sportsman of the 20th century’, Muhammad Ali.
‘I think his career was about as dramatic as sport can get.
Although there was an element of faking in his predictions, it seemed to me that he almost dreamed himself anew each morning.
It was like medieval vaunting.
You felt he had to make it happen or die.’
McIlvanney rode the roller-coaster with Ali — Copper, Liston, Frazier, Norton — climaxing with his seemingly futile attempt in 1975 to regain his world title from the unbeaten George Foreman in the bizarre setting of Kinshasa, Zaire.
‘Everything is relative, but this had an intrinsic scale of drama that nothing could match.
I thought he would get beaten but…’
McIlvanney pauses to savour the memory of Ali's astonishing eighth-round victory.
‘For a long time, it seemed there was no obstacle Ali's spirit could not overcome.’
His other great hero is the Brazilian footballer Pele.
‘He's got such a sense of grandeur about him.
I think my greatest sporting moment, after Ali, was in Brazil's 1970 World Cup semi-final when Uruguay took the lead.
Pele ran all the way back to his own goal to get the ball.’
The incidents and memories have not always been so uplifting, however.
He was at Ibrox in 1971 when 66 fans died in a crush on the steps of the stadium; in September 1980, he had to watch the pathetically outmatched Welsh bantam-weight Johnny Owen die at the hands of Lupe Pintor, after writing beforehand ‘this fight could end up in the intensive care unit’; and he saw the heart-bursting tension of a World Cup qualifying match kill the man with whom he had an almost filial relationship, the Celtic and Scottish national football manager, Jock Stein.
McIlvanney says that Stein, who worked as a miner until he was 27, ‘understood that having a talent for sport can be a matter of luck, not merit.
So for people like him and Bill Shankly, success didn't distort their values.
Life down the pit gave them a perspective.’
Now that Shankly and Stein and many like them have gone, it raises the question of whether McIlvanney's world of sport, embracing values and heroes who genuinely stood for something, faces inevitable decay in these vainglorious and calculating times.
He professes quite despair about the state if football —‘a game that's lost its soul’— but had draw comfort from a meeting with American jockey Cash Asmussen in France, in which the young man had generously given time to talk intelligently and passionately about his sport.
‘Greed, cynicism, the rotters and the agents have spoiled it,’ McIlvanney reflects bitterly, ‘the rotters’being the trade term for journalists trained to sniff out sensation or scandal, or failing that, to drop a cheque down a hole and see who bites.
He has some contempt too for the columnists peddling ‘Woolworth's Jesuitical utterings’, or for those who ‘go for the predictable, the stock reaction’.
You might fear an element of sanctimoniousness here, were it not for the certain knowledge that McIlvanney is probably even harder on himself.
The American Ed Schuyler, the boxing correspondent of the Associated Press, and a long-time pal of McIlvanney, testifies to his uncommon zeal.
‘Hughie seeks perfection.
He's not a computer-age journalist.
He writes and rewrites in long-hand, and endlessly checks for the smallest detail.
I think it's partly to do with his admiration for the language, and also his background as both a reported and a writer.’
McIlvanney cheerfully admits his perfectionism is ‘almost a paranoia’.
But he cites an eagerness not to ‘cheat’ his subjects in any way as the cause.
So he goes on pushing deadlines, working all-nighters, rewriting, calling back, quite apart from the copious travelling and general fretting that is a Sunday writer's regular burden.
‘Your'e better hurting yourself at the time, because you're going to feel awful when you see the paper and it's not right,’ he rationalizes.
But maybe it goes deeper than that.
A Guardian stalwart made a telling observation about him: ‘While Ian Wolldridge might spend hours searching for the good line, Hugh will spend the time searching for the truth’— and suddenly I saw McIlvanney almost as if he were a bare-knuckle fighter in one of his brother's novels.
Indefatigable, playing the hard way, with his own set of rules to back him up.
But a kid who got out not through sport but through The Word, and who wouldn't forget this blessing, even when he became the Big Man.
‘While Ian Wooldridge might spend hours searching for a good line, McIlvanney will spend the time searching for the truth’
After the Fall
You could say that Rob Lowe's story is the story of the Eighties.
It begins with a wild party where nobody is worried about the consequences of all the booze, the nose candy, the easy sex.
Then it gets weird, gets out of control.
It ends stone-cold sober, with thoughts of careers and family.
And no regrets
by Michael Pye
THAT WAS THEN: Lowe caught on video.
Another similar escapade with a sixteen-year-old girl in Atlanta, in 1988, brought him painful public humiliation
YOU LOOK VERY CLOSELY AT ROB LOWE, in a way men usually don't look at other men.
You look, to be honest, for flaws.
The face is the eight by ten glossy of the 1980s: what women wanted and men mostly resented — young, rich, glamorous, able to reach fine women in a single bound.
He was paid $1.5 million to walk through a movie, went out with a princess, ran anywhere that celebrity can take a man.
But at the same time he could look like a fool, crooning ‘Proud Mary’ along with Snow White on Oscar night; he thought he was just being a trouper.
His first-rate performances — in Hotel in New Hampshire , and as a retarded man in Square Dance —were largely unhonoured, and his many other movies weren't   hot, Worse, he had to scrabble out from a confusion of drink, drugs and sexual adventure that had finally landed him in the tabloids and the jokebooks.
The coverboy faced a civil suit from the parents of a sixteen-year-old girl he'd foolishly videoed making out with a women in his hotel bedroom.
On Cable TV, in pirated tapes in bars, you could watch him watching a buddy screw another woman until she had to complain it was all getting just too wild.
You might forget the sex, but not the out-of-it, shit-kicking grin of a man at the limits.
YOU WOULDN'T recognize him today, just four years later.
That famous grin looks like one more performance.
He's cool, articulate and a slighter man than you might expect, a tennis player in a town of Schwarzeneggers.
He's put away the wild times, joined a twelve-step programme and willed himself sober.
He gave up playing the field and married a year ago, to a sinewy woman called Cheryl Berkoff.
She wanders in with Häagen Dazs milkshakes, double chocolate flavour.
‘That's what you get married for,’ Lowe says, sighing.
They met once on a date, nine years ago, and again when she was the make-up artist on Bad Influence , in 1988.
The former professional bachelor now talks about doing up a house, about starting a family.
‘The Outsiders’ changed everything.
At eighteen, he was the high school wet dream with perfect cheekbones
And today he's not some lost boy waiting to be taken seriously as a grown-up actor.
Today, he's the star of a hundred million dollar movie.
Wayne's World , in which he plays the villain, had grossed $110 million at the last count.
He's even taken control of his own future by producing his next film — a biopic of Audie Murphy, the war hero who turned movie star.
As we talk, a thought haunts me: that Rob Lowe's story is just the public and melodramatic version of a whole decade.
Most of us didn't make the changes with cameras rolling.
We played the sexual fool without an audience.
We didn't start as stars, struggling to overcome an excess of charm and good looks.
But we all had the same challenge.
LOWE SAYS HE WAS ‘born performing’ in Dayton, Ohio, the largest Smallville in the world.
At three, he lip-synched to Louis Armstrong, a fact which still gets him chewed and taunted when he's on the Arsenio Hall show.
Before he was ten, he was on stage.
‘If I smell hairspray to this day — a certain brand — it sends me right back.
You know what it is?
It's Streaks and Tips, that's the brand.
You use it to blacken your hair.
Hey, I've been in a Streaks and Tips recovery programme for many years.’
It's only half a joke.
In the real world, his lawyer father was soon gone and so was his first stepfather.
‘I never felt unloved,’ he says, carefully, ‘but it was rough.
Rough, because of the emotional issues of separation and abandonment and being uprooted.
It's much more comfortable to be someone else, to manufacture feelings.
It starts as simple as your stepdad asking: ‘How do you feel today, son?’, and you saying, ‘Fine’ when in fact you're not fine.’
The fixed point in his life was always his mother.
She writes screenplays, poems, stories, letters, not for money, but as an occupation; it's how she defines herself.
All these years, Lowe was close to her.
When he thought he lacked intimacy, at least he had his family.
Not until his mid-twenties did he move out from his converted warehouse on the family's Malibu estate.
For this, Italian fanzines make him a perfect Italian boy (‘Mamma is my true sweetheart’—Max Magazine ).
Men's movement gurus might expect Lowe to turn on Mom, but he doesn't.
You have the strangest sense that this woman, whose life is putting the world down on paper, is the one who imagined Lowe's life, too.
Then he had to fight his way out of her pages.
Lowe was twelve when she married for the third time — to a psychologist — and he arrived, all corn-fed and terminally uncool, in Malibu.
In Ohio, nobody wears shorts; in Malibu, he was the only one in Tufskins — heavy duty, cheap jeans.
He was new.
He was too pretty.
He was a freak.
Odder still, he wanted — needed, really — to act.
‘There were lots of famous actors living in Malibu, but young people didn't act,’ Lowe says.
‘Now you go to the same playgrounds and schools where people called me a fag for being an actor and everybody as a Screen Actors Guild card falling out of their pocket.
And that's the truth.’
In Dayton he left behind a riskier life.
‘My two best friends there were brothers,’ he says.
‘One's dead.
He was killed when the police were chasing him; he crashed his car.
The other had his first son at seventeen.
He's been in and out of jail.
I don't know what would have been if I'd stayed.
In Malibu, he knew what to do about his ambitions.
He took the bus, because his parents wouldn't always drive him to auditions, from Malibu to Santa Monica, 25 miles each way, at the age of thirteen, ‘and the casting directors would literally take a Polaroid and say thank you very much and you got back on the bus.’
It's and unimaginable risk for a kid in these days, but it was how Lowe proved he was serious.
He would even walk on into the Hollywood Hills, beyond any bus line, for the sake of a half-hour voice lesson.
He was in a Coke commercial and a brief TV series.
Woody Allen passed him over for a musical.
By seventeen he was ‘pretty much washed up’— on the awkward side of the labour laws, still forbidden to do overtime or skip lessons, but in competition with eighteen-year-olds who could do both.
And then Francis Ford Coppola cast him as Sodapop in The Outsiders , the movie which launched a whole schoolroom of teenagers into proper stardom — Tom Cruise, Emilio Estevez, Matt Dillon and Lowe among them.
‘I was scared to death of Coppola,’ Lowe says.
‘Even Anthony Hopkins is rattled by Coppola, so you can imagine what a seventeen-year-old kid from Ohio felt like.’
He decided to treat the movie as a learning experience.
‘There's no substitute for being on a hillside, with the sun going down and literally 30 seconds of usable light left, and Coppola screaming: Cry!’,
‘Cry!’.
‘Cry!’.
THE MOVIE changed everything.
Lowe was buffed, Nautilused and raunchy, but with deep eyes.
At eighteen, he was the fanzine coverboy, a high school wet dream with perfect cheekbones.
He began to realize he would have to overcome his looks.
He inspired spite: critics called him a male Farah Fawcett, said he was pretty enough to make a convincing transvestite.
It was sadder still when People magazine was still calling him a ‘bimboy’ at 28.
He admires actors like Robert Redford and Warren Beatty — who have managed to overcome their good looks and make a career.
But still he couldn't cope with being only ordinary.
Offer him the choice of any face and he wants to be Paul Newman, not Broderick Crawford: ‘Wouldn't everybody choose someone better looking?’
But something has changed in the past months, something remarkable.
‘I don't think Lowe gets enough credit,’ says the critic  Andrew Sarris.
‘I think there have been a lot of people who had a problem in Hollywood because they were too good-looking or too charming.
There's a tendency to take someone like Lowe and put him with no-talent good-lookers like Robert Taylor used to be, or Tyrone Power.’
You have to listen, because this is Sarris, the professional type who brought the auteur theory to America, and an unlikely champion for a ‘bimboy.’
‘He makes a very interesting villain,’ Sarris says ‘He has a real talent.
He could be like Alain Delon, playing high-quality villains — interesting, complex people.
I could see him playing Ted Bundy.’
The late Tony Richardson used to say Lowe could be the next Cary Grant.
Lorne Michael, producer of Saturday Night Live and Wayne's World , sees him as a Tony Curtis —‘like Curtis in Some Like it Hot .’
But before Lowe could hope to get there, he had a party to survive.
THIS IS NOW: Lowe with wife Cheryl Berkoff.
These days he talks about doing up a house, about starting a family
NOWADAYS, EVERYONES a puritan.
You have to sermonize about the good times.
But Lowe is refreshingly, unfashionably unapologetic.
The party wouldn't suit him now, but at eighteen it was, he says ‘the greatest thing.
It was enjoyable chaos.
Wonderful chaos.
I'll always look fondly on it.
It was pre-AIDS, of course.
It was pre-herpes, really.
It was like — have a party.
Everyone was making a fortune.
In those days, they gave you a raise just for being in another movie.
It didn't matter if the film made money, you got another hundred and fifty thousand bucks.
And if People magazine wanted to take a picture of me in the surf with a stuffed animal, or whatever the fuck it was, then hey, the joke's on them.’
He was part of a new phenomenon: twentyish actors on whom a studio could hang a flick, stars to match the new, young movie audience.
All of them were vaguely connected by work, or school, or mutual friends.
On Outsiders Lowe was marooned in the Tulsa ghetto with Tom Cruise to learn his part.
He'd been at school with Emilio Estevez and Charlie Sheen.
He'd met Sean Penn maybe 20 times, and they went to the same clubs on Melrose and Sunset, even if not at the same time or on the same night.
Links like that turned them, for the purposes of gossip columns, into the Brat Pack.
‘It certainly wasn't like we were all hanging out and going over our box office figures,’ Lowe says.
On reflection, he rather regrets that they weren't looking out for each other.
But that is a different issue.
‘And I certainly don't think any of the other guys said, ‘I really want to hang out with you, chase girls, go to all the right parties and live really well — so how can we do this?’
He pauses for eye-crossing, brown-knitting thought.
‘I know,’ a light lights.
‘We can become actors.’
But Lowe was glorying in a very public good time.
He could make a film with Nastassia Kinski, the most beautiful woman in the world (Time had just said so, on its cover) and she left him a slim book of Baudelaire, with some verses underlined.
‘I'm not the woman-hater who juggled eight women and kept lying to them all and kept them on a string and had one for every night,’ he says.
‘I was the guy who was completely open.’
He was just out there on the Strip telling the first lady how he wants to get to know her, and the second, and hoping out loud that both of them don't mind about the third: ‘Because I want to get to know her, too.
I really enjoy the company of women.
Ask my wife.’
At the same time, Francis Coppola and Tony Richardson took his work seriously.
Jodie Foster offered him respect, helped him laugh away other people's pretensions.
The contradictions were beginning: a man almost more famous than his work, his best work largely ignored, and expected to play up to his own eight by ten.
‘He was,’ says Andrew Sarris, ‘notorious before he was famous.’
Even his problems were too glamorous for pity.
He had a premiére in Paris, and wanted Princess Stephanie of Monaco for his date.
She kept his picture by his bed, so the papers said.
It was, Lowe says, ‘a matter of mutual physical attraction.
And both of us being free spirits at the time.’
They caroused in Spago, and left others to pay the bill.
There were paparazzi present for each drink and each kiss, and Lowe couldn't bring himself to admit that all this attention was inevitable.
When there was time, the Princess and the movie star discovered they had nothing but lust in common.
Lowe couldn't handle all the deference that went with even minor royalty.
The relationship simply died.
Lowe was drinking too much, too publicly.
At parties, he wouldn't refuse cocaine.
His work got lost in the rush of column items and other people's fantasies.
And all this time, people though he'd always had it easy, him with his women and his cheekbones and his income.
‘There's a tendency,’ he says, ‘to be very Pollyannaish when you're getting million-dollar offers for five weeks of work.
But I knew I was stalled personally and that eventually my career would stall.’
He remembers talking with Bruce Springstein once, at a Wembley concert for the Fourth of July, and asking: ‘When do you think the bottom's going to fall out?’
And Springstein said: ‘I know.
I just wonder when.’
FOR LOWE, IT WAS 1988.
He'd gone down to Atlanta to watch the Democratic Party select its presidential candidate, and at night he went dancing.
It took just one of the party girls to drift by and break up his life.
The politics was serious.
‘When I was ten, I had a Kool-Aid stand for McGovern, and sent the money to campaign headquarters.
It was in the Dayton papers.
You can check it.
Now if I'm going to hand out leaflets on the corner in Dayton, you're damn right I'm going to the convention now I have the entré.’
But Atlanta was also a party.
He went off to a club where they wanted him to prove his age at the door; it never crossed his mind that anyone else was under age.
One girl in particular kept walking the red rope by the door and he couldn't help but notice.
She went home with him, and another woman, and there was a video camera running while the women made love.
That was when the drink began to matter.
The girl was sixteen.
Her parents threatened a civil suit for ‘emotional distress’.
No criminal charges were ever brought although Lowe, to show contrition, struck a deal to do community service — back in his hometown of Dayton.
And Lowe was painfully, publicly humiliated.
‘I was pretty numb,’ he says.
‘I felt I'd been caught in some street scam.
It accelerated my drinking, my partying, my lack of intimacy.’
Even now, he's careful when he talks about Atlanta; you can watch the thought behind his eyes.
He doesn't want anyone to think this sixteen-year-old changed his life, he had to do that for himself.
But still he says he would not be married or sober without the incident.
What saved him was his sense of distance.
He could always look back on bad things.
Now, besieged by TV crews and reporters, he judged himself.
For a start, his timing was shot to hell.
‘Some people screw too many people,’ he says.
‘They drink too much.
They jerk off.
They're irresponsible.
They're young.
But if you're still doing all that in your late twenties, then I think there's a problem.
He admitted, at last, that he needed help, and turned to a twelve-step programme.
He's serious about AA, which means he won't talk about it.
And he married.
Cheryl Berkoff Lowe has things organized, thoughts and moves.
Together, they're remaking a house, planning a family, all the things which Lowe once meant to leave until much later in his life.
He finds all this remarkable ‘for a guy with a history like mine.’
‘I'm thankful,’ he says, ‘that I cam to my senses as early in my life as I did — while I still had a career.’
VARIETY PUT IT ALMOST ALL in one unkind sentence earlier this year: ‘Once a star who asked $1.5 million per picture, Lowe has recently got married and is rehabilitating his image by working on Broadway.’
They didn't know the half of it.
Lowe begged dates with theatre managements last year to say he wanted to do a show.
‘Their jaws hit the floor,’ he says.
‘Movie stars don't come to New York to say they're available.’
He found himself sitting in a leaky theatre dressing room, counting the money he was losing every day — the Hollywood stud, playing a small, virginal part in a Feydeau farce.
The industry thought he needed redemption.
He thought he was just a working actor.
He's in love with that idea; he thinks it's pernicious to try to keep perfect control of a career.
‘You don't see a carpenter saying he won't build a house because he doesn't like what's next door and he's going to wait until there's a house with 8.3 rooms and the sun has it at a certain angle and then he'll pound his nails and he wants billing above the plumber.’
And after Atlanta, something happened to Lowe's work.
‘He was a good realistic actor from the beginning,’ Andrew Sarris says.
‘But in Bad Influence , he was really very good.’
Lowe says he took all his anger and his hurt in the aftermath of the Atlanta incidents, and put it on screen.
And Lorne Michael signed him to host Saturday Night Live .
‘While the scandal was fresh in people's minds, of course,’ says Michael.
Michael was impressed.
‘He's brilliant at playing attitude,’ he says.
‘I don't think he could be a traditional leading man — he's got too good a brain — but he can play anything with an edge.’
A year later, casting opened for Wayne's World , and he needed to find a villain who could not be grotesque, but had to be grand.
‘I was getting dressed to go to my wedding,’ Lowe remembers.
‘I was putting on my tie and sweating out of my mind.’
The wedding was a careful secret — dummy companies inside dummy companies to rent the chairs.
When Michael called and proposed dinner that night with Brandon Tartikoff, the new boss at Paramount Pictures, Lowe explained that he was getting married.
‘Well,’ said Michael, ‘I guess dessert is probably out of the question, too.’
Lowe couldn't know at the time how much both his private life and his work were about to go right.
Wayne's World was just a TV spin-off which the industry thought might end Tartifkoff's brief career.
There were days when it was hard to find a script.
It starred an ensemble of TV players, and its director was a woman most famous for the only true Los Angeles punk movie.
Lowe was strenuously advised not to take the risk.
He did, a hundred million box-office dollars later, he's vindicated.
‘I think the notoriety's all gone now,’ Lorne Michael says.
‘He's very good-looking, but there's something which makes it all right.
He has an endearing quality.
He's kind of a klutz.’
Rob Lowe my even have overcome that face, at last.
Lowe was strenuously advised not to take the risk of doing ‘Wayne's World’.
He did, and, a hundred million box-office dollars later, he's vindicated
ASK WHAT HE'S AFRAID OF, and he finds it hard to think of one thing.
‘But ask me the same question tomorrow and I could give a whole litany of things.
I have good days and bad days.
It's just that I have more and more good days.
‘I tell you what I'd like to see in print.
What am I afraid of?
Less and less.’
Holidays in Hell
They came in search of paradise…but they didn't find it.
Esquire asked six writers to describe their worst holiday experience
Silence of the vipers
BY JOHN SESSIONS
WOULDN'T IT BE NICE to swap places with Count Dracula?
A couple of years ago, I found myself consumed with this very thought.
I was in Italy, it was early morning, and I'd been lying awake for about three hours.
The sun, having messed around with all the colours that Keats and Shelly were so big on, decided at last to give the rosy-fingered routine a bit of a miss and go for the full Colditz searchlight.
It trained its beams on my eyelids with all the casual cruelty of a schoolkid playing with a compact mirror.
Oh, to be a vampire, I thought, now that daylight's here.
At more or less the middle of the night, every night, for a week, I'd been woken first by one child crying, then by two, then by three.
Thin little feline wails would flex and expand until a rich trombonic sonority enveloped every inch of the house.
No wonder the seventh morning with its seventh sun had left me craving for Transylvanian dissolution.
I wanted to crumble like one of the sorely missed Katy's oxo cubes, vanish with a tug of the wind and leave not a wrack behind.
And I knew I wasn't the only one.
Elsewhere in the house of the ever-rising sun, the progenitors of the above-mentioned devil's trio were themselves, at that very moment, near to welcoming a final quietus like a small convocation of Hamlets.
But I was not a parent.
I could escape.
Or rather, like Captain Oates, make something akin to a glorious sacrifice.
Yes, it was fitting and sweet that I should get the hell out of there.
I descended the stairs half-naked to one of the yelling bedrooms and announced that I would have to leave.
Questions of loyalty had to be weighed against the likelihood of my neurological meltdown.
I asked Stephen — one of the two hapless fathers and himself reduced to a mulberry-eyed basket case — if he still had enough marbles to drive me to the station at Orvieto.
He was still sufficiently sane to remind me that Orvieto was perched on the top of a craggy escarpment.
A station there would have constituted one of the wonders of the world.
On hearing of my demented request, the other father, Alan, proceeded to laugh like a gibbon.
Not that he was in any way merry — I'd merely triggered off his own insomniac hysteria and his laughter quickly subsided into a sort of drained whimpering.
Then he just wandered away, hands plunged down the back of his underpants with misery.
Susan and Claire, the wives of Stephen and Alan, looked on wanly, speechless with exhaustion.
The children continued to bawl.
There was something Olympic about their stamina.
The sunshine acquired a near nuclear savagery.
We hauled our weary bodies into the kitchen and make token gestures towards having breakfast.
As I watched one of the boys smother Fireman Sam in milk and Shreddies, the others persuaded me to stay.
‘We mustn't forget we're on holiday.’
But we had forgotten.
Deliberately.
Remembering that what we were experiencing was meant to be enjoyable left our wits spinning like a lawn sprinkler.
But no, it couldn't altogether be forgotten.
We were in Italy and this was a holiday.
We'd saved for it, taken enormous care in choosing the location, even-God spare us in our mortal error-looked forward to the holiday.
I cast my mind back to our excited departure from Gatwick airport.
It was like asking yourself to recall the lay-out of a Bronze Age encampment.
I did, however, remember us asking the children if they were looking forward to a fortnight in Umbria.
They only gazed back at us with eerie little smiles.
They knew.
They knew .
And as I continued to think about how we rarely get the measure of little children, I suddenly realized why they'd been making so much din.
The man who wrote the leaflet clearly thought vipers were just great.
He made them sound like the Famous Five
To put it in a nutshell, I think it would be fair to say they were seriously pissed off with us.
What sort of place had we brought them to?
You couldn't deny that the house was as sense-assaultingly beautiful as it was conceivable for an Umbrian villa to be.
But neither could you escape the fact that it seemed specifically designed for bumping off toddlers.
Yes, indeed.
Herod Construction proudly presents.
Open stone staircases swept up to bedrooms that bristled with floor-to-ceiling windows.
Electrical fittings, apparently lifted from the set of Terry Gillam's Brazil , fizzed in gloomy corners.
Skirting boards bloomed with sockets as deadly as they were dated.
In fact, the whole place defied you to find anything installed after the fall of Mussolini.
And all this before we'd opened the fridge.
If we'd needed the final touch of homicidal brio, this would have had to be it.
Wrapped in copious instruction leaflets and next to a neat pile of syringes, formidable quantities of snakebite serum had thoughtfully been provided.
Claire, a nurse and therefore eminently qualified for the task, was given the job of reading out the instructions.
Claire calmly told us about Umbria's ‘surprising’ popularity with vipers.
So there were vipers.
Fair enough.
One began to think in terms of wasp stings.
But how big were vipers?
Breezily the leaflet filled us in.
It wasn't uncommon for adults to exceed four feet in length and yes, they were dangerous.
How dangerous?
‘In the event of a little accident’ it was ‘advisable’to administer the serum ‘pretty quickly’.
The man who wrote the leaflet clearly thought vipers were just great.
He made them sound like the Famous Five.
Or the Woodentops.
‘There's nothing that vipers like more than basking on hot sunny rocks.’
All eyes were directed down the garden towards the pool.
If the red sunset was anything to go by, those rocks would really have their work cut out next day to be anything less than either hot or sunny.
You could already see those vipers sorting out the Ambre Solaire.
So when the sun went down that night, and indeed.
every night, we submitted ourselves to a rigorous curfew.
But just when we thought the evenings might get a bit boring.
Alan was lucky enough to discover a scorpion in the fruit bowl.
So that was it.
A war on two fronts.
We now had to keep the children confined to a thin corridor of safety, hemmed in as they were both by insects and reptiles.
Not that you could take what was left of your mind off the sockets and the junction boxes.
I'm sure that a collective sense of guilt lay behind many of our trips to Siena, Assisi and Orvieto.
All those churches.
Not that we could really sink down into leisurely contrition.
Three-year-olds give Giotto and Cimabue pretty short shift.
In fact, Alan and I were the only ones to find the old master and pupil just what the doctor ordered.
I have to say that when we came across any martyrs, we tended to regard them with something approaching envy.
Griddles and flaming wheels seem a pretty soft option when you've been sitting in pitch darkness with your pants full of scorpions.
The saints could take it.
They only had to wince at the racket for 20 minutes or so.
We almost wished we could ask one of them to join us for a meal.
How would St Jerome shape up after he'd caught a Dinky toy in the mouth and had a few handfuls of fettucine thrust into his armpit?
Not too well, I think.
All things must end, though.
Good holidays end.
Terrible holidays like this end.
We have all remained friends despite some very dark hours.
We laugh about the whole experience now, but we don't really like to dwell on particular moments too long.
We feel it's better to keep the memories hurrying along.
Mention the word ‘viper’ and the chances are you'd see our faces momentarily twitch.
I only have to see a bottle of Orvieto and those desperate dawns rise up before me.
Stephen refuses to eat fettucine, Claire is not overly keen on the top shelves of fridges, and Susan falls silent in the presence of stone staircases.
And the children?
They've forgotten all about it.
We think.
We saw a viper.
It was 4′long, had a mouth like a mastiff and was as dead as mutton.
Swedish lessons
BY PAUL MILOU
‘MAKE WAY!’
I cried.
The waiters had come with the drinks.
I had been married for seven hours.
I had suggested that some of our guests might enjoy a post-wedding, post-reception, post-dinner nightcap in our hotel room.
A large group seemed to have agreed that this was a good idea.
The hotel was in Stockholm.
Carried away by the occasion, I demanded the right to pay for all that our guests could consume.
‘Just sign,’ I said, ‘Anyone, just sign the bills to the room.
You there,’ I said, pointing through the crowd at a stranger in a naval uniform.
‘Just sign, go ahead, no problem.’
Everyone signed, as my wife considerately whispered to me that this was Sweden, after all, where liquor was…but she didn't have to tell me.
‘Never mind!’
I shouted, the ebullient groom.
‘Devil take the hindmost!’
The last guest left, or was taken away, after five o'clock in the morning.
A pleasant two  hours was slept.
When I awoke, it was to find a neat pile of signed bar bills on a desk next to the window, amid a rather satisfying scene of destruction.
Each one read ‘Rum-550’.
I made a quick tourist's calculation: that many kronor meant 50 pounds.
There were dozens of bills, dozens of signatures.
‘Rum-550’ they said.
Rum?
Who had been drinking rum without telling me?
The naval officer?
And why so much?
And why so much without giving me any?
I actually believed I was thinking clearly as I plotted ways of fleeing the country before having to pay the thousands of pounds I appeared to owe.
Two lessons I then learnt about Sweden: the first lesson was that ‘rum’ means ‘room’.
The second, far more important lesson, I didn't learn until I was downstairs at the desk paying the actual bill: if you can get away with 50 quid for a bottle of anything in Sweden,take it .
Flight to Nowhereland
BY PAUL MORLEY
ONE CHRISTMAS DAY, I stupidly thought that I was flying from London to Bangkok.
The flight from Heathrow was comparatively normal.
Once we had landed in Moscow to change planes, it all started to become sub-normal, and then sub-real, and finally sub-human, a straightforward descent into common or garden madness.
The flight from Moscow to, I still naïvely presumed.
Bangkok, was delayed for up to two days, and in Moscow such a thing as a boarding pass, an assigned seat, has never been thought of.
It's every man, woman, child, animal and suitcase for itself, and if you don't get a seat, too bad, you have to walk.
I should have walked.
I managed to grab a seat, or a seatette, for what I still regarded as a trip to Bangkok (that is, a trip to your auntie might take, not Timothy Leary).
Shoved into a seatette by a hostess who had been trained not to calm and charm passengers but to harm them and occasionally embalm them, I quickly settled into what would become my life for what seemed like more than a lifetime.
Eating sand rice and stone peas, drinking small quantities of an unknown sticky orange substance, stopping off for re-fuelling at most airports in the world, taking crazed detours to Nowhereland through Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Iran, Saudi Arabia, what seemed like Iceland and what definitely was Cuba, herded off the plane every few hours to sit in concrete bunkers while men with machine guns handed out the sticky orange, with the true feeling gnawing into your dead-from-the-nerves-down brain that you wouldn't make Bangkok until the New Year, if at all.
As we droned back in time from one lost place to another, I fondly remembered what had previously seemed by bad travel stories.
Being trapped by snow for three days in the hippy village of Woodstock in New York State and being threatened by Rick Danko of The Band for trying to chat up his girlfriend, who then tried to commit suicide.
Trying to escape by going to the only other bar in Woodstock, where I was chased around a table by The Psychedelic Furs because I had given them a bad review in a music paper.
Don't ask me what they were doing in this bar, apart from looking for me.
For all I knew, they were flying the plane that I now knew was never going to make it to Bangkok.
I am fairly positive that after about three days we were ordered off the plane, handed a small brush and told to clean the toilets at Karachi airport.
After what we'd been through, it was an absolute pleasure, and many passengers refused to rejoin the plane, preferring new careers mopping up oceans of urine, and scraping generations of dried shit from the walls and little holes in the ground, rather than facing up to any more sticky orange and hostess abuse.
Those of us who did carry on with the flight, masochistically addicted to the hellish aimlessness of it, were obliged to leave at New Delhi, and spend a day selling brightly coloured scarves and small gold elephants on a souvenir stall.
Again, many passengers chose to stay behind.
In Kuwait, a few more chose to join an anti-Iraqi underground resistance movement rather than return to the plane.
I carried on, wondering if my destination was going to be a nineteenth-century asylum, or the sixteenth century.
Other travel terror stories, like travelling by taxi to Bombay airport and being besieged by one-armed, one-legged, one-eyed, two-headed beggars, now seemed pure joy.
Indeed, after our second stop in Bombay a few passengers gratefully chose the option of being one-armed, one-legged, one-eyed, two-headed beggars rather than having to return to their seatettes and fly somewhere for a few months with their hands on their heads.
Somehow, we made it to Bangkok.
Some other passengers claimed that it had actually ‘only’ taken 36 hours, but I don't believe them.
The first thing I did at Bangkok Airport was book by flight back.
Club Class on Lufthansa.
I just knew that if I flew back on Aeroflot, I would be stuck somewhere in the ex-USSR locked in a small cell with lots of sticky orange substance, trying to write some new country's first entry into the Eurovision song contest.
Or I would still be flying between Siberia and eternity with nothing to listen to but ‘Pretty in Pink’ by The Psychedelic Furs.
The train of death
BY COLM TOIBIN
BRAZIL HAD BEEN PARADISE.
The train from Sao Paulo to the Bolivian border had been clean and comfortable, and the town of Coromba on the Pantanal made you regret you were not a train robber on the run in search of a safe haven.
I don't know why I left, but on a sunny morning I decided to brave Bolivia.
The woman who stamped my passport made me change money with her and she robbed me.
Then she smiled at me in a brusque, dismissive manner and directed me to the railway station.
The train to Santa Cruz, I later discovered, is called El Tren de la Muerte , the Train of Death.
The queue for tickets was long and the ticket seller was lazy.
The train was going to be late and there was nothing left in first class.
It was hot and sticky and there was nowhere to sit.
The train windows did not open and there were mosquitos everywhere.
I was wearing shorts and whole families fed on my thin white legs.
The train jolted and stopped and started again and jolted.
We were on our way.
If we were lucky, it would take less than 24 hours.
You had to sit up straight and there was barely room for your knees.
The heat got worse.
Just as darkness fell a man and a woman came and announced that I was sitting in their seats.
I realized that the seats were numbered and I collected my bags and went in search of my proper seat.
And this was the real beginning of the nightmare, my proper seat was filled by a Brazilian basketball player who was twice my size and thus needed two seats to sprawl across.
I showed him my ticket and pointed to the numbered seat.
He looked at me as though he was trying to work out which part of me he would take a bit out of.
And then he moved over.
The lights were turned off to keep the mosquitos away.
The mosquitos came up and bit me in the dark.
The mosquitos came up and bit me in the dark.
At every station the locals wandered through the carriages selling local produce: plates of stew, sweets, bags of oranges.
Earlier, I had spoken to a Uruguayan woman and her boyfriend.
They were both vegetarian and she was really skinny.
This gave a man opposite her the chance to wonder why her breasts were so small.
Did she have any breasts at all, he asked anyone who would listen.
He opened up his shirt, and showed us his breasts and pointed out that they were bigger than the woman's.
All night ticket collectors came with torches, and they were followed by police who demanded that I put on proper trousers.
I was no longer in Brazil, they said, I was in Bolivia and I would have to show some respect.
They made Bolivia sound like a great haven of formal dress and civilized values.
Luckily I was too tired to give them a summary of world views on Bolivia.
Some people dozed, but no one could sleep.
It was still hot and the seats grew more uncomfortable as the night wore on.
We stopped all the time for no reason.
The basketball player hated me, and the man with the big breasts would not shut up.
My legs were covered in mosquito bites.
Dawn was dull, and the heat intensified in the morning.
The train was slow and Santa Cruz was still far away.
I dozed for a while, dreaming fitfully of soft beds.
Why bother?
BY KINGSLEY AMIS
THE WORST HORROR STORY about abroad, where all holidays since 1950 have had to take place, is also the shortest.
Here it is, in full: ‘I went abroad.’
In my own case, this view is only xenophobic in patches, depending on where I go and who lives there.
I started not having much time for the French and the Walloons, which is to say the French-speaking Belgians, when I found myself among them in 1944.
My deeper antipathy to Germany and Germans I restrained for a while, on the absurd grounds that it was somehow unreasonable to abominate each of two mutually ill-disposed nations.
It was a happy day when it dawned on me that there was no actual impediment to my cordially disliking both lots.
In the past, nobody holidayed in Germany bar Germans.
One year I took my family to Spain, where the inhabitants' behaviour was impeccable, but I had rashly arranged to come back via France.
No sooner had we crossed the frontier than ‘abroad’ closed in.
Our (French) car packed up.
A Dutchman in Volkswagen (I have always had a soft spot for the Dutch) gave it a push in the rear from time to time, but I shrank from asking him to push it and us to one of the Channel ports.
We halted finally in a village called Le Boulou.
I will draw a veil over the cheerless, fly-infested days that followed and shift the scene to Paris, where we arrived by train with no car and no money.
‘We’ included four children aged eight to fourteen.
I spent some hours in a newspaper office getting nothing, not even any change, out of an understrapper who had learnt his English in Enfield, and wondering less and less intermittently what time the public parks shut.
In the end a single telephone call to London saved us before we could say Jack Robinson.
No doubt anybody who has ever been abroad could match that.
The point is,it could not happen here .
So,why go there ?
Sun?
Really?
Food and drink?
Cheaper, simpler, safer and quicker to do yourself well at home for a bit.
Looking at pictures, churches, etc?
Well yes, but there are some here too.
Getting in touch with another culture?
Eh ?
Even if you could.
What you will not have there, unless you take some of them along, are work and friends.
I suppose you might not care for them, in which case you might as well be miserable at home.
A holiday of a life
BY GEOFF DYER
I'VE HAD TERRIBLE TIMES in many of the world's beauty spots: angst-ridden in Anguilla, miserable as sin in Mexico, suicidal in Sicily, bored out of my brains in Barcelona.
Don't even ask about the freak-out in Fés or the spring break in Chicago (euphemistically remembered by my then girlfriend and me as ‘the Psycho-drama Nightmare’).
No, let's concentrate not the spectacular disasters — the dysentery and drug busts — but the everyday, inherent hellishness of the holiday perse .
The problem has its origin in earliest childhood.
As a family we never to go grips with the idea of holidays.
Since being away from home involved that hideous activity, spending money, my Dad could never see the point of going.
Still, in a spirit of stoic resignation, we would head off to Weston-super-Mare every couple of years.
There and back in a day.
Maximum.
Once we made it in four hours, door to beach to door: bury Mum's feet in the sand, forget they're there, plunge spade into sand and come close to severing three toes.
On the rare occasions when we went away for a fortnight — to my grandfather's dank cottage on the Welsh border, land of the slate grey sky — I could hardly wait to get back and listen to the two-weeks' worth of messages crammed on my answering machine.
The cloudless expanse of leisure, that's the problem with holidays.
All that free time with noting to do.
You know how it is; when you lead a hectic, urban life it takes a while to get used to the change of pace — and by the time you do it's time to go home again.
That's not my grumble, of course.
Life is nothing but free time as far as I'm concerned.
What I could with is a holiday from this perpetual holiday of a life.
Normal working day?
Bit of writing, bit of tennis, bit of reading (to kill time), few beers in the evening before going to bed thinking what a waste my life is.
Holiday routine?
Ditto (with rucksack).
A change is as good as a rest, right?
From where I'm sitting (in a Paris café as it happens, pal, limbering up for the days 500cl — I mean 500 word slog), a rest in that sense would take the form of a couple of shifts in a Bolivian tin mine — and Club Med don't fly there.
The Road to Ruin?
by Jeffrey Ferry
Norton is the last great name in British Motorcycling.
It has survived the Japanese and several recessions.
But can it survive its new boss?
DREAM MACHINE: Philippe Le Roux hoped to resurrect Norton's fortunes with the revolutionary rotary-driven F1.
Although the bike won races, Norton is believed to have lost money on every one it sold
NORTON is to motorbikes what Aston Martin is to motorcars.
Pulses quicken at the mere mention of the name; grown men develop a glazed look in their eyes.
When asked what is it that makes Britain great, some will cite the Empire, some will name Shakespeare or Milton; a not inconsiderable number would offer another list, including names like Jaguar, Rolls Royce, Hawker…and Norton.
In the Sixties, Honda led a Japanese onslaught which decimated the British motorcycle industry.
In the years that followed, many dreamed of restoring Norton to its former glory and, in 1987, Philippe Le Roux finally seized the challenge.
A former merchant banker, Le Roux knew little about motorbikes; he didn't even have a license to drive one.
But he did have determination.
Le Roux wanted to create an industrial miniconglomerate which would finance the development of a new Norton bike for the Nineties: the rotary-engined F1, a sleek, stylish, jet-black, light and aerodynamic superbike.
But Le Roux's first big deal degenerated into personal acrimony; his second was caught by the collapse of the property market; and his third led to allegations of questionable deals between him and Norton's chairman.
In a flurry of controversy and ghastly publicity, Le Roux was forced out of the company in January 1991.
Department of Trade and Industry inspectors were unleashed.
New management was brought in.
Eighteen months later, the DTI inspectors have little to show for their work so far, apart from a bill to the taxpayer which Esquire estimates in excess of £1 million.
The new chief executive of Norton, David MacDonald, an engineer and financier who past record is far from inspiring, has not kept any of his promises.
Norton has yet to release any financial figures informing its 13,000 shareholders of the current state of their investments.
One financial expert who has seen internal financial statements believes Norton Motors, the motorcycle division based at Shenstone, Staffordshire, is losing money every month.
In the 1960s, Honda, Kawasaki, and Yamaha almost killed Norton.
Unless something happens soon, David MacDonald and the DTI may achieve what the Japanese and several recessions could not: the destruction of Britain's greatest motorcycling name.
Says a City source: ‘You should run a photo of a nude woman on top of a Norton bike with the caption: ‘Are the Norton shareholders as naked as she is?’
In 1988, PHILIPPE LE ROUX unveiled the F1, the product of two years' design and development.
It was Norton's first all-new production bike in two decades.
Le Roux knew that if the company was to compete in today's automotive industry, he would have to rely on Norton's two trump cards.
The first was the Norton image, a unique mixture of stomach-churning speed and British style.
Its styling was redolent of the golden age of motorcycling, from the long-legged, leather-and-chrome look of the bike to the distinctive swirling ‘N’ of the Norton logo (still to be seen on the belt buckle of many a fashionable waist).
The jet-black F1, with its giant chrome tailpipes, brought back that classic look with a vengeance.
Norton's other trump card was more recherché.
For two decades, the brilliant engineer David Garside has worked at Norton's Shenstone  factory perfecting his design of a rotary engine.
While around him the motorcycle industry crumbled, Garside's technology gave Norton a small but profitable business producing rotaries for unmanned aeroplanes (‘drones’), largely for the US Defense Department.
Invented in 1951, the rotary engine is a revolutionary concept in internal combustion, feature a single large, long, wedge-shaped piston fixed directly to the crankshaft and driven around the cylinder.
With 588cc of swept volume inside its single cylinder, the F1's rotary engine has the power of a typical 750cc Japanese piston bike.
Riders say the F1 is happiest doing 160mph.
Norton Chief Executive David MacDonald's business record is far from inspiring
MacDonald's failure to publish any financial figures for Norton has resulted in the shares being suspended
In 1989, the racing version of the Norton F1 began to win races.
It was the first time in two decades that a British bike was beating the Japanese and for British biking enthusiasts it was stirring stuff.
Motorcycling News began to notice the word ‘Norton’ on the cover was sufficient to sell an extra 20,000 copies.
London-based motorbiking enthusiast Malcolm Clube bought an F1 and loved it.
He drove it round England to show off to some of his aristocratic and wealthy friends.
Within months, he sold 37.
‘There's something special going on when a chap pulls out his chequebook and writes you a cheque for £13,000 right there in the car park,’ he enthuses.
Back at Shenstone meanwhile, Le Roux was perfecting plans to bring out a range of Norton-logoed ‘accessories’, everything from leather jackets to pocket knives to diaries and cigarette lighters emblazoned with the famous ‘N’.
Harley-Davidson has made millions from its logo, yet comparing a Harley to a Norton is like comparing a lumbering rhino to a cheetah; brute force versus elegant performance, a roar versus a purr.
Had the Norton-logoed products got off the ground, sales could have reached millions.
Le Roux' plans cam unstuck in one crucial area: production.
Pitching the F1 as a ‘super-bike’, he sold it at a retail price of £13,000.
That implied a dealer price of some £8,000, and a parts-and-labour cost to Norton of £4,000 (leaving £4,000 to cover Norton's own overheads and profit margin).
But with projected sales of only 200 bikes a year, the unit cost of parts came in far higher than Le Roux expected.
Our Shenstone sources say the bike cost £8,000 to produce.
Norton did sell nearly 200 bikes in the year 1989–1990, but lost money on every one of them.
Charles Saatchi once said: ‘The reason most companies make an acquisition is to cover up the dreadful mistakes of the last acquisition.’
When Le Roux bought Norton Motors in 1987 with shareholder and bank money, he knew there was a risk the profit might not flow as quickly as hoped.
His solution, in true 1980's style, was to make more acquisitions.
In 1988, he bought a profitable American pipe-fitting producer, ProFit Pipes Inc.
This and every other manor acquisition Le Roux made was to go wrong, quickly, nastily, and, in the last case, quite spectacularly.
Pro-Fit's president, Yehuda Mendelson, who sold the company to Norton's share price.
Mendelson refused to allow Le Roux to repatriate Pro-Fit's cash flow to cover the steadily growing hole in Norton Motors' books.
In 1989, Le Roux's next deal was a complicated merger giving Norton a listing on the main London Stock Exchange (bringing it thousands more shareholders) and ownership of five properties in Camden, north London at a bargain price.
He signed the deal in July 1989 — and by September the bottom had fallen out of the London commercial property market.
He eventually sold the properties for £5 million — half of what he originally told shareholders he expected to get for them.
The explosion came in 1990 with Le Roux's next attempt at acquisition, a German metal-bashing company, FUS Fasteners.
With pre-tax profits of £1.3 million and a purchase price of around £8 million, FUS was a good deal for Norton.
The big problem was a tangled legal dispute between various family members in Germany over who owned FUS.
It was going to take Le Roux time to resolve the legal issues and to raise the £8 million, so to prevent the deal slipping away, he came up with what seemed like a clever wheeze at the time: Norton chairman Jimmy Tildesley would buy FUS personally, and ‘warehouse’ the company until Norton had the funds to buy it from him.
On November 16, 1990, at a stormy shareholders' general meeting at the National Motorcycle Museum in Solihull, Le Roux's house of cards came tumbling down.
Questioning from the floor, led by Mr Brook Land, a high-priced London lawyer representing the disgruntled Yehuda Mendelson, revealed that shareholders had not been fully informed of the arrangements between Norton and its chairman, Jimmy Tildesley.
They had been told the main point — that Tildesley would make a profit for his ‘warehousing’ operation (only fair, Le Roux claimed, since Tildesley took risks in buying the company, including the very real risk that Norton might never have raised the funds  and he'd stuck with FUS).
But the insinuating eloquence of Brook Lane raised the awful spectre that behind the attractive veneer of high-speed motorbikes, Norton Group plc was being irresponsibly run.
The FUS financing failed.
Joined by other suspicious shareholders, Land and Mendelson interested the DTI in what they suggested might be disturbing goings-on by Norton Management.
On January 7, 1991, the DTI announced an investigation into Norton Group plc.
Days later, Philippe Le Roux resigned.
‘I find it inconceivable that Philippe Le Roux lined his pockets from his dealings at Norton,’ comments one senior Norton executive who was there before Le Roux arrived and remains there today.
Le Roux undoubtedly had a bold, exciting vision.
His faults included a desire to be an international conglomerateur, and an underestimate of the engineering challenges involved in motorbike production.
In Japan, motorbike companies, like car companies, are run by engineers.
Whether because British engineers lack business vision, or because prejudices in the City of London, only financial entrepreneurs seem able to raise the backing to run companies like Norton.
The F1 remained stuck with a massive cost problem, and riders reported that the famed rotary engine, although a joy on the open road, was temperamental in city traffic.
But the potential was—is—there.
From America and Germany, enthusiasts continued to ring Shenstone asking when they could buy one.
IN NORTON'S HOUR of need, the company's large shareholders and its bankers, the Midland, turned to aeronautical engineer, David MacDonald, 49.
For a company which in its 90 years' existence has made its share of bad decisions, this may rank as the worst of them all.
Charming, talkative, seemingly well-informed, MacDonald is a busy man.
As chief executive of Norton and Yeovil-based Advanced Material Systems Ltd, MacDonald is always on the move between his two offices and the country village of Irthington, Cumbria, where he lives with his wife and children.
He claims to have worked for three of Britain's leading racing teams in the 1970 ‘s, including that of Graham Hill, perhaps Britain's greatest-ever driver.
Hill died in 1975.
His widow, Betty, told Esquire that MacDonald worked on the team for only a year before he was fired by Hill.
‘He didn't run the team as my husband wished it to be run,’ she said.
MacDonald claims he left of his own choice, but can't remember the details.
‘It was a long time ago,’ he says.
Since 1980, MacDonald has run three companies.
The first two of these, Movitex plc and AC Scotland Ltd, went into receivership soon after he left.
At Movitex, a sign-making company based in north London, MacDonald bought his way on to the board with the help of City support.
He immediately fell out with the managing director, who resigned, and then with the new chairman, respected City figure John Redgrave, who was put into rescue the company by the stockbrokers.
MacDonald quickly departed, but Redgrave was unable to save the company.
AC Scotland was a new company created by MacDonald with public shareholder money, to build a limited run of the AC ME3000 sports car.
Founded in 1984, this company lasted until 1986 before it, too, went into receivership.
MacDonald has colourful explanations for the two failures.
He blames the Movitex collapse on a series of ‘ill-advised’ property transactions made by its then managing director.
‘I left the company because the board didn't want to pursue the matter,’ he says.
And he blames AC Scotland for the sabotaging of his plans to raise a second round of finance by stockbrokers in Europe who let him down at the last minute.
But former executives and advisers to both companies told Esquire that the failures were due primarily to mismanagement and bad decision-making.
For British biking enthusiasts, the F1's success was stirring stuff
Ben Denley on a Norton Model 18 was the first man to cover 100 miles in an hour
In 1990, MacDonald bough high-tech Advanced Material Systems Ltd for £400,000.
Where did a former bankrupt get his money?
‘I and my partners raised £400,000,’ he says.
Since buying the company, its staff numbers have fallen from 25 to six.
It has lost its managing director, and has moved to smaller premises.
Former technical direct Dr Nigel Mykura told us the immediate cause of his February 1991 resignation was a transfer of £350,000 from AMS1s bank account to another MacDonald company, which Mykura believed would make it impossible for AMS to continue its research.
He blames MacDonald for ruining his ‘life's work’.
When we put this to MacDonald, he claimed that since Dr Mykura's departure AMS has made ‘significant’ advances.
Asked how this could be achieved with just one technician and with MacDonald (putatively chief engineer) spending his time at Norton, he replies: ‘Ask our customers’.
He refuses to name any.
In his fifteen months at the helm, MacDonald has yet to publish any financial figures for Norton (despite Companies Act and Stock Exchange requirements for semi-annual numbers), with the result that the shares are suspended from the stock market.
MacDonald explains the failure to publish accounts by saying: ‘The company has been in litigation with its previous auditors for a full year.
That dispute has made it impossible to produce audited accounts.’
Norton's 13,000 shareholders, most of them private individuals who invested out of loyalty to the name and hope for its resurrection, are stuck: they can neither sell their shares nor can they vote on MacDonald's tenure.
(MacDonald's other company, Advanced Materials, is also a year late in filing its figures at Companies House).
MacDonald's rescue plan for Norton involves bringing in new sources of finance, selling the German FUS subsidiary (he says he'll get £100,000 — Norton paid £8 million), and designing (personally) a new, lower-cost bike to replace the F1.
Claiming he will have this design ready by the autumn, MacDonald is taking a personal interest in product design, just as he did at AC Scotland.
Says one Norton executive: ‘Even Honda can't design a new bike in a matter of months.
How can MacDonald?’
Ironically, with the DTI cloud over the company's head, MacDonald can tell his City supporters that financing, sale of subsidiaries, even publication of accounts, is more difficult.
One of Norton's largest City shareholders.
International and Irish, however, has now stopped MacDonald using their offices as his London base.
But by the time the DTI and other City institutions wake up to the severity of Norton's plight, will there by anything left that's worth saving?
0.05 SECONDS
This was the fraction of time that separated Linford Christie from Olympic gold in the 100 metres four years ago.
Now 32, Christie is convinced that he's better than ever.
But can he beat the Americans in Barcelona?
by Laura Thompson
BENEATH A PALE vault of sky, upon an island in the Atlantic Ocean, a man is running, and this run is a brief revelation of pure physical glory, part human, part animal, part transcendent of both.
As I watch, I am quickening to the single thought that this man, for these few moments, is probably running faster than any other man one earth.
The island is savage, blackened, proudly ruined, as if a god had a colossal tantrum and laid it to magnificent, careless waste.
With a sense of endlessness contained only by a sense of the sea beyond, the earth slopes and drops away from one's eyes in charcoal heaps of volcanic ash.
The landscape, physical aftermath of titanic rage, frames the run, physical immediacy of titanic power.
It is a momentarily breathless sight, and all the more so because one has a sense, as one watches, of a man running to meet his destiny this summer.
Sport is so simple, so concentrated and unquestioning, that it sometimes, paradoxically, lends itself to this kind of metaphysical yearning.
It becomes symbolic, mythopoeic, mysterious and, as with all true mysteries, its   mystery is in its simplicity.
It is so very much what it is that it becomes something else.
The 100 metres sprint race, for example, is just a race.
One trains horrendously hard, one runs terrifically fast, one wins or loses.
Ask Linford Christie about what it feels like to run the thing — a stupid question, really, but one's metaphysical yearnings make one try it — and what can he say?
‘Before a race you're not thinking about anything.
All you've got to do is concentrate on getting out quick and running your own thing, not looking at the next guy.
Once you're out there, it's you on your own.
Once he says get on your marks you ain't thinking about nothing.
You just want to get there.’
And those are the facts of it: pure concentration, pure determination, pure confidence, pure adrenalin.
Just doing it.
But then one moves outwards from the internal mysteries of sporting symbolism.
One watches the 100 metres, that legendary dash with its magical ten-second touchstone, and one knows that these men, these Christies and Lewises and Burrells, are running toward the destiny of becoming the fastest human being in the world.
One knows this.
Yet one also fees that the race itself is too insubstantial to bear the weight of this titanic myth, that ten seconds cannot possibly represent the interface between the life before and the life afterwards.
And therein, I think, lies the true fascination of the 100 metres.
It is the tension between it importance and its brevity, both of which one is aware of as one watches.
Indeed time itself seems alternately to scud and to suspend during those ten seconds.
One moment the runners are mere abstract blurs, the next they are men in visible quest of their own mysterious frontiers.
Victory is both a felicitous dip of the head and a glorious obeisance towards the changed life that will surely follow it.
Physical predestination may ordain the winning of the race, but for ten seconds there is a belief in free will and human control.
At the Olympic Games in Barcelona this year, the spectacle of the 100 metres will provide an almost sadistically tremulous thrill for the spectator, a perfect metaphor for those hidden seconds when one's own life was changed by the failure or ability to rise to a demanding moment of crisis.
Ten years or more, for ten seconds or less: it will seem as though whole lives are being relived throughout that run, and that the winner will be the man who has lived his life best in preparation for that reliving.
‘WHO NEEDS IT most will win it,’ says Linford Christie.
At the exalted level of Olympic competition that might be true, although I find it hard to attribute the concept of ‘needing’ to Carl Lewis, who, and no doubt I am being unfair, always looks to me like the lead actor in a Disney film entitled The Fastest Kid on Earth .
With Christie, you feel you are getting a real human being, who races like he lives, courageous and effortful and defiant.
The statement about needing to win felt to me more like an oblique comment upon himself than a philosophical comment upon Olympic sprinting.
‘I train hard, I hurt when I train and my motto is: because I hurt so much somebody has to pay.
I don't want to be one of the best in the world, I want to be the best in the world, and everyone I come up against is a stepping stone to me getting over that bridge.
That's what I'm striving for.’
It is the sense of striving that makes him interesting.
When he runs, you can see, you can feel, how hard he has tried to get to this position of being the fastest sprinter in Europe.
He always runs as though he is competing .
Some sportsmen connect you viscerally with them when they perform, often those who, like Christie, are not infallible, are not always perfectly behaved, but who give you both a run for your money and a sense that what they're doing is dramatic and important.
‘People love a trier.
That's why I've got more fans out there than any other British athlete.
The old days with the Coes and the Ovetts, they used to avoid racing each other, and the public never ever got the benefit from that.
Linford Christie races everybody.
That's what the public loves.
They get a buzz when I go out there and race against the Lewises and people like that.
I think, I may not be in perfect shape, but I ain't gonna run away from you.
‘Especially when they come to Britain, you know, this is my territory.
I'm here to defend.
And I go out there because I want to hear ‘God Save the Queen.’
That makes me feel proud.
Can you imagine?
I'm the only European to make all the major finals since 1986.
If I wasn't there, who would they have?
Nobody.
To represent Britain in the way I'm doing, to me that's just as good as fighting in the war.
I'm doing my service.
I'm doing more for Britain than some of the people actually born here.’
The things he says are right, and they explain his popularity, but ho he says them explains the certain wariness with which he is regarded.
Popular figures in this country don't talk about themselves like that.
They don't enumerate their achievements and explain why they should be regarded with respect.
They don't say what they think.
They bob and weave and genuflect before the altar of their own public image.
But Christie — and this is really very unusual — is not in thrall to his public image.
He seems rather to be at once very aware if it and indifferent to it.
As we know, sports personalities are becoming ever more surely our national heroes, our gods with feet of clay in platform-sole Pumas, our great mates who do what we do only better; and no one has done more to turn Britain into this nation of Leisuretown citizens than Christie.
Why, he spawned a whole army of Linfordettes.
That infamous attire strangling his glorious body — really a pastiche of desirability — inspired battalions of people who should know better than to wear Lycra shorts.
His physical appearance implied a reservoir into which poured many fashionable currents of the late 1980s: of fitness, of black cool, of conspicuous consumption, of success through one's own efforts, of sportsmen as street glamour figures who anticipated and forged tastes in the way that pop stars did in the Sixties.
These imagistic streams now flow, in however thin a trickle, through the lives of almost everybody in this country.
He is an extraordinarily potent image.
It has also become so familiar that it tends to overshadow the running, although it is the running from which the potency is derived.
Tell people that you are going to meet Linford Christie, and women go coy and men go bawdy, and it is all because of the shorts, the blatant visual précis of the image.
Then, after people have had their own ten seconds of breathlessness, they remember that he is competing against those mysterious, those hideously capable Americans for an Olympic gold medal, and, oh, they suddenly say, wouldn't it be lovely if he won?
Once he says get on your marks you ain't thinking about nothing.
You just want to get there’
Crossing the line at Seoul ‘88: Christie needs to go one better at Barcelona
So he is familiar, and he could win us a gold medal in that symbol of absolutism, the 100 metres sprint (he could, theoretically, win us one in the 200 metres, but that is far less likely, far less mythopoeic).
But still, because he does  not bow down before his own popularity, he retains a certain distance.
At Club LaSanta, the sporting holiday resort where he trains in Lanzarote, the other guests are clearly getting a little fillip from the rangy, easy presence of their imagistic icon, but still he was cornered one night in the bar by a posse of English girls to be accused: ‘Oh, we hear you're really arrogant.’
Hear from whom?
Although I must confess that I was nervous and wary about meeting him, I had thought that he used his smile as a mask and his laugh as a barrier against what was probably monosyllabic narcissism.
This was ridiculous and wrong and an alarming testimony to the insidious power of the media, although I doubt that Christie would care very much about that.
I race everybody.
That's what the public loves.
They get a buzz when I go out there’
Christie on home turf, proving his dominance at the UK Championships
HE IS EXACTLY what the media find hard to deal with: a mixture of self-containment and outspokenness that demands that it be taken, or left, for what it is.
Everything about him makes him a tricky subject.
He is an enigma who is not trying to be one.
He is intrinsically proud: this reveals itself through his habit of defining himself by telling you his achievements.
He has a tacit code of conduct based upon the concept of respect, wherein if he is given his due, as man, as runner, as captain of the Olympic team, then he will respect you in return,
If you step out of line, as I did a couple of times, trying too hard to find out how much money he earns, then he will pull you back and forget it, but you feel that if you were to commit a serious breach then we would not forgive.
You sense his personal ethics to be very close to the surface.
And for this reason, I continue to feel nervous every time I meet him again.
He won't say anything if he doesn't want to —‘That's life,’ he will shrug, in response to some question that you have built like a house of cards — but if he wants to, he'll say anything.
Sometimes you feel that he must be doing it to show that he can.
When the captain of the Olympic team tells the Sunday Times that he would never run in the 4x400 meters relay because ‘those guys are not my kind of guys — I don't like their attitude’, then he has to be challenging somebody to say, how dare you say that, to which he'll reply, how can you stop me?
I can imagine him making the statement, but I can't imagine that he meant it sufficiently to make it worth printing.
It simply shows that he won't adapt — and this again is very unusual — to the demands of different people or circumstances, that he won't say what some journalist thinks he should say, that Roger and Kris are wonderful and lovely and it would be a privilege to run with them.
He says what he thinks, even if he only half thinks it.
He also says things that he really does think, things that, again, are usually kept rather quiet.
I was amazed, for example, by how much he talks about being black.
In fact, both he and all the other athletes in Lanzarote talk about it constantly.
If it's not jokes against themselves, then it's arguments about the differences between West Indians and Africans, or debates about relative Britishness, or reminiscences about Jamaican family life.
‘I talk about being black because I'm proud to be,’ says Christie.
‘A lot of black people, they make it and they forget about the street talk, they forget what they used to be, and I think, regardless of whether you're black or white, you should always keep in touch with your culture.
And being black's my culture.’
He also talks about it by way of emphasizing his achievements: the fastest man in Europe, the most medalled athlete in Britain, the Olympic captain, the MBE holder.
‘I'm making it easier for the next black man.
I'm a pioneer.
I came to England when I was seven, yes?
I came here with zilch.
And now they all know me.
And when I went back to Jamaica, they were so proud of me — you know the way they think about Britain.
They say it's paved with gold.
When I came back here I was down on the ground, looking for gold, I couldn't find it.
‘Being poor is one thing, but being black and poor is harder.
I stopped working because I decided that the only way to make it was to go full time.
I was signing on the dole — but I believed in myself.
I believed I could do it.
Well, what happens if I didn't try?
I'd have to live with that for the rest of my life.’
And he talks about being black to underscore the threat of racism.
In Shepherd's Bush, where he grew up, he and his family suffered an incident in which the police, who had surrounded the house in order to arrest Christie's brother (on a charge which never came to court) then burst in and carried out the violent, unprovoked arrest of Christie and his father.
Unbelievably, they were later fined for, respectively, wilful damage and assault, and obstructing the police.
Then there was the time when he was arrested for driving a loaned car which the police insisted had been reported stolen.
Scotland Yard press bureau gave this information to a journalist; he deduced who had been arrested and printed a libellous story.
Substantial damages were paid in recompense.
But somebody saved the best for last: when Christie cam out of the High Court with his windfall he discovered that this car, alone of all those in the road, had been clamped.
As with many proud people, his life appears to be shadowed by those intent upon humiliating him.
To have run the most glorious run of your life, to have become the first European to break ten seconds, to do it in an Olympic final — and then to be falsely accused of drug-taking by an officialdom that was frantically sniffing out Ben Johnsons like a Salem witchfinder!
There was even an incident a few weeks ago, at an athletics meeting in Birmingham, during Christie' first run of the season.
He won the 100 metres.
Officials attempted to disqualify him because his club colours were incorrectly displayed.
The attempt failed, but it really should not have been tried.
IF HE WINS in Barcelona, and sets the gold and lustrous seal upon his career, he will raise himself decisively above such nonsense before retiring to the rest of his life.
At present he is still in the difficult, frictional, vulnerable position of striving to be the best, of running towards an unknown destiny.
His coach Ron Roddan says that, at 32, he has never been fitter, that the disappointment of the World Championships last year, in which he ran his guts out and finished fourth, provided the final necessary impetus to give everything for this final race.
‘If I don't win, they must be in bloody good shape…
I'll have had a good life, and I'll have tried, and I'll have made something of myself.
I've got my respect.
I earned it.
And people will always know who Linford Christie was.
Whether I'll be remembered as the most pompous, hard-to-get-along-with person they've ever come across, because I stand up for what I believe in, or as the best athlete Britain's ever had, which I think will be the case, I'll always be remembered.’
Whether he wins or not, I shall remember him for his fearlessness, for not being content to run like a solitary god between the gunpowder hills of Lanzarote, but for running in the race instead.
The Anatomy of Desire
by Sarah Stacey
The story which follows may sound familiar.
You're on your own.
You're having a drink.
Then you see her.
You talk to her.
You go for dinner.
One thing leads to another.
Maybe you think it's love.
But it's really a chemical reaction…
7.30 pm.
The bar of a hotel.
You're on your own, a single man in a smart, public place.
It's early evening.
Nothing is happening.
Look at you.
Completely normal.
Heart rate, nervous system, brain activity: all normal.
Then, across the lobby, you see her.
And that's how it starts.
The need for another is a defining biological truth.
Call it romance, call it desire, call it lust.
It's a scientific reality.
Men and women are the playthings of programming.
You have already isolated the woman, picked her out from all the women you have seen in the last hour, all the women you have seen today.
Your dominant feelings are — what?
The shock of recognition — and the beginnings of desire.
You have recognized a woman who conforms to your stereotype — or more accurately, your archetype — of sexual attraction.
This act of recognition, of ‘individuation’ according to the neurobiologists, is ruled by your memory of your first object of sexual desire: your mother.
(Every man has always wanted to marry his mother, before and since Oedipus.)
The line of a jaw, the curve of a breast, the way the hair falls just so: as well as this potent mix of stored physical ideals — what Simonde de Beauvoir called ‘incandescence’— you are, like it or not, influenced by fundamental programming which dictates that, while the ‘higher’ processes of your mind dicker around in a gadfly twentieth-century way, the areas of the brain that control instinctive behaviour are looking for a mate, a woman of energy and physical alertness: a good breeder.
You are looking for a woman to produce healthy children.
You look around you, to be sure of the physical world.
Outwardly, the world is the same.
But for you, the peace is over.
Your cerebral cortex has flashed a message to the brain stem to wake up a primitive mass of neutrons, the Reticular  Activating System.
These neutrons are setting off alarms all round your cerebral hemispheres.
For the moment, however, your arousal is non-specific.
You watch here on the other side of the room.
Idle thoughts go through your mind.
You wonder what she's doing here.
Is she meeting her lover?
Does she have a lover?
Is she married?
7.40 pm.
Then she sees you.
Your glances meet.
In fact, you have a particular feeling, that they have collided: a foreshadowing of the physical confrontation of sex.
Your physical response to her moves on to a different plane.
Messages are going to your sympathetic nervous system, to your heart (heart rate and strength of heartbeat both increase), and to the adrenal glands, which respond by producing adrenaline and noradrenaline.
These substances further increase heart rate and blood pressure and are accompanied by a surge of hormones from the pituitary gland, including vasopressin and adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH).
Your stomach beings to churn with the action of the vasopressin.
Your Reticular Activating System is firing on all cylinders, your cortex is turning somersaults.
Simultaneously, the ACTH is stimulating the adrenal glands to produce mood-elevating glucocorticoids (hence the high of sexual attraction).
Meanwhile, you are concentrating, probably more intently than you have concentrated on anything else all day, on the object of desire.
This is another one of the effects of vasopressin.
8.00 pm.
Your emotional high is coloured by anxiety.
Will you get her?
Will she coldly stare you down, leave you standing?
The hormones associated with the delicious stress of desire and the simultaneous fear of rejection flood your system.
Adrenaline and noradrenaline produce hyperalertness, increased heart rate and blood pressure.
The symptoms are close to what a soldier feels before battle.
Seeking a quick fix for your anxiety, you knock back a couple of brandy and sodas: Dutch courage.
Nothing wrong with this; alcohol is a neurodepressant, knocking out the complex brain circuits involved in civilizing behaviour — the obedience to convention, the shyness, the fear of rejection.
Once you have nudged these aside, your ego can dismiss ‘what I should do’ and get on with ‘what I want to do’.
However, if you were to make the mistake of drinking too much, diminished anxiety would go hand-in-hand with exponentially diminishing social skills, moral awareness and desirability, as the alcohol is knocked out the less complex brain circuits as well.
Drinking too much can also, of course, affect your sexual performance.
As she sees you, and senses your interest, her posture changes in subtle ways.
Her shoulders go back, her neck straightens, the small of her back arches, she presents her best profile, as her own hormonal changes, mirroring your earlier ones, start detonating gently inside her body.
Between you, two sets of speculations unfurl, speculations that correspond to gender-specific concerns.
But there is one question that both of you have in common.
What is she/he like in bed?
8.30 pm.
Emboldened by brandy and soda, you walk over to her table.
As you approach, she senses your intent.
Both of you experience a series of cardiovascular changes which can induce either blushing or blanching, caused by the now-familiar hormones — adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine.
These changes in facial colour are the most visible sign that you are reacting to each other.
You may also start trembling, and feel a pricking of the skin caused by the same vascular changes that caused the blushing; the involuntary tremor is caused by an increase in activity in one of the central nervous system circuits that controls level of background muscular tension.
‘May I, er, join you?’
You stutter out your first few words.
The muscles of your larynx, taut with anxiety, cause the sweet nothings to come out in semi-castrato squeak.
8.35 pm.
You gaze at each other properly for the first time.
In the discovery that you were not mistaken, that you do fancy each other, the levels of tension begin to die back.
Your dominant emotions are increased desire and expectation.
As mutual sexual appetite increases, there is a shift towards anticipation of consummation.
Humans express themselves in a complex of visual and verbal thrusts and parries.
Body language is probably the most important visual cue.
For now you are sitting (safely) side by side — the open, confrontational, face-to-face position is for later — showing each other three-quarter profile.
You want to touch her, but you wait; then, occasionally, your hand brushes her wrist, your shoulders meet briefly.
The distance between your faces reduces.
Your sense of smell comes into play.
You are near enough to savour the undertones of personal body scents (pheromones) produced by the activated sebaceous glands of the skin and genital area.
There is an implicit recognition, and perhaps acceptance, of a collaboration between you, a shared agenda which might just include sex.
You agree to have dinner.
9.00 pm.
Your ruling emotion now is anticipation.
You're made of tensions at the moment, programmed for them.
You take your place facing her, moving on from the neutral side-by-side position.
Opposite each other, you're more open and at the same time more confrontational.
There's ambivalence at every stage of the game.
As direct eye contact is established, then held, her pupils are dilated not just by the half-light, but by adrenalin.
The restaurant table shrinks.
Your bodies move closer.
These are no isolated developments, no candles in the dark.
Your body is a blazing metropolis of sexual preparation.
As messages are passed down the autonomic nervous system, the blood vessels in erectile tissue everywhere — penis, walls of the vagina, ear lobes, nose (notice the stuffiness?)— are engorging.
As extra blood is forced into the skin, both your bodies feel the heat.
You can scarcely be bothered to eat.
Vasopressin, secreted by both our pituitaries this time, is inhibiting your appetite, preparing you both for the inevitable.
11.00 pm.
The kiss.
Is an instinct, or a sociocultural habit?
It doesn't exist in China, or among ‘primitive’ peoples.
But the kiss, particularly the French kiss, prefigures the act of love, conjoining you in a confirmation of the agenda.
But where?
You need the encouragement of more intimate surroundings.
In the corridor, the objective correlative of pre-bedroom intimacy, the moment arrives.
Your lips touch.
Slowly, tentatively, they part, your tongues meet, and your awareness of what the future holds passes from speculation to certainty.
Vocal and visual signals both become less important as tactile signals intensify.
The caresses stimulate the extremities of the sensory nerve fibres in the skin, already tuned up to maximum sensitivity, and your seat glands secrete pheromones (the hormones that emit your personal scent and induce sensations such as fear, aggression or sexual arousal).
The scent intensifies desire.
Pulse rates, which stood at 70 to 80 before that moment in the bar, and rose to 90 to 100 during the earlier phases of arousal, now stand at around 130.
(They will climb to 150 at orgasm).
Secretion of sex hormones increases.
All the caution and tension that you may have been feeling has now flown.
The higher, reasoning brain has handed control over to the instinctive brain.
Logic has nothing at all to do with what is about to happen.
11.40 pm.
In her room.
You undress her.
The adrenaline makes her giggle, and still rising noradrenaline levels set off the familiar beat of passion.
As you push the blouse off her shoulders, even the friction of the material sliding over her arms is part of the orchestra of pleasure.
As she unbuttons your shirt, you may be — dimly — aware that her movements are more delicate.
Subtle, definite differences exist in your pleasure and hers.
Your testosterone makes you more aggressive, your pleasure more externalized; for her, even at this stage, the stimuli are more affective, more emotional.
But her passion is the equal of yours, and in addition to your physical lust for skin-to-skin contact, you both experience the psychological desire for closeness, to lose your separateness in emotional and physical fusion.
Her stance changes: legs slightly apart, torso is an ess.
Your body is arching, your pelvis is thrown forward.
12.07 am.
Radioisotope scans of your brains at this moment would reveal frantic activity in the areas of the limbic system referred to as the ‘pleasure centres’(there are several of them) and, in the heat of consummated passion, a reduction in the thinking, cortical activity of the brain.
Your embrace is an expression of a need that unites you and her as much as the sex act itself.
Your bodies align, juxtapose, wed each other.
Far from being just the confluence of two solitary corporeal entities, sex represents a state of the deepest, most needed fusion in which the whole being can realize itself.
Hypothalamus and mid-brain glow together in radical synchronization, and above everything else — you — now a couple — feel the desire to eradicate every feeling of loss and separation, the desire to find the other that began it all.
As you each stimulate the other, rhythmically, sympathetically, it sets up a resonating circuit of activity in the pelvic nervous complexes.
If this is maintained at a sufficiently intense level and for long enough, orgasm will follow.
There is an underlying truth in the metaphor of playing a lover's body like a musical instrument.
You want her to feel the pleasure you know you're going to feel: but you play your body at the pitch and rhythm you sense in hers.
As the pleasure centres fire away, waves of oxytocin (a hormone also produced to stimulate the production of milk during breast-feeding) flood through your bodies.
You both lose awareness of self-consciousness, of anything but the current overwhelming physical and emotional sensations.
Hormonal secretions here reach a maximum, and her breasts, already made firmer by the growing excitement, now reach anything up to 25 per cent more than their normal size.
Your muscles are tensed, your breathing irregular, first shallow, then deep.
At the moment of climax, you experience a momentary cessation of consciousness —la petite mort .
1.30 am.
As you move slowly apart, to rest, your adrenaline levels drop quickly, and prolactin, a calming hormone, is released, disposing you towards sleep.
Your cardiovascular activity slowly now returns to normal.
For her, coitus releases progesterone into her system, calming her, but not taking her into sleep.
Her own physical ‘coming down’ process takes longer than yours, and unlike most men, her capacity for further climaxes is theoretically unlimited.
Lying awake, she is still interested in, and has the capacity to go to, several more rounds.
7.00 am.
You wake up early, your desire sated, your hormones at manageable levels.
Your perceptual mechanism is subtly altered.
You look across the bed.
Last night you were in thrall to your emotions.
What do you feel now?
Guilt, maybe?
Or perhaps the head asleep on the pillow is revealed as something less enticing in the cold light of dawn.
Or perhaps not.
As dawn breaks and your testosterone level lifts naturally to begin the day, the memories of the banquet if provided last night may be so powerful that you can hardly wait to begin again.
THE SECRET WORLD OF SEX
There is a strange and secret world on our doorsteps.
A twilight world.
A network of discreet establishments where men and women get together and have sex.
Free sex.
Sex for sex's sake.
The people who inhabit this world are people like us, people who pass us in the street.
We look at them and think: ‘Last night they stayed at home and watched TV, just like I did.’
But they didn't.
Last night they went to a back-street sauna, chatted politely, stripped, had sex with complete stranger, got dressed, went home, and didn't even trade phone numbers.
by Jon Ronson
FRIDAY: Perched innocuously between Eccles Thrift and Fancy stands the Adam and Eve Sauna Club.
At a casual glance, the club could offer merely what it advertises.
However, the blackened windows emblazoned enticingly with the legend — ADULTS ONLY XXX — and the distinctive odour of chlorine and dried sperm reveal the true intentions of the clientele.
I am undercover.
I'm here to observe and report and, who knows, even get laid and fall in love.
I'm posing as a travelling salesman called Pete.
I haven't quite worked out what I sell, and I nearly blow it when John, the club's proprietor, asks me that very question.
‘Um,’ I stutter.
‘I sell…things.’
But John gives me a wink and passes me through.
I breathe a sigh of relief.
‘Things’, it appears, is a well-established kinky travelling salesman code.
I have passed the test.
On my entry, fifteen fat men in towels immediately stop what they're doing and stare intently.
When they discover that I'm not a woman, they quickly lose interest and sit back down.
So I head downstairs to the Pleasure Dome, a wood-panelled room that shows Dutch movies with spurious plots.
I squeeze between a pleasant-looking, well-built car repairer called Bob and an enormously furry small-businessman who's name I fail to ascertain, and we all smile at each other.
I have absolutely no idea what happens next.
So, in the end, I decided just to wait.
On the screen, a window cleaner is requesting water from a housewife, who, one assumes, has other plans in mind, and we all fold our arms.
‘How's the shop?’ mumbles one balding sweating man to another.
‘Keeping the wolves at bay, touch wood.’
his colleague replies, and everyone hums and tuts.
The decor is very Seventies: all framed photos of buxom women perched — legs akimbo, lips pouting, glistening — on the bonnets of silver Porsches, as the sound system discreetly pumps out Elvis at Vegas .
On the screen, the window cleaner begins to urinate into his loved one's mouth, and everyone sits around, attempting to pretend that she's enjoying the experience as much as they are.
There is a long silence, broken only by a man belching and a topless, middle-aged woman giggling.
Although billed in the contact magazines as ‘couples only’, the male-female ratio here is about 25 to one; the one is the topless woman, so everyone is paying her very special attention.
‘Get the rest off, love,’ winks an overweight man, discreetly fondling his penis, and the topless woman giggles.
‘Come on, love,’ he continues jovially, with only a hint of desperation in his voice, ‘You know you love it,’and the topless woman giggles some more.
I head to the sauna, and Bob stops me in the corridor.
‘First-timer, eh?’ he says.
‘What do you think of the place?’
I'm not sure how to respond.
‘Come on, love,’ the fat man continues jovially, with only a hint of desperation, ‘you know you love it.’
The topless woman giggles
‘Oh, fine,’ I manage eventually.
‘You should have been here last week,’ Bob continues.
‘It was great .
There were these chicks wanking off four guys at a time.
Fantastic .
But tonight…’
He clucks in disapproval.
There you go — last week — trust my luck.
‘I'll tell you what,’ Bob whispers, conspiratorially.
‘Come down to Connections in Ashton on Monday.
They've got a St Trinian's night.
There's prize for the best costume.’
He winks.
‘It's great.
Loads goes on.
Much more than here .’
We swap phone numbers, and part in agreement.
As I head for the exit, Bob shouts back: ‘How do you look in school uniform?’ and we both laugh.
And then, when I am safely around the corner, I stop laughing.
I glance once again at the Dutch movie.
The window cleaner has stopped urinating instead has placed his hand firmly up his partner's rectum.
‘I hope she hasn't eaten beans,’ quips a fat gentleman from Urmston, and everybody roars with laughter.
The sound system is now playing ‘Halfway to Paradise’.
But we're not.
We're not even a third of the way there.
MONDAY: St Trinian's Night at Connections ‘Swingers Club’, Ashton under Lyne.
Bob's brought along Samantha, a pretty blonde wearing a straw boater, a white shirt that is open to her waist and a Crumpsall High School tie.
‘I look like a rough schooley,’ she grins.
‘Well, it's my birthday treat.
What can you do?’
At a casual glance, Connections appears to possess all the erotic aesthetics of the Adam and Eve, and, therefore, all the erotic aesthetics of a mid-Seventies young offenders' institute situated on the outskirts of Cardiff.
‘Right, who wants one?’ says Samantha, producing a clutch of condoms from her bra.
She doesn't offer me one and I take this as a snub
The club offers, in fact, the additional sex-hell of the overweight, unattractive clientele being dressed entirely in ill-fitting nylon gymslips and hockey outfits.
They wink, they pout, they gobble down the complimentary potato salad.
But at least— unlike the Adam and Eve — there are women here.
At least people are communicating.
‘The first time I met Samantha,’ Bob says, ‘I'll never forget this, she was surrounded by these six guys and she was funking herself with a vibrator.
Really putting on a show for them.’
Samantha shrieks at the memory.
‘That was the same night I was crouched on the pool table getting all the fellas to aim their shots between my legs,’ she laughs.
‘It's a giggle.
Gets me out of the house.’
We catch up with Sue, a 52-year-old mother of four — wearing pigtails and painted-on freckles — whose divorce has just come through.
‘My husband's idea of a night of sex,’ she informs me, ‘was wham-bam-thank-you-ma'am.’
She shivers at the memory, and adds: ‘I want to swing.
It's not a crime, is it?’
‘No, no’ we all reply.
‘Like, you read in the News of the World that it's disgusting, but we're only doing what we want to do.’
‘Yes, yes,’ we all reply.
We are joined by a couple of first-timers, a camp psychiatrist called Dave and his partner, Andrene, a social work student.
A balding Brummie called Martin throws his arms around Sue, and Samantha suggests that we all head upstairs to the room that locks from the inside.
‘Come on, Pete,’ she says, adjusting her school tie.
‘Let's have some fun.’
She takes me by the hand, but stops, and kisses Bob straight on the lips.
She pulls back, laughs, and skips upstairs.
We dutifully follow her.
It's a small, dusty room, filled with mattresses.
There are seven of us, all stretched out, chatting and joking.
‘The last time I was in this room,’ Samantha reminisces, ‘me and Gail were funking each other senseless.
But her funking nails.
I tell you, that girl's a health hazard.’
She chuckles.
‘Samantha,’ announces Dave the psychiatrist, as if he's spent the night evaluating, analyzing and concluding, ‘is absolutely marvellous.
She's so strong, so at one with her emotions.’
He pauses.
‘You don't meet people like her in the Peak District.’
‘It was between the movies and coming here,’ adds Andrene, removing her T-shirt, rubbing Samantha's thigh.
‘I'm so glad we chose this.’
Samantha takes the compliments with a shrug and a giggle.
She begins casually to fondle Bob's penis, and everyone moves slightly closer to everyone else.
She turns to Dave.
‘So you're a psychiatrist,’ she begins.
‘I was raped when I was fourteen.
It was really bad.
I could have been killed.
But what happened was, I was raped.’
She pauses, and glances around the room.
Everyone is looking at the floor, the wall, anywhere.
All penises have suddenly become limp.
Samantha smiles.
‘–It's OK,’ she says.
‘I can talk about it and everything.
It's not a problem.’
Dave murmurs something along the lines of how she seems to be coping with it very well.
‘What I want to know,’ she continues, ‘is whether hypnosis can help me.’
‘Well…’ begins Dave.
But the night is moving on.
In the corner, Sue is receiving head from Martin the Brummie and she stares glazedly into space, her pigtails bobbing with the motion.
Everyone goes quiet.
Samantha turns to Andrene.
‘Do you mind,’ she says, still rubbing Bob's now re-erected penis, ‘if I touch Dave's leg?’
‘Feel free,’ replies Andrene, and Dave casually nods in agreement.
‘Right, who wants one?’ says Samantha, producing a clutch of condoms from her bra.
They are immediately grabbed.
She doesn't offer me one, and I take this especially under the circumstances, as a snub.
Bob starts funking Samantha.
I'm sitting and watching, drinking coffee, trying to blend.
It is like watching a porno movie, or a medical examination.
Sometimes it is very difficult to distinguish between the two.
Samantha sighs.
‘It's like being in a different world,’ she keeps saying.
‘It's like being in a different world.’
She is masturbating Martin with one hand, whilst taking Dave in the mouth.
It is a display of tremendous dexterity.
After a moment, Samantha notices that I'm on my own, smiles, and beckons me over.
‘Come on, Pete,’ she says.
‘I've got a free hand.’
Everyone laughs.
So I stand up, and head towards the throng.
A momentary rush of neurosis envelops me.
I have never banged away with fifteen strangers in a back street in Ashton before.
It is, morally, a giant step to take.
But pure animalistic lust gets the better of me.
I look around at everyone else huffing and puffing in their glows of ecstasy, and realize that I am huffing and puffing with just as much relish.
And I discover, to my horror, that I am slowly becoming what I have been claiming all this time to be.
I am slowly becoming a travelling salesman called Pete.
When it is all over, it begins again, this time without condoms.
It's as if the initial prophylactic use was enough to salve any consciences, enough to make everyone think, ‘Well, we've done our bit’, and nobody mentions their absence second time around.
Eventually everyone leaves the room to shower and drink coffee and do all things that people usually do after intercourse — communally in this case — and Samantha and I are left alone.
‘Bob's my main man,’ she says.
‘I hope you're not offended by that.’
I reply that it's fine, whatever.
‘I mean,’ she continues, ‘I'll piss about with everyone else, but Bob looks after my kid when I go out shopping.
Do you know what I mean?’
She pauses, and I nod.
‘It's my birthday today,’ she continues.
‘I'm 25 today.
And it was Bob who took me out.
Looked after me.
Nobody else did.
He's not my boyfriend or anything, but he looks after me.
Know what I mean?’
I head downstairs.
It is 4.00 am, and most people have gone home.
I notice the poster on the wall promising a prize for the best school uniform on display, and I question Mick the proprietor as to who won.
‘Nah,’ he replies.
‘We didn't bother with that in the end.’
‘Why not?’
‘Well,’ he continues, clearing up what's left of the cheese and pineapple sticks.
‘Nobody seemed that interested.’
THURSDAY: The telephone rings.
It is Bob.
‘Pete!’ he almost yells.
‘You've got to come to Kidderminster.
It's the Sex Maniac's Ball.
Me and Samantha went there last night.
I tell you.
Fuck the saunas.
Fuck Connections.
They're funking nothing .
I was like a kid in a toy shop.
It was amazing .
I'm going to funking live there from now on.
Samantha spent the night laughing at me.
I was just walking around with a huge grin on my face.
All night.
It was…’
He pauses for breath.
‘What happened?’
I ask.
‘Oh, I just can't describe it,’ he gasps.
‘I couldn't walk anywhere without being molested .
I've never seen anything like it .
You've got to come.’
‘Okay,’ I reply.
‘I'll come.’
So, Bob gets the person who recommended him to recommend me, and a few days later the ticket, and the rule book, arrives:
1 Please remember never to give the exact dates or locations of our evenings to anyone.
2 Gentlemen must be smartly dressed.
3 Ladies must be dressed erotically.
4 Gentlemen must not remove their underwear in public.
And so on.
The club is situated in a wine bar in Kidderminster: a town not famed, admittedly, for its sizzling erotica.
But time will tell.
SATURDAY: There is absolutely no entry for single men allowed, so I enlist the services of a colleague, Sarah.
She's wearing a slinky black mini-skirt and slinky black top, but it is not, apparently, erotic enough.
‘Take your clothes off whenever you want to,’ suggest the doorman.
‘You'll feel more comfortable that way.’
Sarah declines, and we head downstairs.
The room is full of strangers, but they all start chatting to us before we've even sat down.
‘Oh yes, we're all very friendly here,’ explains Jim from Dudley.
‘It's all very friendly.’
‘I spent ages on the sunbed today,’ says his very white wife.
‘I want to look my best.’
I'm in the selling game too,’ says Eric from Basingstoke.
‘Imports and exports.
That's my game.’
I look around.
All the men are in shell suits and have moustaches.
All the women are in kinky underwear and have perms.
They are package holiday people from hell.
‘I've got some spare kinky underwear,’ suggests Paula from Walsall adjusting her suspenders, ‘if it'll make you feel more relaxed.’
Sarah declines.
9.00 pm, and we are fed our complimentary supper of sausages and mash — hardly the food of love, unless you're a particularly staunch Freudian — and head stodgily back to the dance-floor.
It's all ‘Cherish’ and ‘Three Times a Lady’and ‘Deeply Dippy’, and everyone takes to the floor, clutching and fondling, their hands lightly patting the buttocks of their partner.
This could be a very beautiful sight, I'm sure, if it weren't for the fact that the men all look like Jim Bowen and the women all look like your mother.
Bob and Samantha arrive, and we hug each other.
Bob surveys the room.
‘I tell you what,’ he clucks, pulling up his trousers.
‘Some of the women here are funking fit.’
I look to see if he's joking.
He's not.
Samantha starts necking Bob, and then starts necking me.
Sue, the mother of four from Connections, turns up, and Samantha starts necking her.
Sue's middle-aged partner, Alan, looks on slightly miffed, so Samantha starts necking him.
She notices Sarah.
‘Borrow some of my kinky underwear,’ she suggests, ‘if it'll make you feel more comfortable.’
Sarah declines.
‘Go on,’ says Bob.
‘It'll make you feel more at ease.’
Sarah declines again.
And so the night progresses.
Bob and I stand on the edge of the dance-floor and discuss the clientele.
‘See that really sexy Indian bird,’ he says.
‘Well, she just goes for women, but she doesn't mind you watching.
Last week, her and Samantha went back to the hotelroom and put on a show for me.
It was exhausting to watch.’
‘Yeah, you were just looking,’ contends Samantha.
‘I was the one doing all the work.
You and her were just sitting there.’
She pauses.
‘Nah, she didn't do much for me Good figure and that, but…’
‘Get your clothes off,’ jokes Bob to Sarah.
‘Go on.
It'll make you feel more comfortable.’
Sarah declines.
‘Go on ,’ continues Bob, his voice beginning to rise with a hint of anger.
‘Honestly .
It'll make you feel better.’
And Sarah declines again.
The whole situation has become rather threatening.
Sarah is obviously becoming hated for her refusal to co-operate.
You are either in, or completely out.
It's understandable, of course.
There were no illusions about what was expected of us when we paid our £15 entry.
We're spoiling the fun.
We disappear into the darkness, where nobody can see that we're not rolling around the floor in paroxysms of ecstasy.
And just sit there.
The men are in shell suits and have moustaches.
The women are in kinky underwear and have perms — the package holiday people from hell
By midnight, nothing much as occurred, apart from the odd scene of fellatio.
But since Connections, all that appears positively tame.
I am a veteran by now.
I am weary.
I guess you read one porno magazine and the second one is just the same.
A close-up crotch shot will eventually do little more than remind the reader that sex without affection is merely moving your legs up and down for a bit and then stopping.
At the end of the night.
Bob suggests that we all go back to his hotel room for a ‘smoke and a shag’.
But somehow the invitation no longer holds the same enticing mystery as it once did.
So we politely decline.
We make our excuses, in fact.
And leave.
Did you know that the main natural ingredient of the quintessential English drink is to be found in the green heart of Italy?
Or that the secluded hillsides and valleys are…
GORDON'S COUNTRY
Imagine the scene: as the sun rises over the purple hills of Umbria in central Italy, Franco Scarponi and his son Adolfo set off in search of one of the region's most highly prized delicacies — juniper berries.
Used extensively in local cuisine, the juniper grows wild in the hills around the medieval walled town of Gubbio.
For something so very Italian it comes as a surprise to learn that the juniper harvested by the Scarponis has a British connection — it is the main ingredient in that quintessential British drink — Gordon's Gin.
Unlike cheaper gins, Gordon's uses only the finest natural ingredients and has never used essences.
Gordon's favours Umbrian juniper berries — and the Scarponis, who have been harvesting juniper for Gordon's for over 40 years, use their local knowledge to find the very best juniper Umbria can offer.
The Scarponis harvest their crop by beating the bush with a stick so that the ripe berries fall into the conciola — the whicker basket traditionally used to collect and sieve juniper.
Once sorted, the berries are sent to England to be distilled along with the other natural ingredients harvested from all over the world.
Coriander from the Crimea, orange and lemon peel from the Mediterranean, angelica from Germany and other spices and herbs are all used in accordance with Alexander Gordon's original secret recipe.
Passed down to master distillers through the centuries, it is this recipe and the insistence on using only the very best natural ingredients that sets Gordon's Gin apart.
The Diary of The Innocent
The scene is Berlin.
Rehearsals for the filming of Ian McEwan's The Innocent are underway.
Anthony Hopkins and Isabella Roselini are among he stars.
And McEwan himself is keeping a diary of events
APRIL 20, 1992
The Cold War is over, the hostilities have ceased.
But not for us.
We are coming to Berling to relive the Fifties and rebuild the Berlin Wall.
Nor is battle yet done for the United States Air Force.
As I am preparing to set off from Oxford a copy of a fax arrives from the production office.
In response to our request to film at Tempelhof airport, the headquarters in California has replied: ‘Unfortunately, cooperation in this screenplay is not considered to be in the best interest of the US Armed Forces and the Department of Defense.
More to the point, we are unable to support productions which appear to condone or endorse activities by citizens or organizations when such activities are contrary to US policy.’
What we are condoning, or rather, taking for granted in our film, is a tunnel, illegal and therefore officially unacknowledged, completed in 1955, dug by the Americans and equipped by the British.
It ran from the American to the Soviet Sector, to tap into phone lines that connected with High Command in Moscow.
It was a technological triumph and a magnificent intelligence coup, or would have been had the Russians not know about it all the time.
Leonard, the young English electronics genius who comes to Berlin to lay the taps, will be played by an American, Campbell Scott.
Maria Eckdorf, the German he falls in love with, will be played by an Italian, Isabella Rossellini, and Leonard's American boss will be played by a Welshman, Anthony Hopkins.
The rehearsals promise texture.
APRIL 21
I arrive straight from the airport for the read-through.
As we settle around a large table, John Schlesinger, the director, asks if I would like to read the minor parts.
I decline, and feel like a spoilsport.
But I want to listen to these accents.
For the moment, the credibility of the characters, and therefore of the film, hangs on this bizarre elision of nations and voices.
Tony Hopkins is trying out a truncated George C Scott croak.
He reads at high speed, hoarsely swallowing words deformed by an imaginary cigar.
I keep my eyes fixed on my script.
Isabella Rosellini has armed herself with a fizzing S and V — ve vill, von't we?
Perhaps we won't.
I am making an eyeshade out of my hand.
But Campbell Scott has arrived with his accent ready shaped — an unlocatable, non-descript English that neatly sidesteps the posh or Cockney axis that characterizes most American attempts.
Perfect.
The Defa studios in the East Berlin suburb of Badelsburg are no longer the crumbling, work-shy, institutionalized dump they were two years ago when we began this project and were looking for a home for it.
A lick of paint, new management, massive redundancies.
The 80-strong standing orchestra, the many-acred hats department and all the job-for-life people are as much a part of its history as The Blue Angel and Metropolis .
In our movie a brute of a German called Otto is killed (sort of accidentally) and ends up in two suitcases.
It's comforting that on an adjacent sound stage they are making a comedy called Otto: The Love Story .
What is my role at these rehearsals?
How am I to conduct myself?
It's a delicate matter.
There are directors who experience pain or panic when they see the writer in unmediated discussion with an actor.
There are others who won't let the writer near the set.
Such paranoia probably derives from an unconscious recognition that in such a collaborative medium, the director as sole auteur is an artificial concept, a labelling convenience, the confection of French theorists: and, who knows, the hand that slips from behind the shadow of the throne to reach for the director's crown most likely belongs to he who first dreamed the kingdom.
Banish the contender forthwith…
So I am wary as we begin our first rehearsal in the afternoon.
I know that behind John Schlesinger's twinkly, avuncular charm lies a volcanic temper.
In fact, a couple of weeks ago he confided to me that he rather enjoyed losing his temper.
I don't want to be blown across the room in the first ten minutes so I hang back a little as we sit round the table with Anthony Hopkins and Campbell Scott to read the scene through and discuss it.
When we ‘put the scene on its feet’— the walls of the set are marked by masking tape on the floor and there are rudimentary props — things become clearer.
John wants my total involvement.
He wants ideas, new possibilities, experiments, and he wants me to talk to the actors.
He seems to want me to direct the rehearsals with him.
Such openness can only come from confidence.
ROLE PLAY: right, Isabella Rossellini and Campbell Scott, who play the leading role of lovers Leonard and Maria, are put through their paces by director John Schlesinger at the Defa studios in East Berlin.
Above, Anthony Hopkins comes to grips with his part as Glass, Leonard's Cold War boss
In the afternoon we rehearse the scenes in which Glass welcomes Leonard to Berlin.
Tony Hopkins tries out an array of voices and manners — befuddled vagueness, booming ferocity.
dangerous, smiling brusqueness.
He is easing himself into his part, into an American voice.
Between scenes he puts his specs back on and is the gentlest, kindest of presences, faintly apologetic.
He takes me aside a couple of times and begins in a soft Welsh lilt: ‘I was thinking, now this might not be a good idea and tell me straight away if you don't like it…’
And there follows a suggestion for a one- or two-word modification.
At the end of two or three hours a character has emerged, one that he will refine over the next ten days, but it is essentially there now.
He only has to remove his specs and this Cold Warrior is before us, gruff, sometimes frightening, puritanical, rather sad.
APRIL 22
There are all kinds of fame.
There's a writer's fame — one quiet guy at your reading with a plastic bag of first editions for you to sign.
And there's a movie star's fame — a mob outside your hotel hoping to catch a glimpse of you leaving.
This morning the rain has kept the numbers on the pavement down to three German lads in anoraks holding photographs of Isabella.
They are blocking the hotel doorway, demanding signatures or tokens from her, as of right.
She shrinks from them.
The first assistant, David Tringham, promises he will try to make her exits easier in future.
As Isabella makes towards the waiting Mercedes, one of the Germans shouts: ‘But we've come all the way from Hamburg.’
Isabella turns and flashes back, ‘And I've come all the way from New York!’
(I swear she is already into her German accent.)
The fans watch her car draw away, unwilling to believe their bad luck and disperse.
But they are wrong to be so forlorn.
They did not get their photographs signed, but they have had an exchange, a smidgen of repartee with a star.
When I catch up with Isabella in the rehearsal room, I am surprised to find her still a little shaken.
‘I'm not angry,’ she says.
‘I'm frightened of these people.
I don't know what they really want.’
I conclude that behind this fear is the Lennon factor — if you exist as fantasy object in so many minds, there is always the chance of an encounter with one sick spirit who has found a role for you that could hurt or destroy.
APRIL 23
John's bald head intrigues me.
It's as perfectly smooth, as perfectly curved and almost as attractive as any buttock or breast.
I now regard my own receding hair with a little more hope.
Like ET's glowing gorge, John's pate is a highly sensitive register of mood, flashing through deeply charged shades of pink to a beef tomato red, luridly offset by the pure white beard.
Amusement will bring him to it, but explosive anger will do just as nicely.
Mid-rehearsal, the third assistant brings across a note from the production office: will Mr Schlesinger kindly consent to such and such an interview with Herr So and so.
Paf!
The cultured, husky voice rises and shakes out an incandescence of brilliant obscenity, of sexual and visceral allusion, the stripped message being that serious work is being interrupted by trivialities which someone else should be dealing with.
The pate rainbows up through oranges, pinks, blushing reds and beyond, to ultraviolet perhaps.
Then, a shrug, a twinkly grin, and work resumes.
Normal hue is regained in less than ten seconds.
McEwan, right, watches as the professionals rehearse his lines
Hopkins only has to remove his specs and his Cold Warrior is before us
APRIL 24
The state of the pate can also be transformed by faked emotion.
In the scene that precedes the scuffle that results in Otto's death, Isabella has to lose her temper and scream at her husband, first in English, then in German.
Since Isabella speaks no German, letting rip this torrent is not going to be easy for her.
John suggests a series of moves that will bring her closer and closer to Otto with each phrase.
To demonstrate, he starts some 30 feet away from the actor, Ronald Nitschke, and moves in, hissing obscenities which rise in volume as he transfers to an invented, rasping, jabberwocky German.
By the time he arrives in front of Ronald, he has come to the boil and the pate is registering off the scale of visible light.
‘You must be careful,’ I tell him as I fan his head with my script.
‘You could kill yourself.’
APRIL 25
Leonard is in almost every scene.
This is his story and the film will in a sense be shot over his shoulder.
Things happen to Leonard, and things get out of control around him.
But have I given him enough lines?
Is the part too passive?
After two days, no worries Campbell lifts his part, and in every scene we rehearse he develops an added point of reference, of texture, a moment of silence, self-doubt, humour, or an elegant short cut from one emotion to another, and this bewildered (but not passive) young Englishman springs into life.
John thinks Campbell is superb in rehearsal, leaping from his chair after a protracted silence to make a passionate speech about some aspect of the story that suddenly stirs him.
One scene that looked fine on the page, but plays awkwardly, has Leonard and Maria arriving drunk at his apartment.
He wants sex, she wants to look around the place and make condescending remarks.
Things turn ugly, he assaults her, she breaks away, gives him a tongue lashing and leaves.
John isn't satisfied with it, we are bogged down, and finally it is Campbell who comes up with a plausible route through drunken, volatile shifts of feeling.
I take back to the hotel a plan of the set with John's pencilled movements on it and rewrite the scene that night.
A huge improvement.
APRIL 27
In the couple of hours between the end of rehearsals and bedtime, Campbell and I snatch a Berlin social life.
A glass of beer, tennis in a flash indoor court, a Cary Grant movie.
Afterwards, we drink in the pleasant, shabby bar attached to the Kreuzberg cinema.
At Campbell's request, I give a thumbnail history of Germany from Yalta to 1989.
His questions make me realize again how far away Europe is from the United States, and how relatively obscure.
Through ebullience, nervousness or both, Campbell teases me constantly.
Since I am used to doing the teasing, this is a novel experience.
Retaliation is the only way and the banter spills into rehearsals:
‘Campbell, would you mind putting the emphasis on ‘you ‘.’
‘What?
Oh, I see.
The writer's giving me a line-read.’
‘That's the deal.
You re-write the script.
I try and help out with your acting.’
‘Ian, no one 's listening to you.’
Tony Hopkins, on the other hand, is a loner.
He prefers to go out to restaurants and read a book, or watch people.
In the mornings he speaks feelingly about what has been on his  mind the night before.
He seems preoccupied with how the history and miseries of Berlin have disappeared beneath wealth and newness.
He tells me the story of two US servicemen who were stationed during the war near the Welsh town where he grew up.
These two men made a big impression.
Tony was with his mother when she first met them in the street.
She invited them to tea.
One of the GIs called for a pen from his friend, caught it deftly in the air and planted his huge boot on the handlebar of Tony's tricycle to write the address.
I like that detail.
The men cam frequently to the Hopkin's home and always brought gifts.
Over the weeks, one of them became morose.
The other soldier explained that his friend had intimations that he would never see his wife and child again.
He himself didn't worry.
He would take things as they came.
Months later, both men were killed in action, along with all their unit in Belgium.
Mr Hopkins, who was a baker, saved rations and made Christmas cakes for the two men's bereaved families in America.
Tony remembers going with his mother to the Post Office bearing the parcels and all their sorry weight.
This story, told from a child's point of view, from the limited perspective of a small Welsh town, far away from the fighting, brought the sadness of war closer than any story I have ever heard.
Tony is now so thoroughly Bob Glass that he does not seem to act.
He quietly transforms.
It surprises me when he speaks with a Welsh accent between scenes.
Campbell is fully in control of his part and cannot wait for shooting to start.
But Isabella is having a hard time.
While the two men have spent most of the first week concentrating on their acting, Isabella has been burdened by the special responsibility of the leading actress —the look .
Wardrobe, make-up, hair — it hasn't been going well.
She isn't happy with how she looks, and nor is John.
Until these fundamentals are in place, she cannot really begin.
She arrives at rehearsals one morning after three hours in the chair, exhausted by insomnia and with a series of panicky questions for me about her part.
John is faintly impatient; there is a lot of work to get through.
By the end of the week all Isabella's problems have been solved except the hair.
The trick apparently is to make it look ordinary without it actually being so.
A kind of nominal dowdiness is being pursued within the general context of lustrous beauty.
ISABELLISSIMA: ‘Rossellini's Maria is by turns sweetly protective and vulnerable, sexy and completely convincing.
Everyone agrees the camera loves her’
Late in the evening, John and I ride in his car from the Babelsburg studios into central Berlin.
He is worrying about Isabella.
‘She's drop-dead gorgeous and we're very lucky to have her.
But she hasn't committed to the part, she won't let go, she won't commit…’
He's right on both counts.
At lunchtime we watched the make-up tests.
Isabella walked towards camera, turned and walked away and sat on the edge of a chair.
She looked beautiful, womanly, everyone agreed, the camera loved her.
And in rehearsal the other two actors have been making  the running.
‘She needs some space,’ I say to John.
‘We need to create the space around her so she can start her work…’
APRIL 28
The following morning.
Isabella and Tony have two scenes together.
Bob Glass comes to Maria's apartment in search of Leonard.
Otto's dismembered body has been found in the tunnel, a murder investigation is already under way.
Maria tries to fend off Glass's questions, then cracks.
We cut away to business with Leonard.
When we return to the apartment, Maria has made a full confession and is asking Glass to help Leonard out of Berlin.
We sit at the table for the read-through, which is efficient but lifeless.
John makes a suggestion.
He asks Isabella to ad lib Maria's confession.
He wants the two actors to invent the scene we never see.
Isabella turns away, and for a moment I think she is about to refuse.
But she is gathering herself.
She begins to tell her story, of how she and Leonard came back from their engagement party to find Otto, her alcoholic ex-husband, in the apartment, asleep on the bed.
How an argument began, then a fight, how Leonard would have been killed had she not hit Otto over the head.
His death was accidental, but the police would never believe that, and so they came to their terrible decision, to cut the body up and hide it.
But Isabella does not tell her story in linear sequence.
She loops back, she repeats and contradicts herself, circling the truth rather than revealing it, she stammers her fear and guilt and tortuous self-justification, and in the face of Tony's soft, insistent questioning, revises her account, tries to start again, loses herself, blushes, bites her lip, pushes on…
She speaks for 35 minutes.
John and I exchange glances.
Here it is, the commitment.
The pate, I note, is pleasure-pink.
For my part, I feel elated and close to tears.
APRIL 29
In the rehearsal room after lunch I find a tough-looking guy brawling with two younger men.
It is the fight choreographer working out the moves for Leonard's struggle to the death with Otto.
Work begins.
The choreographer demonstrates to the actors with one of the stuntmen.
Campbell and Ronald try it out, but it doesn't look quite right.
Leonard should be hopeless at fighting, with no fancy tricks, but courageous all the same.
I look around and notice that the rehearsal room is becoming unusually crowded.
As we take apart the fight story, more and more men seem to be pushing in with their own excited commentaries.
The place is really beginning to hum.
People are grabbing at each other and pushing, pulling and scuffling, or twisting in the air with imaginary opponents, urging their own version of violence.
Everyone seems to know exactly how he would like to hurt someone.
Only Tony Hopkins sits it out, smiling to himself.
Isabella is also in the fight.
She has to try and drag Otto off Leonard.
‘I could jump on Ronald's back,’ she says, demonstrating, ‘and be like a fly on his shirt.’
This is generally taken up in a chorus of masculine approval: Yes, a fly on his shirt!
So he hardly notices!
He brushes her off!
That's exactly it!
APRIL 30
Isabella is now transformed in her part.
Her Maria blossoms and is by turns sweetly protective and vulnerable, generally very sexy and completely convincing.
During the last three days of rehearsals everything comes together.
We work on what we call the ‘Casablanca’ scene.
Maria and Glass rendezvous with Leonard at Tempelhof airport.
Glass has been given to believe that there may be a future for him and Maria together, so he has agreed to help get Leonard out of Berlin.
Maria has to pretend not only to Glass that she no longer loves Leonard, but to Leonard too.
It is only at the foot of the aircraft steps, with the propellers starting to down out his protests, that Leonard discovers that Maria will not be coming with him to London.
We put the scene on its feet.
‘It's no good,’ John says, and adds consolingly: ‘It's beautifully written, but it's too literary.
It needs to be more ragged.’
He's probably right.
The actors try improvising the scene two or three times while I scribble down the lines that sound good.
Then, at my insistence, all five of us sit round the table and write the scene together, line by line.
Like all committee writing, it is slow and unexciting.
We decided just when exactly the engines will start to overwhelm the dialogue.
This is something that cannot be left to the dub because we will see the wind from the propellers buffeting the actors.
We try the scene and it works.
It hardly differs from my original version.
MAY 1
It is hard to understand how people can make films without rehearsals.
Doing so presumably gives a director complete control over the performances, but surely at the expense of the final result.
I have time to observe how good John is with the actors.
He respects them, and gives them the freedom, as he did Isabella, to solve their own problems.
He stands disconcertingly close to the action, hands deep in his pockets, weight well back on his heels.
He is furious perfectionist.
Nothing darkens the directional pate better than John being told by production what he cannot have.
But I suspect the rages are in some degree tactical, part of the well-established struggle between a director and his producers.
By European standards the budget is fairly large, but this is a big, complicated film.
There are dozens of locations and complicated sets.
I have spent some time strolling awestruck inside Luci Arrighi's magnificent, painstaking re-construction of the tunnel.
It lies across the studio floor in two giant sections.
A convincing, busy world of the Berlin of 1955 has to be created with passers-by, traffic, army personnel, neighbours, café crowds.
In the dancehall scene where Leonard and Maria first meet there will be a crowd of 200.
At the reconstructed Berlin Wall where they are reconciled 34 years later, the crowd will swell to 500.
Through the considerable efforts of the US Ambassador in Bonn, the Pentagon has relented — permission to use Tempelhof airport has bee granted.
Leonard's reluctant leave-taking from Maria takes place on the airport apron.
The script calls for a period propeller plane that actually works.
If he cannot have one, John says, he will ask the German producers, Wieland Schultz-Keil and Chris Severnich, to stand on the wings, whirl their arms and make airplane noises.
The threat seems to work.
MAY 2
I decided long ago that I would cut out as soon as shooting began.
But I know it is going to be a wrench.
Working intensely alongside people for two weeks makes you very fond of them.
This experience of a tight community of shared aspiration is rare in a novelist's lonely life.
Because the daylight hours are lengthening, the first week's work will be a punitive sequence of six night shoots.
Back in Oxford I fax John a note telling him how much I have enjoyed working with him, and urging him not to get too red.
MAY 5
I'm experiencing the expected withdrawal symptoms.
I feel restless.
The shooting schedule tells me they are night shooting at Tempelhof.
Norma Heyman, the English producer who has nurtured this project every day of its labyrinthine two and a half years, phones me with a report.
‘It went wonderfully, darling, John is so pleased.
We all miss you.
It just doesn't seem right that you're not here…’
I console myself with writing up my notes.
Solitary work also has its pleasures.
A postcard arrives from Berlin.
It ends: ‘Will the tight budget bring us to a grinding halt?
I hope not, and will go down fighting — and VERY RED.
Love, J.’
Eye Esquire
DISAPPEARING EARTH'S T-shirts feature some of the world's most endangered species.
A newly created invisible ink makes the animals disappear with the heat of your body.
To help save the animals call  And to win one of fifteen free T-shirts write to Earth Esquire $addr;
DENTAL HEALTH
The Interplak electric toothbrush removes plaque and prevents gum infection more effectively than other methods, according to the American Dental Association.
It costs £65, but to receive one of 20 we have to give away write to 
JUST LIKE VIRGIN
For the transatlantic traveller who wants bigger seats, more leg room, dedicated check-in and priority baggage handling without paying more, Virgin Atlantic have launched Mid Class.
For more information on this upgraded economy class, call 
THIRTIES ELEGANCE
This summer, Oris, watchmakers since 1904, are recreating the magic of past decades.
The watch, left, was designed according to an original Thirties blueprint.
It is a thumb-wind, hand-crafted mechanical watch and is the perfect accessory for stylish summer evenings.
To enter the draw to win one of three watches, each worth £155, just write the name of Nat Adderley's more famous brother on a postcard and send it to Oris/Esquire,
ICE COLD BEER
Would you like a free case of the coldest beer in the world?
It is called Kulta and it comes from the distant reaches of Lapland.
It is made with the purest of polar waters, drawn from the post-glacial streams of the Arctic region.
And, interestingly, it is brewed entirely by women.
All you have to do is write and tell us the name and address of your favourite bar — anywhere in the country — and a case of Kulta could be sent there for you to collect or even enjoy on the premises.
We have 125 cases ready for dispatch, so write now to Kulta/Esquire,.
Don't forget to give your address and daytime telephone number.
A DINNER FOR EIGHT, in a couple of hours and without breaking into a sweat?
Impossible!
Well, Matthew Fort, Esquire's Food Editor, will be able to show you how it's done on July 23.
He'll show you how to impress your friends and he'll talk about the role of the man in the kitchen.
We'll be serving Corbieres full-bodied red and dry white wine from Languedoc in France, and we have a Krups Espresso/Cappuccino machine to give away, along with a month's free supply of Lavazza coffee.
For your invitation simply send a cheque for £10, made out to Esquire, to Cook/Esquire  
Lenny's the man they call the Guvnor.
He's the king of unlicensed boxing, the most famous bouncer in London.
But when a man dies after a scuffle behind closed doors, Lenny is left facing the biggest fight of his career…
Lenny McLean V The Crown
by Duncan Campbell
THE RINGSIDE SEATS AT THE OLD BAILEY costs nothing.
But it's clear from the level of concentration on the brows of the muscular young men and the shoulder-padded young women in the front row that they would have happily forked out for the privilege of being present.
This is to be a longer and harder fight than any of them have ever witnessed at Sinatra's or the Rainbow or any one of dozens of warehouses and car parks.
This is the decider, the one that could end the career of the king of unlicensed boxing, the man they call the Guvnor.
When Lenny McLean is brought up from the cells in his cardigan to strand trial for the murder of Gary Humphreys, there are no spare seats in the gallery of Court 13.
Lenny has filled the house again.
He stands looking straight at the judge as the clerk reads out his name and that of his co-defendant, Robert Lopez, who is charged with manslaughter and inflicting grievous bodily harm.
So what has brought the best known boxer on the unofficial circuit, the best known bouncer in town, the man who has inspired film scripts and tall tales in the snooker halls, once one of the six people in Britain said to be able to bench-press 500 pounds, what has brought  him to the dock in front of Judge Richard Lowry and to the possibility of spending the rest of his life locked up with robbers and rapists?
THE STORY GOES LIKE this: a young man of 31 called Gary Humphreys from  came down to London on June 1, last year.
He had a condition known as hypomania, which makes the sufferer erratic, irrational and hyperactive.
It can be contained by medication and he had been receiving treatment at a hospital in Salford as a voluntary patient just prior to his trip.
He had discharged himself on May 30, borrowed some money from a friend and headed off to East Anglia.
This was a sort of pilgrimage, as his father, a former Norwich City footballer, had recently died.
The journey took him to Harwich, then Norwich, where he tried unsuccessfully to get the medication he needed from the local hospital.
But the nursing staff, understandably enough, wanted to check his identity before prescribing the drugs.
Frustrated, he set off for London.
Humphreys spent the morning of June 1 at Madame Tussaud's and the afternoon, from 1.30 to 7 pm, at the Mayfair Hotel in the West End.
There his hypomania was already taking effect.
He was pestering people at the bar, trying to butt into their conversations or sit down at their tables and behaving — as far as people who did not know he was ill were concerned — like an archetypal northern wally.
Lenny made his name in the unlicensed ring.
He was The Guvnor, the big draw, the main event
Just before midnight, Humphreys went to the Hippodrome nightclub on Charing Cross Road.
It was a busy night and among the crowd there were 28 women from Bournemouth, celebrating a chum's birthday.
At 2.10 am, he climbed on to the disc jockey's console and tried to grab the mike, shouting wildly at the swirling crowd below him.
To most people he must have seemed simply drunk and he was bundled away from the equipment and dumped six feet below to the floor by a couple of the DJ team.
Back with the dancers, Humphreys peeled off all his clothes, started playing with himself and finally urinated on the dance-floor.
The security staff were alerted.
A naked man was going crackers and had to be dealt with.
On duty that night were Leonard McLean, a pugnacious 42-year-old from Bow in east London and Robert Lopez, a tall good-looking 33-year-old black man from Edmonton.
They swung into action.
Humphreys was hoisted off into a private room and blows were exchanged behind closed doors.
Lenny McLean said later that he had had to give the chap a ‘right and a left’ because he was still in a wild, uncontrolled state.
McLean emerged from the room rubbing the knuckles under his fingerless black leather gloves.
Humphreys emerged bleeding.
Lopez gave him a kitchen towel so that he could wipe himself up with, handed him his discarded clothes and sent him on his way via the Hippodrome's back door.
Humphreys must have presented a strange sight, bloodied and bewildered and still without his shoes and socks.
He attracted the attention of fire-fighters returning from a job who realized that we was hurt.
They called an ambulance and he was helped into it.
But he was still not suffering from his hypmaniacal attack — he now believed the Mafia were after him — and when the ambulance stopped at Tottenham Court Road, a quarter of a mile away, he leapt out and set off again naked down the street.
He was finally restrained by police officers from the Diplomatic Protection Squad, who happened to be in the area, and two doormen from a nearby gambling club.
Bystanders say that he was conscious and aware of what was happening and was asking for help.
He was taken to hospital.
By 4 am Gary Humphreys was dead, having suffered a broken jaw and choked to death on his own blood.
Reports in the papers the following day spoke of a naked man going berserk on the street and being struck by a car.
It rated about four paragraphs.
The police traced Humphrey's moves back to the Hippodrome and interviewed both Mclean and Lopez about what had happened that night.
They were charged with murder and manslaughter respectively.
Lenny McLean was remanded in custody in London's newest prison, Belmarsh in Woolwich.
He had been in court before on charges of violence but never for anything like murder.
Which brings us to the Old Bailey.
McLean is not the first bouncer to have been tried for Murder and certainly not the first bouncer to have been up on charges of serious violence.
Over the last few years a breed of bouncer has evolved, a Rottweiler in a bow-tie, who likes doing serious harm to lippy young men.
At the same time, some smart security companies have wised up and realized that such people are bad for business and they have duly set out to recruit the New Bouncer, who is trained to smile and defuse, rather than scowl and disembowel.
What the jury has to decide is to which of these breeds McLean belongs.
Is he just, as his barrister, David Whitehouse, acknowledges, a man with an ‘appalling exterior’ but no more, or is he, as the charge suggests, a murderer?
ONE OF FIVE children who father, a bookie, died young, Lenny McLean grew up in one of the tougher parts of London's East End, left school at fifteen and, as a young man, started to make a few quid in the unlicensed boxing matches which were becoming increasingly popular at the time.
He started with bare-knuckle fights at Epsom on Derby Day.
Unlicensed boxing is not illegal, but it is not recognized by the British Board of Control.
It need not have the medical checks or the rules on weight difference or the timed rounds of official boxing.
Unfit scrappers with a weight difference of a couple of stone can slug it out for as long as the organizers see fit and the sport can accommodate fighters who might have been barred from the more formal ring or people who want to avoid the cartels that run the official game.
Fights can take place anywhere, from the back room of a pub to a municipal hall.
One of their main features is the heavy betting, often into four figures.
In the early Eighties, McLean, by now the champion of unlicensed boxing, took on Brian ‘The Mad Gypsy’ Bradshaw in a fight that was  televised and seen by millions.
Anyone who saw it will not have forgotten it.
Bradshaw rather unwisely greeted McLean's arrival in the ring by nutting him.
This was not wise.
McLean understandably took offence, whacked Bradshaw to the ground and proceeded to stomp on his head and chest.
It was horrific to watch.
Bradshaw's ribs were broken and he was unconscious for 45 minutes.
Footage of the fight was later used by Thames TV's This Week as an example of the dangers of unlicensed boxing.
It was in the unlicensed ring that Lenny made his name.
He has the build — 6′2″ and around nineteen stone — and he is a showman.
As the sound system blared out Gary Glitter's ‘Do You Wanna be in My Gang’, he would lunge towards the crowd as he entered the ring at Finsbury Park's Rainbow.
He was The Guvnor, the big draw, the main event.
His reputation as a hard man — he had picked up a conviction for GBH — had won him work on the bouncer circuit and the title ‘King of the Bouncers’.
He had looked after the Camden Palace and was earning £270 a week at the Hippodrome on that dark June night.
Lenny McLean was the best known bouncer in London.
A film about his life, to be called The Guvnor , was planned, with the actor Craig Fairbrass to star.
This project was ‘starting in weeks’ in May 1989, but is still under discussion.
In an interview about the film, he told the Guardian : ‘They said I was an animal.
Well, I am.
I admire animals.
But I don't like being called a funking animal by a load of nonces who know nothing about me.’
He explained his philosophy: ‘It's a nasty brutal world and the only morals I've got are: be proud; get what you can; look after the wife and family and fuck everybody else.’
Before the trial, the Sunday Times had just asked him to pose for the fashion pages of their magazine, wearing tough-guy togs.
BACK IN THE COURTroom, David Calvert-Smith opens the case for the Crown in front of Judge Lowry.
‘It is likely that as you hear the story you will experience strong emotions,’ he tells the jury.
This was a night of ‘bizarre events,’ he says.
He sketches out the prosecution case, suggesting that Lenny McLean sought to teach Humphreys a lesson because ‘he was being a darned nuisance’.
Humphreys's behaviour, concedes Calvert-Smith, ‘obviously presented a most unpleasant spectacle’ and no one has suggested that McLean had intended to kill him.
But did Humphreys warrant the punishment he received?
What will the jurors feel is the true story whey they have heard from the ‘hen party from Bournemouth’?
One of the sound system team, Anthony Adamson, gives evidence, telling of Humphreys's spiral towards oblivion as he tussled over the turn-tables.
The trial is in its early stages, yet the crowds still file in every morning to the public gallery.
But although they do not know it, the fight is nearly over.
Is he a man with ‘appalling exterior’ and no more, or is he, as the charge suggests, a murderer?
Sponges and towels are not part of the judicial kit bag.
So when it becomes clear that a criminal case is not proceeding as anticipated — a trial is not scuppered by lobbing something into the ring — there are discreet discussions between learned friends in chambers, many exchanges of the phrase ‘I'm much obliged’ and finally the jury is summoned back.
And so it happens in Court 13.
The prosecution acknowledges there is insufficient evidence to proceed against Mr McLean on charges of murder, manslaughter or grievous bodily harm, and against Mr Lopez on any charge.
For the prosecution case to stand, it will be necessary to prove that Lenny McLean struck the fatal blow.
A dental specialist, Dr Bernard Sims, has told the court that if the original whack from Lenny McLean did indeed break Humphreys's jaw, he would not have been able to speak coherently afterwards.
Yet witnesses to the latter part of the night's events heard him talking clearly to a policeman.
Did Humphreys suffer his major injuries when he fell from the disc jockey's platform at the Hippodrome, or in the streets later on when he fled from the ambulance and was restrained once more?
There is clearly insufficient evidence for the most serious charges.
Mr McLean, for his part, will offer a guilty plea to the charge of actual bodily harm.
There is to be no knock-out, no longer deliberation in the jury room.
The formal verdicts have to be returned on the judge's instruction.
Robert Lopez is released without a stain on his character.
All that is left is the mitigation plea for McLean.
David Whitehouse has enough letters of character reference to paper Bermondsey warehouse and he seems anxious to read all of them.
He recalls that when one of his legal team visited Mr McLean in Belmarsh he was in tears of distress.
He has contemplated suicide, he says; he feels deep regret about the death.
He is a family man himself, with a son and daughter in their twenties.
He wants to express his deep sympathy to the Humphreys family.
Mr Whitehouse reads the letters: someone called John Huntley, a model, gained the confidence to enter his profession through Mr McLean's kindness; Janice Joyce, who knew McLean at the Hippodrome, thinks the only way Lenny could really kill anyone would be by making them laugh.
‘He knows how to treat a lady,’ she writes.
Someone else calls him a ‘big softy’.
Ronald Joyce recalls Lenny helping raise £2,000 for a dying cancer victim.
He has coached youngsters at the Freddie Mills boxing club.
He has raised money for muscular dystrophy charities.
Listening to all this in the body of the court is the family of Gary Humphreys, the forgotten player in this tragedy.
As he is described by Mr Whitehouse as a ‘sad’ character, they shake their heads tearfully.
To them, clearly.
he deserves a happier memorial than the one afforded him by his last few crazy hours on the dance-floor and the street.
A police officer escorts them out as the verdicts are confirmed.
The judge retires for the night to consider his sentence and returns the next day to jail Leonard McLean for eighteen months.
McLean takes it calmly.
He appeals against the sentence on April 9, but it is the day of the election and no one notices that his plea is turned down by three Court of Appeal judges.
He returns to jail to contemplate the saddest fight of his career.
L.A. Into the War Zone
‘It was just another war.
They're all pretty much the same.
They have their fighters, their arms suppliers, their innocent and not so innocent victims, their aid workers, their peacekeepers, their wounded, their mass graves.
And their reporters.
That's where I come in.
I write about them’
by Charles Gross
ONE WAR WAS WINDing down for a while, not ending, because they never end.
They start again when the time comes, when alliances have shifted, when everyone has stored enough ammunition to have another go, when race hatreds revive under the guise of class wars begin anew as ethnic strife.
But this one was in a lull, and it was better to move on.
I was passed out after a night drinking rice wine and native beer with my band of happy, brother war correspondents in the bar of a hotel a few miles from the front.
I was just feeling the early morning sun as it warmed the beads of sweat that dripped down my two days' stubble.
I was thinking about a morning eye-opener, when the telephone rang.
I heard the voice, but I tried not to listen, concentrating instead on the spider's web in the window.
A fly, whose buzzing had been driving me insane, was struggling for life.
Beyond were the mountains where rebel artillery waited to shell the city and the cool blue sea with loyalist naval batteries pounding the coast.
From the minaret, the muezzin's call to prayer mingled with the gentle serenade of mariachis.
Overhead, the fan revolved slowly.
From the other end of the telephone, on another continent, in another world where people slept soundly in their beds and knew nothing of battle, the familiar voice that had ordered me into so many hells was sending me back, this time to the lowest rung.
How could I tell Fatima with her large, trusting brown eyes that her war had become stale news and I had to move on?
I thought she was asleep, until I heard her voice.
‘What is it muchacho?’
‘Another war, Imelda.
Some place called Los Angeles.’
‘I have heard of it, sir.
It is dangerous.
Have you ever been there?’
‘A long time ago…’
I SUPPOSE THIS WAR too was like all the others, but it was different, except in the ways they are the same.
The names change.
A few other things, not many.
The accents.
The clothes.
The exchange rate.
A few days later, I was standing in another third world  airport .
They say the people of Los Angeles speak 93 languages and teach just as many in the schools, but the signs in the airport were in two: Spanish and English.
Bienvenidos .
I suppose I didn't feel welcome.
The smell of burning buildings from the last flare-up still filled the air.
My faithful driver, Murphy, met me at the gate, taking my bags and walking me past the vagrants and money changers to his car, an old American model that had become something of a collector's item.
He opened the boot to put my bags in, and I saw a Colt.45 lying there.
Noticing my expression, he justified himself: ‘Things are much worse now.’
We drove north past the gutted buildings, through God knows how many factional districts whose cultural and political differences were imperceptible to all but the most practiced eye, up to a fairly safe area called Beverly Hills.
The jacarandas were blooming purple, just as they had in Rhodesia during the civil war.
Palms loomed over cypresses and poinsettias, and brown men in straw hats trimmed the miles of green lawns.
I always stayed in the Beverly Hills Hotel.
It was a good place to cover the war.
You could see city below and you could hear anything big, but you were just far enough away to be able to sleep safely.
It was also a vital information centre, where spies mingled with oilmen, where officials of the local security forces met heir hookers, and where the waiters brought valuable intelligence every morning from their homes in the rabbit warrens in the ghettos and barrios where few diplomats or reporters dared go.
Murphy waited until we were in the Polo Lounge to break the bad news.
He would not be able to drive me around, not this time.
Things had changed.
He was a lawyer now, defending innocent multinational corporations against bogus claims of injury by their workers, and I'd have to find someone else.
No, he didn't know anyone who both spoke English and knew the ‘hoods, as the neighbourhoods where the rival factions played out their daily drama were known.
Words like ‘hood’, ‘gang’ and ‘police’were part of the local argot, argot common to all wars, but different.
In Salvador, it's all death squads, guerilleros, sombreros.
In Lebanon, it was militias.
Christians, Muslims, Israelis.
In what was Yugoslavia, Serbs, Croats and federal forces.
Different, but the same.
I tried new drivers — Armenians, Indians, Arabs, blacks — but ended up driving myself in a rented car.
That's the kind of war this one was, one where the only person you could trust was yourself, and yourself not that much.
Some people called it a riot.
Whatever it was, it was another round in a long war that is not over yet
Most of the factions in Los Angeles called themselves ‘gangs’, although a few used names like ‘the police,’ or ‘the sheriffs’.
They have been fighting a real war, a race war, a class war, a war over resources and territory, a war in which real children die every day, a war nobody can win because no territory is conquered and the body counts do not mean victory.
The biggest weapons, except for a few weeks in May when the federal army intervened, were mere light automatic weapons — AK-47s from Russia, Uzis from Israel, M-16s from the USA.
Not many people had grenades, and many relied on sidearms.
It will be some time before the factions upgrade to rockets, missiles and heavy artillery.
I arrived just after one of the more serious rounds, when thousands of people took to the streets to burn and loot.
Some people called it an insurrection, others a riot.
Whichever it was, it was another round in a long war that is not over yet.
‘WE MAKE SURE the high ground is safe for the officers before they go in,’ Officer Terry McIntosh, a helicopter pilot with the Los Angeles Police Department, said as we flew over the city at a few hundred feet.
‘And we're the highest ground of all, so we can see if anyone is waiting on a roof for an ambush.’
Officer McIntosh, a striking blue-eyed blonde who looked like Honor Blackman as acrobatic flyer Pussy Galore in Goldfinger , was observing.
Tonight the pilot was Frank Provenzano.
Below us was the battle zone, 464 square miles of urban decay, whose every street was a border to someone.
When I arrived and called Bob Keller, an ABC News producer who had lived in Beirut and was now covering LA, I asked him where the Green Line was.
All cities have green or red lines that separate Muslim from Christians, or rich from poor, lines beyond which you are no longer safe if you belong to one tribe or the other.
Keller said: ‘It depends on how rich you are and how white you are.
I know people who have never been east of Western.’
Below, Western Avenue ran from the Hollywood Hills in the north for miles south towards the port at San Pedro, one of many frontiers that let gangs know which turf was theirs and separated one class from another, black from Latino, Latino from Asian, white from the rest, us from them.
The police demarcated the city into eighteen geographical divisions, the gangs and races into thousands.
From the air, I could see the burned-out shopping centres along Western Avenue whose Korean signs were still visible in the ashes.
Every few blocks, a building or two had been gutted, walls standing, roofs collapsed, as if random artillery shelling had taken out the commercial heart of the city, leaving a few lucky businesses to struggle on until the next round.
GUN LAW: ‘There are more guns down there now that we ever thought possible.’
— Officer Terry McIntosh, helicopter pilot with the LAPD
‘Look down there at the Western Surplus Store,’ McIntosh said.
It was a huge, single-story wreck.
‘It was completely looted and then burned down.’
What did they take?
‘At least 1,100 guns,’ she said.
‘There are more guns there now that we ever thought possible.’
The ground radio had reports of a gang shooting at the corner of La Brea and Rodeo, and Provenzano dipped the chopper to the west and flew at 130 mph to reach the site.
Once there, we saw nothing.
This was not the first false alarm designed to draw the police into an ambush, although no one had been ambushed so far.
From the air, the most suspicious sights were large gatherings.
Over Rancho Cienega Park, a few dozen black people were playing basketball or waiting to buy food from a catering truck in the car park.
We went in for a closer look.
‘It's okay,’ McIntosh said, looking through her binoculars.
‘They're just having a good time.’
Police patrol cars have their numbers painted on their roofs, so the helicopters will recognize them.
So do all the roofs in the government housing projects and many private houses.
Below on the street, near numbers 1408 and 1411, black teenagers played outside.
Some of them, a dozen or so, ran into the street and appeared to start fighting.
Then I saw two men hitting each other, others running, some falling down.
McIntosh's voice grew stern, as it directed the crowd over the helicopter's loudspeaker.
‘This is the Los Angeles Police Department.
Leave the area southbound or you may be under arrest.’
The crowd was running along the road, stopping traffic on Normandy.
The fights were playful, obviously intended to goad the police.
We watched several patrol cars surround the area without confronting the crowd.
On the radio, police supervisors were recommending alternate courses of action.
One wanted to go in and break it up, a second to stay back and let them go home.
The second view prevailed.
The ground radio blurted out the most horrible crimes.
Someone was holding hostages.
‘Suspect is a male black with a grenade.’
A few minutes later: ‘Report that a man heard shots and a woman screaming.’
Provenzano accelerated to reach the spot, but we found nothing.
‘Drive-by shooting.
White vehicle heading towards Broadway,’ the radio said.
Then: ‘On South Third Avenue, a screaming child.’
Later, Provenzano flew over a stolen car and circled while the patrolmen on the ground arrested four black men inside, forcing them to lie on the ground to be checked for weapons.
The area Provenzano and McIntosh covered was called South Central.
‘There are really some very pretty places in this city,’ Terry McIntosh assured me.
‘We're just not over them.’
A REPORT PREPARED by the District Attorney, who would not vouch for the figures, said Los Angeles had 150,000 gang members of all races.
The LAPD had 7,000 officers, albeit better trained, with an air fleet of eighteen helicopters, a budget of over $400 million and an arsenal the teenagers in the gangs could never match.
The police could also take prisoners, and more than 25,000 people were behind bars in Los Angeles, nearly all of them black or Latino.
More prisons were under construction.
‘In prison, you learn racism,’ said Bobby Lavender, a triple X OG,’an Original Gang leader, at a barbecue in his brother-in-law's back yard in south Los Angeles.
‘There are drugs coming down.
Every time he guards want overtime they start a rumour that there's going to be trouble.’
Bobby Lavender came of age at the time the police had just crushed the last Black Panthers political group and new non-political gangs were beginning.
He and his friends started the Bishops, which split into the Bloods and the Crips, each further divided into sets by neighbourhood.
Bloods wore red, Crips blue, and woe betide anyone wearing the wrong colour in the ‘hood.
There were more Crips and they had a larger share of the market in illegal drugs.
As Bobby Lavender talked and his relations tried to eat their lunch, a police helicopter hovered, its rotor blades occasionally too loud for us to hear each other.
No one mentioned it.
‘The gangs have been going 23 years.
A lot of  kids were born into it.
They've never seen anything but shooting and death, like those kids in Beirut and South America.
Lavender, an intelligent, thoughtful man nearing 40, might have been a guerrilla chief in another war.
Now, he had become a peacemaker, and he was encouraging a truce between the Bloods and the Crips, who had shot at one another for years.
Before he served two years in prison, Bobby Lavender had, as they say in LA, ‘dressed the dress, walked the walk and talked the talk’ of the black urban gangster.
And lived.
‘It's a warrior code,’ a white hight school principal named Newton Hart said, ‘the clothes, the walk, the talk.’
Hart, a big man with a beard, had been teaching for nineteen years.
Seventeen of his students had died violently.
His school, John Glenn High, was in a suburb, Norwalk, to which many city families had fled when they made enough money.
It looked like a pleasant small town anywhere, mostly bungalows on leafy streets.
We went for a drive through the ‘one ways’— small one-way streets of tiny clapboard houses built for an earlier generation of warriors, the GIs who returned from Europe and the Pacific in 1945.
The GIs had moved out years earlier, and Latinos and a few Asian former warriors from Vietnam and Cambodia had taken their place in houses that were built cheaply to last a short time.
‘The biggest gang we've got has been at war with its rival for eleven years,’ Hart explained.
‘This was the biggest shooting war in America.
In six months, we had over 400 shootings.
More than a hundred kids were wounded and more than 30 died last year.’
That was just Norwalk.
Los Angeles had 800 deaths.
The only obvious sign of gangsterism in Norwalk was the graffiti.
Gang names and nicknames of gang members were spray painted on walls, gates, garage doors, mail boxes, stop signs, nearly every flat surface that would take them.
‘You want to start something?’
Hart asked me, as he stopped next to a gang signature on someone's house.
‘Spray paint that over and wait a few minutes.
The street will be filled with people with guns.’
A boy who looked about sixteen walked from his front yard to the car.
He was shirtless, had the merest hint of a moustache and smiled easily.
He was telling his former teacher about his new job.
Hart listened to him for a few minutes, shouted hello to his brothers who were sitting outside and wished the boy luck.
I said he seemed like a nice kid, and Hart said: ‘The story is that he killed somebody, when he was thirteen years old.’
IT TURNED OUT TO BE an average weekend in the war of Los Angeles.
The local newspaper, the Los Angeles Times , put the total number of people shot over the weekend at 53.
Ten people died.
The Times printed a map showing where each shooting had taken place under the heading: ‘LA Weekend: 48 Hours of Gunfire.’
The story of victims number 37,38 and 39 was: ‘In an apparent ambush, a gang member, fourteen, is killed and two others are wounded as they stand at a bus stop.’
FATHER GREG BOYLE, SJ, has been pastor at the Mission Dolores Church in East Los Angeles for six years.
In that time he has said 27 funeral masses for gang members who had died at gunpoint.
It was Friday at Mission Dolores, when the probation officers came to met the boys on parole and Father Boyle paid the many youngsters whom he had working the church, the school and charity programmes in the parish.
The boys called him Father Greg of ‘G’.
He called most of the ‘Homes’ or ‘Homey’for ‘homeboy’.
He had just turned 38, but his beard was nearly all grey.
His office, in a small building adjoining the church, was always open, and children of all ages cam in and out without asking.
Amid interruptions from the telephone and boys coming into to ask for help, he talked about the parish, which is the poorest in Los Angeles.
‘A few weeks ago, someone came up to a tagger with the KWS tagging crew,’ Boyle said.
Taggers were kids who painted their names on walls, not gang members, but unarmed graffitists.
Some, like the famed Chaca, had put their names up all over the country.
Chaca had even spray painted his tag ‘Chaca’ on the inside of the lift as he was leaving the criminal court building after being convicted of defacing public property.
‘KWS are Kings with Style.
The guy asked him what tagging crew he was with, he said KWS.
‘Not any more you're not,’ the guy said.
And he shot him.
This is a new thing, having a tagger kill another tagger.’
Perhaps no one was immune to the lure of war.
When Father Boyle finished paying his workers at $6 an hour, he took a stack of cheques to deliver around the neighbourhoods of East Los Angeles.
‘A lot of them cannot come to us, because we are near the projects.
They'll be shot, so I take their pay to them.’
We went from house to house, passing White Memorial Hospital, whose waiting room had been shot up when one gang went to kill the wounded members of another.
We drove east along Brooklyn Avenue, the heart of Jewish Los Angeles 50 years earlier.
People walked past La Farmacia, Botica del Sol and El Paso Shoes in the late afternoons as if they were making their evening promenade through a village in Mexico.
The old shops along East Brooklyn Avenue were crumbling, but the people brought the street to life.
The rest of Los Angeles moved only in the safety of cars, and the streets had become sterile and unwelcoming.
On East Brooklyn, the walking people, who had lost more in this war than most, wandered gaily with their families and paused to talk to one another.
LA LAW: Members of the Nation of Islam survey the wreckage after the riots.
Above left, Bloods and Crips declare a truce.
Above right, police chase a looter
Father Boyle stopped the car to talk to a young mechanic in overalls.
‘I hear two of your homeboys got killed.
I'm sorry.’
‘Yeah,’ the  boy said, wiping the grease from his hands with a rag.
‘A taxi pulled up and two guys, a black and a Hispanic, shot him.
They say it was Quatro Flats.’
Quatro Flats were an old Mexican gang, founded 40 years ago.
‘And the other homeboy?’
Boyle asked.
‘He got a gun and shot himself right in the head.’
‘Why?’
‘Over a girl.’
There were more gang symbols on the walls of East Los Angeles than in Norwalk, where they seemed to be everywhere.
And here, with so many gangs living close together, more names were crossed out with an X. That would have meant more killing.
US Marines have won medals of honour dying to save their flag, and these kids died for their symbols as well.
In a housing project car park, we watched as a white Cadillac stretch limousine pulled up to buy cocaine from the barrio kids, while Los Angeles's contribution to the economy of the underclass.
Later, a black Mercedes.
‘A woman organized the neighbourhood last year,’ Boyle recalled.
‘She had everyone standing out here at night, and they unfurled a banner across the whole street saying, ‘If you came here to buy drugs, go home.’
It worked for a while.
People from West LA were embarrassed, but then the dealers shot up her house and she had to move away.’
IN DOWNTOWN LOS ANGELES, a black cop sat in his office above the Criminal Courts and told me of his seven years with the Hardcore Gang Unit of the District Attorney's office: ‘I haven't worked on anything but a murder since I started here.’
In this war, Ken Bell has crossed the line.
Born black in the Aliso Project, in the days before it became Mexican, he became a cop 20 years ago because he thought it was an honourable job.
I wanted to help people, but I know now it's rare you can help people.’
He has arrested many black gang members and sent them to prisons.
‘I don't let colour get in the way of right and wrong.’
A tall, powerfully built man with short hair and a well-trimmed moustache, he paid his respects to the young gangsters who were technically his enemies.
‘I'm a little disturbed with the news media,’ he said.
‘For example, the truce now between the Bloods and the Crips.
I tell the reporters it's happening.
Instead of accepting what I say and what the kids say, they won't accept they want peace.’
Wanting peace among themselves and achieving peace with everyone else, including the police and the fundamentally white power structure the police represent, are different things, both difficult to achieve — impossible, if they have to accept the status quo indefinitely.
With the authorities responding by building more prisons and the police referring to gang members as urban terrorists, Bell does not see an early end to the war.
‘I think we'll end up with some kind of big confrontation,’ he said, leaning back in his desk chair, surrounded by other desks and with an open window looking over the rest of downtown.
‘It could be between black and white.
It's not like the Sixties when people were just throwing rocks.
These kids don't want this confrontation.
They know their .38s and Uzis are no match for tanks.
They know the Airborne can come in.
I don't want that.
They don't want that.’
THOUSANDS OF GUNS were looted in May, more are for sale illegally, but easily, in the ghettos.
More still are for sale legally over the counter in shops like the Brass Rail on La Brea, the store that sold guns to the Black Panthers in the 1960s and where I watched white and Korean men wearing jeans queuing to buy.
For $300, they could buy a good pistol.
For $599.95, the old army issue M-1 carbine.
No price was given for the newer M-16 on the wall.
At the target range in Van Nuys, a lower middle-class white suburb in the Valley, north of Central Los Angeles, I saw a dozen people line up early in the morning to take target practice with hand-guns, shooting at targets shaped like men — most of them at 25 paces: ‘the most common range for street warfare,’ as one man there put it.
‘What do you think would happen if I went there?’
Bobby Lavender asked me about the target range.
‘They would have the police down there so quick I would never get to practise.’
So, the war goes on.
One side drives by and shoots innocent people.
Another side imprisons a generation.
One side kidnaps women over bungled drug deals, rapes other women, attacks shopkeepers and, occasionally, shoots the police.
The other side beats people, humiliates them, escalates its campaign to deny them their rights.
A few desert the ranks.
One policeman said he was planning to leave the force after 21 years.
‘I just can't take it any more,’ he said, much as Bobby Lavender could no longer endure the life of a gangster and watch a generation vanish.
Yet the war goes on and more arrivals—veterans of the Khmer Rouge, the South Vietnamese army, the Salvadorean death squads — come to replace the lucky few who make enough money to escape the war of Los Angeles.
And the authorities build more prisons, like the new Twin Towers Correctional Facility, huge windowless towers of forbidding grey concrete with openings like arrow slits.
The last time I saw prisons like that was in northern Iraq, when the Kurds were knocking down doors and killing guards, freeing men and women who had seen daylight in years.
The fighting never stopped from the time I got to Los Angeles, but no one gained ground.
No one was winning.
It must be time to go, maybe to Yugoslavia, East Timor or Iraq, but I suppose they'll send me back.
One side drives by and shoots innocent people.
Another side imprisons a generation.
So the war goes on
CLINTON
The Oxford Years
Sex, drugs and Vietnam have haunted Bill Clinton's campaign for the US presidency.
But during Clinton's two years at Oxford in the heady days of the late Sixties, attitudes were different
by Henry Porter
YOU CAN SEE IT in his eyes.
The moral dilemma which contorts Bill Clinton's face as he confronts his accusers has also got a hold on every Democratic candidate or would-be candidate of his generation.
Even one so buttoned-down as Senator Al Gore trembles to consider that if he made a full-out run at Pennsylvania Avenue, every part of his private life would be scrutinized for the sort of improprieties that cause lips to purse out on the Plains.
As with any candidate his age, the trouble originates in his early adult life and consists of three things: the draft, dope and sex — the all-absorbing issues of the Sixties, when Clinton spent two years at University College, Oxford.
He arrived in England in the autumn of 1968 aboard the USS United States of America , along with 32 clean-cut American youths who had formed the Sailing Party of that year's Rhodes Scholars.
Clinton was much like the others — a rangy boy with a tuxedo in his trunk who had come to Oxford to study political science and to read all he could before starting to build a career in law and government.
The England in which he arrived was in a peculiar condition, being neither the Brideshead cocktail party of their Ivy League fancies, nor the go-go hotspot of mini-skirted hairdressers pictured on the front of American news weeklies.
When Clinton disembarked,The Times was trying to come to grips with the modern world: William Rees-Mogg asked Mick Jagger to explain his generation and wrote fearful leaders about student unrest.
This was 1968, the year of les événements in Paris and the Prague Spring.
And in England student revolutionaries were gathering in television studios to frighten nervous presenters like Frank Mackenzie.
The shambling uprising of anti-war Guevara-dreamers which had begun in Cambridge in October 1967 with a demonstration against Harold Wilson, leading to some skirmishing with police, had spread through the universities of the country.
By the autumn of 1968, revolutionary politics were becoming as much the stuff of Oxford parties as the riffs of Jimi Hendrix.
In his first year, Clinton lived in rooms in St Helen's Court Almshouses.
He stayed close to fellow Rhodes Scholars Strobe Talbot (now an editorial writer for Time magazine), Frank Aller and Richard Stearns (now a Massachusetts judge).
He began to construct the famous network of friends (known as Friends of Bill or FoB) who power the Clinton campaign.
They include Derek Shearer, who helps to run Clinton's financing team; Frank Reich, the brilliant professor of economics at Harvard; Stearns; the writer Ira Magaziner; and Michele Mandelbaum of the School of Advanced International Studies.
Most of those who met the future candidate on the Sailing Party were struck by his insatiable appetite for debate and a good time.
Clinton, a graduate of Hot Springs High and of the School of Government at Georgetown University, Washington, would dispute anything to provoke discussion.
He was at his most sincere when he argued for the South and   defended it ferociously against the feebleness of Yankee and British snobberies and prejudice.
Clinton, left, with his friend Frank Aller outside the house they shared in Leckford Road in 1969.
The house was to become a party spot for some of the more adventurous spirits in Oxford at the time
Photographs of that time show him to have been clean shaven and crisply dressed.
He spent his Rhodes scholarship money on books, hitchhiking around Britain and trips to London, where he joined anti-war rallies.
He attended Germaine Greer's first feminist lecture, but if he had a connection with the ferment of drugs, ‘sexual politics’ and revolutionary doo-da which was stewing amid the spires, it was probably distant and reserved.
Martin Walker, the Guardian's Washington correspondent, was a friend of Clinton of Oxford.
He remembers: ‘He was one of those people who had a firm sense of the system and how it could be made to work.
There's a kind of chap who's always going to be head boy or chief prefect and who appeals to his elders.
Bill was it.
He was impressive.’
Change came in 1969.
Clinton grew a beard and moved into a house in Leckford Road which he shared with Strobe Talbot and Frank Aller.
The boys were going to have some fun.
Their house was to become a party spot for some of the more adventurous spirits in Oxford at the time.
Among them was Christopher Hitchens, the Washington-based writer, a figure of magnetic charm and great volubility.
Like most former friends of Clinton, Hitchens is uneasy about describing his days and nights at Leckford Road in detail, fearing to harm the candidate, but he remembers ‘a number of polymorphous soirées’ there.
Quite what this means is unclear, but one can be sure that voters out on the Plains would not approve.
As Martin Walker says: ‘The Oxford of the late Sixties was going through the heady delights of the sexual revolution.
Anyone who didn't get his leg over and smoke a few joints wasn't in it as a normal human being.’
Walker's ex-wife, Anna Somers Cocks, editor of the Art Newspaper , says: ‘Oxford had its Brideshead element, of course, but everyone smoked dope.
It was just part of life.’
‘In the Oxford of the late Sixties, anyone who didn't get his leg over and smoke a few joints wasn't in it as a normal human being’
Clinton did not like smoke.
Walker remembers that he ‘was always on about his nasal allergies or something.
I particularly remember him at parties diving out of the window for fresh air.
Clinton couldn't stand the smoke.’
Such a person may be believed when he says that he has only once tasted marijuana and did not inhale.
It may also be true, as Clinton says, that he has never broken the laws of his country.
But there can be no doubt or question that, in Oxford in the late sixties, Clinton was keeping company with many who were enthusiastically breaking the laws of their own country.
The same year, Clinton was also to become friends with a trio of women who had advanced ideas about sex.
They were Sara Maitland, now an author and reviewer; Mandy Merck, a radical lesbian feminist who now teaches at Cornell; and Catherine Gieve, a senior solicitor at Bindman and Co in London.
After Oxford, Merck joined the staff of Time Out , where she wrote impenetrable reviews and helped to organize the strike which came close to destroying the magazine.
Maitland became a Christian with a gift for utterance.
She once declared in print that what ‘the carpenter got done in for’ was ‘this thing called sin and we keep on doing it’.
In 1988, she wrote The Book of Spells , urging that: ‘Knowing how to cast spells is a technique everyone ought to have, along with computer technology.’
Clinton spent a lot of time with the trio in Leckford Road.
There were parties, but there was also a good deal of hanging out and late night discussion.
It is evidence of the trio's friendship for Bill Clinton that they are unwilling to be drawn.
Sara Maitland says: ‘I could say something which I thought was warm and friendly, but which might be regarded by the voters of Milwaukee as offensive.’
Mandy Merck says: ‘To associate Bill Clinton with a known gay activist like myself cannot do him vast favours in large parts of homophobic America.’
Did Bill Clinton have an affair with a member of the trio?
The consensus view seems to be that he probably did not.
One friend said: ‘Well, I suppose he might have with Sara, but I think it is unlikely.
They were just friends and although there was a lot of that [sex]at Oxford at that time, a platonic friendship was not unknown.
IN HIS INAUGURAL address on January 20, 1989, George Bush spoke about America's need to put the Vietnam War in its place; in history; in the past.
A quarter of a century after the first American military advisers were sent to Saigon, the moment had come.
Bush said, for the agony to end, for the wounds to be healed.
Bush is one of the last western leaders to have seen active service.
The badges of honour he sports on his veteran's beret when he goes dining for the old soldiers' vote gave his plea a sort of authority.
This was no anti-war, limp-wristed liberal telling the American people that the Vietnam War had been a colossal and ghastly waste of life and money.
This was a brave soldier urging his fellows to acknowledge the slaughter of the Khe San and Da Nang.
All this may have helped to clear the way for Dan Quayle, the much lampooned vice-president who dodged the draft by joining the National Guard.
Bush might have spoken differently if he had known Clinton would be running in 1992.
During his two years at Oxford, Clinton wrestled with the Vietnam dilemma, wishing to show himself a loyal patriot, but painfully unconvinced by the justice of America's involvement in Vietnam.
Clinton behaved as if his first year at Oxford would be his only year.
He considered applying to the Reserve Officers' Training Corps of Arkansas University, a nearly foolproof means of escaping combat service in Vietnam.
It would also have meant he could not take up his place at Yale Law School, which he felt was an essential part of his preparation for political life.
On September 9, 1969, by which time Clinton knew his draft number was high and that he was therefore unlikely to be called up, he wrote to his friend Richard Stearns: ‘Nothing could be more destructive of whatever fibre I have left than this mental torment.
And if I cannot rid myself of it I will just have to go into the service and begin to root out the cause.
This may seem melodramatic, particularly with Clinton's high draft number, but as Strobe Talbot points out, the draft regulations were constantly being changed.
This torment, shared by millions of young American men and those who loved them, killed his friend Frank Aller, who decided to dodge the draft and fled to Sweden.
He was eventually persuaded — some say hounded — back to America by his disapproving family.
He committed suicide shortly afterwards.
VROOOOM!
After a day on the track with Formula One driver Martin Brundle, Neil Lyndon thought he knew all about driving a racing car.
Then he tried it on his own
AN ANIMAL SOUND, like a bull in tumescence, was intruding in the helmet, a yowling, roaring noise, audible even above the roar of the engine behind my shoulders and the rush of wind which was buffeting them.
This distracting racket pitched in every time I came out of a corner and put on the power in the Formula First single-seat racing car I was driving.
After some laps of the Snetterton Circuit in Norfolk, I identified the source of the noise.
It was me, yelling and bellowing in high-speed transports of pleasure.
Ayrton Senna is always carrying on about the intellectual and spiritual fascination of discovering his own limits in a racing car.
Now I began to know what he means.
In two days at Snetterton, first in the company of Benetton's Formula One driver Martin Brundle and then at the wheel of the Snetterton school's racing cars, I found that the limits of my own prudence, dependability and, even, sanity were disturbingly slim.
Observers around the track might not have been able to hear my orgasmic bellowing, but they could plainly see that a mental rivet had shaken loose inside my helmet.
Through the raindrops which were snail-trailing across my visor as I accelerated, I could see a marshal on the start/finish line flapping his yellow flag at me and screwing a finger at his temple.
His meaning was unmistakable.
‘Slow down, you maniac,’ he was signalling.
‘You're a menace to yourself and everybody around you.’
You may discover a hidden self in a racing car on a high-speed circuit.
The discovered self may not be pleasing to behold.
At 45, a devoted parent, a fully paid-up citizen, supporter of village fêtes and officer of societies, one who has not been chastised, still less cautioned by a policeman for nearly 20 years, I had complacently reckoned that speed lust might, like other adolescent juices, have dried up within me.
At Snetterton I discovered otherwise.
THE REVELATION CAME in stages.
Martin Brundle arrived at the circuit with a mint-fresh six-litre Jaguar XJR-S on load for the day from Tom Walkinshaw Racing, a company connected with the Benetton F1 team for which Brundle is driving this season.
The gleaming £50,000 car and its driver made a glossy match.
When he was World Champion in sports cars, driving Jaguars for Walkinshaw, Brundle was the soul and embodiment of unostentation, a steady King's Lynn lad who dutifully wore the team's Silk Cut blazer and a squaddie' short back and sides when he was appearing on team duty.
Now that he has advanced to the front ranks of the most expensive and super-hyped entertainment on earth, Brundle has acquired some of the essential accoutrements of a global celebrity who earns over a million dollars a year.
The baggy suede jacket over a cashmere jacket, costly jeans and light brogues all bespeak a casual wardrobe allowance which is probably greater than the amount most people spend on a new car.
While the circuit is being cleared to give us a free run, Brundle takes the car out on the public roads.
‘I agree with the Jackie Stewart philosophy,’ he says.
‘Driving on a track is essentially no different from driving on a road.
The correct approach to a corner in the Monaco Grand Prix.
And the truth is that driving on the M25 can be far more frightening than a Grand Prix because so many drivers on the road lack the finesse and understanding to control their cars.’
At the wheel of the XJR-S on a traffic-laden A11, pushing the big car past streams of trucks at high speed, Brundle's driving is like a chauffeur's: it looks as if anybody could do what he is doing.
His wisdom seems unremarkable.
‘You touch the car at three points: hands, feet and backside.
If you're receptive to the sensations, you can feel everything you need to know about the car through these points of contact; but if you're tense, the car will be tense.
If your knuckles are white on the wheel you've got it wrong.
Treat the pedals as if there's an egg beneath them,’ he says.
I can understand all that.
‘Get all the braking and gear-changing done and cleared before you take position for the corner,’ he says.
No problem, Martin.
Is this man being paid a million dollars a year for a driving technique which is dispensed by every BSM instructor?
I'm laughing aloud.
It is the laugh of one who knows he's about to die
Brundle looks askance when he is asked if he has ever read the books of technical instruction in race-driving written by Pierro Taruffi and Alain Prost, among others.
‘I did read a book once,’ he says.
‘I think it had a green cover.
It would never enter my head to read a textbook on race-driving.
Perhaps some people would say that my own driving makes that obvious.’
THE FIRST CIRCUIT of the track is unshattering.
The car is travelling at about 100 mph on the straights and braking hard before corners; but it is stable enough for me to make notes and so quiet in the leather and teak-lined cabin that we can easily hear each other through out helmets.
Brundle is, however, merely warming up the brakes and tyres and re-acquainting himself with the lines of his old home track.
As we pass the finish line at the end of the first circuit, he lets go all the power in the car's 333 bhp, the big bonnet lifts, the needle on the rev counter winds towards the red limit and, suddenly, your complacent reporter is hanging onto his seat-belt mounting with white knuckles, his notebook abandoned in the footwell.
‘We're never going to make it!
We're going off!’ screams every nerve of the BSM graduate's 25 years of road driving as Brundle approaches the first corner at more than 120 mph and heels the car, its tyres wailing and jouncing on the limits of their purchase, across the corner.
‘This,’ he shouts, sliding the rear of the two-ton car, ‘is oversteer.’
He flicks the wheel and slides the front wheels.
‘And that is understeer.’
We're into the second corner.
Brundle puts the car into a massive slide across the bend and catches it after we have left the track on the other side.
The car thumps and thunders across rough paving.
‘This will bugger the rear suspension,’ he yells.
‘All in a day's work.’
We're doing 130 mph on the back straight, approaching the Esses, a left and a right at dog-leg right-angles.
As I hang on to the arm-rest with white knuckles, it is clear to me that Brundle has decided not to attempt the corners but to go straight on to the escape road: the turn is impossible now; it's just a joke; he's trying to scare the shit out of me.
He turns.
My guts jolt.
He powerslides the car through the right, catches it again off the track and aims towards the next left-hander under full power.
When we reach the pit straight again, exceeding 130 mph, Brundle tells me to listen out for the tone of screaming on the front left tyre.
‘It won't last ten laps at this speed,’ he says.
Sure enough, the shrieking is louder and the wheel is hopping more violently at the first corner.
Soon, the cockpit is filling with acrid fumes.
The brakes are overheating.
‘This is an excellent road car,’ yells Brundle.
‘But you can see how inadequate the best road  car is on the track.
In no time, we'll have done in £500 worth of tyres and knackered the rear-axle.’
This knackering of one of the world's most coveted cars took just ten laps.
When it was over, I asked him if he would let me have a drive and ride with me.
He looked as if he had heard better ideas.
‘I'm not a very good passenger,’ he said, his eyes going into a deadlock.
In any case, he said, picking up arguments, I wasn't insured, didn't have a competition licence, the circuit management wouldn't like it, what would Tom Walkinshaw and Benetton say if I took Martin Brundle out in a ball of fire?…
Okay, Martin; got the picture, let's leave it.
TWO DAYS LATER, Simon Miles couldn't wait to get me behind a wheel.
This sparky kid in Ray-Bans and monogrammed racing overalls is one of the resident instructors at Snetterton.
He was to be my minder for an initial trial which would give me three laps in one of the school's Escort XRi's under his instruction, three laps with him driving and five laps in a single-seat Formula First racing car.
Simon got very excited when he heard that I had already been driven round the circuit by Brundle.
‘You'll have to mark me against him,’ he said.
‘I'm not a very good passenger,’ I said.
Wearing an open-faced helmet, I joined Simon at the Escort, climbed into the stripped-down cockpit over supporting struts and got strapped in.
Simon said that he wasn't expecting me to be spotted by Ferrari that day; he just wanted me to get round safely.
He was very stern in saying that I should not exceed 4,000 rpm in any gear.
‘Four thousand revs will give you 90 mph in the Formula First,’ he said, ‘and in a car which is one and a half inches off the ground, that will feel like 190 mph, so it should be plenty fast enough for today.’
I reassured him that this warning was unnecessary: my ambition was to set the record for the slowest lap of the circuit.
He looked dubious.
He said that when I was ready we should go.
We went.
I braked too late at the second corner and changed down to third while turning the wheel, feeding it through my hands.
Coming out of the corner, the white needle went over the red line at 4,000 revs and, in my panic, I changed from third to fifth.
Smashing the egg under the brake pedal, I got the car sideways through the Esses and left the track on the exit.
All of Brundle's simple rules and runes had left the complacent head which believed it knew it all anyway.
After three laps, I drove back to the pits sweating and embarrassed.
Simon was not discomposed.
‘Not too bad,’ he said.
‘Not too bad at all.’
(Sub-text: for a big-headed slob.)
The marks on his driving analysis sheet told another story.
I had lost four points for having only one hand on the wheel ‘when initiating braking’, three for ‘incorrect hand positions when cornering’, three for ‘exceeding the permitted rev limit’ and so on to a total of 27 errors.
Anybody who scores more than 40 errors on that first drive is taken quietly aside and told to take the bus home.
Simon now took his only chance to measure himself against a Formula One driver.
He loved it.
He had the rev counter into the red band at 6,500 revs in every gear.
He had me smashing my helmet against the car's supporting struts on every corner and bracing myself with both legs against the bulkhead at every braking point.
For some godforsaken reason, I loved it too.
These passive, voyeuristic, passenger thrills were dull stuff, however, compared with driving the single-seat Formula First.
Getting into the thing is like being fitted for a tin wet-suit.
You stand on the flat tray which they call a seat, take the weight on your arms on the sides of the cockpit and lower your feet into the nose cone.
The pedals are so close that your feet can't feel them apart.
The clutch is so stiff that you think you're pushing against the bulkhead until it gives.
The little gear lever feels like a tin opener on a string of cables.
The steering wheel is the size of a soup dish.
You fire up the engine on the starter button and the mechanic waves you out into the pit lane and you realize that the overall purpose of a racing car's design is that you should feel a pure sense of yourself in propulsion.
Looking ahead, over the instruments, there is nothing to see but the front tyres and the track.
Ah, glory!
The heaven of that engine behind and the transcendent power of control in positioning the car exactly on the track where you imagine it should be.
Irresistible omnipotence.
The completely captivating moment when all worldly concerns evaporate.
No wonder Yves Montand says in the film Grand Prix : ‘There's only racing: everything else is marking time.’
Mr Toad was loose on the racetrack, yowling and tooting to himself
So taken was I with the lines of the corners and the graduations of power through the gears that all the rules and strictures of the racing school fled my mind.
The orgasmic bellowing began when I got the car into a slide as the track began to get wet with rain and caught it with opposite lock.
I had read Taruffi and my day had come.
Mr Toad was loose on the racetrack, yowling and tooting to himself and let all beware who saw him come.
The needle on the rev counter soared: I didn't care; a delinquent jubilance had got me.
The marshal was right when he waved his yellow flag and pointed his finger at his head.
I was nuts.
At the end of my five laps, I wheedled and wangled for another session, saying that the photographer needed more time to get his shots.
They let me out again.
I went circling as the rains came down, the track cleared and all the other initial trialists went home.
They couldn't get me to come in until every marshal's flag on the circuit was flapping.
In my dreams, I am still out there now, jinking into the chicane in second, piling on the power through third and into the pit straight, drifting left for the marker cone, turning in, clipping the apex and howling away to the second corner.
All else has come to feel like marking time.
For information on Snetterton, call .
A guide, ‘Starting Motor Sport’(£2.50), is available from Motor Sports House  .
Hot Pursuits
Stop sitting on the sidelines and get involved.
Esquire together with Veuve Clicquot Champagne presents the ultimate guide to an active summer.
Compiled by Joanne Glasbey.
Research by Linda Kessler
CRICKET
If the last time you were out for a duck was eating a salade tiéde magret de canard in an austere brasserie, or your most recent celebrated run was rushing to the embrace of the Cricketer's Arms as last orders was called, pausing briefly to adjust your googlie, all is not lost.
Clive Radley, ex-England cricketer, is head coach at the MCC, based at Lord's.
Coaching in the nets for individuals, or a group of up to six, costs £30 per net per hour, and a half-hour session with the bowling machine costs £21.
Weekly coaching groups of one hour (£7 per person per session) and a two-day summer coaching course (£60 per person) are also offered.
For application forms and details, contact the MCC Indoor School.
Re-enact Wisden's greatest moments by staging your own one-day challenge at the Oval.
All you need is enthusiastic, if affluent, friends to split the £3,150 cost for the day.
It's also possible to play at Old Trafford (applications are negotiable and subject to committee approval).
But if you want to play for a good cause and strap on your box in the company of famous faces, challenge The Lord's Taverners to a match.
Proposals for charity games have to be approved by the committee, but the suggested donation of £6,000 is negotiable and all money raised helps young people, especially handicapped youngsters, get involved in sport.
The best way to get the cricket juices flowing again is to find a club in your area that provides coaching and practice for novices.
The National Cricket Association Handbook (£3) lists local county information, with all its varying membership costs, facilities and standards.
TENNIS
There's noting like the two weeks of exciting tennis on the television every summer to get the local course overflowing with putative Beckers.
And they're nothing like Boris.
But you're also pretty seedy — your service is more out of Le Gavroche than Wimbledon, your slam a gossamer dropping.
The best advice is to go in search of some coaching.
Individual coaching by professionals at one of the David Lloyd Clubs around the country costs £15 an hour, and group sessions can be arranged.
Jonathon Smith, ex-Davis Cup and Wimbledon player, offers individual coaching (£22 an hour) at the Royal County of Berkshire Rackets and Health Club, and also privately (£20 an hour).
More intensive courses are available at weekend coaching clinics run by Roger Taylor at the luxurious Chewton Glen Hotel in Hampshire (£199 per person per day, including full board and tuition, based on two people sharing a room.
Happily Veuve Cliquot is kept ready on ice).
Wimbledon champion turned commentator, Virginia Wade, hosts and coaches four-day tennis breaks, costing £654, at the Gleneagles Hotel in Perthshire.
Local tennis clubs can be found through the International Tennis Federation or the Lawn Tennis Association.
If you really are more tennis ace than joker, how about facing Nastase across the net?
David Whitehead, director of International 35s, a tennis circuit for ex-Grand Slam and Wimbledon players, organizes tailor-made tournaments.
Everything can be arranged — from constructing a professional-quality synthetic court, to providing top-name players like Roscoe Tanner, Veejay Armitraj and Ilie Nastase.
A personalized Technotile court can be laid in a day for about £1,000; players' fees, seating and catering costs vary depending on requirements.
It's a lot of effort for a fish supper, but fly fishing is both peaceful and exhilarating.
A little tennis coaching will transform your service game.
FLY FISHING
To the aficionado, angling is both peaceful and exhilarating, to the uninitiated, sitting on a river bank on which you are more likely to catch a score of gnats than one trout, seems a long-winded way of getting a fish dinner.
But those who have actually hooked a fish, regardless of size, will know the thrill.
And they will tell you that you don't necessarily have to fish on the priciest beats to find good sport.
If you are yearning to sling your hook, the short cut to learning the skill is to book a course with an experienced instructor.
The Arundell Arms Hotel in Devon runs a variety of courses in wet and dry fly fishing for salmon and trout.
Its weekend beginners' quickie course (£120, including tackle and equipment — accommodation is extra) is an excellent introduction to the sport.
Once you've mastered the basics and feel confident enough about casting and are looking for adventure, night fishing for sea trout is one of the most exciting forms of fly fishing.
You fish from dusk to dawn (or as long as you can last) for three nights (£180, excluding accommodation).
You are allowed to sleep all morning, so breakfast is served at lunchtime.
Actually, the hooking of a fish, regardless of size, is always a thrill
Set in magnificent surroundings, the Tweed Valley Hotel in Peebleshire, Scotland offers six-day trout and salmon fishing courses in the autumn and spring (£95, excluding tackle hire and accommodation).
The Kinnaird Country House Hotel, in Perthshire, Scotland has a lot to offer the fly-fishing enthusiast — three miles of excellent salmon fishing on the River Tay.
You can also fish for wild brown trout on one of the three hill lochs on the estate.
The latest innovation in trout fishing is ‘float tubing’, a rubber fetishist's Nirvana.
For this, you don a neoprene suit, boots, flippers and life-jacket and take to the water in a specially adapted inflated lorry inner tube.
Apparently, casting from the comfort of your improvised boat is relaxing and effective — floating on the water's surface, you are far less visible to the fish, so you can sneak up on them better.
A float tube kit can be hired or bought from Spartan Fishing Tackle in Nottingham.
For game fishing in truly wild and unspoilt countryside, it is well worth venturing to the loughs of western Ireland.
In this region, accompanied only by a gillie or local boatman, you can have the water all to yourself.
Roy and Sorcha Peirce at Gillie Angling in County Galway can arrange a personal programme catering to individual requirements.
Becoming a member of the Salmon and Trout Association (£16 for an annual membership) is a useful thing to do, as it sometimes offers access to private fishing which the association owns or leases and, through its 54 branches nationwide, offers information on courses and instruction.
SAILING
A seasoned view of Howard's Way or a Cowes spectator may always have nurtured the dream of sailing a dinghy or crewing a yacht, but any old sea salt worth their grinder will tell you that it's essential to learn the ropes first from a qualified sailing instructor.
Britannia Sailing runs off-shore sailing courses for complete beginners to advanced yachtmasters, all leading to a Royal Yachting Association certificate.
A recommended course for beginners is the RYA Competent Crew Certificate, which can be taken over three sailing weekends (£110 per weekend) or a full five-day course (£215).
But if you crave the adrenalin-sapping excitement of competition sailing, the ultimate thrill has to be the Fastnet — the world's toughest 650-mile ocean race.
To get a piece of the action, take up Britannia Sailing's Fastnet Challenge, a chance to go from absolute novice to crewing one of their 20 yachts entered in the 1993 Fastnet race, in less than a year.
You will also be happy to learn that more exciting things than sherry happen in schooners.
The Sail Training Association has two spectacular three-masted Tall Ships — the Sir Winston Churchill and the Malcolm Miller , operating weekly sailing adventures all year round.
It's challenging, but you don't have to be an experienced sailor to have fun.
A week's voyage on an STA schooner costs from £250, including waterproofs.
Or, you can learn to sail and navigate a traditional ketch-rigged (twin-masted) Brixham sailing trawler, the Lorne Leader , in her centenary year.
A six-day chartered trip, sailing around the rugged western Scottish Isles of Skye, Mull, Isla and Jura, costs £385 per person (waterproof hire is extra).
Donald and Gillian Hind also organize sail training and other special interest cruises — wildlife, history — from their base in Argyll.
If solitary sailing in a dinghy is more your style, check out the Royal Yachting Association, which runs a five-level National Dinghy Certificate Scheme with courses available on inland and open water nationally.
ROWING
Cast out the rowing machine that sits gathering dust in your bedroom, put your oar in and the real thing — you don't have to be an undergraduate at Oxbridge.
And rowing is ideal for building stamina and endurance.
Daniel Toploski, former coach to Olympic, World Championship and Oxford University teams, recommends joining a club that provides training and coaching facilities for novices and then arranging personal coaching for maximum benefit.
Call him for advice.
Put your oar in: the ultimate rowing machine
Western-style riding is alive and bucking in Britain
Many club coaches are available for private coaching sessions and most of them will be able to organize training in a club boat (approximately £30 an hour).
Richard Ayling, former Olympic rower, Assistant National and ARA-approved coach, is now a professional rowing consultant, providing a wide range of coaching services, from individual sculling tuition (£15 per hour) to organizing your regatta.
It is almost impossible to get access to a boat without being a rowing club member.
However, rowing boats for individuals or teams of two, four and eight, can be hired for arranged periods from Eton Racing Boats in Berkshire.
A one-man or ‘single’ boat costs £60 a day.
Most rowing clubs don't insist on immediate payment of an annual membership fe (usually between £80 and £100) and should give you the opportunity to train with other club members before making a commitment.
The Amateur Rowing Association provides information on affiliated rowing clubs, approved coaches and also produces a useful yearbook (£9).
If you prefer to start out as a pay-as-you-go rower, try the Nottingham-based National Water Sports Centre's Rowing Club.
This offers a free trial, followed by a two-hour weekly session (£4.85), which includes coaching and equipment.
Run by qualified volunteers, the club is keen to attract people of all ages and all abilities.
Novice enthusiasts in London should steer towards the Trafalgar Rowing Centre.
The course offered here comprises five weekly sessions of two hours' duration, costs only £16 and is open to individuals or groups.
When you've gained confidence on the water, you then have the option of joining the Curlew or Globe rowing clubs based at the centre.
RIDING
When sitting astride a conveyance that prefers hay to unleaded, you should remember that John Wayne made it look a lot easier than it is.
Even if you've only got one horsepower, knowledge and skill are necessary in order to handle a horse properly.
Novices should get professional instruction at a riding school which has been inspected and approved by the British Horse Society.
This will guarantee that safety and animal welfare standards have been satisfied.
Cityslickers and Bonanza aficionados will be delighted to learn that Western-style riding is alive and bucking in the UK.
It's easier than conventional-style riding clinics (approximately £200) with instruction in basic techniques and the principles of herding cattle cowboy fashion, from roping (lassoing, to the uninitiated) to cutting (separating a steer from the herd), under the guidance of head instructor Doug Allen, a roping expert from the US.
Bot the Western Horsemen's Association can provide information on other Western riding establishments with approved instructors.
If you've mastered the basics of riding and are a competent rider lusting after some unbridled adventure, saddle up for trail riding — a trek lasting two or three days with overnight stops.
The Cae Iago Trekking Centre in Dyfed runs two-day (£95) and three-day (£135) trail rides in the remote foothills of the Welsh Cambrian Mountains.
It is possible not to see anyone other than your fellow riders during the journey on horseback.
Overnight stays on the trail are in pub/hotels or hostel accommodation, depending on which route is taken.
The White Horse Trekking Centre in Wiltshire runs two-day summer trail rides on Salisbury Plain and in the surrounding forests.
Dispel notions of lethargic ponies plodding nose to tail, only speeding up on the way back to the stables: trail riding can be both challenging and exciting.
For information on approved riding schools, the British Horse Society produces a book called Where to Ride (£4.95).
Grown-up cowboys and Indians
RESOURCES
The insider's guide to the material world
Food
DRESSING FOR DINNER
As with everything else, salads must be properly dressed
BY MATTHEW FORT
IT'S A VERSATILE thing, is a salad, a culinary flag of convenience.
There are the salads of leaves.
There are salads of flowers, salads of potatoes, salads of mushrooms, salads of rice, salads of cracked wheat, salads of fish, salads of pasta, and salads of brains.
Then there's the whole sub-species of warm salads.
There's nothing, it seems, that can't be turned into a salad as long as it is properly dressed.
And that's where your problems begin, because at the end of the day it's the dressing that separates the distinguished from the duff.
No one remembers the herbaceous border for itself, or remarks on the subtlety of textures in your dashing skate-and-potato combo.
What implants a salad in the memory banks is the salad dressing.
I work form a range of five oils — peanut, mass-produced Italian extra virgin olive-oil, non mass-produced Italian extra virgin olive oil from Liguria, walnut oil and hazelnut oil.
Of course, you can always go round collecting different oils.
Go ahead if you want to, I say, but it's not necessary.
It isn't quite the same for vinegars.
The distinctions between them are greater and the guarantee of quality is more uncertain, so you have to rely on experience, advice and a decent shop to help.
I keep six—red wine, white wine, cider, balsamic, rice and sherry — and use them according to mood and the principal ingredients.
I have never had much time for the more esoteric confections you find all over the place.
Rather, I settle for a balanced, rounded style of dressing most of the time, more Dougie Heywood than Tommy Nutter.
The brown rice vinegar and red wine get more work-outs than any of the others, although a dash of  sherry or balsamic will help take the edge of sharper dressings.
FASTA PASTA
We've had fresh pasta, boil-in-the bag pasta and now Lensi have launched ready-flavoured pasta.
The two flavours available thus far are Penne al Funghi (wild mushroom) and Trenette al Pesto (pesto).
The sauce is actually in the pasta, so there's no need to add other ingredients.
Simply boil for about eight minutes and serve with parmesan cheese.
Lensi ready-flavoured pasta is available from all good food retailers.
Ross Lovegrove and his acrylic/glass thermos flask
Charles Fontaine of the Quality Chop House, and for my money the purveyor of the finest dressings in London, uses only red wine vinegar, vegetable oil, mustard, salt and pepper.
The vegetable oil is important, as it seems to be slightly more viscous than olive oil.
It coats the artichoke or leaves in a rich and  langourous fashion.
This style of dressing works well for the heartier textured salad items such as artichoke, potato and the crisper leaves such as iceberg, chicory, frisée or romaine.
For more delicate greenstuff and for the fruity veg I tend to turn to olive oil.
It's difficult to give a hard and fast rule.
Be grown up and make up your own mind.
Whatever oil we're talking, what I am quite certain about is that the conventional proportions (three oil to one vinegar)— favours the vinegar far too much.
You need at least 5:1, even 6:1 in some cases.
The same is true if you use lemon juice.
After that you need salt and pepper and mustard.
Some veg, like chicory and potatoes, can stand a lot of mustard in the dressing.
Stick to Dijon, although I have used Colman's mustard and horseradish mix to good effect when I wanted a slightly sweet one.
And although frowned on by some, sugar has its place in small quantities amidst the salt and pepper, particularly if the vinegar is very acid.
It helps the illusion of expertise if you give precise measurements and proportions in recipes, but, alas, I don't believe this to be possible when it comes to vinaigrette.
So much depends on which individual ingredients you chose on each particular moment.
There is nothing for it but to taste and to experiment for yourself.
All this mixing and matching has a French feel to it.
Were you to take after the Italians, you would use no more than oil and vinegar, added at the time you served the salad, even leaving each consumer to make up his or her own dressing.
And they would never use anything other than olive oil from the nearest olive tree, and red wine vinegar.
Design
THE CHEQUERED FLAG
Ross Lovegrove's winning formula
BY ALICE RAWSTHORN
AS BUSINESS meetings go, the beginning was hardly auspicious.
When Ross Lovegrove walked into the office of the Hermés design director he spotted a memo from the chairman lying on the desk.
‘I want to work with Lovegrove,’ it said, ‘but it's going to be difficult.’
Difficult or not, Hermés went ahead and told Ross Lovegrove to write his own brief and design whatever he wanted.
The result of that is a series of chess and back-gammon games which will go on sale this summer.
Lovegrove, 33, is one of the handful of industrial designers who are so highly regarded in the international arena that they can win commissions from Hermés, one of France's most famous luxury goods groups.
The same designers — Phillippe Starck of France, Javier Mariscal of Spain and the American Kenneth Graves — crop up over and over again.
There are very few British names among them, but Ross Lovegrove is certainly one.
Hermés told Lovegrove to write his own brief and design whatever he wanted
Lovegroves ideal is to work on as many different products as possible.
‘There's a real danger in the field of design these days that you become known for a specific style, like a particular type of chair, for instance, and that is all that people will ever want you to do.’
Lovegrove's biggest project this summer is an office chair for Knoll.
The chair is typical of his work in that it combines his passions for functional design —‘there's nothing cosmetic about it, everything has a purpose’— and for modern materials, in this case BV130, ‘a very exotic, high performance plastic’ usually used to make power drills and lawnmower parts.
He is also trying to find a manufacturer for a porcelain razor he  designed for an exhibition in New York.
‘It bothers me that, as a designer, I take natural resources and turn them into something which will eventually be thrown away to become landfill.
‘I used to throw away plastic razors all the time.
So I thought about using porcelain instead.
It's so straight and so sharp that it works perfectly as a blade, but when you've finished you can just grind it up into the ground.’
The games, by contrast, are all about opulence.
They contrast Lovegrove's favourite modern materials, like carbon fibre, with natural forms, like the Hermés silk square that doubles as a portable chessboard.
‘It's good not to work on serious projects all the time.
The games are fun.’
Prototype for a digital compact camera
Money
METAL ALLY
Gold and silver make good friends in bad times
BY CHRISTOPHER FILDES
BUY NOW AT TEN-year-old prices — or, better still, at the prices of the 1970s!
Reduced to clear in the bargain basement, with absolutely no rush to buy, are the world's two oldest investments and most trusted stores of wealth: silver and gold.
The finest gold has been changing hands in London — the world's biggest market — for £190 an ounce.
That is what you would have paid for it in 1982.
An ounce of silver costs an affordable 225p, just as it did in 1976.
That price has been to the moon and back again, helped by the Hunt brothers from Texas, who tried to corner the market and found that it, in fact, cornered them.
What has got into these old faithfuls?
Have they at last had their day?
Has the value of gold been rumbled for what Keynes said it was — a barbarian superstition?
Or is this the time to bring home a few ingots, dig up the cellar and bury them under the floor?
If you had done that a quarter of a century ago you would still be pleased with yourself.
Gold and silver had a brilliant run in the years that followed, when inflation was unchecked and the world's currency markets were in disorder.
The disadvantages of paper money were never more obvious.
The advantage of paper money, however, is that you can get interest on it.
Precious metals earn no interest, and for a decade have had to contend with high interest rates and lowish inflation.
Their luck has been out.
New finds and new technologies have brought more gold into the market.
The ex-Soviet Union, the world's second-largest producer, has been selling its gold for what it would fetch, to pay its bills.
On top of all this, world recession meant that industry used less gold and silver and that jewellers' customers stayed away, as Gerald Ratner learned.
Now you hear it said that we are going to live with stable currencies or even with a single currency for Europe; that recovery will be slow; that inflation will stay down while interest rates stay up — poison for precious metals.
I wonder.
I can imagine a slow recovery and low inflation which would fail to bring interest rates down — the poison's antidote.
Dollar interest rates cracked the price of gold down a dozen years ago when they were hoisted to 20 per cent.
Now they are at their lowest for a quarter of a century, and that must be good.
So the timing may be right — but the most basic reason for owning precious metals is a healthy distrust of governments, their paper promises, their currency cardhouses, their assurances that this time everything will be all right.
The reason for owning precious metals is a healthy distrust of governments
Governments, as you might expect, put obstacles in friendship's way.
Not long ago you could have been prosecuted for owning gold.
Now you will be caught for Value Added Tax.
At today's prices the thing to do with silver is to buy some and enjoy it.
The other day, when a new silver dinner service was commissioned for 10 Downing Street, I asked how much silver could be bought for a million pounds, which seemed a suitably round number.
The answer worked out at twelve tons.
Solid value in solid silver will pay dividends, but will it show you a profit?
I dare say, but it will already have given you a pleasure that no taxman can touch.
RIGHT-ON INVESTMENT
Stockbrokers Henry Cooke Lumsden have launched a new investment service for clients who want to buy shares according to their ethical beliefs.
Each client's portfolio is tailor-made to avoid investing in companies they might consider to be unethical.
Common objections among clients are to companies associated with gambling, alcohol, oppressive regimes and polluters.
A recent objection came from a client who did not want to invest in a company that gave political donations.
For more information contact Henry Cooke Lumsden .
Drink
BURSTING THE BUBBLE
The Grandes Marques lose out to cheaper champagne
BY TIM ATKIN
IS IT REALLY ONLY three years since the infamous incident when drunken revellers used champagne to flush a broken nightclub toilet?
The gesture belongs to another age, to those pre-recession days of Porsches. portable telephones and Paisley braces.
As the economy boomed, champagne boomed with it, becoming the house wine of the upwardly mobile.
But nowadays, only pigeons are putting deposits on Porsches.
With precious little to celebrate, and even less money with which to do it, many have stopped drinking champagne altogether.
Others have switched to cheaper sources of sparkling wine, such as Australia, New Zealand, California, Italy and Spain.
In one sense, the Champenois have only themselves to blame.
They decided to capitalize on their success by putting up prices/ The official reason, worth of Pravda in hits heyday, was that champagne could not stay abreast of rising demand.
Unfortunately, faced with price increases of up to 25 per cent, many of us decided we could live without champagne.
Frankly, it wasn't much of a sacrifice.
The sparkling alternatives were getting better and better, thanks largely to the overseas investment of champagne houses, and the basic quality of champagne was decidedly dodgy.
Last year, sales went through the floor.
While things have improved in 1992, champagne is still struggling.
The region's self-styled elite, known as the Grandes Marques, have held their prices at 1991 levels, but consumers continue to vote with their wallets.
Sensing the embattled mood of the consumer, the Grandes Marques' competitors (the co-operatives and some of the larger individual growers) are swamping the market with cheap fizz.
A year ago, champagne under £10 was history, like Tiny Tim or the London Omnibus.
But now, champagne is on sale at £7.99.
Good news for the champagne drinker?
Not really.
The problem with sub-£10 champagne is that most of it doesn't taste very good.
You can be sure that, slump or no slump, the Champenois aren't going to drop their prices very far before they start cutting corners.
Nevertheless, there are deals to be done, and you can be sure that our supermarkets and high street retailers are doing them.
Which of them are offering the best value?
I did a tasting of over 40 of the cheaper champagnes to find out.
The tasting proved that buying really inexpensive champagne is a bad idea.
Under £10, Australia, California, New Zealand, Italy and Spain are more consistent producers of sparkling wine.
But once you look at the £10 to £15 bracket, high street champagne is definitely a good deal more impressive.
The tasting's top mark went to the Waitrose non-vintage Blanc de Noirs
My top mark went to Waitrose's non-vintage Blanc de Noirs (£11.25), an elegant, finely structured champagne which is made entirely from the Pinot Noir grape.
Marks and Spencer also sell a very good Blanc de Noirs.
If you want an aromatic champagne, Majestic's De Telmont Grande Reserve (£11.99) is a good buy.
More complex are Thresher's rich, creamy Descombes Brut (£12.99) and Tesco's Michel Arnould Grand Cru Reserve (£13.95), an intense, flavoursome fizz with attractive, biscuity overtones and a long, dry finish.
Pink champagne buffs should try Sainsbury's fruity Brut Rosé, a bargain at £12.45.
Cheap champagne may be unpredictable these days, but no one in their right mind would flush these wines down the loo.
Health
DR HOOKED
The nightmare of prescription sleeping pills
BY SARAH STACEY
STEVE, A 27-YEAR-old rock musician, used to return home from a gig at 4 am.
Exhausted but high on adrenalin, he would roam about the house unable to sleep.
At dawn, he would finally fall into bed and stay there the whole of the next day.
His wife complained.
He missed seeing his two small daughters.
‘My doctor, who I trusted totally, was rally sympathetic.
He said it was a common problem with shiftworkers and prescribed Mogadon sleeping tablets.
He assured me they were totally harmless.’
That was in 1974.
Steve took the Mogadon, one of a class of tranquilizers and sleeping pills called benzodiazepines, for eight years on a repeat prescription.
‘Wonderful, dreamless sleep engulfed him every night.
So, increasingly, did addiction — a process in which he now believes the medical profession were conspirators.
‘The Mogadon hangovers were appalling, so my GP's partner told me I needed Noctamid, another sleeper but shorter acting.’
Over his fourteen-year period of dependency, Steve became more distant from reality.
Paradoxically, he also suffered overwhelming paranoia.
More than once, depression drove him to attempt suicide.
During several periods of in-patient treatment at his local NHS mental illness unit, he was prescribed more benzodiazepines: Halcion, Temazepam, Valium.
‘Nightmare times they were…my life just consisted of swallowing pills.
I had a hoard of 300 for emergencies.
I gave up on myself.’
Then, about four years ago, a gut instinct for survival surfaced from somewhere.
‘I was in hospital again.
I told them I thought I was hooked.
They couldn't even look me straight in the eye, but they agreed I should withdraw from everything.’
Steve, now 45, is one of more than 17,000 former benzodiazepine dependents who are involved in legal action against the manufacturers for compensation for negligence.
In an action which could be the largest personal injury case in legal history, they claim that these pharmaceutical companies which include market leaders Roche and Wyeth, and Halcion manufacturer Upjohn, failed to warn doctors and consumers of the possible side effects — which may include long-term brain chemistry damage — of seventeen different drugs.
One of Steve's bitterest memories is his own assumption of guilt.
‘I felt it had to be my fault: I was a weak human being with no moral fibre or I would have been able to kick the habit.’
As Charles Medawar points out in his seminal study,Power and Dependence (Social Audit, £10), it was not until the 1980s that benzodiazepine dependency became recognized as an iatrogenic problem, a disease caused by medicine itself.
‘Virtually every anti-anxiety drug and sleeping pill ever prescribed has proved to be a drug of dependence.’
Despite much more detailed warnings by the pharmaceutical companies, doctors still prescribe tranquilizers and sleeping pills at the rate of 21 million annually.
It is believed that a significant number of these are repeat prescriptions, although it is now clear that these powerful drugs should only be used short term.
According to pharmacologist Dr Joe Collier, editor of The Drugs and Therapeutics Bulletin , the case brings into question the whole process of drug licensing in Britain.
All evidence of the safety and risk/benefit ratio of drugs is assessed using manufacturers' own data.
This is understandable, considering drug research can take 20 years and cost upwards of £200 million.
However, says Dr Collier, the infamous Section 118 of the Medicines Act means that the Department of Health's Medicines Control Agency, unlike the American Food and Drugs Administration, ‘can hide virtually all of their activities, including incompetence, behind a cloak of secrecy’.
Wonderful dreamless sleep engulfed him every night.
So, increasingly, did addiction
Even more contentious is the MCA's professional advisory body.
the Committee for the Safety of Medicines.
The part-time members of the CSM are almost all reported to be advisers, consultants or in receipt of research grants from the drug barons.
‘They work hand in glove with the pharmaceutical industry and with the government,’ one ex-insider told me.
It is perhaps not a surprising liaison, considering that the British drug industry is one of the superstar contributors to our balance of payment figures.
In 1990, £1,000 million flowed into government coffers from medicinal and pharmaceutical products, compared with the oil industry's £1,223 million.
‘Drugs are remarkably safe,’ said CSM Chairman Sir William Asscher in 1986.
‘Drug regulatory authority should be immune from political and public pressure and, above all, free from the pressures of action groups.’
Steve's comments on that statement are unprintable.
Benzodiazepines are just one example of the many drugs which have proved over the years to cause rather than cure illness.
Dr Collier and others hope that this trial will remove the toxic cloak of secrecy surrounding their regulation.
WELL TRAVELLED
Nothing can substitute for the health advice your doctor or specialist clinic can provide before you go on a trip to some exotic and far-flung destination, but we thought it worthwhile to turn to one very frequent business traveller for some of his tips.
Fred Finn, who appears in the Guinness Book of World Records as the world's most travelled person, has clocked up a mind-boggling ten million miles since he started travelling on business, back in 1958 — and that includes no fewer than 687 flights on Concorde.
Whenever he's away, Fred says he takes with him a Gucci washbag packed with what he considers to be the essential medication for the business traveller.
It contains pain killers; general purpose antibiotics (in case they're not available locally); anti-diarrhoea pills; ointment for burns; plasters; penicillin powder (useful for preventing infection of open wounds); scissors; anti-malaria pills and sleeping pills.
Some items on the list, of course, require a doctor's prescription, but, says Finn, most GPs will happily provide them.
And he has some other advice, particularly for anyone travelling to third world countries — never drink local water, use bottled water instead and make sure the bottle's seal is intact.
The type with gas is best as unscrupulous locals can't refill the bottles from the tap.
Take a small water boiler such as those used for making tea — they are great for boiling water to either drink or clean your teeth.
And never have ice in your drink; the best the local beer, because the brewing process means the water used is safe.
Also make sure your vaccinations are up to date.
Some of the best advice can be had from any of the 27 British Airways Travel Clinics throughout the UK (for your nearest).
And it's worth getting hold of the booklet,Health Advice for Travellers , published by the Department of Health ().
SUN DOWNER
The increase in skin cancer across the globe has led to growing awareness about the damaging effects of sunlight on skin.
Sunlight, or ultraviolet light, is divided into three bands: UVA, UVB and UVC.
The ozone layer still prevents any lethal UVC radiation reaching the earth.
UVB light triggers the tanning response in which melanin is produced to darken, toughen and help protect the skin.
UVB is also chiefly to blame for burning and blistering.
UVA is a prime cause of early ageing.
UVB and UVA are both now believed to cause deep cellular damage and skin cancer.
Effects are cumulative, with fair-skinned, blue-eyed individuals and people with moles running a higher risk.
So, if you are going to be exposed to the sun, don't forget the sun cream.
Make sure you choose the right SPF (sun protection factor) for your skin type.
A suncream with a protection factor of 8 allows you to stay in the sun without burning up to eight times longer than normally.
The SPF system refers only to protection from UVB rays, but this year a star rating system has been introduced which also categorizes sun products according to their UVA protection.
Avoid the sun during the middle of the day and reapply the sun-cream, especially when swimming (water reflects and intensifies UV rays) or perspiring heavily.
Pay attention to sensitive areas such as ears, lips and nose.
Motoring
FORGIVE AND FORGET
The new Metro GTi deserves to be taken seriously
BY MATTHEW GWYTHER
IT WILL NOT SURPRISE those who have driven one to know that the Metro is a stunningly good car.
Having read that, the rest of you probably now think that the author is a sandwich short of a picnic.
Trust me — my hamper is full.
Like small men, small cars find it hard to be taken seriously.
Over-compensation with ‘bags of character’ afflicts both pint-sized man and machine, as they invariably come over as busy and mildly ridiculous.
The Metro in this hot GTI version may appear slightly risible from the outside, but just try driving it.
The Metro almost makes driving in a big traffic-choked city a pleasure.
Being a mere 60 inches wide you can dart and squeeze into even the smallest of gaps.
For the 16 valve GTi, Rover has given the 1.4 litre K-series engine multi-point fuel injection and, despite the addition of a standard catalyst, it delivers 104 bhp and 94lb of torque at 5,000 rpm.
That's a lot of muscle for such a small car.
You can make it from a standing start to 60 miles per hour in 8.6 seconds — almost exactly the same time as a Mazda MX3.
What is surprising about the Metro is its reluctance to being screaming and howling when you start working the engine hard.
The K-series is a great power unit — smooth, sweet and willing.
You need to go mad with your right foot before unpleasant noises being to emanate from the front end.
The Metro uses a system of Hydragas spheres for its suspension, which link the front to the rear of the car and ensure a smooth passage over bumps — provided they don't become moguls.
The gear change is slick and rapid.
The seats are firm and comfortable with adjustable lumbar support.
Indeed, the Metro is well built all round and has the feel of a real quality car.
It's all enough to make one feel quite patriotic and forgive and forget the years of Allegros, Marinas and Princesses that British Leyland foisted on a wretched, unsuspecting British public.
The Metro does, however, have a few little problems; the ghastly coloured light with which the dash is illuminated, a sort of blood-shot red; some quite nasty, outdated body styling which involves add-on, red-striped plastic strips down the sides and a central locking system which emitted a noise rather like a very small horse coughing.
However, the main gripe has to be with the amount of room in the back.
I know a family with three kids under five who can get the whole clan plus a bike and pushchair into their metro and drive off still smiling.
The K-series engine is a great power unit — smooth, sweet and willing
However, once you're growing hair you can sit on and are headed skyward from five foot three, then, if there are no seats left in the front, you'd be more comfortable tied to the roof rack.
The Metro is not cheap either.
On the road, the GTi costs £10,903 — add about 300 to that figure for a radio cassette and electric front windows.
That is almost £1,700 more than Citroen's contender in this class, the AX GTi.
You would only have to spend £1,400 more than the price of the Metro to acquire a 16 valve Renault Clio and that really is a different class of car altogether.
And you could sit in the back.
CRUMPLE ZONE
Good news for all those dedicated Sunday morning car washers.
Gone are the days of the rock-hard chamois leather.
Pittards have developed a new chamois leather.
Pittards have developed a new chamois which dries soft, reducing the risk of scratching the paintwork.
The Pittards chamois is available in two sizes: large, £12.99 and medium, £9.99.
For information and stockists, call freephone .
Counter Culture
A BIT OF THE FAST LANE IN SAVILE ROW
A new shop challenges tradition
BY NICK SULLIVAN
You might think opening a new gentleman's outfitters in Savile Row is like taking coal to Newcastle.
Not so, according to Alan Freedman and Christopher Tarling, who open Freedman and Tarling at  this month.
Despite being slap bang in the middle of the historic capital men's style, it will have a decidedly younger edge than many of its neighbours, targeting young British men who Tarling believes are rejecting fashion for its own sake and returning en masse to classics that will last longer than a season.
This is surprising perhaps, given Tarling's background as menswear buying director at Brown's, London's South Molton Street meccas for serious fashionites.
But life in fashion's fast lane has taught Tarling a lot.
‘Working with the best international designer labels, I learned about comfort — something that wasn't always the prime consideration in the traditional British off-the-peg suit.’
A bit of Euro savvy is de rigueur these days — so while Tarling and Freedman's suits and jackets are clearly inspired by Savile Row, they are made in soft, lightweight tweeds and worsteds, with a far more relaxed fit and gentle construction.
Instead of regulation City stripes, you'll find work shirts in lime green or azure blue as well as stripes, check and plaids in the coolest ice-cream colours.
The store's interior is traditionally inspired, complete with original oak-lined walls and parquet flooring.
But with the oak painted Wedgewood green, a vividly coloured Turkish carpet and armchairs upholstered in primary colours the atmosphere is anything but crusty.
The store is about what Tarling and Freedman like to wear themselves.
For them, classic clothes no longer have to be fussy or stuffy — an increasing number of British men want classic style, but won't give up the comfortable feel of the designer clothes they got used to in the Eighties.
The intention is simply to provide a relaxed mood and everything a gent could need — so the store will stock suits, jackets, shirts, cufflinks, ties, knitwear, underwear, dressing gowns and pyjamas.
BIG IN JAPAN
Piccadilly Circus is the traditional haunt of busloads of Day-Glo-rucksacked European schoolchildren loitering with intent to spend their last tenner on a Sex Pistols T-shirt.
The area has not been know for fashion stores for a long time, but the new Criterion building is the location of Sogo, the new drive-in fashion store.
Sogo, one of Japan's biggest department stores, is currently expanding energetically into Europe, with its first opening in London in early July.
On two floors, covering 24,000 square feet, shoppers will find a broad selection of big-name classic British labels like Dunhill and Chester Barrie as well as famous international designer names like Paul Smith, Jasper Conran, Ermenegildo Zegna and Louis Féraud.
But in Piccadilly, tourism is never far away, and the store is also designed to offer Japanese tourists (who on average spend only 1.7 days in London during their holidays in the UK) the chance to buy clothes all in one place and at prices more affordable than back home.
A special bus ramp behind the store even allows tour coaches to decant eager customers directly into the store.
Acquire
THE GOOD LIFE
Welcome back to the fold
BY JOANNE GLASBEY
PHOTOGRAPHS BY TOM DOBBIE
THE MINI TRAVEL RAZOR is a necessity for travellers.
The tiny chrome box fits in the palm of your hand; the razor is less fragile than it looks.
Around £11.25, call  for stockists and mail order.
ORIGAMI MEETS PLASTIC and aluminium.
This foldaway table seats four, folds into a carrying case and weighs just 21lb. £69. (plus £10 p&p), from Huzar co,.
THE FOREST COLONIAL folding chair would have been entirely at home on the deck of any of the great ocean liners of the 1830s.
The chair, with its folding leg rest, is made of teak and has solid brass fittings.
It looks as good inside your home as it does in the garden.
£199, from Clifton Nurseries,.
HAND-MADE, frost-proof and beautiful — Brannam Pottery's Terrachino terracotta pot.
The more weather worn the pot gets, the better it looks.
A real investment, it will add to any garden.
£102.15, from Clifton Nurseries,.
DIMINUTIVE but perfectly formed, this barbecue by Odell folds into a compact carrying case, perfect for beach cuisine, patio parties and for anyone who doesn't want a rusting heap of metal in their yard all winter.
£55, from The Conran Shop,.
A FULL BAG of the new Voyager set of regulation clubs weighs only 12lb and contains a two-piece master shaft and a complete set of interchangeable club heads.
£599, for stockists call .
THE OPINEL pocket knife has been a part of French life for years; it's even featured in movies alongside Jean Gabin.
It's now available in colours, the first time it's altered in 102 years.
£8.95, from Authentics,(for mail order.)
RANGER & LOEW'S embossed stainless steel art deco cigarette case looks like the authentic article — but it's even better because your king-size cigarettes will fit neatly in — which they wouldn't have done in an original case.
Around £12.50, call  for stockists details and mail order.
THE PHILIPS PVR200 Compact Moving Video opens up to reveal a four-inch LCD TV with pan-European reception.
It takes regular VHS tapes and offers a 24-hour timer facility.
£799.99, for stockists call .
Men Talking
So, tell me…
Why do some men spend more than £25 an hour just to talk?
Marina Cantacuzino meets three men who've sought help on the therapist's couch.
JAMES GATHORNE, 36, runs his own record publishing business.
He sees a therapist once a week at a cost of £26 an hour.
He lives in London with his wife and young daughter.
At the age of 30, I suddenly found myself at a turning point in my life.
I had a good job, was head of a department in a large record company and had achieved the ambitions of my early twenties in a brutish, short-term kind of way.
My primeval instincts should have been satisfied, yet I as far from content.
I began seeing a Freudian analyst.
His approach was to nudge me in certain directions, and very quickly I came to a number of revelations.
Within days, for instance, I'd broken up with my girlfriend, because things came to the surface that I had been neatly burying away for years.
The most obvious revelation was that I had a very ow opinion of myself and was constantly seeking the approval of others, because my mother had always withheld approval.
Suddenly everything began to fit into place.
In other words, I'd always known the ingredients but hadn't been able to put them together.
I kept expecting very painful things to come up: that's what I thought analysis was about.
In fact, everything was much less traumatic and emotional than I'd expected, probably because I'm pretty hard on myself anyway.
I stopped going after six months because I felt I'd resolved my immediate problem, and it had become a drag and an effort, largely because I had a problem with the silences.
We'd just sit there in silence.
I'd stare at him and he'd stare back at me and it made me want to shoot myself.
Also, I felt I'd dealt with the first layer and although I was well aware that there were subsequent layers, I thought I would deal with them at some later date.
That time came six years later.
Once again, I was restless and unfulfilled, though I now had a successful business and was happily married.
But I found having a child had put enormous strains on the marriage.
I felt I wasn't appreciate anymore and was suffering from the normal jealousies that a father has when the child monopolizes the mother's attention.
This time I'm seeing a woman, who is more of a therapist than an analyst; I prefer this because the sessions are more conversational and practical and there is even a certain amount of role playing.
I find it very helpful because we deal with immediate problems.
For instance, I'll say: ‘I'm going to see this guy tomorrow who I hate but I've got to get a contract out of him.’
And then we'll discuss why I hate him, which invariably is because I feel threatened.
I also wanted to explore the reasons why I feel angry a lot.
I usually manage to curb my anger when I'm at home, but at work I often don't succeed.
I've realized that this temperamental behaviour is the child in me not getting what I want.
The child in me dominates my personality — which has good and bad aspects — but I realize I need to explore and exert the adult and parent aspects of my character too.
One thing she has pointed out, which I find absolutely fascinating, is this triangular trap I'm in with the victim at the bottom and the persecutor and rescuer at the top.
Because I'm afraid of being the victim I'll bubble my way up to being either the rescuer or the persecutor.
I quite often see this at work: I love helping people out of difficult situations, but I'm also very good at pushing people out of my way if I feel that they are a threat to me.
Therapy is still considered a marginal thing but I really don't see why.
What's wrong with getting help to sort yourself out?
RUPERT ROSE, 28, runs his own public relations business.
He started having psychotherapy six months ago.
He pays £54 for two 50-minute sessions a week.
I was isn a relationship which I could feel was going wrong — in the same way that all my previous relationships had gone wrong.
I was very confused because I couldn't make it work, but not could I break it.
Eventually I went along to the British Association of Psychotherapists, where I was assessed and asked if I wanted to see a male or a female therapist.
I said I'd prefer a man because women were a problem area for me and I was frightened I'd push the therapist into a certain role by flirting with her if she was young and attractive, or feeling dependent on her if she was my mother's age.
Actually, this might have been quite productive since therapy is supposed to be a microcosm of your relationships, with the therapist taking on multiple roles.
Throughout the session I'm the one required to do all the talking and there's only intermittent participation from the therapist.
At first I found this rather frustrating, since I was looking for answers.
but I hadn't yet realized that the answers had to come from me rather than from the therapist.
Now I feel grateful that I've got someone who listens and who is there for me.
It was the therapy that gave me the strength to leave my girlfriend because through it I established the fact that I was prone to passivity, always waiting for other people to call the shots.
For the first time it was me who provoked the break in a relationship.
In the past I'd behaved in a way that made it impossible for women to stay with me — for instance, I'd cut off emotionally, or refuse to have sex, or start seeing other women.
At the beginning, I read a moral stance into the therapist's answers, until I realized it wasn't really there and that he was actually playing the role of my alter ego— sometimes being the ‘right’ and ‘good’side of me.
Direct advice is almost never offered by a therapist.
Every session is different — some sessions race by, others drag, some are quite businesslike, others get very emotional.
The emotional ones are the most productive because it means I'm usually to upset to try to rationalize or draw conclusions.
I've cried a lot while lying on that couch and find that the act of crying is a cathartic release.
I expected to have my family ripped to shreds, even though my childhood was extremely happy, but in Freudian analysis you look to the family for the source of all your anxieties.
At the moment I can only take the family thing so far: I can talk about certain things, but then everything becomes a blank because I still feel too close to it all.
I found that I had far more anger in me than I ever realized.
It can be extreme and very violent.
This loss of control is frightening and therapy has helped me to acknowledge its existence, although I still don't know why it happens.
It's a matter of recognizing the anger in me on an everyday basis so that I don't bottle it all up to the point of explosion.
Since starting therapy I find that I'm behaving much more honestly with friends and colleagues.
I'm more decisive, but I'm also less confident because whereas before I used to hide my lack of confidence behind a kind of arrogance and bravado, now I'm not afraid to show my weaknesses.
Therapy has rocked the boat because it's made me much more vulnerable.
I've lost all my props and foundations.
The deeper I get into this the more difficult it becomes, but I know I need to delve deep in order to get to grips with what lies underneath.
It's quite an adventure.
NEIL RYAN, 38, is a freelance graphic designer.
He is Australian by birth but moved to England in 1975.
Five years ago he began seeing a psychotherapist, but stopped after two and a half years of treatment.
I started therapy because of a lot of unresolved conflicts in my childhood.
Basically, my mother didn't know how to show me and my two sisters love and she was immensely critical of us, telling us we were ugly and undermining our self-esteem.
Every comment was designed to hurt.
Therapy has made me much more vulnerable.
I've lost all my props.
The deeper I get into this the more difficult it becomes.
Up until the age of 33, I managed to push this turmoil to the back of my mind, although I'd always had trouble with relationships because I was so full of self-doubt, and succeeded in destroying any relationship that seemed to be leading anywhere.
I came to a crisis point and knew I had to do something to sort myself out.
I went to the British Association of Psychotherapists and was given the name of a woman who used the Kleinian method.
Luckily, I was put on their reduced fee scheme and only had to pay six pounds a session.
I felt relieved once I'd started because at last I felt I was doing something about my life.
I told all my friends what I was doing and they were supportive, although one or two wondered why I couldn't do it by myself.
My relationship with the therapist was up and down.
She reminded me of my mother because, coincidentally, she was also a middle-aged, Australian woman.
She would say things that sounded critical and I would feel hurt.
Sometimes she lost her cool and I thought she stepped out of her role as therapist.
For instance, once when a friend from Australia was coming to stay with me, she asked me if I was going to sleep with her.
I found her insight and her interpretations of dreams interesting, although I didn't always agree with them.
She was careful not to push me in a direction I didn't want to go.
For instance, she never specifically said: ‘Don't blame your mother for everything’, but she made me understand that I was using my mother as an excuse for the fact that I wasn't happy a lot of the time.
Once, though, she made a comment that really upset me.
I happened to mention that I didn't much like my sister's husband.
Her interpretation of this was that I didn't like him because I was jealous of their relationship.
I felt this was totally unjust: the reason I didn't like him was because he was a selfish and violent man who was causing my sister a great deal of misery.
I thought it showed a gross lack of understanding on her part to have made a comment like this and it made me doubt whether she understood the complexity of the situation.
The comment may have been innocent enough, but it caused me to lose confidence in her and from that moment on something in me just froze.
I went along a few more times, but just sat there in silence.
She said I was cutting her out just as I'd cut out other people in my life.
I felt that after two and a half years, the therapy had served its purpose.
I was much more at peace with myself and more accepting of the way that I looked.
Also, before therapy, I used to be constantly plagued by memories of my childhood, but all of a sudden that had ceased to be a problem.
It was as if my mind was ready to let go of the past.
Poker
Why a perfect hand doesn't mean you still don't lose the lot
by ANTHONY HOLDEN
THERE ARE MOMENTS in a man's life when he feels the gentle brush of destiny's hand on his shoulder.
So it was last Tuesday night, when the change allowed at the end of our whacky version of five-card rolling draw brought your correspondent the most beautiful five of spades he had ever seen — face down what's more — to go with the A-2-3-4 he was showing.
The perfect both-ways hand in a high-low game, with a big pot building.
With only one opponent behind me, showing A-2-4-5 and declining to change, I knew I had it sewn up both ways.
His hole card must be worse than a five for a goodish low, or a second ace for a well-concealed high.
No way could he have the miracle three in the hole, to match my equally flukey hand.
He had changed one card (or was it even two?) before the off, and had not since played powerfully enough.
I bet the max, and prepared to count the spoils.
Judas (let's call him—thought for hours.
Finally he called.
Then he thought for several more hours.
What's to think about?
One for high, none for low, two for both ways.
My two chips were ready in my sweaty palm.
The more he thought, the more I knew I had him on toast.
Finally, he declared low; I declared both ways; and he showed me a concealed three.
My both-ways call had been a disaster.
To go both ways, in our game, you have to win both outright.
I had managed, with a perfect hand, to lose the lot.
That takes some doing.
So destiny wasn't on my team that night.
But what lesson was she trying to teach me?
The lads, as always, were on the phone all week with helpful hints.
My maximum bet had given away my hand and forced Judas to go one way where he would otherwise have certainly gone both.
Then I could have gone just one way — either way — and raked in the entire pot.
as if I wasn't already angry enough with myself, now the lads were cross with me too.
Judas has been the big winner lately, now he'd be cockier than ever, and it was my fault.
More than most of the zillion poker hands I've ever played, I confess, I've lost sleep over this one.
The first few hundred hours of thought made me regret my bet; but the second couple of thousand convinced me that I'd played it right.
If I hadn't made that bet, and hadn't then gone both ways, nine times out of ten Jude would have shown a beaten hand and raked in half the pot — while the lads trashed me for letting him off lightly.
This, alas, was the tenth time — the freak one that you hope will happen to someone else, while you gasp at poker's infinite potential for cruelty.
Sure, I was aware of the possibility that he too could have the perfect hand — even that he had cunningly rolled that five to mislead my own investment when I could have collared his.
To have funked it, and then known I had let him off lightly, would have cost me even more sleepless nights.
Writing this apologia has completed the process of exorcism a hand like this requires.
One of the hallmarks of the good poker player is the ability to absorb such kicks in the solar plexus, catch his breath, and call for the next deal.
Around the very next corner may lie the chance to recover, perhaps to retaliate.
Will it come next Tuesday night?
I will report back.
My two chips were ready in my sweaty palm.
I knew I had him on toast.
In the meantime, I am mindful of Harold Wilson's instructions to his staff before the 1974 election: ‘In victory, malice; in defeat, revenge.’
Letters
The Sound and the Fury
Broken Brummie
SO JIM SHELLEY reckons David Platt has a ‘broken Brummie Italian accent’ does he (‘Forza Dav-eed Platt’, May)?
Either Jim's ears or his imagination needs returning, for the fleet-footed midfield maestro hails from Chadderton, midway between those two pillars of the Midlands, Manchester and Oldham.
To be charitable, it's entirely possible that Platt's spell with Aston Villa might have led to him speaking broken Brummie.
But with an Italian accent?
Red card and back to the subs' bench for Jim.
Brothers in arms
IN CASE YOU hadn't noticed, Mr O'Hagan,(Modern Times: ‘The revenge of the Angry Man’, May) the strident ‘total war’ feminists still exist, in abundance.
Mainly middle-class, they often have little or no concept of the lives of working-class women, who are still the real victims of male oppression.
…
WHEN I WAS at university in 1981–84, the contempt, intolerance and oppression of men and their sexuality was revolting.
No, Sean O'Hagan, we don't resent women's progress, but we certainly resist the notion that all men are naturally deficient or morally inept.
…
WITH REFERENCE to Zoë Heller's column (‘View from a Broad’, May), it occurred to me that if this guy can't get it right, then who the hell can?
He's intelligent, good-looking, great job, etc.
But wait!
He has a hang-up — not a dick the size of a pin, not even a fetish for sharing his bed with woolly four-legged animals.
No, this guy's fault is he had one too many bourbons before getting up to strut his stuff on the dance-floor.
The poor woman must have been devastated!
Dirty tricks campaign
YOUR ARTICLE ENTITLED ‘The Oyston Tapes (May issue) attempts to show that a dirty tricks campaign was mounted against Owen Oyston, the socialist entrepreneur, by politicians in Lancashire and a local businessman, and that the Sunday Times was a party to this.
This is nonsense and the record needs to be put straight.
The author, Chris Blackhurst, claimed that in 1989 a 22-page dossier entitled ‘Owen Oyston’ was circulated to the press by Michael Murrin.
He was said in the article to be a campaigner in Preston who was being paid by local Tory politicians to investigate Oyston.
Blackhurst alleged that Murrin's greatest success was to get the Sunday Times to publish libellous evidence about Oyston from this dossier in a series of three damaging articles.
The facts are that no such dossier was produced by Murrin in 1989.
In June 1988, he produced a 22-page dossier entitled ‘Statement re: The Preston Dock Development, Red Rose Radio and Cable Television’.
In 1988, the Sunday Times Insight team had been sent this dossier, read it and chose not to rely on it.
In June 1989, we began a separate investigation into Oyston's relationship with Derbyshire County Council, which resulted in the publication of two articles in September of that year.
Murrin had not investigated Derbyshire County Council, which resulted in the publication of two articles in September of that year.
Murrin had not investigated Derbyshire County Council and his dossier made no reference to that part of the country.
It follows that the two articles in the Sunday Times could not be part of a ‘successful dirty tricks campaign’ by Murrin.
TO READ PETER HOUNAM's letter, you would think he had had little enough to do with Michael Murrin.
In fact, Hounam encouraged Murrin to ‘set me up’(Hounam's phrase, not mine).
The details are contained in a recording and transcript of a telephone call between Hounam and Murrin on October 16, 1990.
Michael Murrin, realizing he had been used, gave me a copy of the tape, which is now locked up in my lawyer's safe.
Basically, the plot was to get me to bribe Murrin so he would give evidence helpful to me in my libel case against the Sunday Times .
At one point, Hounam asks Murrin: ‘Is Oyston prepared to pay you over the odds for your services?’
He later adds: ‘If you are trying to set him up…you should go for a fairly substantial sum.’
Suggesting that Murrin should be ‘wired up’ when he meets me, Hounam says anything which earns me only a slap on the wrist wouldn't be enough.
‘Its got to be the coup de grâce,’ he tells Murrin.
Interestingly, during the same conversation, discussion switches to Merseyside, when Hounam makes it quite clear he believes someone in the Conservative government has intervened to prevent an investigation into a serious instance of corruption.
What, I wonder, is the fearless Insight Team doing about that?
In Defense of Do
‘THE SEXUAL VOLCANO’(June) hasn't read the back of his credit card.
It says: ‘This card remains the property of…’(then the bank's name).
He can certainly collect them, but he'll have trouble selling them!
Coming up short
AS A COPYWRITER AT the agency responsible for advertising the launch of Femidom I felt I had to comment on the remarks made by your testees (pun intended).
Generally, it was thumbs down, with comments like ‘plastic bag’ and ‘surgical glove’being bandied about.
This is a pity and I'm afraid it's a case of your researchers not seeing much beyond the end of their dicks.
The writer of the lead letter each month will receive a Waterman Man 100 pen with an 18-carat gold nib
View form a Broad
Couldn't men stop being so right on?
Couldn't they reconstruct themselves and go back to being pigs?
Zoë Heller on the problem with feminist men
ME AND THIS OLD FRIEND of mine are about to go out to the movies.
‘Wait a minute,’ I say, ‘I have to put my make-up on.’
‘Why?’ he says.
‘We're only going to the movies.’
‘Because I want to,’ I say.
I dig around in my bag for a lipstick.
‘But that's terrible if you feel you can't go out even to the cinema without putting on war paint.
I find it so depressing the way sane, reasonably intelligent women don't feel they can go round the corner to get a pint of milk without their mascara.
I mean you're a slave to it.
You obviously don't love yourself for who you really are.’
‘That's a beautiful insight.
Thank you for sharing it with me.’
‘No, really — think about the last time you went a day without wearing make-up and I bet it would be a frighteningly long time ago.’
‘Helloey?
Who are you all of a sudden?
Gloria funking Steinam?’
‘So go on and laugh.
But as long as you keep putting that gloop on your face, I think you have to seriously consider how liberated you really are.’
My friend has now stood up and is pointing his finger at me.
He is beginning to bug me.
‘I think,’ I say, taking eye-liner out of my bag and pencilling it on really thick, ‘…
I think you have me confused with someone who gives a shit.’
‘Hey’, he says, with this horrible, calm expression, ‘calm down.
Just think about it.’
It is not my imagination — I keep having conversations like this.
Perfectly normal men I know have taken to reprimanding my personal politics — harrying me about how liberated I am.
They correct my language.
 ‘Chairman’?
I can't believe you said ‘chairman’, Zoë…’
They tut and fret if I call another Woman a ‘cow’.
They laugh scornfully when they find my Fabulous Thighs in Thirty Days book: ‘Oh, how pathetic — next you'll be getting plastic surgery…’
They want to know why I'm drinking Diet Coke.
‘Jesus, Zoë — didn't you ever read Fat is a Feminist Issue?’
The other day, some man attacked me for using the phrase ‘biological clock’.
He went on about what a ludicrous concept it was, devised by a reactionary media to keep women down.
In the end, just to save myself from socking him one, I had to pretend I'd been using the term ironically .
I mean, please.
This is getting serious.
Zoë Heller on the problem with feminist men
I guess we should have seen it coming.
Certain men have been trying to get in on the politically correct act for a while.
It's just that until now, their efforts have been pretty much restricted to the dreary business of pointing out female ‘sexism’.
This has been irritating, but easy to deal with.
A woman will say something like, ‘Oh look, he's got a cute butt’ and some geek standing next to her, sensing that his chance has come to make serious waves in the world of sexual politics, will whine, ‘You wouldn't like that if I said that about a girl.’
But now that things have taken a new, altogether creepier turn, and men are actually pulling women up on points of feminist propriety, it's harder for a woman to know how to react.
She can stick to aggression and abuse — tell the offending man to back off from teaching his granny to suck eggs.
But then he'll know he's got her riled.
And in any case, men are getting more tenacious on these topics.
He'll just keep coming back: ‘No — but really.
Why are you drinking Diet Coke?’
She can seek to defend her political rectitude by lying.
(‘Yes I borrowed the Fabulous Thighs book for research purposes.
I'm writing a long article about the horrors of the diet and exercise industry.’)
But that only makes her feel like a jerk.
She can keep cool and smile in a superior, inscrutable sort of a way.
But that's not going to fool anybody.
Personally, for want of a better alternative, I've resorted to the rather shameful practice of sanctimony-baiting.
If a man starts droning on about whether I'm sisterly enough or not, I start talking about my hopes of marrying a rich, masterful husband and learning to cook Baked Alaska.
Then I start dribbling slightly and dusting furniture while singing ‘I Feel Pretty’.
If that doesn't shut the kvetch up, nothing will.
Still, it seems a shame to have to resort to such base practices.
Why are these men forcing me to do this?
Couldn't they stop being so right on?
Couldn't they unreconstruct themselves and go back to being pigs?
Couldn't we have the arguments that we used to?
The other day, I got in the way of a car and the driver had to swerve to avoid me.
He leaned out of his window and shouted: ‘Watch the way you're funking going you ugly trollop.’
‘Fuck off and die, you fat creep,’ I yelled back.
Everyone in the street stared and for a moment it was pretty embarrassing.
But walking away.
I felt a strange, warm glow.
It was something like nostalgia.