

[QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION]
REGINA V. LIVERPOOL CITY JUSTICES, Ex parte DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
1991 Oct. 30; Nov. 7
Watkins and Mann L.JJ. and Roch J.
Justices — Bail — Conditions of bail — Arrest for breach of condition — Appropriate procedure — Whether single justice having jurisdiction to hear matter — Whether power to adjourn — Bail Act 1976 (c. 63), s. 7(4) (5)— Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (c. 43), s. 121(1)
The defendant, who had been committed for trial to the Crown Court on bail, was arrested for breach of a condition of his bail and brought before the magistrates' court pursuant to section 7(4) of the Bail Act 1976.
When the case was called on for hearing only one justice was available.
She was advised that formal evidence would have to be called in order for her to form an opinion under section 7(5) of the Act of 1976 as to whether the defendant should be remanded in custody or on bail on the same or more stringent conditions, and that accordingly the hearing would in effect be a trial and would require to be heard before at least two justices.
She thereupon remanded the defendant in custody pending the determination of the section 7(5) proceedings by two or more justices on the next working day.
On the defendant's subsequent appearance, the justices held they had no jurisdiction to hear the matter and released the defendant on the same bail conditions as before.
On the prosecution's application for judicial review, on the questions whether, in proceedings under section 7(5), a hearing before two or more justices was required by virtue of section 121 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, whether formal evidence was required to be adduced, and whether there was power to adjourn the proceedings:—
Held , allowing the application, that since section 7(5) of the Act of 1976 made provision for persons arrested for breaking bail conditions, or on the likelihood of their so doing, to be brought before a single justice, it was an enactment falling within the exception contemplated by section 121 of the Act of 1980 which, in any event, was limited to summary trials of informations and the hearing of complaints under the civil jurisdiction; that Parliament had intended by section 7(4) to create a simple and expeditious procedure whereby a justice was required, before forming an opinion under section 7(5), to conduct no more than an informal inquiry, hearing the arresting officer's grounds for belief that the person had broken or might break his bail conditions and allowing that person to respond, but without the giving of evidence on oath or cross-examination; and that, since the provisions of the Act of 1980 relating to the adjournment of proceedings before magistrates' courts did not apply, there was no power in the justice to adjourn proceedings under section 7(5) (post, pp. 24A, G — 25B, C–G, 26B, E–F, H — 27A, G–H).
The following case is referred to in the judgment of Roch J.:
Moles, In re [1981]Crim.L.R. 170, D.C.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Reg. v. Bournemouth Magistrates' Court, Ex parte Cross (1988) 89 Cr.App.R. 90, D.C.
Reg. v. Mansfield Justices, Ex parte Sharkey [1985]Q.B.
613;[1984]3 W.L.R. 1328;[1985]1 All E.R.
193, D.C.
APPLICATION for judicial review.
By notice of motion dated 14 May 1990 the Director of Public Prosecutions sought judicial review of (1) the decision of a single justice sitting at the Liverpool Magistrates' Court on 16 February 1990 declining to proceed under section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976 in respect of John James Bell, who had been arrested pursuant to section 7(3) of the Act, until such time as the bench was composed of at least two justices;(2) her decision adjourning the proceedings to a court sitting on 19 February 1990 for evidence to be called and until such time remanding the defendant in custody; and (3) the decision on 19 February 1990 of the justices before whom the adjourned decision came declining jurisdiction to hear the section 7(5) proceedings.
The applicant sought a declaration and/or prerogative orders to identify the lawful decisions and correct any unlawful decisions.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
William Bellis for the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Nigel Pleming as amicus curiae.
The justices did not appear and were not represented.
7 November.
ROCH J. read the following judgment.
John James Bell was charged, on 5 December 1989, with unlawfully wounding his former girlfriend, Bridget Coffey, contrary to section 20 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (24 & 25 Vict. c. 100).
On 1 February 1990, Mr. Bell was committed by the Liverpool Justices to the Liverpool Crown Court and released on bail to surrender into the custody of the Crown Court at such time and on such date as should be notified to him.
It was a condition of his bail that he should not approach Bridget Coffey, the complainant.
At 6 o'clock on the evening of 15 February 1990, police officers went to the home of Bridget Coffey as the result of a communication from her and shortly thereafter arrested Mr. Bell in the vicinity of Miss Coffey's house.
Mr. Bell was taken to a police station in Liverpool and detained in police cells overnight.
At that police station a charge sheet was made out which read:
‘You are charged with the offences shown below.
You do not have to say anything unless you wish to do so but what you say may be given in evidence.
The sheet then recorded that Mr. Bell had been charged that on 15 February 1990 he was guilty of drunk and disorderly behaviour in Faulkner Street, Liverpool, contrary to section 91 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, and that on 1 February 1990 Mr. Bell was committed to the Liverpool Crown Court and was released on bail under a duty to surrender into the custody of the said court at such time and date as would be notified to him ‘and Constable 677F Whittaker alleges that you have broken conditions of your bail not to approach Bridget Coffey.’
It would seem that at the police station Mr. Bell denied both those matters.
On the morning of 16 February 1990 Mr. Bell appeared before the Liverpool justices unrepresented.
His case was put back to enable a solicitor to represent him.
That solicitor attended on the magistrates' court at 4.20 that afternoon.
Mr. Bell denied being drunk and disorderly and denied being in breach of the bail condition.
At that time there were two justices in court, one of whom had indicated that he was unable to sit beyond 4.15 p.m.
The other, a lady justice, indicated that she was able to remain and the clerk of the court made inquiries to see if any other justice was available.
Before that was done, Nichola Jane Davies, a barrister employed as a senior Crown prosecutor by the Merseyside area of the Crown Prosecution Service, who was representing the prosecution before that court, had explained to the court that the justices would now have to hear evidence before considering whether Mr. Bell should be remanded in custody or on bail.
There were then present at court two police officers and Miss Coffey.
The court and the court clerk accepted that if evidence was to be called and witnesses cross-examined, then the hearing was, in effect, a trial, and that two justices would be necessary.
At approximately 4.40 p.m. the clerk to the court returned to say that no other justice was available.
The affidavit of Andrew John Workman, a senior principal clerk employed by the Liverpool City Magistrates' Courts Committee, states that he advised the single justice in open court that ‘there was a power to remand a breach of bail allegation until the next available court.’
In giving that advice, Mr. Workman relied upon footnote (e) to section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976 in Stone's Justices' Manual , 121st ed. (1989), vol. 1, p. 128, para. 1–476, which states:
‘It is our view that where a person indicates that he will contest the allegation that [section 7(5)](a ) or (b ) applies, a court may still remand in custody (or grant bail) pending trial of that issue; the statement of the arresting constable's ‘reasonable grounds’ may form the basis of the opinion of the justice of the peace.
In the circumstances, however, the period of remand should clearly be as short as possible so that an early decision may be made on the full evidence.
It is also our view that a full bail application followed (if appropriate) by a full hearing certificate should be made and not just a hearing limited to whether there has been a breach or not.
Arrest under section 7 is a ground for withholding bail under Schedule 1; this suggests that Schedule 1's parent section, section 4, should apply in such circumstances, together with section 5.
It is to be noted that that footnote has been rephrased in the current edition of Stone's Justices' Manual , 123rd ed. (1991), vol. 1, p. 139, para. 1–1566.
Both Mr. Workman and Miss Davies deposed to the fact that Mr. Whitehead, Mr. Bell's solicitor, accepted that the matter could properly be adjourned until Monday, 19 February and that Mr. Whitehead did not object to his client being remanded in custody until that date.
Accordingly, the justice remanded Mr. Bell in custody until the following Monday.
It followed that no representation was made as to whether Mr. Bell should be remanded on bail or in custody, nor was the justice asked to form any opinion as to whether Mr. Bell had broken or was likely to break any condition of his bail.
On that Friday afternoon Mr. Bell denied having broken the conditions of his bail not to approach Bridget Coffey.
No plea was taken from Mr. Bell in respect of the alleged offence of drunk and disorderly behaviour.
On Monday, 19 February 1990, Mr. Bell appeared before the justices in court No. 1 at Liverpool Magistrates' Court.
The clerk on that day was Miss Claire Robinson.
The court was told of the events of 15 and 16 February; that Mr. Bell had denied being in breach of his bail conditions and that the court on Friday, 16 February had remanded Mr. Bell in custody without hearing any evidence.
The remand had been for the purpose of the issue being tried by the justices on the Monday.
The court was then addressed by Mr. Bell's solicitor, Mr. Whitehead.
He submitted that the court had no jurisdiction to hear the matter because the terms of section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976 empower a justice of the peace to remand a person in custody only if the justice is of the opinion that, inter alia, he has broken a condition of his bail; otherwise, if not of that opinion, the court must grant bail on the same conditions as were originally imposed.
As the court on 16 February had remanded Mr. Bell in custody without forming that opinion, the remand was unlawful and the court as constituted on 19 February did not fall within the terms of section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976.
Mr. Anthony Barrey, a barrister and a Crown prosecutor who was prosecuting in that court on that morning, drew the court's attention to the footnote to section 7(5) in Stone's Justices' Manual , 121st ed., vol. 1, to which reference has already been made.
Claire Robinson in her affidavit deposes that all parties were in agreement that the court on 16 February had not come to any opinion as to whether or not Mr. Bell had broken or was likely to break any condition of his bail.
She goes on to say that the justices came to the view that the justice on the Friday had had no power to remand Mr. Bell in custody until the Monday, as the remand did not fall within the terms of section 7(5) of the Act of 1976 and that, accordingly, they no longer had any jurisdiction to hear the matter.
Consequently, Mr. Bell was released on bail on the same conditions as before.
The Director of Public Prosecutions brings this application for judicial review of these decisions of the single justice on Friday, 16 February; the first, declining to deal with the issue of the alleged breach of bail condition by Mr. Bell on the ground that that issue could not be resolved by a single justice of the peace but required a court consisting of at least two justices, and the second, to adjourn the hearing of the alleged breach of condition to a court sitting on Monday, 19 February, and to remand Mr. Bell in custody in the intervening period.
Alternatively, judicial review is sought of the decision of the justices on Monday, 19 February 1990, that they had no jurisdiction to hear and decide the issue whether Mr. Bell had been in breach of a condition of his bail.
The relief sought is declarations or prerogative orders to identify the lawful decisions and correct the unlawful decisions.
We have been told that the case is of no interest to Mr. Bell, he now being in custody in relation to other matters.
Nevertheless, we have been told by counsel that the matter is far from academic, in that justices' courts are concerned, this being a matter which has exercised justices' courts on many occasions and on which there are different practices in different justices' courts.
Leave to move this court for judicial review was granted by Kennedy J. on 7 June 1990, and an amicus curiae was appointed.
The first question is whether the procedure under section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976 is a matter which calls for a formal hearing by a court consisting of at least two justices.
In my judgment, it does not.
The constitution of magistrates' courts is governed by section 121 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980.
Section 121(1) reads:
‘A magistrates' court shall not try an information summarily or hear a complaint except when composed of at least two justices unless the trial or hearing is one that by virtue of any enactment may take place before a single justice.
There are, in my opinion, two reasons why a proceeding under section 7(5) of the Act of 1976 does not require a court of two justices.
First, the wording of section 7 itself.
It is convenient at this stage to set out the relevant parts of section 7, as amended by section 65(4) of and Schedule 12 to the Criminal Law Act 1977:
‘(3) A person who has been released on bail in criminal proceedings and is under a duty to surrender into the custody of a court may be arrested without warrant by a constable —(a ) if the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that that person is not likely to surrender to custody;(b ) if the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that that person is likely to break any of the conditions of his bail or has reasonable grounds for suspecting that that person has broken any of those conditions; or…(4) A person arrested in pursuance of subsection (3) above —(a ) shall, except where he was arrested within 24 hours of the time appointed for him to surrender to custody, be brought as soon as practicable and in any event within 24 hours after his arrest before a justice of the peace for the petty sessions area in which he was arrested; and (b ) in the said excepted case shall be brought before the court at which he was to have surrendered to custody.
In reckoning for the purposes of this subsection any period of 24 hours, no account shall be taken of Christmas Day, Good Friday or any Sunday.
(5) A justice of the peace before whom a person is brought under subsection (4) above may…if of the opinion that that person —(a ) is not likely to surrender to custody, or (b ) has broken or is likely to break any condition of his bail, remand him in custody or commit him to custody, as the case may require, or alternatively, grant him bail subject to the same or to different conditions, but if not of that opinion shall grant him bail subject to the same conditions (if any) as were originally imposed.
Section 7, both in subsections (4) and (5), refers to ‘a justice of the peace;’ consequently, the procedure under section 7(5) must come within the closing words of section 121(1) of the Act of 1980, namely, that it is a hearing that by virtue of an enactment, namely the Bail Act 1976, may take place before a single justice.
It is to be noticed that bail applications themselves can be dealt with by a single justice by virtue of section 2(2) of the Act of 1976, which provides that in the Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ‘court’ includes ‘a justice of the peace.’
The second reason why two justices were not required was that the proceeding under section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976 was neither the trial of an information summarily nor the hearing of a complaint within the meaning of section 121(1) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980.
The procedure under section 7(5), in my opinion, is a procedure sui generis, and that is demonstrated clearly by the facts of this case, the justices having already committed Mr. Bell to the Liverpool Crown Court.
There was therefore no further step for the justices to take in the process of committing Mr. Bell for trial or in the conduct of his trial.
Section 7 does not create an offence which can be the subject matter of an information.
In this respect it is to be contrasted with section 6 of the Bail Act 1976, which does create an offence where a person who has been released on bail fails without reasonable cause to surrender to custody.
Section 6(1) provides that a person who behaves in that way ‘shall be guilty of an offence.’
Nor is the procedure under section 7(5) ‘the hearing of complaint.’
Those words in section 121(1) refer to the civil jurisdiction of the justices under Part II of the Act of 1980.
The second question which arises for determination is whether the proceeding before the justice or justices, if there happens to be more than one justice before whom the person arrested is brought under section 7(5), necessitates the giving of evidence on oath with the opportunity to the person arrested or his legal representative to cross-examine and the person arrested having the opportunity to give evidence himself, before the justice of the peace may properly form an opinion on the matters set out in paragraphs (a ) and (b ).
Such a hearing is not, in my judgment, required.
Section 7 does not create an offence.
It provides a simple and expeditious procedure for dealing with the situation where a constable believes that a person bailed is unlikely to surrender to custody, or alternatively, that a person bailed is likely to break a condition of his bail, or has broken a condition of his bail.
That this was Parliament's intention is clear from the use in section 7(4) of the words ‘shall…be brought as soon as practicable and in any event within 24 hours after his arrest.’
The structure of section 7, in my view, clearly contemplates the constable who has arrested the person bailed bringing him before the justice and stating his, that is to say the constable's, grounds for believing that the defendant has broken a condition of his bail.
That may well involve the giving of ‘hearsay evidence.’
No doubt the justice will in fairness give the defendant an opportunity to respond to what the constable is saying.
The justice will then either form one of the opinions set out in subsection (5), and if he does so, go on to decide whether to remand the defendant in custody or on bail on the same or more stringent conditions, or if the justice feels unable to form one of the opinions set out in the subsection, he will order the defendant to be released on bail on the same terms as were originally imposed.
It is to be observed that a proceeding under section 7(5) in no way precludes a defendant who is remanded in custody from making an application for bail either to the justices, or to the Crown Court, or to a judge in chambers, whichever tribunal is appropriate.
However, any such fresh application for bail will be subject to this; that the presumption in favour of the granting of bail under section 4(1) of the Act of 1976 will, in the case of such a defendant, be subject not only to the exceptions to the right to bail in Part I, paragraph 2 of Schedule 1 to the Act but also to the exception in paragraph 6 of that Schedule, namely:
‘The defendant need not be granted bail if, having been released on bail in or in connection with the proceedings for the offence, he has been arrested in pursuance of section 7 of this Act.
Indeed, it would seem that the purpose for the inclusion of this paragraph in Part I of Schedule 1 is to prevent a person who has been arrested for breach of a condition of his bail from claiming that he is entitled to bail despite that breach of condition, because none of the matters set out in paragraph 2 of that Part of the Schedule apply to his case.
The conclusion that the Act of 1976 requires the justice under section 7(5) to conduct an informal inquiry into the reasons for the defendant's arrest is consistent with the decision of this court in In re Moles [1981]Crim.L.R. 170.
There the Divisional Court, consisting of Donaldson L.J.
and McNeill J., had to consider an application for a writ of habeas corpus, where justices had refused bail on the ground that there was likely to be interference with witnesses and had at an application for a further remand in custody declined to hear the defendant's counsel who wished to renew the application for bail on the basis that there had been a material change of circumstances.
The Divisional Court held:
‘(1) strict rules of evidence were inherently inappropriate in a court concerned to decide whether there were substantial grounds for believing something, such as a court considering an application under the Bail Act 1976;(2) when considering an opposed application for bail justices were bound to investigate an alleged change of circumstance but where they erred by refusing so to do their subsequent order was not rendered void, although a court with appropriate jurisdiction could interfere to set it aside.
Accordingly, a writ of habeas corpus could not issue; the appropriate remedy was an application for bail before a judge in chambers.
In the redrawn footnote to section 7(5) in Stone's Justices' Manual , 123rd ed., the editors refer to this authority, but do not repeat the view which was contained in the first section of the footnote in the earlier editions.
The third and final question is whether the justice had power to adjourn the proceeding before her under section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976 to the following Monday.
In my judgment, she did not.
The justice's role in the disposal of the offence with which Mr. Bell was charged was at an end.
The only reason for Mr. Bell being before the justice was that he had been arrested without warrant under section 7(3) of the Act of 1976 and was being brought before her under section 7(4).
The sections in the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 which give justices' courts power to adjourn are: section 5(1), adjournment of an inquiry into an offence as examining justice; section 10(1), adjournment of the trial of an information; section 18(4), the power to adjourn proceedings under sections 19 to 23 of the Act, that is to say the procedure which has to be followed where the information charges the defendant with an offence triable either on indictment or summarily; and section 30, a duty to adjourn the case to enable a medical examination and report to be made where the court is satisfied that the accused did the act or made the omission charged but is of the opinion that inquiry ought to be made into his physical or mental condition.
None of those sections are applicable to the present case.
There is also a power of adjournment given by section 54(1) of the Act but that relates to matters heard on complaint, that is to say, the justices' civil jurisdiction, and is not applicable in the present case.
Even if the matter were still proceeding before the justices' court, either for the purposes of committal for trial or for trial of an information, it would be my opinion that neither section 5(1) nor section 10(1) of the Act of 1980 would apply to give the justice hearing a proceeding under section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976 a power to adjourn that proceeding.
The justice would not, in my view, be inquiring into the offence as examining justice so as to bring the matter within section 5(1) nor would she be ‘adjourning the trial of an information’ to bring the matter within section 10(1) of the Act of 1980.
Further, the terms of section 7(5) of the Act of 1976 are clear and they are mandatory in form, to the extent that if the justice is not of the opinion that the person is not likely to surrender to custody, or has broken or is likely to break any condition of his bail, the justice has to grant him bail subject to the same conditions, if any, as were originally imposed.
In my judgment, Parliament intended to and did provide a simple and expeditious method of dealing with a person arrested without warrant by a constable who had reasonable grounds for believing that that person had broken a condition of his bail, or was likely to break a condition of his bail, or was likely to fail to surrender to custody.
The procedure is informal.
Material on which the justice can be invited to form one of the required opinions does not have to consist of evidence given on oath, subject to cross-examination.
If the justice forms the opinion that section 7(5) (a ) or (b ) is applicable, then the matter can be tested if the defendant is dissatisfied with the order made by the justice by a fresh application for bail.
It seems to me that the advantages of this interpretation of the legislation are twofold.
First, it does no violence to the language either of sections 5(1) and 10(1) of the Act of 1980, or to the language of section 7(5) of the Bail Act 1976.
Secondly, it means that the person who has been arrested under section 7(3) of the Act of 1976 by a constable without warrant has the matter resolved one way or the other within 24 hours, or sooner if practicable, subject to the exceptions of Christmas Day, Good Friday and Sundays, and the prosecution, if they wish a remand in custody or the imposition of more stringent conditions, must make sure that they have within that time period sufficient material to place before the justice to enable the justice to form one of the opinions set out in section 7(5).
Finally, I would observe that the justice in this case is not to be criticised for the decision she reached on the Friday, which was based on advice given her by a legally qualified court clerk, reinforced by the submission of the representative of the Crown Prosecution Service and acquiesced in by the defendant's solicitor.
For those reasons, I would declare that it was within the power of the single justice; indeed, it was her duty on the Friday to complete the proceeding under section 7(5) of the Act of 1976, and that it was unlawful for her to adjourn the matter to the following Monday, she having no power to do so, and that the decision of the justices on the Monday was correct.
MANN L.J.
I agree.
WATKINS L.J.
There will be a declaration to that effect.
Declaration accordingly.
Solicitors: Crown Prosecution Service, Liverpool; Treasury Solicitor.
[Reported by DAVID BARRACLOUGH ESQ., Barrister]
Bail Act 1976, s. 7(4) (5): see post, p. 24D–F.
Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s. 121(1): see post, p. 24A–B.