

[COURT OF APPEAL]
In re B. (MINORS)(RESIDENCE ORDER)
1992 March 25
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R.,
Stocker and Butler-Sloss L.JJ.
Children — Residence order — Interim order — Mother removing one of four children from father's care — Father applying ex parte for return of child and residence orders in respect of all four children — Whether jurisdiction to grant orders ex parte— Whether to be exercised — Children Act 1989 (c. 41), ss. 9(5), 11(7) — Family Proceedings Rules 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 1247 (L. 20)), r. 4.4(4)
On the parents' separation the mother initially left the four children of the marriage with the father in the former matrimonial home but on her subsequently removing one of the children the father applied ex parte for orders, including a residence order, a prohibited steps order and a specific issue order pursuant to section 8 of the Children Act 1989 requiring her to return the child and directing her not to remove any of the children from the father's care and control.
The judge concluded that since rule 4.4(4) of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991did not expressly provide for the making of an application ex parte for a residence order and since section 9(5) of the Children Act 1989 prohibited him from making either a prohibited steps order or a specific issue order to achieve that result he had no jurisdiction to make the orders sought.
He accordingly dismissed the applications.
On the father's appeal:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that the absence from the Children Act 1989 of any express provision that applications be made either inter partes or ex parte connoted the availability of either course in appropriate circumstances; that on a true construction the court's powers conferred by the Act of 1989 had not been abrogated by the Family Proceedings Rules 1991 so that rule 4.4(4) did not preclude the making of an ex parte application for a residence order, although normally applications should be made inter partes; that the judge therefore had jurisdiction to make such an order and, under section 11(7) of the Act, to attach such directions as might be appropriate; and that, accordingly, in the exceptional circumstances, the court would make an interim residence order to which directions would be attached for the return of the child to the former matrimonial home and for all the children to remain in the father's care until the inter partes hearing of the father's applications (post, pp. 116B, D–E, F, G–H, 117A–E, F–H).
Per Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. The words in section 8(1) ‘directions for the purpose of determining a specific question which has arisen, or which may arise,’ refer not to the method of determining that question, but to a direction which will, as a matter of law, determine the issue between the parties (post, p. 118F).
No cases are referred to in the judgments or were cited in argument.
INTERLOCUTORY APPEAL from Judge Galpin sitting at Portsmouth County Court.
By an application dated 17 March 1992 the father applied ex parte for an injunction requiring the mother, inter alia, to return the child, A., to his care and directing her not to remove or attempt to remove the other children, G., R. and M. from his care without consent.
By an application dated 18 March 1992 the father applied ex parte for a prohibited steps order preventing the mother from removing the four children from the care and control of the father, a specific issue order directing the mother to return A. to the father's care and control and not to remove him therefrom and a residence order directing that the four children live with the father and that the mother return A. to the former matrimonial home and into the father's care, all such orders being sought pursuant to section 8 of the Children Act 1989.
On 18 March the judge dismissed the applications.
By a notice of appeal dated 23 March 1992 the father appealed on the grounds that (1) the judge had been wrong to conclude that he had no jurisdiction to make the orders sought and (2) having found that A. had been removed from his home with the father the judge had failed to order his return whether pursuant to section 8 of the Children Act 1989 or otherwise.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Butler-Sloss L.J.
Keith Cutler for the father.
BUTLER-SLOSS L.J.
This is an appeal by a father, ex parte in the rather unusual circumstances of this case, from the refusal of Judge Galpin in the Portsmouth County Court on 18 March 1992, only a few days ago, to make a residence order or a prohibited steps order or a specific issue order on an ex parte application made the day before by a father in connection with a snatch, and a potential snatch of the rest of the children of the family.
The judge made a non-molestation order and there is no problem about that.
There are four children of the marriage which took place on 17 March 1990, three girls born in 1984, 1986 and 1988 and a little boy born in July 1990.
The parties eventually separated on 14 March 1992, again very recently, and the mother left without the children, having found another man and formed another and very recent relationship.
She returned with her new boyfriend on 17 March and effectively snatched the little boy, leaving the three little girls behind with their father.
The father came before the judge on an ex parte application designed to return the boy, A., to the family, to protect the other three children and to preserve the status quo pending a decision by the judge as to where the children should live by making the appropriate applications for a residence order and so on.
The judge held, in effect, that he had no power to deal with a snatch.
He said:
‘The difficulty is that this is an ex parte application and I can grant ex parte relief for prohibited steps and specific issues but cannot ex parte make residence orders.
The petitioner asked for an order not to remove from care and control of petitioner.
The petitioner has no order giving care and control of children.
Both parents have parental responsibility.
I do not think I can give the petitioner superior rights.
I cannot properly order that the children be returned to the care and control of the petitioner when the respondent has equal rights to the child.
Counsel has helpfully suggested that I could make an order not to remove child from place he was presently living until removed, as well as in respect of the other three children.
I consider this is the equivalent of a residence order through the back door, and do not think it appropriate to make that order when Parliament has specifically denied the right to grant ex parte applications for residence orders: see also the provisions of section 9(5) of the Children Act 1989.
I regret I cannot give the petitioner relief.
He then granted leave to appeal to this court, which I do not think in fact he needed to do but, in any event, it was an indication that he refused to make the order with regret.
If the judge is right, it is an incredible state of affairs.
The Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (1980)(Cm. 33), the European Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Decisions concerning Custody of Children (1980)(Cm. 191) and the Family Law Act 1986 all provide the opportunity for steps to be taken to return abducted children anywhere within the world, including between England and Scotland and England and Northern Ireland, but do not permit such a state of affairs to occur within England and Wales.
Looking at the matter generally, I cannot believe that that could conceivably have been the intention of Parliament when passing the Children Act 1989 and thereby, if Judge Galpin is right, taking away from children within England and Wales the right to have an order made in their best interests by returning them to where they ought to be, which was a right which those children had, and parents acting on their behalf were able to claim in the courts, until 14 October 1991.
Under section 8 a residence order can be made, or a contact order (which does not apply), or a prohibited steps order, or a specific issue order.
Under section 9(5):
‘No court shall exercise its powers to make a specific issue order or prohibited steps order —(a ) with a view to achieving a result which could be achieved by making a residence or contact order;…
Consequently, the court cannot use what used to be called injunctions, either mandatory or prohibitory, to achieve that the child should live in a particular place.
I respectfully agree with the judge that that would be an inappropriate way of achieving the result which clearly ought to be achieved, which is that a child abducted in the way this little boy was should be able to return home pending a decision as to whether he lives with his father or with his mother.
Under section 10(1), however, the court has considerable powers:
‘In any family proceedings in which a question arises with respect to the welfare of any child, the court may make a section 8 order with respect to the child if —…(b ) the court considers that the order should be made even though no such application has been made.
So, once the matter comes before the judge, he can, in effect, make any appropriate order within the very considerable flexibility that the Children Act 1989 is intended to provide, but with this important proviso.
This section, by subsection (3), is subject to the restrictions imposed by section 9.
Consequently, the court cannot make a prohibited steps order, or a specific issue order, to achieve a residence order.
However, if it is appropriate to make any sort of residence order, under section 11(7): ‘A section 8 order [which includes a residence order]may —(a ) contain directions about how it is to be carried into effect;…
’ Speaking for myself, I read that very broadly as giving the judge who makes a residence order the jurisdiction to attach conditions, or directions which I think are very much the same thing, as to how the children should be cared for and where they should be once the residence order has been made.
Nothing is said in the Act about whether orders can be made ex parte or only inter partes.
By the Family Proceedings Rules 1991, coming into force on the same day as the Act, that is to say 14 October 1991, applications under the Act are to be found under rule 4.4, and under paragraph (4) there is set out the way in which ex parte applications can be made under section 8 in respect of a prohibited steps order or a specific issue order, and then in respect of emergency protection orders and recovery orders.
Nothing is said about residence orders, either that they can be made or that they cannot be made ex parte.
Judge Galpin understandably read this as meaning expressio unius exclusio alterius.
I am by no means certain, however, he is right because, if he is right, the silence of the Act as to whether applications can be made ex parte or inter partes — which means, in my judgment, they could be either in appropriate circumstances — has been by the Rules cut down to deprive a party from being able to make an ex parte application.
If Judge Galpin's interpretation of the Act and the Rules is correct, it drives a coach and horses straight through an enormously important area of child protection within family relationships; that is to say, the ability to prevent an abduction and the ability to prevent the possibility of an abduction, or to restore a child who has been abducted to the home where the child should be, unless or until the 21 days service or other abbreviated service has been effected, by which time it may be in certain cases far too late for the welfare of the child.
In my judgment, the Act cannot be read as being constrained by the Rules to preclude an ex parte application.
I understand that this particular problem may be dealt with in the near future, and it is quite obvious that the Rules need urgently to be reconsidered in order to make it clear to circuit judges and to magistrates, who have the problem of dealing with these snatches, that they can deal with it in an appropriate way which is in the interests of the child concerned.
But in this case I am satisfied that Judge Galpin had the jurisdiction to make an ex parte order.
In those circumstances, he had the jurisdiction under section 11(7) to require the child to be returned, to direct the return of the child to the former matrimonial home and to the interim care of the father, and to direct that the three little girls should remain with their father pending an inter partes hearing of the application for a residence order.
In this case, as in all other ex parte applications, it is not to be taken that an ex parte application for the return of a child, or an ex parte application for an interim residence order, will be granted easily.
In the majority of cases it is preferable that there should be service of the application upon the other side.
There is no reason not to abridge time.
The 21 days for a residence order application is the standard.
The standard can always be abridged if the requirements of the children require the case to be heard very quickly.
But there are occasionally cases where an ex parte application needs to be made, and I stress occasionally .
This appears, on the face of it, to be such an occasional case.
There is some suggestion of violence on the part of the mother's current and very, so far, short-lived relationship with the man she is now with and, if that is so — and one has to accept, for the purposes of this application, the untested evidence of the father — it would not be in the interests of these children for the original order to be made after an inter partes hearing.
But it is obviously undesirable to have ex parte residence orders other than very occasionally.
That is not to say that there is not the power to do it and, in my judgment, the Act provides for this exceptional circumstance to take place.
It is appropriate in this case that there should be an interim residence order, and there should be directions attached to that order that A. be returned forthwith to the care of his father and that G., R. and M. remain in the care of their father and that there be an inter partes hearing with service of the application as quickly as the Portsmouth County Court can make it possible to be heard, which means within a matter of days not a matter of weeks, because it would be quite wrong for this matter to die down once the child is returned.
On the contrary, it is a matter of great urgency that the mother's case should be heard because, at the end of the day, it may be that these children should live in the future with their mother.
But what is more important than anything else is that they should not be treated as packages and removed from one place to another and back again because the grown-ups are involved in a dispute and have overlooked that children have rights, and that children's rights are to remain somewhere until after calm and sensible consideration and a decision by a court that the particular place in which they are living is changed by the decision of the court to them living somewhere else.
For those reasons, in the exceptional circumstances of this case, in my judgment the judge was wrong.
He misinterpreted the Act and he failed to allow himself to have the jurisdiction to deal in a flexible manner with the children, which is the whole purpose of the Act, and consequently it is for this court to make the order that it appears Judge Galpin would have liked to have made and felt impeded from so doing.
I would allow the appeal and give the directions as I set out in my judgment.
STOCKER L.J.
I entirely agree and there is nothing I wish to add on my own behalf.
LORD DONALDSON OF LYMINGTON M.R. I agree.
If I had been of the view, which I am not, that it was open to the rule making authority, whether by accident or design, in any way to remove powers which the Act has given to the court, I should still have been of opinion that the judge had the powers which he clearly wished to have.
The obstacles in his way, as he saw it, were the rule which purported to prevent the making of an ex parte residence order and section 9(5) of the Act.
Section 9(5) provides:
‘No court shall exercise its powers to make a specific issue order or prohibited steps order —(a ) with a view to achieving a result which could be achieved by making a residence or contact order;…
If the effect of the rule was that an emergency ring holding position could not be achieved by making a residence order, because of a requirement for 21 days notice, then section 9(5) would have no application and the judge was free to achieve the objective by means of a specific issue order and/or a prohibited steps order.
In that context I have had to look at the definition of a specific issue order which is contained in section 8(1) of the Act and I know, from talking to those who have been concerned with this Act and are familiar with it, that they have no doubt at all as to what that definition means.
But I have to say that somebody coming to it from outside might indeed take a different view, so I would like just to deal with that aspect of the matter.
What the outsider might say is this.
He would read the definition in section 8(1), which is
‘a specific issue order’ means an order giving directions for the purpose of determining a specific question which has arisen, or which may arise, in connection with any aspect of parental responsibility for a child.
He might then say to himself, as indeed I did, ‘Well, this is power to give directions with a view to a hearing in seven days' time, at which hearing there will be a determination of a particular question which has arisen between the parties.’
Those who are familiar with this Act would say to him, ‘Ah, yes, but what happens then?
There is no power here to make any order to give effect to that determination.’
That, of course, is a plainly nonsensical result and, casting myself in the role of the interfering outsider not so familiar with this Act, I ask myself what is the answer to that.
The answer, I think, is quite clear when you look at the definition again, but it is not necessarily clear at first reading.
It is that the words ‘directions for the purpose of determining a specific question which has arisen, or which may arise,’ do not refer to the method of determining that question, but refer to a direction which will, as a matter of law, determine the issue as between the parties.
So construed, a specific issue order means what the cognoscenti always thought that it meant but, since one member of the other group, the ‘incognoscenti,’ perhaps was a bit puzzled by it in the first place, I thought it was worthwhile to clarify the matter on this occasion.
Appeal allowed.
Legal aid taxation of father's costs.
Liberty to apply to county court.
Solicitors: Stokes, Portsmouth.