

[CHANCERY DIVISION]HALIFAX BUILDING SOCIETY and Others v.
EDELL and Others [1991 H. No. 10828]1992 Feb. 19, 20, 21, 24; 28
Morritt J.
Building Society — Ombudsman — Jurisdiction — Further mortgage advances — Property valuations by societies' employees — Borrowers' complaints of negligent surveys to ombudsman — Whether jurisdiction to investigate and determine — Building Societies Act 1986 (c. 53), s. 83(1), Sch.
12, Pt.
III, para. 1(a) (d)
The second to ninth defendants, existing borrowers from the plaintiff building societies, applied for further advances secured against properties to be charged.
They were required to choose one of three mortgage valuations; a basic valuation to enable the society to assess the adequacy of the security offered, pursuant to the duty imposed on societies by section 13(1) of the Act of 1986, a copy of which would normally be provided for the borrower on payment of a fee; a house buyers' valuation containing a fuller report, for which the borrower paid a higher fee; or a full structural survey.
The borrowers chose basic valuations or house buyers' valuations.
They complained pursuant to section 83(1) of and paragraph 1 of Part III of Schedule 12 to, the Act to the first defendant, the ombudsman appointed under the Building Societies Ombudsman Scheme set up under the Act that their valuations had been prepared negligently by the professional valuers, who in each case were employees of the plaintiff societies, who were all members of the scheme.
On the plaintiffs' originating summons for a declaration that the ombudsman did not have jurisdiction to investigate and determine the borrowers' complaints:—
Held , refusing the declarations, that a basic valuation prepared by an employee of a building society was an ‘action taken by the society in relation to’ the grant of a further advance within section 83(1) of the Act and since it constituted part of the society's process of administration, such a valuation, if negligently prepared, could amount to maladministration within paragraph 1 (d ) of Part III to Schedule 12 to the Act; that, on the documentation used by the plaintiff societies, a house buyers' valuation prepared by an employee created a contract between the society and the borrower, which if negligently prepared could amount to a breach of the society's contractual obligation within paragraph 1 (a ) of Part III to Schedule 12; that although the alleged want of due skill and care might relate to matters not affecting the society's assessment of the adequacy of the security, the valuation was in reality a single process amounting to an action within section 83(1); and that, accordingly, the ombudsman had jurisdiction under the scheme set up under the Act to investigate and determine complaints arising out of basic valuations, house buyers' valuations, and, since there was no relevant distinction in the nature of the contractual relationship, structural surveys by a society's employee in the same circumstances (post, pp. 145A–H, 150B — 151A, H — 152A).
The following case is referred to in the judgment:
Reg. v. Local Commissioner for Administration for the North and East Area of England, Ex parte Bradford Metropolitan City Council [1979]Q.B.
287;[1979]2 W.L.R. 1;[1979]2 All E.R.
881, C.A.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Reg. v. Commissioner for Local Administration, Ex parte Croydon London Borough Council [1989]1 All E.R.
1033, D.C.
Reg. v. Local Commissioner for Administration for the South, the West, the West Midlands, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire, Ex parte Eastleigh Borough Council [1988]Q.B.
855;[1988]3 W.L.R. 113;[1988]3 All E.R.
151, C.A.
Roberts v. J. Hampson & Co. [1990]1 W.L.R. 94;[1989]2 All E.R.
504
Smith v. Eric S. Bush [1990]1 A.C. 831;[1989]2 W.L.R. 790;[1989]2 All E.R.
514, H.L. (E.)
Yianni v. Edwin Evans & Sons [1982]Q.B.
438;[1981]3 W.L.R. 843;[1981]3 All E.R.
592
Originating Summons
By an originating summons dated 18 December 1991 the plaintiffs, the Halifax Building Society, the Woolwich Equitable Building Society, the Leeds Permanent Building Society, and the Alliance and Leicester Building Society, sought (1) a declaration that, upon the true construction of the ombudsman scheme recognised under Part IX of the Building Societies Act 1986, the first defendant Stephen Bristow Edell, the ombudsman appointed under the scheme, was not entitled to investigate or determine (a) the complaint against the first plaintiff received by him from Michael Robert Allen and Christine Allen, the second and third defendants respectively, alleging that the report and valuation for mortgage assessment prepared for the first plaintiff had been negligently prepared,(b) the complaint against the second plaintiff received by him from Jeffrey Leonard Brommage and Heather Maureen Brommage, the fourth and fifth defendants respectively, alleging that the report and valuation prepared for the second plaintiff had been negligently prepared,(c) the complaint against the third plaintiff received by him from Lawrence Frederick West and Christa West, the sixth and seventh defendants respectively, alleging that the report and valuation prepared for the third plaintiff had been negligently prepared, and (d) the complaint against the fourth plaintiff received by him from Joseph Paul Hardcastle and Astrid Marie Hardcastle, the eighth and ninth defendants respectively, alleging that the report and valuation prepared for them had been negligently prepared; and (2) a determination, upon the true construction of the scheme, whether and if so in what circumstances the first defendant was entitled to investigate and determine a complaint relating to an allegation of failure to exercise the requisite degree of professional skill and care on the part of a valuer or surveyor employed by the building society against which the complaint was made in relation to a report by him on the condition or value of any property where the report in question consisted of:(a) a written report prepared pursuant to section 13 of the Building Societies Act 1986 for a building society on the value of the land which was proposed as security for an advance to be made by the society and on any factors likely materially to affect its value made by a person who is competent to value and is not disqualified under section 13 from making a report on the land in question,(b) a written valuers' report and valuation for mortgage prepared for the first plaintiff,(c) such a report prepared for the second plaintiff,(d) such a report prepared for the third plaintiff,(e) such a report prepared for the fourth plaintiff,(f) a house buyer's report and valuation prepared by a chartered surveyor subject to the standard conditions of engagement of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors,(g) a flat buyer's report and valuation prepared by a chartered surveyor,(h) a home buyer's standard valuation and survey report prepared by an incorporated valuer and auctioneer subject to the standard terms of engagement of the Incorporated Society of Valuers and Auctioneers,(i) a written report known as a ‘home purchase report’ prepared by a chartered surveyor or an incorporated valuer and auctioneer subject to the standard conditions of engagement of the second plaintiff,(j) a written report known as a ‘house buyer's report’prepared by a chartered surveyor or an incorporated valuer and auctioneer subject to the standard conditions of engagement of the third plaintiff, or (k) a structural survey report.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Simon Berry Q.C.and John McGhee for the plaintiffs.
Timothy Lloyd Q.C.and Katherine McQuail for the first defendant.
The second to ninth defendants did not appear and were not represented.
28 February.
Morritt J. read the following judgment.
Section 83(1) of the Building Societies Act 1986 confers on an individual the right as against a building society to have any complaint of his about action taken by the society in relation to a prescribed matter of complaint which affects him in prescribed respects, investigated under a scheme recognised by the Building Societies Commission.
There is one such scheme known as the Ombudsman Scheme which was recognised by the Building Societies Commission on 5 June 1987.
Each of the plaintiffs is a member of the scheme and the first defendant is the ombudsman appointed under it.
The ombudsman claims that the jurisdiction and duty to investigate conferred and imposed on him by the scheme enables and requires him to investigate and determine complaints in relation to valuations made by employees of a building society of properties to be charged to the building society to secure further advances to an existing borrower from that society.
The plaintiffs disagree and, by the originating summons now before me, seek the determination of certain questions of construction of the scheme so as to resolve the question of jurisdiction.
The brochures issued by each of the plaintiffs show that there are three types of valuation which may be made.
There is the basic valuation required to enable the society to assess the adequacy of the security offered pursuant to section 13 of the Building Societies Act 1986.
The second to seventh defendants have complained to the ombudsman that such valuations made in respect of further loans to them were carried out negligently by an employee of, in the case of the second and third defendants, the Halifax Building Society; in the case of fourth and fifth defendants the Woolwich Building Society, and in the case of the sixth and seventh defendants the Leeds Permanent Building Society.
Such brochures also refer to two other types of valuation or survey.
The second is a home or flat buyers' report and valuation.
The eighth and ninth defendants have complained to the ombudsman that such a report and valuation made by an employee of the Alliance and Leicester Building Society was carried out negligently.
The third type of valuation and report is a full structural survey.
It is accepted that such surveys are only carried out by employees of the building society in the case of the Woolwich Building Society, so that the question at issue can only arise in regard to the structural surveys provided by that building society.
None of the second to ninth defendants appeared at the hearing but all the arguments available to them were put by counsel for the ombudsman.
It was common ground that the scheme, though set up pursuant to a statutory obligation, was a private and not a public law scheme so that the procedure by way of originating summons rather than judicial review was appropriate.
Before considering the scheme, it is necessary to refer to various provisions in the Building Societies Act 1986.
Section 83 provides, so far as material:
‘(1) An individual shall, by virtue of and in accordance with schemes under this section, have the right, as against a building society, to have any complaint of his about action taken by the society in relation to a prescribed matter of complaint which affects him in prescribed respects investigated under the scheme.
…(6) Schedule 12 to this Act has effect for the purposes of this section and, in that Schedule —(a ) Part I prescribes the matters for which provision must be made by a scheme if it is to be a scheme which qualifies for recognition for the purposes of this section;(b ) Part II prescribes the matters action in relation to any of which must be subject to investigation under a scheme if it is to qualify for recognition for the purpose of investigations in relation to that matter; and (c ) Part III contains other requirements to which a scheme must conform if it is to be so recognised.
Subsection (7) enables the Building Societies Commission with the consent of the Treasury by order to vary Part II or Part III of Schedule 12.
Subsection (15) provides, so far as material:
‘In this section, section 84, Schedule 12 and Schedule 13…‘action’ includes any failure to act, and so as regards‘exercise’in relation to any power; and ‘action,’in relation to a society, includes action on its behalf by any body associated with it; ‘prescribed,’in relation to matters of complaint, means prescribed for the time being in Part II of Schedule 12 and, in relation to the respects in which a complainant is affected by any action, means prescribed for the time being in Part III of that Schedule as grounds for making action subject to investigation under the scheme;…
Section 84 provides, so far as material:
‘(2) Determinations of complaints under recognised schemes shall be made by reference to what is, in the adjudicator's opinion, fair in all the circumstances of the case and any direction given to a building society or associated body by an adjudicator may (if the complainant accepts the determination) require it or the complainant not to exercise or require the performance of any of the contractual or other obligations or rights subsisting between them.
(3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5) below, a determination of the adjudicator under a recognised scheme, which is, by virtue of the complainant's acceptance of it, binding on the building society or associated body shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(4) Subsection (3) above does not apply where a society or associated body is authorised by the scheme to relieve itself of its obligation to take the steps it is directed to take or pay the compensation awarded by the society's undertaking an obligation to give the requisite publicity for the reasons for not doing so and the society undertakes that obligation.
(5) Where a determination of the adjudicator under a recognised scheme is binding on the building society or associated body, the adjudicator shall, at the request of the society or associated body, state a case for the opinion of the High Court on any question of law and the High Court may direct the  adjudicator to reconsider the complaint.
Part II to Schedule 12 sets out the prescribed matters of complaint.
The relevant matter is paragraph 3 which provides:
‘The operation or termination of the account of a member borrowing on a class 1 or class 2 advance and the grant or refusal to grant a borrowing member of that description other or further class 1, or as the case may be, class 2 advances secured on the same or different land or other facilities normally available to borrowing members of his description.
Note: The operation or termination of the account of a borrowing member includes any aspect of the relationship or the termination of the relationship between the society and a borrowing member as such, including in particular the exercise of the right of foreclosure or any other power over the land by virtue of the mortgage.
Note: The grant of advances includes the terms on which they are granted.
Part III to Schedule 12 is headed ‘Minimum Requirements for Recognised Schemes: Other Provisions.’
Paragraph 1 is headed ‘Grounds of complaint’ and provides:
‘The grounds for making action by a building society or associated body subject to investigation under the scheme must be that the action constitutes —(a ) in the case of a building society, a breach of the society's obligations under this Act, the rules or any other contract, or (b ) in the case of an associated body, a breach of the associated body's obligations under its rules (if any) or any contract, or (c ) unfair treatment, or (d ) maladministration, in relation to the complainant and has caused him pecuniary loss or expense or inconvenience.
Paragraph 2 sets out the permissible exclusions from investigation, and paragraphs 3 to 5 set out the functions of the adjudicator.
Paragraph 3 (a ),(c ) and (d ) provide as follows:
‘A scheme must, as regards the duties and powers attached to the investigation of complaints under the scheme —(a ) impose on the adjudicator a duty, subject to the provision made in pursuance of sub-paragraph (c ) below, to investigate and determine any complaint duly made;…(c ) confer power on the adjudicator to advise, mediate or act as conciliator before proceeding further with an investigation;(d ) confer power on the adjudicator to extend the scope of his investigation to other matters related to the action complained of;…
Paragraph 4 provides, so far as material:
‘(3) Subject to sub-paragraph (4) below, a scheme may preclude the adjudicator, in his determination, from questioning the merits of any decision taken by the society or associated body with reference to…(b ) the creditworthiness, for the purposes of any advance or other service or facility, of the complainant…but not otherwise.
(4) Where investigation of a complaint on the ground of maladministration involves consideration by the adjudicator of any decision taken with reference to the creditworthiness of the complainant the scheme must confer power on the adjudicator to direct the society or associated body to take its decision again and reach it by proper procedures.
Pursuant to section 85 and Schedule 14, if both the complainant and the society agree, the adjudicator may act in relation to a complaint within section 83 as an arbitrator with all the legal consequences that that entails.
The scheme conforms with the provisions of the Act of 1986.
It provides all the minimum requirements and no more.
It provides for the appointment of the ombudsman to be called the Building Societies Ombudsman as the adjudicator required by the Act.
Clauses 14, 17 and 18 provide:
‘14.
Conditions for Investigation.
The ombudsman shall (in accordance with and subject to the following clauses of this scheme) investigate any complaint received by him from an individual if:—(a ) the complaint relates to action taken in the United Kingdom by a building society or a body associated with it;(b ) at the time that the complaint is received by the ombudsman, the building society or (as the case may be) associated body is a participant in the scheme;(c ) the action was taken in relation to one of the activities specified in clause 17;(d ) the grounds of the complaint are included in the grounds specified in clause 18; and (e ) the complainant alleges that the action has caused him pecuniary loss, expense or inconvenience.’
‘17.
Activities Covered.
The activities which may be subject to investigation under this scheme are those specified in Part II of Schedule 12 [to the Act of 1986], which are described there under the following headings:— share accounts — deposit accounts — borrowing members: class 1 or class 2 advances — borrowers: loans by appropriate mortgage companies — borrowers: mobile home loans — borrowers: other loans — banking services — trusteeship — executorship.
‘18.
Grounds of Complaint.
The grounds of any complaint must be that the action complained of constitutes, in relation to the complainant:—(a ) in the case of a participating society, a breach of its obligations under [the Act of 1986], its rules or any other contract; or (b ) in the case of a participating associate, a breach of its obligations under its rules (if any) or any contract; or (c ) unfair treatment; or (d ) maladministration.
It is unnecessary to refer to any other provisions of the scheme because I have already quoted the corresponding provisions in the Act.
The provisions of clauses 14, 17 and 18 relevant to the issues before me have been helpfully set out in the affidavit of Mr. McKeown in which I have interpolated three numbers to indicate the particular passages which were dealt with in argument.
With that interpolation, the relevant provisions read:
‘The ombudsman shall…investigate any complaint received by him from an individual if [1]…the complaint relates to action taken in the United Kingdom by a building society…[2]in relation to…the grant or refusal to grant a borrowing member…other or further…advances secured on the same or different land provided that the grounds of complaint [are]that [3]the action complained of constitutes in relation to the complainant:—(a ) in the case of a participating society, a breach of its obligations under the Act, its rules or any other contract or…(b ) unfair treatment or (c ) maladministration.
Before referring to the arguments, it is necessary to refer to other provisions of the Act of 1986.
Section 13(1) provides:
‘It shall be the duty of every director of a building society to satisfy himself that the arrangements made for assessing the adequacy of the security for any advance to be fully secured on land which is to be made by the society are such as may reasonably be expected to ensure that —(a ) an assessment will be made on the occasion of each advance whether or not any previous assessment was made with a view to further advances or re-advances;(b ) each assessment will be made by a person holding office in or employed by the society who is competent to make the assessment and is not disqualified under this section from making it;(c ) each person making the assessment will have furnished to him a written report on the value of the land and any factors likely materially to affect its value made by a person who is competent to value, and is not disqualified under this section from making a report on, the land in question; but the arrangements need not require each report to be made with a view to a particular assessment so long as it is adequate for the purpose of making the assessment.
Section 45 sets out the criteria for the prudent management of a building society.
By subsection (3), paragraph 4, and subsection (10) such criteria include maintenance of the requirements of section 13.
By section 34, a building society was authorised to provide the services described in Part I to Schedule 8.
As originally enacted, paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 8 and 14 were:
‘1.
Money transmission services.
2.
Foreign exchange services.
3.
Making or receiving of payments, as agents.…
8.
Arranging for the provision of credit, whether on behalf of the borrower or the person providing credit, and providing services in connection with current loan agreements to the party providing credit.
…14.
Surveys and valuations of land.
Paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 8 corresponded to the headings and description of the matters of complaint originally contained in paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 9 of Part II to Schedule 12.
Schedule 8 was varied by the Building Societies (Commercial Assets and Services) Order 1988 (S.I.
1988 No. 1141).
Paragraphs 1, 4, 5 and 6 now read: ‘1.
Banking services.
…4.
Trusteeship. 5.
Executorship. 6.
Land services.’
‘Land services’ is defined:
‘Land services’ means services relating to the acquisition, management, development or disposal of land.’
When Part II to Schedule 12 was amended by the Building Societies (Investigation of Complaints) Order 1990 (S.I.
1990 No. 2203), matters of complaint in paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 corresponded to paragraphs 1, 4 and 5 of Schedule 8 as amended.
Thus, both before and after amendment the matters of complaint in Schedule 12 embraced some only of the services a society was authorised to provide and omitted both surveys and valuations of land and land services.
It is common ground between the plaintiffs and the ombudsman that the only relevant matter of complaint is that part of paragraph 3 of Part II to Schedule 12, which refers to the grant or refusal to grant further advances to a borrowing member.
Thus, it is also common ground that the complainant must have been an existing borrower at the time of the grant or refusal in question.
Likewise, because the complaint must be about action taken by the society, the ombudsman has no jurisdiction to investigate complaints relating to valuations made by a surveyor who is not an employee of the society in question.
Thus it is clear that the ombudsman could, if his arguments are right, only investigate complaints arising from negligent valuations in the case of some lenders and some borrowers.
I propose to consider the questions raised in respect of basic valuations first.
In the case of each plaintiff, the application form for a further advance requires the borrower to state whether he wishes a basic valuation, a house buyers' report or a structural survey; the brochure having pointed out the limited scope of the first two.
If he opts for a basic valuation, for which he pays a lower fee than for either of the other two, he will normally receive a copy.
Such a valuation is, in any event, required by the building society to ensure compliance with the criteria of prudent management set out in section 45 and by the directors of the building society to ensure compliance by them of the duties imposed by section 13.
For the plaintiffs it is submitted that the action of the employee valuer in exercising his professional skill and judgment in providing a basic valuation for consideration by the assessor is not action taken by the society but a service rendered to the society by a professional man as such, even though he is also an employee.
Second, it is submitted for the plaintiffs that such action is not in relation to the grant or refusal of a further advance because the making of the valuation is not part of the administration or managerial process leading to the grant or refusal but is only a condition precedent to the actual process of making a grant.
Third, it is submitted that maladministration is the only relevant ground for complaint in respect of basic valuations and that that does not comprehend the exercise of professional skill and judgment by an employed surveyor.
The plaintiffs rely on the ordinary meaning of that word as connoting faulty administration or inefficient or improper management of affairs as approved by Eveleigh L.J.
in Reg. v. Local Commissioner for Administration for the North and East Area of England, Ex parte Bradford Metropolitan City Council [1979]Q.B.
287, 314, in the context of the Local Government Act 1974.
I was referred to a number of other Acts in which the word ‘maladministration’ is used in that sense, namely the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967, Local Government Act 1974, National Health Service Act 1977 and Social Security Act 1990.
The plaintiffs submit that if maladministration includes the provision by an employee of a negligent valuation, then the result would be anomalous because, as is common ground, the provision of such a report by an independent surveyor could not be maladministration.
I will consider each of these points in turn, though it must always be borne in mind that the provisions of the scheme must be construed as a whole so that each phrase provides part of the context for the others.
As a body corporate, a building society can only act through the human agency of its officers and employees.
The performance of his contract of employment by an employee involves the provision of services to his employer.
But if such performance involves an action within the scope of his employment affecting persons outside the building society, then such action is by the building society.
I see no justification for concluding that if the service provided involves the use of professional skill and judgment, the provision of such a service to the society cannot also constitute action by the society.
In my judgment, it is plain that the provision of a basic valuation by an employee to a building society to enable the assessment of the adequacy of the security offered by a borrowing member for a further advance involves action taken by the society about which the member may complain if the other prescribed conditions are satisfied.
The next question is whether such action is taken in relation to the grant or refusal to grant a further loan.
It was common ground that the words ‘in relation to’ are general words linking the action to the prescribed matter of complaint.
It is apparent from section 13 that a basic valuation is necessary to the consideration of an application for a further advance.
It is quite true, as the plaintiffs submit, that provided the person making the valuation is competent to value, it matters not who instructed him to produce the valuation or whether he is an employee of the building society or not.
Thus, there is no obligation on a building society itself to provide the valuation.
But this consideration seems to me to be immaterial.
The existence of such a valuation is a sine qua non to the grant of a further advance.
The provision of such a valuation is in relation to the grant of a further advance because that is its raison d'être.
The fact that it may have been provided by the member, not the society, and produced by an independent surveyor, not an employee of the society, merely shows, as conceded, that it is not in those cases action taken by the society.
But this is irrelevant to the question whether it is in relation to the grant of a further advance.
In my judgment, it plainly is.
So the crucial question is whether, if the basic valuation is produced by an employee of a building society, any failure to exercise due care and skill can constitute maladministration.
It was common ground that this word connotes faulty administration, inefficient or improper management of affairs.
Likewise, it was common ground that faulty administration contemplated the procedures by which decisions are made as opposed to the merits of the decisions.
This distinction is borne out by paragraph 4(4) of Part III to Schedule 12.
To my mind, the answer to the question depends on ascertaining in the context of the Act as a whole what is the administration referred to.
A building society is not concerned with public or local government or the provision of a public service.
Thus, the administration referred to is not of a governmental nature and the other legislation to which I was referred is of no assistance.
It is clear from Part II of Schedule 12, that the relevant maladministration, and hence administration, is not the conduct of the building societies' business as a whole but only in those spheres of their activity falling within the prescribed matters of complaint.
Those spheres are financial and commercial.
It seems to me that the administration in question must be the procedure by which the building societies' business is conducted within those spheres.
In the case of the grant of a further advance, those procedures include all the steps necessary to assess the adequacy of the security offered for an advance.
This requires ensuring that there is a basic valuation and considering its contents.
If the borrowing member does not produce a basic valuation, then the building society must procure one itself.
Thus, in my judgment, the administration of the society's business in the field of making advances includes, if necessary, obtaining a basic valuation from, if it so chooses, one of its employees.
If it chooses to get one from one of its employees, then it seems to me that the preparation of that report by one of its employees is as much a part of the administration of the societies' business in the field of making advances as is consideration of the report by the assessor required by section 13(1) (b ).
The fact that it is not an essential part of the process of granting an advance in all cases that a basic valuation should be supplied by an employee of the society, does not mean that where the basic valuation is supplied by an employee its provision is not part of the process of administration.
It follows from this that the failure of an employee to exercise reasonable skill and care in making his basic valuation is faulty and therefore maladministration.
It is true that this conclusion may appear anomalous in that the right conferred on a borrowing member by section 83(1) is confined to cases where the basic valuation is produced by an employee of the society.
But anomalies are bound to arise with any investigative scheme of limited scope.
Moreover, the anomaly arises not from the word ‘maladministration’ but from the limitation that the complaint must be about action taken by the society.
In my judgment, the meaning of the words used is too clear to permit the exclusion of negligent basic valuations by an employee of the society by any process of construction.
The fact that this conclusion enables the ombudsman to investigate complaints that a professional man has failed to use due care and skill otherwise that in accordance with the common law, is no reason for reaching a contrary conclusion either.
It is inherent in the business of lending money that a variety of professional skills will be deployed.
I see no ground for excluding the valuer if his acts or omissions are those of the society.
Likewise, the fact that surveys and valuations of land or land services are permissible activities for a building society but not, as such, matters of complaint within Part II to Schedule 12, does not mean that the provision of a basic valuation by an employed valuer in relation to the grant of a further advance must be excluded from the administration of granting or refusing advances.
The terms are not mutually exclusive.
In my judgment, the ombudsman is right.
There is nothing relating to the facts of any of the specific complaints of the second to seventh defendants which requires separate consideration.
Accordingly, I refuse to make the declaration sought by sub-paragraphs (a),(b) and (c) of paragraph 1 of the originating summons and I will answer the questions raised in sub-paragraphs (a) to (e) of paragraph 2 in the affirmative.
The next set of issues relates to house or flat buyers' reports and valuations.
The brochures issued by each of the plaintiffs encourages a borrowing member to have such a report for his or her own protection.
A higher fee is charged for such a report and where the surveyor who carries it out is an employee of the society, the fee is retained by the society.
Where an independent surveyor is used, he is paid by the society but the society retains part of the amount paid by the borrowing member to cover the costs of its administration.
The surveyor conducts one inspection and provides a fuller report than is required to ensure compliance with section 13.
The report is sent to the borrowing member.
Either that report or a summary of it or a basic valuation prepared from the same materials is used by the building society for the purposes of section 13.
As with the basic valuation, the issues only arise where the house buyers' report is made by an employee of the society, for it is accepted that in other cases there is no relevant action by the society.
In addition to the three points on the basic valuation, namely action by the society in relation to the grant or refusal of an advance and maladministration, one further point arises in the case of a house or flat buyers' report.
That is whether a report prepared by an employee valuer without due care and skill is a breach of contract by the society so as to constitute a ground of complaint within paragraph 1 (a ) Part III to Schedule 12.
There are variations in the literature used by each of the four plaintiffs and it is necessary to refer to the various brochures, application forms, conditions of employment and report forms.
In the case of the Halifax Building Society, the brochure states in relation to valuations generally:
‘We have an extensive panel of valuers and surveyors who are well equipped to complete these reports speedily and effectively.
Please bear in mind, however, that we cannot accept responsibility for the contents of the reports as the valuers act independently from the society — except in certain parts of the country where we employ in-house valuers.
With regard to the house buyers' report, the borrower is informed:
‘The valuer advises whether or not the price agreed for the house is realistic, taking into account its repair and condition and the property market in general.
A summary of the report will be sent to the society for mortgage assessment.
The conditions of engagement of the valuer are set out indicating the nature of the service he will perform and, so far as relevant, state:
‘1.
The surveyor will advise the client as to his opinion of the state of repair and condition of and the value of the property specified by the client on the standard form of house buyers' report and valuation published on behalf of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.…
8.
The report is provided for the sole use of the named client and, where the surveyor is so notified, his mortgagee, and is confidential to the client and his professional advisers.
The surveyor accepts responsibility to the client alone for the stated purposes that the report will be prepared with the skill, care and diligence reasonably to be expected of a competent chartered surveyor, but accepts no responsibility whatsoever to any person other than the client himself.
Any such person relies upon the report at his own risk.
In the form of application for a mortgage the applicant is invited to state which type of inspection he requires.
The form of declaration to be signed by the applicant includes the following: ‘I/we agree to a valuer being instructed to prepare the report and valuation and I/we accept the terms and conditions of engagement.’
A six page report is provided to the borrower signed by the surveyor.
Where he is employed by the society, that will be indicated below the signature.
A copy was formerly, but is no longer, supplied to the society.
The society always received and still receives from the same surveyor a basic valuation containing a summary of some but not all the matters contained in the report to the borrower.
The borrower does not receive a copy of the basic valuation.
In the case of Woolwich Building Society the brochure states:
‘Who prepares the report?
One of the Woolwich's surveyors, all of whom are members of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, or the Incorporated Society of Valuers and Auctioneers, or an approved surveyor nominated by the society.
Under the heading ‘What does the report cover?’ it is stated:
‘The full terms and conditions upon which the report is prepared are set out opposite with the scale of fees charged shown separately.
The report will be used by the Woolwich instead of the mortgage valuation report as it includes all the information which usually appears in that report.
The relevant conditions of engagement are:
‘1.
The surveyor will advise the applicant and Woolwich Building Society (‘the society’) as to his opinion of the state of repair and condition of, and the value of, the property specified by the applicant on the standard form of home purchase report published by the society in conjunction with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.…
7.
The report is provided for the sole use of the named applicant and the society and is confidential to the applicant and his professional advisers.
The surveyor accepts responsibility to the applicant and the society only for the stated purposes that the report will be prepared with the skill, care and diligence reasonably to be expected of a competent chartered surveyor, but accepts no responsibility whatsoever to any person other than the applicant and the society.
Any such person relies upon the report at his own risk.
The form of application states:
‘I/we request the society to arrange for a Woolwich home purchase report to be prepared and confirm I/we have read, understand and accept the conditions of engagement.
The fee of [blank]pounds is enclosed.
As indicated in the brochure, a copy of the whole report is supplied to the building society.
The last page contains a summary of the information required for the purposes of section 13, though some consideration is also required of the first page.
The report is signed by the surveyor who will indicate under his signature whether he is an employee of the building society or an outside valuer.
Where the property in question is a flat, the society receives a separate section 13 basic valuation as well.
In the case of the Leeds Permanent Building Society, the brochure now in use states:
‘Two alternative valuation and survey services are available to you, both of which are primarily for your use — house buyers' report or structural survey.
If you wish to obtain either of these more detailed reports we can request one from the surveyor or valuer we would normally use to obtain our report and mortgage valuation.
In respect of the house buyers' report and valuation it is stated:
‘The house buyers' report and valuation, without being a structural survey, is a report on the state of repair and condition of the property.
It contains a summary for mortgage purposes and statistics and can be used by the society instead of a report and mortgage valuation.
The relevant conditions of engagement state:
‘1.
The surveyor, who will be a chartered surveyor or an incorporated valuer, will advise the applicant(s) and Leeds Permanent Building Society as to his opinion of the state of repair and condition of, and the value of, the property specified by the applicant(s) on the standard form of Leeds Permanent/R.I.C.S. house buyers' report and valuation.…
8.
The report is provided for the sole use of the named applicant(s) and Leeds Permanent Building Society and is confidential to the applicant(s) and his professional advisers.
The surveyor accepts responsibility to the applicant(s) and the Leeds Permanent Building Society for the stated purposes and the report will be prepared with the skill, care and diligence reasonably to be expected of a competent chartered surveyor or incorporated valuer, but accepts no responsibility whatsoever to any person other than the applicant(s) and the Leeds Permanent Building Society.
Any such person relies upon the report at his own risk.
The report consists of seven pages, the first six, described as the inspection report, signed at the foot of page six by the surveyor with an indication whether or not he is employed.
The seventh page is described as a ‘summary for mortgage purposes and statistics’ and is also signed by the surveyor with the appropriate section 13 certificate.
Both the society and the borrower receive all seven pages.
In the case of the Alliance and Leicester Building Society, the brochure states:
‘The society will be pleased to help you get a report suitable for your needs; details of the house or flat buyers' reports (option 2) and building survey (option 3) are set out overleaf.
The fees for a fuller report are, of course, higher than for the society's valuation report, because the surveyor will spend more time both inspecting the property and preparing a fuller report suitable for your needs.
In relation to option 2 it is stated:
‘With these reports the society will instruct, on your behalf, a suitably qualified surveyor who will write to you direct with the details of the terms and conditions of engagement.
The surveyor will be responsible to you for the stated purpose of the report.
The relevant conditions of engagement may be either those of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors or the Incorporated Society of Valuers and Auctioneers.
The former are those I have quoted in the case of the other building societies.
The relevant condition of the latter states:
‘Responsibility is accepted in the preparation of this report for the skill and diligence reasonably to be expected of a competent surveyor and valuer but the information it contains is for the confidential information only of the clients for whom it is prepared and of any building society, bank or other lender to whom written application for a mortgage advance has been made or will be made within 28 days after the date of this report.
In the form of application in relation to the house buyers' report it is stated:
‘In choosing this option, you authorise the society to request an appropriate surveyor to undertake a report and valuation as described in the guidance notes for mortgage applicants and you are satisfied and understand the conditions of engagement.
The report when made takes the same form as that in the case of the Leeds Permanent Building Society.
Both the society and the borrower receive a copy of all seven pages.
For the plaintiffs it was submitted that in each case either the only relevant contract was between the borrower and the valuer or, if there was a contract to which the building society was a party, its obligation was limited to instructing a competent valuer.
In neither case, it was submitted, was the society contractually bound to provide a report prepared with due skill and care.
In each case the valuer, though employed by the society, contracted as principal and accepted liability to the borrower.
In consequence, it was submitted, the relevant action was taken not by the society, the report was not required by the society for its own purposes and was thus not in relation to the grant or refusal of an advance, and a report negligently prepared could not constitute maladministration or a breach of the society's obligations under any contract.
As conceded by the ombudsman, these submissions are well founded in the case of a valuer who is not employed by the society.
The forms of document in use by each of the plaintiffs are directed primarily to cases where independent valuers are instructed but they must also be considered against the background of a contract of employment between the valuer and the society.
In these cases the society not only fixes and receives the fee payable for the report but it retains the fee for itself.
The valuer gets his usual salary and no more.
It is entirely a matter for the society whether it selects one of its own employees or instructs an independent firm.
In the ordinary case, the borrower plays no part in the choice and has no right to do so.
As recognised by the conditions of engagement, the report is made to the borrower and the valuer accepts liability to him.
But I do not think that these circumstances demonstrate a contract between the valuer as principal and the borrower.
The performance of his task by the employed valuer is the performance of his contract of employment.
There is little scope and seemingly no consideration for a contract by the valuer as principal.
The conditions of engagement show that the valuer accepts liability in tort to the borrower and the society but this has no additional consequence where the valuer is liable to the society under his contract of employment and the society would be vicariously liable to the borrower for the valuer's negligence if it were not already liable to the borrower under a contract.
In the case of Halifax Building Society the brochure states that the society accepts responsibility for its employed valuers.
I accept the submission for the ombudsman.
In accordance with that analysis, there is a contract between the society and the borrower that the society will procure a house buyers' report either through its own employee or at the society's option through an independent valuer.
If it chooses an independent valuer, then there is a separate contract between the valuer and the borrower, the society's obligation being confined to using care in the selection of the valuer.
If the society chooses to use its own employee, then there is no separate contract between the valuer and the borrower.
The valuer does the work pursuant to his contract of employment and the society provides the report to the borrower pursuant to the contract between them.
In the latter case, but not the former, the society is responsible if the report is not made with due care and skill by its employee.
It follows from this analysis that the provision of the report to the borrower is an action by the building society and that if it is prepared without appropriate skill and care the ground of the complaint, namely breach of the society's contractual obligation, falls within paragraph 1 (a ) of Part III to Schedule 12.
Thus, it is unnecessary to consider the alternative ground of maladministration.
But it does not necessarily follow that the action of the society is in relation to the grant or refusal of an advance.
As all the brochures make plain, the house buyers' report goes beyond what is required by the society for the purposes of section 13.
The want of due skill and care may arise in respect of a matter which finds no reflection in the summary or separate basic valuation.
Thus, it is true, as the plaintiffs submitted, that the provision of a house buyers' report is not in all its details a necessary part of the process of assessing the adequacy of the security.
But the phrase ‘in relation to the grant or refusal of an advance’ does not require the action complained of to be a necessary part of the process.
As a matter of ordinary English it includes actions, which, whilst not strictly necessary, relate to the grant or refusal of an advance.
In the case of each of the plaintiffs, the application form indicates that the borrower must ask for one of the three valuations referred to.
If the borrower chooses the house buyers' report, the work undertaken by the valuer results in both a report to the borrower and the necessary report to the society.
A single fee is paid to the society.
In reality it is all one process not susceptible to division, which is in relation to the grant or refusal of an advance because the borrower selected that form of report in his application for an advance and in consequence of the society's decision to use its own employee it is contractually liable for any want of due skill or care.
Accordingly, I refuse to make the declarations sought in paragraph 1(d) of the originating summons and I will answer the questions raised in paragraphs 2(f) to (j), but limited to the documentation currently used by each of the four plaintiffs, in the affirmative.
This leaves the structural survey.
The question only arises in the case of the Woolwich Building Society because none of the other plaintiffs uses an employee to produce it.
In their brochure the Woolwich Building Society states:
‘The Woolwich can now offer homebuyers a structural survey report.
This will provide a much more detailed examination of the structure and condition of the property being purchased and will be carried out by one of the Woolwich's own structural surveyors.
The form of application states:
‘I/we request the society to arrange for a structural survey and, if appropriate, a mortgage valuation report to be prepared and confirm that I/we have read and that I/we understand and accept the conditions of engagement.
The fee of [blank]pounds is enclosed.
The relevant conditions of engagement state:
‘1.
The surveyor will advise the client and Woolwich Equitable Building Society (‘the society’) as to his opinion of the state of repair and condition of, and the value of, the property specified by the client on the report form published by the society.
…15.
The report is provided for the sole use of the named client and the society and is confidential to the client and his professional advisers.
The surveyor accepts responsibility to the client and the society only for the stated purposes that the report will be prepared with skill, care and diligence reasonably to be expected of a competent chartered surveyor, but accepts no responsibility whatsoever to any person other than the client and the society.
Any such person relies upon the report at his own risk.
The report is provided on a form headed ‘Woolwich Building Society: Structural Survey.’
A copy is supplied to the society.
But, as the brochure makes plain, a structural survey may be provided as part of the provision of surveying and valuation or land services wholly unconnected with any application for the grant of an advance.
In those cases the report is not in relation to the grant or refusal of an advance so that even if negligently prepared it is not a matter of complaint within paragraph 3 of Part II to Schedule 12.
But where there is an application for the grant of an advance a structural survey is one of the three forms of valuation from which the applicant is required to choose.
The same valuer will also produce a basic valuation for the purposes of section 13.
In such a case, as the brochure states:
‘The fee for the structural survey normally includes the cost of a separate mortgage valuation report, which all mortgage applicants need to have carried out.
This report is prepared to enable the Woolwich to determine how much to lend.
If you are intending to take out a Woolwich mortgage a copy of this report will be provided to you and will accompany our formal mortgage offer.
If, however, you are not intending to obtain a Woolwich mortgage then the fee will reflect the fact that there will not be a need for a mortgage valuation report.
I do not see any relevant distinction between the provision of a structural survey at the request of a borrower applying for a further advance and the provision of a house buyers' report in the same circumstances.
An analysis of the contractual relationship produces the same result and the same consequences.
Accordingly, in relation to paragraph 2(k) of the originating summons I will answer the question in the affirmative, subject to the question being limited to the existing documentation in use by the Woolwich Building Society and subject to the request for the structural survey being part of an application for a further advance.
Order accordingly.
Solicitors: Church Adams Tatham & Co.; Farrer & Co.
[Reported by Ian Saxton Esq., Barrister]