

[HOUSE OF LORDS]1992 June 2; 25
Lord Griffiths, Lord Bridge of Harwich, Lord Brandon of Oakbrook, Lord Oliver of Aylmerton and Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle
Legal Aid — Costs — Jurisdiction to award — Defendant initially unassisted but subsequently obtaining legal aid — Plaintiff legally aided throughout — House of Lords making order for defendant's costs incurred while unassisted person to be paid out of legal aid fund — Order suspended to allow Legal Aid Board to object — Whether House of Lords making ‘order forthwith’— Whether jurisdiction to make order — Legal Aid Act 1988 (c. 34), s. 18(1) (2)— Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989 (S.I.
1989 No. 339), regs.
143, 147
In proceedings under the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985 the plaintiff was legally aided throughout.
The defendant became legally aided from 5 July 1990, before the conclusion of the proceedings at the first instance, and continued to be legally aided until the disposal of the appeal by the House of Lords.
The defendant was successful throughout.
On 13 June 1991 the House of Lords ordered, pursuant to section 18 of the Legal Aid Act 1988 that the defendant's costs before the issue of his legal aid certificate should be paid out of the legal aid fund and, pursuant to regulations 143 and 147 of the Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989, suspended the effect of that order to give the Legal Aid Board an opportunity to object.
On the board's objection:—
Held ,(1) that section 18(1) and (2) authorised an order for payment by the board of that part of the costs of the proceedings determined in the defendant's favour incurred by him personally at any time when he was not receiving legal aid and was thus an unassisted person; that, accordingly, the House had jurisdiction under the section to order payment by the board of the defendant's costs incurred before the issue of his legal aid certificate; and that the appropriate course was to adjourn the defendant's application under regulation 143 of the Regulations of 1989 for him to pursue his claim in accordance with regulation 147 (post, pp. 199G, 201A–B, E, H — 202A, 203B–D).
(2) That the prohibition in regulation 143 on the making of orders ‘forthwith’ applied only to an order which was to take immediate effect, and not to a suspended order which took effect after a lapse of time in the absence of objection by the Board; and that, accordingly, a suspended order did not contravene the regulation (post, pp. 199G, 202B–C, H — 203A, B–D).
No cases are referred to in their Lordships' opinions.
The following cases were cited in argument:
Auten v. Rayner , The Times, 28 April 1960
Davies v. Taylor (No. 2)[1974]A.C. 225;[1973]2 W.L.R. 610;[1973]1 All E.R.
959, H.L. (E.)
Lewis v. Averay (No. 2)[1973]1 W.L.R. 510;[1973]2 All E.R.
229, C.A.
Maynard v. Osmond (No. 2)[1979]1 W.L.R. 31;[1979]1 All E.R. 483, C.A.
Reg. v. Leeds County Court, Ex parte Morris [1990]1 Q.B.
523;[1990]2 W.L.R. 175;[1990]1 All E.R.
550, D.C.
Reg. v. Miller (Raymond)[1983]1 W.L.R. 1056;[1983]3 All E.R.
186
Rodgers v. British Transport Commission (1963) 107 S.J. 619
Further Consideration of an order for costs.
This was further consideration of an order for costs made by the House of Lords [1991]2 A.C. 476 on 13 June 1991 under section 18 of the Legal Aid Act 1988 in these proceedings under the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985.
The House ordered that the defendant's costs before the issue of his legal aid certificate in respect of his costs as from 5 July 1990 should be paid from the legal aid fund.
The order was suspended and the Legal Aid Board was given leave to object if it was so minded.
The board applied for that order to be set aside on the ground that there was no jurisdiction to make it.
Charles Utley for the board.
Christopher Llewellyn-Jones Q.C.
and Debora Price for the defendant.
Their Lordships took time for consideration.
25 June.
Lord Griffiths.
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speech prepared by my noble and learned friend, Lord Bridge of Harwich, and agree with his conclusions and his reasons for them.
Lord Bridge of Harwich .
My Lords, in this appeal the House [1991]2 A.C. 476 delivered judgment in favour of the defendant on 13 June 1991.
The plaintiff had been legally aided throughout.
The defendant initially bore his own costs, but was legally aided from 5 July 1990, before the conclusion of the proceedings at first instance, until the disposal of the appeal by the House.
An order was then made that the costs incurred by the defendant in the High Court before the issue of his legal aid certificate be paid out of the Legal Aid Fund pursuant to section 18 of the Legal Aid Act 1988, but that the order be suspended to enable the Legal Aid Board to object if they wished.
The board has now objected.
The board's first ground of objection raises an important question of principle which depends on the construction of section 18 of the Act of 1988 which provides, so far as material:
‘(1) This section applies to proceedings to which a legally assisted person is a party and which are finally decided in favour of an unassisted party.
(2) In any proceedings to which this section applies the court by which the proceedings were so decided may, subject to subsections (3) and (4) below, make an order for the payment by the Board to the unassisted party of the whole or any part of the costs incurred by him in the proceedings.
(3) Before making an order under this section, the court shall consider what order for costs should be made against the assisted party and for determining his liability in respect of such costs.
(4) An order under this section in respect of any costs may only be made if —(a ) an order for costs would be made in the proceedings apart from this Act;(b ) as respects the costs incurred in a court of first instance, those proceedings were instituted by the assisted party and the court is satisfied that the unassisted party will suffer severe financial hardship unless the order is made; and (c ) in any case, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case that provision for the costs should be made out of public funds.
…(6) In this section ‘costs’ means costs as between party and party, and includes the costs of applying for an order under this section; and where a party begins to receive representation after the proceedings have been instituted, or ceases to receive representation before they are finally decided or otherwise receives representation in connection with part only of the proceedings, the reference in subsection (2) above to the costs incurred by the unassisted party in the proceedings shall be construed as a reference to so much of those costs as is attributable to that part.
The only other provision which I think I need cite is section 2(11) which provides:
‘In this Act ‘legally assisted person’ means any person who receives, under this Act, advice, assistance or representation and, in relation to proceedings, any reference to an assisted party or an unassisted party is to be construed accordingly.
Mr. Utley submits on behalf of the board that, on the true construction of section 18(1), power to make an order for payment of costs by the board is only exercisable in favour of a person who is an unassisted party at the time when the relevant proceedings are finally decided, i.e. who is not then receiving legal aid.
If this is right, it produces a very odd result.
It means that a defendant who has incurred large costs both at trial and in the Court of Appeal in resisting a claim by a legally aided plaintiff, but who then receives legal aid in the House of Lords where he is finally successful, is ineligible for any award of costs against the board.
But conversely (as Mr. Utley did not feel able to dispute, although he did not formally concede the point) a defendant who is legally aided at first instance and in the Court of Appeal, but who for any reason then ceases to be aided and incurs the full costs of successfully resisting an appeal to the House of Lords, is eligible to recover those costs from the board.
It is difficult to think that Parliament intended the section to operate so capriciously and I would not construe it in that sense unless clearly constrained to do so by the statutory language.
But I see no difficulty in reading the language of subsections (1) and (2) of section 18 as authorising an order for payment by the board (subject, of course, to the criteria prescribed by subsection (4)) of such part of the costs of the proceedings which are eventually determined in the defendant's favour as were incurred by the defendant personally at any time when he was not receiving legal aid and accordingly fell within the definition of an unassisted party.
A final decision of the proceedings in favour of the party claiming costs from the board is an essential prerequisite of his entitlement.
I have not thought it necessary to set out the elaborate provisions of subsection (7) which determine when the proceedings are to be treated as finally determined.
But in construing subsection (1) the mere conjunction of the words ‘finally decided’ and ‘unassisted party’in a single phrase affords no ground to link the required status of the party with the moment of final decision.
What matters is the status of the party as unassisted at the time when he incurred the costs in the proceedings which he seeks to recover.
I think this construction receives some indirect support from subsection (6) which limits the costs which the unassisted party can recover to costs attributable to those parts of the proceedings for which the other party was in receipt of legal aid.
This is consistent with the view that the structure of section 18 is related to the status of both parties (as assisted or unassisted) and operates differentially according to their relative status at different stages of the proceedings.
I would accordingly hold that the House had jurisdiction under section 18 to order payment by the board of the defendant's costs incurred before the issue of his legal aid certificate.
But this would be of limited value to the defendant, since any costs recovered by the defendant would be subject to a charge in favour of the board under section 16 of the Act and the operation of regulation 103 of the Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989, the detail of which I need not examine, and would have the effect in this case that the defendant would in fact recover only a very small proportion of the costs he actually incurred.
This explains why Mr. Llewellyn-Jones, for the defendant, sought to persuade your Lordships that the power to order the board to pay the defendant's costs under section 18 was not limited to the costs he incurred as an unassisted party but extended to the whole costs of the proceedings.
There are many reasons why I cannot accept this submission.
But I am content to rest my conclusion in rejecting it on the simple ground, which closely reflects the reasoning I have already deployed in rejecting the board's construction of section 18, that the words in subsection (2)‘an order for payment…to the unassisted party…of the costs incurred by him in the proceedings’ can only apply to costs incurred by the unassisted party in his capacity as such.
It is common ground that an order for payment to the defendant by the board of his costs in the court of first instance can only be made if he can establish under section 18(4) (b ) that he ‘will suffer severe financial hardship unless the order is made…
’ This issue has not yet been explored.
It is again common ground that the appropriate course for the House now to take in accordance with regulation 143 of the Regulations of 1989 is to adjourn the hearing of the defendant's application for an order under section 18, which will automatically activate the procedure under regulation 147 requiring the defendant, if he is minded to pursue the matter, to file evidence in support of his claim.
Examination in this connection of the provisions of regulations 143 to 147 of the Regulations of 1989, which reproduce identical provisions in the Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1980 (S.I.
1980 No. 1894), has raised the question whether the long-established practice of both the Court of Appeal and this House in relation to the costs of appellate proceedings to make, in an appropriate case, a suspended order under section 18 (or its predecessors) to take effect after a lapse of time in the absence of objection by the Legal Aid Board (or formerly the Law Society) is one which runs counter to the strict requirements of those Regulations.
The material provisions are:
‘143(1) On an application for an order under section 18 of the Act made in respect of proceedings in the Supreme Court (except proceedings on appeal from a county court) or in the House of Lords, the court shall not make an order forthwith, but may in its discretion —(a) refer the application to a master or registrar for hearing and determination; or (b) adjourn the hearing of the application; or (c) dismiss the application…’
‘147.
If the court adjourns the hearing of an application in accordance with regulation 143 but does not refer it for inquiry and report, then —(a) within 21 days of the adjournment, the unassisted party shall file an affidavit of costs and resources together with original exhibits and any other documents necessary to support the affidavit; and (b) not less than 21 days before the adjourned hearing, the unassisted party shall serve notice on the area director of the date and time of the adjourned hearing together with a copy of his affidavit of costs and resources (and of any exhibits and supporting documents).
It is not disputed by the Legal Aid Board, and indeed it is obvious, that the existing practice is highly convenient and may avoid unnecessary costs being incurred which would eventually fall on the legal aid fund if it were necessary in every case to set in motion a procedure for filing of evidence.
It is common ground that in a majority of cases where an order may be made under section 18 for the payment by the Board to the unassisted party of the costs of appellate, as opposed to first instance, proceedings, the Court of Appeal or this House will be in a position at the conclusion of an appeal on the information then before it to decide under section 18(3) what, if any, order for costs should be made against the assisted party and to form at least a provisional view under section 18(4) (c ) as to whether it would be ‘just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case that provision for the costs should be made out of public funds.’
If the Legal Aid Board, as the only party adversely affected by the proposed order, has the opportunity to challenge it but decides not to do so, one may ask rhetorically what possible objection of substance there can be to the existing practice.
The answer is, I think, none.
But beyond this, I think the prohibition in regulation 143 against making an order ‘forthwith’ can only apply to an order which is to take immediate effect and that a suspended order which the Legal Aid Board has the opportunity to contest in no way contravenes the regulation.
Moreover the Legal Aid Board, being in a position, as is rightly conceded, to waive observance of procedural formalities which exist solely for the board's protection can do so by raising no objection to the proposed order and thereby obviate the necessity for any further inquiry before the suspended order takes effect.
Lord Brandon of Oakbrook .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speech prepared by my noble and learned friend, Lord Bridge of Harwich.
I agree with his conclusions and his reasons for them.
Lord Oliver of Aylmerton .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Bridge of Harwich.
I agree with his conclusions and his reasons for them.
Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speech prepared by my noble and learned friend, Lord Bridge of Harwich, and agree with his conclusions and his reasons for them.
Order of House of Lords as to costs dated 13 June 1991 discharged.
Hearing of defendant's application for order under section 18 of Act of 1988 adjourned in accordance with regulation 143 of Regulations of 1989.
Solicitors: Legal Aid Board; E. Edwards, Son & Noice, Grays.