

[HOUSE OF LORDS]A. T. & T. ISTEL LTD.
AND ANOTHER Appellants
and TULLY AND ANOTHER Respondents
1992 May 12, 13, 14;
July 20
Lord Templeman, Lord Griffiths, Lord Ackner, Lord Goff of Chieveley and Lord Lowry
Practice — Discovery — Privilege against self-incrimination — Action for damages for fraud and breach of trust — Plaintiffs obtaining order requiring defendants to disclose information and documents — Proviso prohibiting use of information in criminal proceedings — Defendants claiming privilege against self-incrimination — Whether proviso effective to protect defendants — Whether plaintiffs' claim proprietary so as to defeat claim to privilege — Whether claim for infringement of rights pertaining to commercial information — Supreme Court Act 1981 (c. 54), s. 72
In 1988 the second plaintiff company, then in the control of the first and second defendants, entered into a contract with a health authority for the supply of computer services.
After the first plaintiff had purchased the entire shareholding of the second plaintiff, they learned of allegations that the contract with the health authority had been operated fraudulently.
In proceedings against, inter alios, the first and second defendants for damages for fraud and breach of trust the plaintiffs obtained, from Buckley J., an order ex parte  requiring both defendants to disclose information relating to dealings with certain assets and to produce copies of documents in respect of such dealings.
Paragraph 33 of the order prohibited the use of the material so disclosed in the prosecution of either defendant.
On the application of both defendants Wright J. set aside the order in so far as related to such disclosure on the ground that it infringed their privilege against self-incrimination.
The Crown Prosecution Service were informed of Buckley J.'s order and of the plaintiffs' intention to appeal from the decision of Wright J., and were asked whether they wished to intervene or make representations in the appeal.
By a letter dated 23 October 1991 they stated that they did not intend to intervene or be heard and that, since the paragraph applied only to disclosure by the defendants in compliance with the order it would not prevent them from using any material which they had already obtained or which they might obtain independently.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the plaintiffs' appeal from Wright J.'s order, holding that it was not open to the court to devise protection in substitution for the defendants' privilege against self-incrimination, and that the plaintiffs' claim was neither proprietary nor within section 72 of the Supreme Court Act 1981
On the plaintiffs' appeal:—
Held ,(1) that the order for disclosure was not an order made in a proprietary claim so as to defeat the defendants' claim to privilege against self-incrimination, nor was it a claim relating to infringement of rights pertaining to commercial information within section 72 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 (post, pp. 351A–B, 352A, 355B, B–C, 360A, G–H, 361D–F).
(2) That although the privilege against self-incrimination subsisted and could only be removed or altered by Parliament, there was no reason to allow a defendant in civil proceedings to rely on it, thus depriving a plaintiff of his rights, where the defendant's own protection was adequately secured by other means (post, pp. 350B, 352C–D, 354B, 355B, 357F–G, 358F–G, 359A–B, F–G, H, 360A).
In re O. (Restraint Order: Disclosure of Assets)[1991]2 Q.B.
520, C.A. approved.
Rank Film Distributors Ltd. v. Video Information Centre [1982]A.C. 380, C.A. and H.L. (E.) and Reg. v. Director of Serious Fraud Office, Ex parte Smith [1992]3 W.L.R. 66, H.L. (E.) considered.
(3) Allowing the appeal (Lord Griffiths dissenting), that in view of the terms of the letter from the Crown Prosecution Service, in which it was accepted that the order restricted them to utilising material already collected or independently gathered, and the safeguards contained in paragraph 33 of Buckley J.'s order, the compliance with the order for disclosure would not create any real danger for the defendants of prejudice in criminal proceedings (post, pp. 353G–H, 354A–B, 358G–H, 359C–E, 360A, 362G–H, 364E–H).
Decision of the Court of Appeal [1992]1 Q.B.
315;[1992]2 W.L.R. 112;[1992]2 All E.R.
28 reversed.
The following cases are referred to in their Lordships' opinions:
Attorney-General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. [1992]1 A.C. 191;[1991]2 W.L.R. 994;[1991]2 All E.R.
398, H.L. (E.)
Allhusen v. Labouchere (1878) 3 Q.B.D. 654, C.A.
Bishopsgate Investment Management Ltd. v. Maxwell [1992]2 W.L.R. 991;[1992]2 All E.R.
856, C.A.
Blunt v. Park Lane Hotel Ltd. [1942]2 K.B.
253;[1942]2 All E.R.
187, C.A.
Green v. Weaver (1827) 1 Sim. 404
Londonderry's Settlement, In re [1965]Ch. 918;[1965]2 W.L.R. 229;[1964]3 All E.R.
855, C.A.
National Association of Operative Plasterers v. Smithies [1906]A.C. 434, H.L. (E.)
O. (Restraint Order: Disclosure of Assets), In re [1991]2 Q.B.
520;[1991]2 W.L.R. 475;[1991]1 All E.R.
330, C.A.
O'Rourke v. Darbishire [1920]A.C. 581, H.L. (E.)
Rank Film Distributors Ltd. v. Video Information Centre [1982]A.C. 380;[1980]3 W.L.R. 487;[1980]2 All E.R.
273, C.A.;[1982]A.C. 380;[1981]2 W.L.R. 668;[1981]2 All E.R.
76, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Director of Serious Fraud Office, Ex parte Smith [1992]3 W.L.R. 66, H.L. (E.)
Sociedade Nacional de Combustiveis de Angola U.E.E. v. Lundqvist [1991]2 Q.B.
310;[1991]2 W.L.R. 280;[1990]3 All E.R.
283, C.A.
Spokes v. Grosvenor and West End Railway Terminus Hotel Co.
Ltd. [1897]2 Q.B.
124, C.A.
Tate Access Floors Inc. v. Boswell [1991]Ch. 512;[1991]2 W.L.R. 304;[1990]3 All E.R.
303
United States v. Field (1951) 193 F.2d 92
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
A. v. C. (Note)[1981]Q.B.
956;[1981]2 W.L.R. 629;[1980]2 All E.R.
347
Burnand, In re, Ex parte Baker, Sutton & Co. [1904]2 K.B.
68, C.A.
Butler v. Board of Trade [1971]Ch. 680;[1970]3 W.L.R. 822;[1970]3 All E.R.
593
Chadwick v. Chadwick (1852) 22 L.J.Ch. 329
Chantrey Martin v. Martin [1953]2 Q.B.
286;[1953]3 W.L.R. 459;[1953]2 All E.R.
691, C.A.
Dier v. Banton (1923) 262 U.S. 147
D.P.R. Futures Ltd., In re [1989]1 W.L.R. 778
Fuller, Ex parte (1923) 262 U.S. 91
Harris (Matter of), Bankrupt (1911) 221 U.S. 274
Johnson v. United States (1913) 228 U.S. 457
Low v. Bouverie [1891]3 Ch. 82, C.A.
McCarthy (Marshal of the United States) v. Arndstein (1924) 266 U.S. 34
Phipps v. Boardman [1967]2 A.C. 46;[1966]3 W.L.R. 1009;[1966]3 All E.R.
721, H.L. (E.)
Raymond v. Honey [1983]1 A.C. 1;[1982]2 W.L.R. 465;[1982]1 All E.R.
756, H.L. (E.)
Tilley's Will Trusts, In re [1967]Ch. 1179;[1967]2 W.L.R. 1533;[1967]2 All E.R.
303
Appeal from the Court of Appeal.
This was an appeal, by leave of the Court of Appeal, by the plaintiffs, A. T. & T. Istel Ltd. and Abbey Business Consultants Ltd., from an order dated 12 November 1991 of that court (Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R., Neill and Butler-Sloss L.JJ.)[1992]1 Q.B.
315 dismissing an appeal by the plaintiffs from an order of Wright J. dated 20 August 1991.
In an action by the plaintiffs against various defendants, including the first and second defendants, Arthur Hugh Tully and his wife, Margaret McConnell Tully, Buckley J. on 5 June 1991 granted the plaintiffs ex parte injunctive relief requiring Mr. and Mrs. Tully, inter alia, to disclose all dealings relating to certain moneys referred to in a schedule to the order and all sums and assets representing or derived from such moneys, and to exhibit copies of all documents which related to the receipt or transfer of dealing with all such assets.
By paragraph 33 of the order it was provided that no such disclosure should be used as evidence in the prosecution of an offence alleged to have been committed by Mr. and Mrs. Tully.
On an application by Mr. and Mrs. Tully, Wright J. made an order on 20 August 1991 setting aside the disclosure order on the ground that it infringed their privilege against self-incrimination.
The facts are stated in the opinion of Lord Templeman.
Michael Tugendhat Q.C.
and Richard Spearman for the plaintiffs.
Alan Rawley Q.C.
and Jeremy Gibbons for Mr. and Mrs. Tully.
Their Lordships took time for consideration.
20 July.
Lord Templeman.
My Lords, this appeal concerns the ambit of that right to silence which is known as the privilege against self-incrimination and entitles any person to refuse to answer questions or to disclose documents if to do so would tend to expose him to proceedings for a criminal offence.
The plaintiffs' claim in these proceedings is based on allegations of a complicated fraud said to have been perpetrated by the first defendant Mr. Tully in conspiracy with his wife the second defendant, Mrs. Tully and with all or some of the other first 16 defendants.
By a contract made as from 1 April 1988 Wessex Regional Health Authority (‘Wessex’) engaged the second plaintiff company (‘Abbey’) to provide computer services.
At that time Abbey was controlled by Mr. and Mrs. Tully and their family settlement trustees.
By a written agreement dated 26 May 1988 the first plaintiff company (‘Istel’) agreed to buy the entire share capital of Abbey and its subsidiary companies for the sum of £2,550,000.
Mr. Tully remained a director of Abbey and continued to play a prominent part in its management.
In 1991 Wessex entertained the suspicion that they had been and were being swindled by Abbey and in particular by Mr. Tully and certain employees of Wessex and Abbey and others.
The alleged swindle took the form of charging Wessex for computer services which had not been rendered and double charging for services which had been rendered by a multiplication of invoices and false entries.
The sums involved were suspected to run into millions of pounds.
A police investigation followed and a number of people including Mr. Tully were arrested and questioned but so far no charges have been laid.
The plaintiffs, alerted by claims put forward against Abbey by Wessex for damages and repayment of moneys wrongly extracted from Wessex carried out their own investigations and now by these present proceedings allege a large commercial fraud.
It is said that invoices were raised against Wessex on behalf of Abbey and that when payment was received by Abbey the moneys were diverted by Mr. Tully and others and were partly dissipated in bribes and partly disguised and concealed in various bank accounts and other havens.
The first 16 defendants are said to have been involved in the fraud or in receiving and laundering the money involved.
The seventeenth to twenty-fourth defendants are banks and other institutions innocent of the fraud but in possession of correspondence, bank accounts and other documents which would enable the plaintiffs to trace moneys derived from Abbey.
The twenty-fifth defendant, Wessex, is sued more prosaically for breach of the contract dated 1 April 1988 which has been repudiated by Wessex on the grounds of fraud.
As a general rule a plaintiff is entitled to disclosure and discovery of all dealings and documents relevant to the plaintiff's claim and the defendant is entitled to the like relief from the plaintiff relevant to the defence.
In the present case disclosure by Mr. and Mrs. Tully of their dealings and documents with the affairs and money of Abbey and its subsidiaries will enable the plaintiffs to complete their investigation and to trace the fate of moneys paid by Wessex and moneys which were received or ought to have been received by Abbey and to recover such moneys and to recover damages for any wrongful dealings with those moneys.
All the allegations made by the plaintiffs are denied by Mr. and Mrs. Tully but, of course, if there has been no fraud, the disclosure by Mr. and Mrs. Tully of their dealings and correspondence will not cause any harm but will on the contrary demonstrate that the suspicions of the plaintiffs are ill-founded.
Accordingly on 5 June 1991 Buckley J. made against various defendants orders for disclosure and discovery including an order in paragraph 18 that Mr. Tully should make and serve on the plaintiffs' solicitors an affidavit:
‘(a) setting out with full particulars all dealings by the first defendant or anyone on his behalf with:(i) the moneys referred to in schedule 1 to this order; and (ii) all and any sums or assets representing or derived from those moneys; and…(c) exhibiting copies of all documents which relate to the receipt or transfer of, or dealing with all such assets, and in particular all such documents as are set out in schedule 3 hereto and are in the possession custody or power of the first defendant.
Schedule 1 includes references to certain specified sums paid out or received by Abbey or Wessex, some of the moneys said to be ‘in respect of charges which were not due and/or were inflated.
…’ Schedule 3 specifies all documents, correspondence and memoranda relating to any accounts or assets, owned or controlled by the first 16 defendants, and to their dealings with the assets of the defendants or the sums described in Schedule 1.
In paragraph 19 of the order Mrs. Tully was ordered to make an affidavit corresponding to that required from Mr Tully.
Wright J. set aside paragraphs 18(a) and (c) and 19(a) and (c) of the order dated 5 June 1991 on the grounds that they infringe the defendants' privilege against self-incrimination.
The Court of Appeal agreed with Wright J. Mr. Tully is in effect saying that if he discloses his dealings with his assets or the moneys of Wessex and Abbey and if he furnishes copies of the documents relating to those dealings he will be providing evidence which may assist the police to prosecute him for the crime of embezzlement.
As is always the case with the privilege against self-incrimination, the greater the fraud or other wrongdoing of the person claiming the privilege, the greater, it is said, is his need for protection.
The plaintiffs, not finding this submission very attractive, now appeal.
In his speech in Reg. v. Director of Serious Fraud Office, Ex parte Smith [1992]3 W.L.R. 66, 74 my noble and learned friend, Lord Mustill, identified six ‘rights of silence’ namely:
‘(1) A general immunity, possessed by all persons and bodies, from being compelled on pain of punishment to answer questions posed by other persons or bodies.
(2) A general immunity, possessed by all persons and bodies, from being compelled on pain of punishment to answer questions the answers to which may incriminate them.
(3) A specific immunity, possessed by all persons under suspicion of criminal responsibility whilst being interviewed by police officers or others in similar positions of authority, from being compelled on pain of punishment to answer questions of any kind.
(4) A specific immunity, possessed by accused persons undergoing trial, from being compelled to give evidence, and from being compelled to answer questions put to them in the dock.
(5) A specific immunity, possessed by persons who have been charged with a criminal offence, from having questions material to the offence addressed to them by police officers or persons in a similar position of authority.
(6) A special immunity…possessed by accused persons undergoing trial, from having adverse comment made on any failure (a) to answer questions before the trial, or (b) to give evidence at the trial.
Lord Mustill considered, at pp. 74–75:
‘Each of these immunities is of great importance, but the fact that they are all important and that they are all concerned with the protection of citizens against the abuse of powers by those investigating crimes makes it easy to assume that they are all different ways of expressing the same principle, whereas in fact they are not.
This appeal is concerned with the second right to silence, an immunity from being compelled on pain of punishment to answer questions which may incriminate.
In the present case if Mr. Tully refused to disclose his dealings with the moneys of Abbey or Wessex or refused to produce copies of the documents relevant to those dealings, he would be in breach of the order of Buckley J. and liable to be fined or imprisoned by the judge for contempt of court.
The speech of Lord Mustill to which I have referred discussed the motives for the evolution and retention of the privilege against self-incrimination, at p. 75:
‘The first is a simple reflection of the common view that one person should so far as possible be entitled to tell another person to mind his own business.
This reasoning cannot apply to the present case.
If Mr. Tully had not dealt with the moneys of Abbey or Wessex he would be able to tell the plaintiffs to mind their own business.
But if he has had dealings with such moneys then those moneys were the business of the plaintiffs as well as the business of Mr. Tully and he cannot fairly tell the plaintiffs to cease to bother him about those moneys.
If Mr. Tully has good grounds for exercising the privilege against self-incrimination, then his refusal to comply with the orders for disclosure and discovery made by Buckley J. may have the effect of assisting Mr. Tully to escape prosecution and punishment for a crime and also the effect of assisting Mr. Tully and others to keep money which belongs to Abbey.
‘Secondly, there is a long history of reaction against abuses of judicial interrogation.
The Star Chamber and the Council had the power to administer the oath and to punish recusants; and literally to press confessions out of those under interrogation.
Even after the abuses of the Star Chamber had been curbed the magistrates, who in the absence of a police force had some of the functions of a modern juge d'instruction, had power to interrogate the accused before trial.’
(P. 75)
This reasoning also does not apply to the present case.
It is true that if Mr. Tully fails to comply with the order of Buckley J. he could be punished for contempt after a hearing in open court and subject to review by an appellate court.
But I find nothing improper in this threat.
Thirdly, Lord Mustill referred to, at p. 75:
‘the instinct that it is contrary to fair play to put the accused in a position where he is exposed to punishment whatever he does.
If he answers, he may condemn himself out of his own mouth; if he refuses he may be punished for his refusal…
But in the present case it is contrary to fair play for Mr. Tully to prevent the plaintiffs from recovering damages caused by wrongdoing inflicted on Abbey.
Finally Lord Mustill referred, at pp. 75–76, to:
‘the desire to minimise the risk that an accused will be convicted on the strength of an untrue extra-judicial confession, to which the law gives effect by refusing to admit confessions in evidence except upon proof that they are ‘voluntary.’
This is a powerful reason for the existence of the privilege against self-incrimination in certain circumstances.
Indeed, in my opinion, the privilege can only be justified on two grounds, first that it discourages the ill-treatment of a suspect and secondly that it discourages the production of dubious confessions.
Neither of these considerations applies to the present appeal.
It is difficult to see any reason why in civil proceedings the privilege against self-incrimination should be exercisable so as to enable a litigant to refuse relevant and even vital documents which are in his possession or power and which speak for themselves.
And it is fanciful to suggest that an order on Mr. Tully to say whether he has received Abbey's money and if so what has happened to that money could result in his ill-treatment or in a dubious confession.
I regard the privilege against self-incrimination exercisable in civil proceedings as an archaic and unjustifiable survival from the past when the court directs the production of relevant documents and requires the defendant to specify his dealings with the plaintiff's property or money.
Events have shown that none of the rights to silence can guarantee freedom from ill-treatment of a suspect or prevent the production of dubious confessions.
A policeman, convinced of the guilt of a suspect, distrustful of juries and magistrates and more cynical than ethical may seek to extract a confession in order to support a charge and may elaborate a confession in order to obtain a conviction.
Events have also shown that in this day and age the exercise of a right to silence affords protection for the guilty and is unnecessary to safeguard the innocent.
Ill-treatment of prisoners and fabrication of confessions can only be prevented by better organisation, selection, training, supervision and remuneration of the police force coupled with stringent rules for access to independent legal advice and a bar on confessions obtained in the absence of that representation.
If fewer convictions result, this is a price which must be paid and a price which the police force as at present trained are unable to accept.
But these abuses and reforms have nothing to do with the order made by Buckley J. in the present proceedings.
Parliament has recognised in a piecemeal fashion that the privilege against self-incrimination is profoundly unsatisfactory when no question of ill-treatment or dubious confessions is involved.
By section 31 of the Theft Act 1968:
‘(1) A person shall not be excused, by reason that to do so may incriminate that person or the wife or husband of that person of an offence under this Act —(a ) from answering any question put to that person in proceedings for the recovery or administration of any property, for the execution of any trust or for an account of any property or dealings with property; or (b ) from complying with any order made in any such proceedings; but no statement or admission made by a person in answering a question put or complying with an order made as aforesaid shall, in proceedings for an offence under this Act, be admissible in evidence against that person or (unless they married after the making of the statement or admission) against the wife or husband of that person.
In the present case the proceedings do not fall within section 31 of the Act of 1968 and the criminal charges to which Mr. Tully may be exposed do not fall within that Act.
But in considering the privilege against self-incrimination it is difficult to see any logical distinction between an order for discovery and disclosure where the defendant has stolen the plaintiff's property and an order for discovery and disclosure where the plaintiff is seeking damages for fraud in dealings by the defendant with the property or moneys of the plaintiff.
By section 72 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 in any proceedings in the High Court for infringement of intellectual property rights or passing off:
‘(1)…a person shall not be excused, by reason that to do so would tend to expose that person, or his or her spouse, to proceedings for a related offence…(a ) from answering any question put to that person in the first-mentioned proceedings; or (b ) from complying with any order made in those proceedings.
By section 72(5) a ‘related offence’ is defined as any offence committed in the course of infringement or passing off or any offence committed in connection with any infringement or passing off, being an offence involving fraud or dishonesty.
If it be necessary or desirable to protect the holder of a patent against fraud or dishonesty it must equally be necessary and desirable to protect the plaintiffs against the fraud and dishonesty alleged in the present case.
By section 72(3) no statement or admission made by a person pursuant to that section shall, in proceedings for any related offence, be admissible in evidence against that person or against the spouse of that person but any statement or admission may be admitted in evidence in proceedings for perjury or contempt of court.
By section 434 of the Companies Act 1985 if inspectors appointed to investigate the affairs of a company consider that an officer or agent of the company ‘or any other person’ is in possession of information relating to a matter relevant to the investigation they may require him:
‘(a ) to produce to the inspectors all…documents of or relating to the company…(b ) to attend before the inspectors when required to do so, and (c ) otherwise to give the inspectors all assistance in connection with the investigation which they are reasonably able to give.
By section 434(5) an answer given by a person to a question put to him by the inspectors may be used in evidence against him.
By section 291 of the Insolvency Act 1986 a bankrupt must deliver up all his books, papers and records and give to the official receiver such information of his estate and such other information as the official receiver may reasonably require.
So if the plaintiffs can, without obtaining the bank statements and other documents held by Mr. Tully prove that he has embezzled money from Abbey and make him bankrupt, the plaintiffs can then discover the bank statements and other information they now seek.
By that time the money may have been dissipated.
By section 2 of the Criminal Justice Act 1987 the Director of the Serious Fraud Office may require any person under investigation for a suspected offence involving serious or complex fraud ‘or any other person’ to answer questions, furnish information and produce documents.
Any person who without reasonable cause fails to comply may be sent to prison for not more than six months.
By section 2(8) a statement by a person in response to a requirement imposed under the section may only be used in evidence against him in proceedings for making a false or misleading statement or in proceedings for some other offence where in giving evidence he makes an inconsistent statement.
Parliament has thus recognised the unsatisfactory results of the common law privilege against self-incrimination and has been willing to abrogate or modify that privilege.
The present proceedings are not precisely covered by any of the statutory relaxations of the privilege but they are similar to and analogous to situations in which Parliament has intervened.
The rule has been abrogated with regard to theft when the plaintiff is deprived of money; the plaintiff companies complain of fraud and embezzlement whereby they were deprived of money.
The rule has been abrogated in favour of the intellectual property monopolist seeking damages for fraudulent interference with his statutory rights; the plaintiffs claim for fraudulent interference with their money.
Under the Act of 1987 the privilege against self-incrimination does not apply to investigations of serious or complex fraud.
The plaintiffs seek to investigate what they consider to be a serious and complicated fraud.
Under the Act of 1987 the privilege against self-incrimination becomes unnecessary because a statement made in response to a requirement under the Act cannot be used in evidence in criminal proceedings.
Having regard to the fact that Parliament has not abolished the privilege against self-incrimination Mr. Tully would be entitled to rely on that privilege if but only if and so far as compliance with the order of Buckley J. would provide evidence against him in a criminal trial.
There is no reason why the privilege should be blatantly exploited to deprive the plaintiffs of their civil rights and remedies if the privilege is not necessary to protect Mr. Tully.
In order to make the exercise of the privilege unnecessary in the present case Buckley J. included in his order the following paragraph:
‘33.
No disclosure made in compliance with paragraphs 18 to 32 inclusive of this order shall be used as evidence in the prosecution of the offence alleged to have been committed by the person required to make that disclosure or by any spouse of that person.
This limitation is similar to the protection afforded by section 2(8) of the Act of 1987.
In In re O. (Restraint Order: Disclosure of Assets)[1991]2 Q.B.
520 the Court of Appeal affirmed the making of a disclosure order to which the privilege against self-incrimination applied but attached to the order a direction in the form utilised by Buckley J. in paragraph 33 of his order.
In In re O. the Crown Prosecution Service was a party to the proceedings and consented to the order.
Wright J. struck out paragraphs 18 and 19 of the order of Buckley J. despite paragraph 33 because ‘the Crown Prosecution Service are not a party, and no order I make is capable of binding it.’
The Court of Appeal agreed [1992]1 Q.B.
315.
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. considered In re O. and the decision of this House in Attorney-General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. [1992]1 A.C. 191 upon which the plaintiffs relied.
Lord Donaldson M.R. said [1992]1 Q.B.
315, 324:
‘For my part I do not think that the House of Lords in that case had in mind the special position in the administration of justice of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Crown Prosecution Service or would have been prepared to extend the effect of the orders of a civil court in such a way as indirectly to bind them in the performance of their duties in relation to the criminal law and before the criminal courts in circumstances in which they had not sought and may not have wished for an order for discovery.
At one stage the plaintiffs made overtures to the Director of Public Prosecutions with a view to his joining in these proceedings.
As he declined the invitation it is unnecessary to consider further what would have been the effect of such a joinder.
It would still not have been an In re O. situation, unless the director had joined as an applicant for the order.
I agree that the Crown Prosecution Service cannot be bound against their wishes.
I also agree with the Court of Appeal in In re O. [1991]2 Q.B.
520 that the Crown Prosecution Service can be bound if they consent to be bound.
But I do not agree that it is necessary for the Crown Prosecution Service to appear before the court in order to be bound.
In the present case the Crown Prosecution Service were informed of the order made by Buckley J. including paragraph 33 and were asked whether they wished to intervene in the hearing before the Court of Appeal or otherwise make representations in the appeal.
By a letter dated 23 October 1991 the Crown Prosecution Service replied as follows:
‘The Crown Prosecution Service does not intend, in this particular case to seek to intervene or be heard.
I have discussed the situation with the officer in charge of the inquiry in the Hampshire Constabulary who admits that on 1 May 1991, searches were carried out and a large quantity of potential evidence was seized from the possession of Mr. Tully.
As I understand the position, the condition proposed to be included in the order after [In re O. ]would only apply to ‘disclosure made in compliance with’ the order sought and therefore not prevent the Crown Prosecution Service/Hampshire Constabulary utilising the material held and/or other material obtained independently of the present proceedings in the High Court.
In those circumstances the Crown Prosecution Service do not seek to be heard in this particular case.
In any future case the situation will be considered on the facts known at that time and if appropriate application will be made.
In view of that letter it is clear that the Crown Prosecution Service do not seek to employ any of the material disclosed by Mr. Tully in compliance with the order of Buckley J. but of course the Crown Prosecution Service can use any material which the Crown Prosecution Service have already obtained and any other material which they obtain ‘independently’ of the present proceedings.
On behalf of Mr. Tully it was argued that the disclosures made by Mr. Tully in compliance with the order of Buckley J. might be ‘leaked’ to the Crown Prosecution Service or might suggest to the Crown Prosecution Service new lines of inquiry.
It was also suggested that a policeman attending court at the trial of the present proceedings might take note of evidence based on the disclosures and use that evidence.
My Lords, in view of the terms of the letter from the Crown Prosecution Service I am satisfied that the Crown Prosecution Service cannot profit from any disclosures in the present proceedings.
They can only rely on evidence obtained independently of these proceedings.
The precautions taken by Buckley J. in paragraph 33 of his order to ensure that the privilege against self-incrimination is not necessary in the present instance exceed the statutory protection afforded by the Criminal Justice Act 1987.
The Court of Appeal reached their decision with regret because as they clearly saw Mr. Tully is seeking to exploit the privilege against self-incrimination in order to frustrate the plaintiffs' claims.
In my opinion compliance with the order of Buckley J. subject to the safeguards provided by paragraph 33 of that order will not create for Mr. Tully any real danger that he will be prejudiced in criminal proceedings by his compliance.
For these reasons and for the reasons to be given by my noble and learned friend, Lord Ackner, I would therefore allow this appeal and restore the order of Buckley J.
Lord Griffiths .
My Lords, the privilege against self-incrimination is in need of radical reappraisal.
It is however deeply embedded in English law and can only be removed or moderated by Parliament.
As the speeches of your Lordships show Parliament has in recent years made many inroads into the privilege in a number of statutes.
In civil actions, as this appeal demonstrates, the privilege can be claimed to thwart the claims of victims of fraud.
I can for myself see no argument in favour of the privilege against producing a document the contents of which may go to show that the  holder has committed a criminal offence.
The contents of the document will speak for itself and there is no risk of the false confession which underlies the privilege against having to answer questions that may incriminate the speaker.
The rule may once have been justified by the fear that without it an accused might be tortured into production of documents but those days are surely past and this consideration cannot apply in the context of a civil action.
I therefore associate myself with Lord Templeman when he said, ante p. 350B:
‘I regard the privilege against self-incrimination exercisable in civil proceedings as an archaic and unjustifiable survival from the past when the court directs the production of relevant documents and requires the defendant to specify his dealings with the plaintiff's property or money.
I have, nevertheless, considerable doubts about the wisdom of the order proposed by your Lordships.
Criminal financial fraud on a vast scale has emerged as threat to the financial health of the community.
Those who commit these crimes must be pursued most vigorously under the criminal law; if they are allowed to get away with it others will take encouragement to follow their example.
Your Lordships accept that a civil court should never make an order that will inhibit the processes of the criminal law, but regard the letter written by a Principal Officer in the Crown Prosecution Service as a sufficient assurance that the prosecution will be placed at no disadvantage if pursuant to the order of the court the defendants produce a number of incriminating documents that cannot be used in a prosecution.
Criminal fraud is notoriously difficult to establish and the evidence required to do so needs careful and skilled assessment.
I do not know what consideration had been given to a prosecution of the defendants in this case at the time the letter was written.
I accept of course that the police officers investigating on behalf of the Hampshire Constabulary, whose rank I do not know, and the Principal Crown Prosecutor thought they had seized sufficient documents or might acquire others independently.
I wonder, however, if they realised that by producing documents in this civil action, the defendants could safely resist the use of those documents if the police subsequently acquired them ‘independently’ from some other source.
For my part I would not have been prepared to make an order in the terms proposed unless I knew that the letter was written by or with the direct authority of either the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Director of the Serious Fraud Office.
It is only in such circumstances that I would feel assured that the matter had received consideration at the highest level and that there was no risk that the criminal law would be impeded.
In all other respects, I agree with the opinion of my Lord, Lord Lowry; but for the reason I have given I would dismiss this appeal.
Lord Ackner .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speech prepared by my noble and learned friend, Lord Lowry.
I respectfully agree with his reasons for rejecting the plaintiffs' claim for the inspection of documents and disclosure of information before trial based upon section 72 of the Supreme Court Act 1981, upon the alleged proprietary claim and upon waiver.
This then leaves for consideration solely ‘the effective protection argument.’
The plaintiffs' contentions under this heading do not seek to cut down or erode or encroach upon the privilege against self-incrimination.
Existence of that privilege is not put in issue.
What is proposed is to give effect to the privilege by removing the ground for apprehending danger.
This, it is said, is achieved by the inclusion of paragraph 33 in Buckley J.'s order.
This paragraph reads as follows:
‘No disclosure made in compliance with paragraphs 18 to 32 inclusive of this order shall be used as evidence in the prosecution of an offence alleged to have been committed by the person required to make that disclosure or by any spouse of that person.
In his judgment in the instant case Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. summarised the plaintiffs' argument in this way [1992]1 Q.B.
315, 323:
‘(a) It is accepted that no civil court ‘has any power to decide in a manner which would bind a criminal court that evidence of any kind is admissible or inadmissible in that court’(per Lord Wilberforce in the Rank case [1982]A.C. 380, 442f) and that restrictions embodied in the order of the civil court would not bind ‘an English criminal court…from admitting the information in evidence at a trial:’per Lord Fraser of Tullybelton, at p. 446e. (b) However it is different if the prosecutor is personally restrained from placing the information before the criminal court, because in that scenario no question of admissibility arises.
(c) In In re O. [1991]2 Q.B.
520 this court clearly regarded a condition in the terms of paragraph 33 as effective where the prosecutor was the party seeking the disclosure.
A similar view appears to be taken by Lord Fraser of Tullybelton in the Rank case [1982]A.C. 380, 446D’— where he said: ‘A restriction by the court making the order would, no doubt, be effective to bind the party who obtained the order…’—‘(d) Since the decision of the House of Lords in Attorney-General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. [1991]1 A.C. 191 it is to be taken as settled law that it is a contempt of court, as constituting an interference with the course of justice, for anyone, whether a party to the action or not, knowingly to thwart or subvert that purpose of an order of the court.
Accordingly the Crown Prosecution Service and a private prosecutor having notice of the terms of paragraph 33 would be unable to adduce in a criminal court evidence disclosed in compliance with the paragraphs of the order to which exception is taken.
Again no question of admissibility or inadmissibility could arise.
The last step in the reasoning is stated in terms which are unnecessarily wide for the facts of this case and, as I shall indicate later, unnecessarily wide in principle.
In the course of his judgment, at p. 324c, Lord Donaldson M.R. stated that at one stage the plaintiffs made overtures to the Director of Public Prosecutions with a view to his joining in these proceedings.
As he declined the invitation, it was therefore unnecessary to consider further what would have been the effect of such a joinder.
This is not a complete statement of what in fact happened.
The possibility of involving the prosecuting authorities was canvassed in argument at the ex parte hearing before Buckley J., and, in the event the plaintiffs informed the Director of Public Prosecutions about the appeal to the Court of Appeal.
The Director passed on the information to the Crown Prosecution Service (being the relevant prosecuting authority).
It decided to take no part on the footing that sufficient documents for prosecution purposes had already been obtained from the defendants by the Crown Prosecuting Service.
The terms in which it expressed this decision are to be found in a letter dated 23 October 1991 addressed to the plaintiffs' solicitors and written by Mr. A. D. Farries, a principal in the Crown Prosecutor Fraud Investigation Group.
The material terms of the letter read as follows:
‘The Crown Prosecution Service does not intend, in this particular case to seek to intervene or to be heard.
I have discussed the situation with Officer in Charge of the inquiry in the Hampshire Constabulary who admits that on 1 May 1991, searches were carried out and a large quantity of potential evidence was seized from the possession of Mr. Tully.
As I understand the position, the condition proposed to be included in the order after [In re O. ]would only apply to ‘disclosure made in compliance with’ the order sought and therefore not prevent the Crown Prosecution Service/Hampshire Constabulary utilising the material held and/or other material obtained independently of the present proceedings in the High Court.
In those circumstances the Crown Prosecution Service do not seek to be heard in this particular case.
In any future case the situation will be considered on the facts known at that time and if appropriate application will be made.
I should be grateful if you would advise your counsel of the Crown Prosecution Service's position so that he might appraise the court if necessary…
Mr. Tully's claim to privilege is taken in paragraph 6 of his affidavit sworn on 31 July 1991 and is in the vaguest of terms:
‘I am concerned that if I now have to respond fully to that part of the plaintiffs' order of 5 June dealing with the various alleged payments my position vis-à-vis the police investigation may well be prejudiced.
Your Lordships are invited to construe that benevolently in the defendants' favour as a claim to invoke the privilege against self-incrimination on the ground that the order called upon him to disclose material which might be used in furtherance of criminal proceedings against him.
The essential question is then whether the terms of the order in paragraph 33 quoted above, in the light of the letter from the Crown Prosecution Service to which I have just made reference, provides Mr. Tully with sufficient protection by effectively removing the danger to which he obliquely refers.
It is submitted, on behalf of the defendants, that it does not and for the following reasons.
(1) The decision in the Court of Appeal in In re O. (Restraint Order: Disclosure of Assets)[1991]2 Q.B.
520 was wrong.
The material facts of that case, in so far as they relate to the present appeal, were that on the application of the Crown Prosecution Service, McCullough J. made a restraint order pursuant to section 77 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 in respect of the assets held by the applicants, a husband and wife.
They were subsequently charged, inter alia, with offences under section 1(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977 and section 15(1) of the Theft Act 1968.
Macpherson of Cluny J. adjourned an application by the applicants for a variation of the order and ordered each of them to swear an affidavit disclosing detailed information in respect of the assets held by them.
On an appeal to the Court of Appeal it was contended, inter alia, that the judge wrongly failed to take into account the applicants' privilege against self-incrimination.
In his judgment, Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. held that the applicants were entitled to refuse to comply with the disclosure order, if and insofar as to do so, might tend to incriminate them.
However, in order to avoid frustrating the purpose of the order the court imposed conditions upon the use which might be made of the affidavits sworn in compliance with the order.
The condition which the court imposed was in the very terms subsequently incorporated in paragraph 33 of Buckley J.'s order.
Glidewell L.J.
in his short concurring judgment said, at p. 531:
‘unless a defendant is assured that information given in response to an order for disclosure cannot and thus will not be used as evidence at his trial for the offences charged, he may well be entitled to refuse to supply the information on the ground that it would tend to incriminate him.
Thus I agree with Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. that a disclosure order under these provisions should normally contain an express condition in the terms that he suggests, to obviate the risk.
Ralph Gibson L.J.
also agreed.
In my opinion In re O. was correctly decided.
The danger had in the circumstances of that case been eliminated.
Accordingly there was no foundation for the claim to privilege.
(2) Restraint orders made at the request of the prosecutor under section 77 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 are a special case and in In re O. does not therefore assist the plaintiffs.
This was the view of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. expressed in his judgment in this appeal.
He said, at p. 323:
‘In the nature of things most respondents applications for discovery in aid of restraint orders would be able to rely upon the privilege against self-incrimination and the fact that Parliament has made no special provision in this regard suggests that, in that context, restrictions upon the use which can be made of the information were accepted as being effective.
With great respect I can see no basis for concluding that Parliament ever addressed its mind to the problem which arose in In re O. [1991]2 Q.B.
520.
(3) It is not open to a court to substitute some different protection in place of the long-standing privilege against self-incrimination on which defendants seek to rely.
This apparently was the view of Neill L.J.
as expressed in his judgment in this appeal, at p. 326 et seq.
He said, at p. 332:
‘It is true that since the Rank Film case the House of Lords have extended the class of persons who would be bound by an order restricting the use of disclosed material: see Attorney General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. [1992]1 A.C. 191.
It is also true that there may be some doubt whether the privilege against self-incrimination can be used as a shield to prevent a process being set in train ‘which may lead to incrimination or may lead to the discovery of real evidence of an incriminating character:’ see Sociedade National de Combustiveis de Angola U.E.E. v. Lundqvist [1991]2 Q.B.
310, 324–325,per Staughton L.J.
Nevertheless I am convinced that where, as here, a party can satisfy the court that there is a genuine risk of prosecution for some offence which is not within the scope of section 31 of the Theft Act 1968’— e.g. conspiracy —‘or any similar statutory provision, it is not open to this court to substitute for the privilege against self-incrimination some other protection based on an order restricting the use of disclosed material.
Neill L.J.
observed, almost by way of invitation, at p. 329b: ‘It may be that the House of Lords will feel able to take such a step but it is my present view that this is a matter for consideration by Parliament.’
In their judgments both Lord Donaldson M.R. and Neill L.J.
echoed the pleas made by Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. in Sociedade Nacional de Combustiveis de Angola U.E.E. v. Lundqvist [1991]2 Q.B.
310, 338 and subsequently in Tate Access Floors Inc. v. Boswell [1991]Ch. 512, 532 that urgent consideration should be given by Parliament to extending the provisions of section 31(1) of the Theft Act 1968 to other offences which might be committed in the course of financial fraud.
I, of course, accept that if the privilege against self-incrimination is to be abolished or abridged, then this must be done by Parliament, as has occurred in a number of statutes.
Indeed such is the number and effect of these abrogations of privilege that in the view of the editors of the latest edition of Cross on Evidence , 7th ed. (1990), p. 427, this should give pause for thought on the part of anyone who regards the privilege as a fundamental principle of English law.
Your Lordships are not invited to abolish or abridge the privilege.
It remains wholly intact.
Its invocation is merely rendered superfluous.
The terms of paragraph 33 of the order, coupled with the written response of the Crown Prosecution Service, prevents the material provided in compliance with paragraphs 18 to 32 inclusive of the order being used as evidence in the prosecution of any offence alleged to have been committed by the defendants.
As Templeman L.J.
pointed out in his judgment in the Court of Appeal in Rank Film Distributors Ltd. v. Video Information Centre [1982]A.C. 380, 423:
‘Where a defendant in a civil action relies on the doctrine against self-incrimination and insists on remaining silent and on concealing documents and other evidence relevant to the action, he is relying on his own wrongdoing or on his own apparent or possible wrongdoing to hamper the plaintiff in proof of his just claims in the suit.
That is the inevitable result of the doctrine which can only afford protection of the defendant at the risk or price of causing an injustice to the plaintiff.
It is, I believe, in the public interest that your Lordships should remedy that injustice if this can be achieved while ensuring that the defendant shall not be subject to an order, compliance with which might tend to incriminate him.
(4) Paragraph 33 of the order coupled with the letter from the Crown Prosecution Service does not provide effective protection because compliance may set ‘in train a process which incrimination or the discovery of real evidence of an incriminating character.’
In support of this submission the defendants rely on the observations of Lord Wilberforce in the Rank Film case, at p. 443, when considering the adequacy of the protection of the undertaking which was there sought to be imposed as a term of the grant of an Anton Piller order.
To my mind it is clear from the terms of the third paragraph of the Crown Prosecution Service's letter that it is accepted that the order restricts them, in any prosecution which they decide to initiate, to utilising material already obtained or other material obtained independently of that disclosed in the High Court civil proceedings.
Assuming without deciding that the privilege of self-incrimination can be used to prevent a process being set in train ‘which may lead to incrimination or the discovery of real evidence of an incriminating character’ I consider that the defendants are sufficiently safeguarded in the circumstances of this case.
I should perhaps add for completeness sake that it was urged upon your Lordships that there was always a possibility of a leak to the prosecuting authorities of incriminating information disclosed by the defendants as a result of complying with the order and use being made, innocently, by the prosecution of such information, which, ex hypothesi, they had not themselves acquired.
The short answer to that proposition is that your Lordships are not concerned with remote or insubstantial risks or fanciful possibilities.
For the above reasons and those contained in the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Templeman, which I have had the privilege of reading in draft, I would allow this appeal on the ground that the courts are entitled to substitute some different protection in place of the privilege against self-incrimination, providing that such protection can properly be considered as adequate protection.
I would reject the submission made to the Court of Appeal that so long as the terms of paragraph 33 had been brought to the notice of the prosecution authorities they would be unable to adduce in a criminal court evidence disclosed in compliance with the order.
Not only must the prosecuting authorities have notice of the proposed order but they must unequivocally agree not to make use, directly or indirectly, of material divulged as a result of compliance with the order.
It must remain entirely a matter for the discretion of the prosecuting authorities as to whether they are in a position to and are prepared to give an assurance.
Without such an assurance the court would not be able to provide a substitute protection which was adequate.
Lord Goff of Chieveley .
My Lords, for the reasons contained in the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Ackner, which I have had the opportunity of reading in draft, I, too, would allow the appeal and restore the order of Buckley J.
Like others of your Lordships, I am concerned about the unsatisfactory state of the law on this subject, and I trust that it can before long be the subject of review and, hopefully, reform.
Lord Lowry .
My Lords, this appeal exemplifies the conflict between two principles, one that no one ought to be compelled to incriminate himself and the other that justice should be done between the parties to an action.
The relevant facts and an account of the proceedings have been set out by Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. in his judgment in the Court of Appeal [1992]1 Q.B.
315, 321–322.
I also gratefully adopt the narrative contained in the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Templeman.
With a view to persuading your Lordships to restore the order of Buckley J., the plaintiffs, who are the appellants in the circumstances described, have put their argument in a number of different ways, but only the last need, in my opinion, seriously occupy your Lordships' attention.
I turn first to a submission based on section 72 of the Supreme Court Act 1981, which, so far as material, provides:
‘(1) In any proceedings to which this subsection applies a person shall not be excused, by reason that to do so would tend to expose that person, or his or her spouse, to proceedings for a related offence for the recovery of a related penalty —(a ) from answering any question put to that person in the first-mentioned proceedings; or (b ) from complying with any order made in those proceedings.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to the following civil proceedings in the High Court, namely —(a ) proceedings for infringement of rights pertaining to any intellectual property or for passing off;(b ) proceedings brought to obtain disclosure of information relating to any infringement of such rights or to any passing off; and (c ) proceedings brought to prevent any apprehended infringement of such rights or any apprehended passing off.
…(5) In this section —‘intellectual property’ means any patent, trade mark, copyright, registered design, technical or commercial information or other intellectual property;…
Subsection (2) shows that the relevant information has to be intellectual property in order that section 72 may apply and the plaintiffs submitted that the relevant information here is ‘commercial information’ within the meaning of subsection (5).
In my opinion, the information with which your Lordships are here concerned simply does not fit into the definition in the subsection.
Even if it were not already obvious, the concluding words, ‘or other intellectual property,’ show that the ‘commercial information’which the definition contemplates must be information of the same type (‘ejusdem generis’) as the other examples of intellectual property which are listed in subsection (5).
The information with which this case is concerned does not pass that test and this action is not concerned with the infringement of any rights pertaining to intellectual property.
On this part of the case I respectfully agree with the observations of Lord Donaldson M.R., at p. 325f, in the Court of Appeal and of Neill L.J., at p. 328f.
The plaintiffs' next contention has been described as the proprietary argument to the effect that Mr. and Mrs. Tully are constructive trustees for the plaintiffs of the moneys claimed in the action, that a court of equity will not hesitate to protect and preserve a trust fund in interlocutory proceedings on the principle that, if the trust fund disappears, it will turn out that equity has been invoked to no purpose and that a claim for privilege cannot be successfully raised against an order which permits a plaintiff to search for and to seize his own property, including property which is in the possession of the defendant.
The plaintiffs argue that the same principle should apply in favour of making an order that the defendant should deliver up such property on the basis that such an order is not an order for discovery and that the authorities relating to discovery have no application.
Trust documents, they say, are the property of the beneficiaries of the trust and must be produced by the trustees as a matter of property and not of discovery:O'Rourke v. Darbishire [1920]A.C. 581, 626–627;In re Londonderry's Settlement [1965]Ch. 918, 933f–g, 934b, 938.
Finally, the plaintiffs contended, the documents referred to in the sub-paragraphs of the order which Wright J. set aside are clearly documents which show the state of the trust and therefore are trust documents.
(I have taken this summary of the plaintiff's argument from the judgment of Lord Donaldson M.R., at p. 324h.)
Here again I respectfully agree with the observations made by Lord Donaldson M.R., at pp. 324–325, and by Neill L.J., at pp. 326–327, when rejecting the proprietary argument, which had not been advanced before Wright J. but which had rightly to be considered when it was put forward for the first time in the Court of Appeal.
The fallacy in the plaintiffs' argument lay in the assertion that the challenged paragraphs of the order of Buckley J. constituted a proprietary remedy and not a mere order for discovery.
The order was not one for the recovery or preservation of trust property but called for information and for copies of the defendants' documents which, so far as compliance might incriminate them, the defendants were entitled to disregard.
As Lord Wrenbury said in O'Rourke v. Darbishire [1920]A.C. 581, 626–627 (and as Neill L.J.
pointed out), ‘The right to discovery is a right to see someone else's documents.
The proprietary right is a right to access to documents which are your own.’
And, while the general right of beneficiaries to inspect trust documents was recognised in In re Londonderry's Settlement [1965]Ch. 918 as being a proprietary right, that case does not provide support for the plaintiffs' contention in the instant appeal.
Rank Film Distributors Ltd. v. Video Information Centre [1982]A.C. 380 was relied on by the plaintiffs both in the Court of Appeal and before your Lordships but, as Neill L.J.
pointed out, at p. 327d, this House, while upholding the Court of Appeal's order requiring the respondents to allow access to premises for the purpose of looking for illicit copies of films and to allow them to be removed to safe custody, also upheld that court's refusal of an order to answer interrogatories and to make discovery of documents relating to the illicit copies, including ‘invoices…books of accounts, letters, lists or other documents.’
And that is just the kind of order, it seems to me, which ought to have been granted if the plaintiffs' contentions are correct.
The case is therefore an authority against the plaintiffs on this point.
In support of the proprietary argument the plaintiffs resorted to an analogy with the position of a trustee in bankruptcy, whose right and duty it was to get in everything which had been owned by the bankrupt, including his business documents.
I need not trouble your Lordships by referring to the authorities cited, since the analogy serves no purpose if one cannot identify, as belonging to the plaintiffs, the documents of which production is desired.
The plaintiffs then had a new point which I may call the waiver argument, the basic principle of which is stated in Wigmore on Evidence , 8th ed. (1961), pp. 453–455, para. 2275:
‘It has never been doubted that the privilege against self-incrimination, like all privileges…is waivable.
There are two possible ways of waiving:(a ) By contract or other binding pledge before trial…
The promise to waive may be embodied in an express contract or in a contract implied by the conduct of the parties.
…Where there are not only the ingredients of an express or implied contract to waive privilege but also a fiduciary relation or other elements of public policy making recognition of privilege unconscionable, the waiver of privilege may be specifically enforced and the witness held in contempt for failure to make disclosure.
A broker or trustee or agent, for example, might be compelled to render a self-incriminating accounting to the person to whom the fiduciary duty is owed…
Mr. Tugendhat, for the plaintiffs, cited in support Green v. Weaver (1827) 1 Sim. 404 and United States v. Field (1951) 193 F.2d 92 and referred to two observations of Templeman L.J.
in the Court of Appeal in Rank 's case [1982]A.C. 380:
‘Green v. Weaver , 1 Sim. 404 is authority for the proposition that an agent or other person who undertakes a duty to the plaintiff waives the privilege against self-incrimination in respect of discovery relating to the performance of that duty.’
(P. 421).
‘Chadwick v. Chadwick , 22 L.J.Ch. 329 may be explained on the grounds that a trustee, like an agent, cannot resist discovery in an action in relation to the property which he is alleged to hold on trust.’
(P. 422).
I hope that it is not too perfunctory a way of dealing with this interesting point to say that in my opinion it is comprehensively answered by the judgments in Bishopsgate Investment Management Ltd. v. Maxwell [1992]2 W.L.R. 991 which Mr. Rawley, for the defendants, brought to your Lordships' attention.
I now come to what I regard as the plaintiffs' most convincing argument, namely, that paragraph 33 of Buckley J.'s order, combined with the letter dated 23 October 1991 from the Crown Prosecution Service, provides effective protection for the defendants against the criminal consequences of having to disclose incriminating information or documents by virtue of paragraphs 18(a) and (c) and 19(a) and (c) of the order.
I agree with the conclusions in favour of the plaintiffs which my noble and learned friends, Lord Templeman and Lord Ackner, have reached on this point but, in view of its general importance, I venture to add some observations of my own.
What my noble and learned friends have said will, however, enable me to express myself quite shortly.
The ‘right of silence’ and the concomitant immunity from making incriminating disclosures was most helpfully discussed by Neill L.J.
in the Court of Appeal, at pp. 329–330.
As he said, the principle that there is a privilege against self-incrimination has been recognised for centuries.
And, as Lord Templeman has pointed out, that privilege has recently been the subject of an illuminating discussion by my noble and learned friend, Lord Mustill in Reg. v. Director of Serious Fraud Office, Ex parte Smith [1992]3 W.L.R. 66.
Lord Templeman has given examples of Parliament's encroachments on the principle (sometimes involving a measure of protection for the person compelled to make disclosure, and sometimes not) and Lord Ackner, quoting a passage from Cross on Evidence , 7th ed., p. 427, has reminded your Lordships that the principle is not immutable.
What one needs to recognise, as my noble and learned friends have done, is that the privilege against self-incrimination must prevail, unless it has been modified or abrogated by statute.
And, even if one can see that the reasons which caused the principle to be adopted provide no logical justification for such an immunity as the privilege against producing incriminating documents which came into existence before any dispute arose, that immunity holds sway.
It is, however, important to consider the reason why a party or witness is excused from making an incriminating disclosure.
I refer again to Cross on Evidence , p. 418, where the statement of Goddard L.J.
in Blunt v. Park Lane Hotel Ltd. [1942]2 K.B.
253, 257 is cited:
‘the rule is that no one is bound to answer any question if the answer thereto would, in the opinion of the judge, have a tendency to expose the deponent to any criminal charge, penalty, or forfeiture which the judge regards as reasonably likely to be preferred or sued for.
The principle, as Goddard L.J.
there stated, applies to oral evidence, interrogatories and discovery of documents.
It must also be noted that the liability to answer or to make discovery depends on the opinion of the judge.
For the sake of brevity, and because the point is clear, I quote again from Cross on Evidence , at pp. 423–424:
‘The witness's mere statement that his answer might have this effect is not sufficient, although it is on oath and even if there is no doubt concerning his bona fides.
The court must see, from the circumstances of the case and the nature of the evidence which the witness is called to give that there is reasonable ground to apprehend danger to him from his answer.
There must be no nice balancing of odds, the judge must come to the conclusion that such danger is real and appreciable with reference to the ordinary operation of law in the ordinary course of things, not a danger of an imaginary and insubstantial character, having reference to some extraordinary and barely possible contingency so improbable that no reasonable man would suffer it to influence his conduct.
The defendants asserted their privilege against making possibly incriminating disclosure by what seems to me the unusual step of incorporating in a summons their application to set aside the paragraphs of Buckley J.'s order which appeared likely to upset that privilege and supporting that application by affidavits expressing their apprehensions in vague terms.
I am not familiar with this procedure which in relation to a request for discovery (provided the request is generally in order) or the administering of interrogatories does not conform with the practice described in The Supreme Court Practice 1991 , vol. 1, paras.
24/5/14 and 26/1/17, pp. 440 and 481 and in Allhusen v. Labouchere (1878) 3 Q.B.D. 654;Spokes v. Grosvenor and West End Railway Terminus Hotel Co.
Ltd. [1897]2 Q.B.
124 and National Association of Operative Plasterers v. Smithies [1906]A.C. 434, all of which cases suggest that the claim of privilege should be taken when complying with the obligation to make discovery or answer the interrogatories.
I take no point on this except to say that normally (and this case would probably have been no exception) some documents and some items of information would be disclosable while privilege would be claimed in respect of others.
Subject to the letter, from the Crown Prosecution Service of 23 October, to which I shall hereafter refer, I would (subject also to my procedural misgivings) have made the same order as Wright J. made and the Court of Appeal affirmed and I would have sympathised with the observation of Neill L.J.
that it was not open to a court ‘to replace the general privilege with some other protection of its own devising.’
But the rightness of that observation would depend on the inadequacy of the ‘other protection,’ because it is clear that there is no absolute privilege against answering incriminating questions: the privilege is against exposing oneself to the reasonable risk of prosecution.
The Court of Appeal sat on 28 October 1991 and gave judgment on 12 November.
Lord Donaldson M.R. did not mention the Crown Prosecution Service Letter but said, at p. 324:
‘At one stage the plaintiffs made overtures to the Director of Public Prosecutions with a view to his joining in these proceedings.
As he declined the invitation it is unnecessary to consider further what would have been the effect of such a joinder.
It would still not have been an In re O. situation, unless the director had joined as an applicant for the order.
I respectfully agree, but I think that the Crown Prosecution Service letter has made all the difference.
I shall pick out what I think is the decisive sentence:
‘As I understand the position, the condition proposed to be included in the order after [In re O. ]would only apply to ‘disclosure’ made in compliance with the order sought and therefore not prevent the Crown Prosecution Service/Hampshire Constabulary utilising the material held and/or other material obtained independently of the present proceedings in the High Court.’
(Emphasis supplied.)
The words ‘prevent’ and ‘independently’convey clearly to my mind that the prosecuting authorities regarded themselves as inhibited for all practical purposes from making use of material disclosed in consequence of the court order and that they felt free to pursue their own inquiries and to use material thereby discovered.
I also think that, realistically speaking, the Crown Prosecution Service letter disposes of the potentially troublesome question whether the authorities might have decided to follow up clues revealed by the primary disclosures on the part of the defendant.
Given the information in the Crown Prosecution Service letter I have no hesitation in concluding that the conditions for insisting on discovery in accordance with Buckley J.'s order were satisfied.
Therefore I would allow the appeal and restore the order.
In agreement with the Court of Appeal, I do not consider that the order in this case leaves room for the extension to persons who are not parties of the doctrine expounded in Attorney-General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. [1992]1 A.C. 191.
I also consider that In re O. [1991]2 Q.B.
520 was a correct decision and was (in the absence of the Crown Prosecution Service letter) correctly distinguished by the Court of Appeal.
It should, I think, be emphasised that the present decision of your Lordships does not represent a breakthrough in relation to the principle against self-incrimination; it is a decision on its own facts in the light of that principle.
Therefore, if reform of that principle was, as I believe, desirable before this decision, it is still needed in several respects which have already been recognised, such as the present inadequacy of section 31 of the Theft Act 1968, the illogicality of protecting pre-existing documents, the inconsistency between statutes which do and statutes which do not offer protection when material has to be disclosed and the uncertainty as to making use of material discovered by following up admissions which cannot themselves be adduced in evidence.
The critical importance of the Crown Prosecution Service letter has highlighted another point.
Without having enough knowledge to judge its magnitude, I can foresee a real problem for the Director of Public Prosecutions and her ancillary services if they are to be expected to join in applications or to provide undertakings or letters for the purpose of facilitating parties in complex civil proceedings who will naturally be anxious to achieve the maximum disclosure by their opponents.
Numerous requests for this purpose could impose an intolerable burden and not all of those requests would admit of a ready answer, having regard to the Director of Public Prosecution's duty to prosecute and to make use of the most cogent evidence, particularly in a very serious case of great notoriety.
Here again, it seems to me that there is not only an opportunity but a necessity for Parliament to give the problem its urgent attention.
Appeal allowed.
Defendants to pay plaintiffs' costs in House of Lords and below.
Order not to be enforced without leave of High Court.
Solicitors: Taylor Joynson Garrett; Lawrence Graham for Dutton Gregory & Williams, Eastleigh.