

[QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION]GILLINGHAM BOROUGH COUNCIL v. MEDWAY (CHATHAM) DOCK CO.
LTD. and Others [1988 C. No. 2103]1991
Nuisance — Public — Planning permission, grant of — Local authority granting permission for development of commercial port — Movement of heavy goods vehicles on roads leading to port — Vehicles causing serious disturbance to residents — Local authority bringing action in nuisance against port authorities — Whether disturbance public nuisance
Highway — Heavy vehicles, use by — Disturbance to residents — Heavy goods vehicles on roads giving access to port — Movements of vehicles causing serious disturbance to residents — Whether movement of vehicles creating public nuisance
The defendant dock company, a wholly owned subsidiary of a port authority, was granted a long lease of part of a disused naval dockyard and applied to the plaintiff local authority for planning permission to develop the land as a commercial port.
The plaintiff, in considering that application, was aware that the residents living by the two approach roads to the port would be affected 24 hours a day by the movement of heavy goods vehicles to and from the port but decided to grant planning permission because of the employment and economic benefits for the area resulting from the operation of a commercial port.
The volume of movement of heavy goods vehicles along the approach roads seriously affected the residents' enjoyment of their properties.
The plaintiff, acting under section 222 of the Local Government Act 1972 ‘to promote or protect the interests of the inhabitants in its area,’ brought an action for declarations that the dock company and its sublessees operating in the port had created a public nuisance and it sought injunctions restraining them from permitting heavy goods vehicles coming to and from the port between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m.
On the question whether the disturbance was an actionable public nuisance:—
Held , dismissing the action, that the statutory framework leading to the grant of planning permission envisaged that a local planning authority would balance the interests of the community against those of individuals; that where a planning authority had granted consent to the development of an area, the measure of disturbance to individuals had to be considered against the changed character of the neighbourhood and those living close to a public highway affected by that change had to accept the increased volume of traffic in the greater public interest; and that, accordingly, since as a result of planning permission the two roads now gave access to a commercial dock operating 24 hours a day, the serious disturbance to individuals from the movement of heavy goods vehicles was not an actionable nuisance (post, pp. 460G–H, 461A–C, H — 462B, C–F).
Allen v. Gulf Oil Refining Ltd. [1981]A.C. 1001, H.L. (E.) applied.
Quaere .
Whether lawful use of a highway can amount to a public nuisance (post, p. 459A–D).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Allen v. Gulf Oil Refining Ltd. [1980]Q.B.
156;[1979]3 W.L.R. 523;[1979]3 All E.R.
1008;[1981]A.C. 1001;[1981]2 W.L.R. 188;[1981]1 All E.R.
353, C.A. and H.L. (E.)
Amalgamated Investment & Property Co.
Ltd. v. Texas Commerce International Bank Ltd. [1982]Q.B.
84;[1981]3 W.L.R. 565;[1981]3 All E.R.
577, C.A.
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v. Simmenthal S.p.A.
(Case 106/77)[1978]E.C.R. 629, E.C.J.
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948]1 K.B.
223;[1947]2 All E.R.
680, C.A.
Attorney-General v. P.Y.A. Quarries Ltd. [1957]2 Q.B.
169;[1957]2 W.L.R. 770;[1957]1 All E.R.
894, C.A.
Attorney-General v. Sheffield Gas Consumers Co. (1853) 3 De G.M. & G. 304
Bartlett v. Marshall (1896) 44 W.R. 251
Bauhuis (W. J. G.) v. The Netherlands State (Case 46/76)[1977]E.C.R. 5, E.C.J.
Halsey v. Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd. [1961]1 W.L.R. 683;[1961]2 All E.R.
145
Iannelli & Volpi S.p.A.
v. Ditta Paolo Meroni (Case 74/76)[1977]E.C.R. 557, E.C.J.
Lambton v. Mellish [1894]3 Ch. 163
Metropolitan Asylum District v. Hill (1881) 6 App.Cas. 193, H.L. (E.)
Pride of Derby and Derbyshire Angling Association Ltd. and Earl of Harrington v. British Celanese Ltd. [1952]1 All E.R.
1326;[1953]Ch. 149;[1953]2 W.L.R. 58;[1953]1 All E.R.
179, C.A.
Reg. v. Holme [1984]C.L.Y.
2471
Reg. v. Wheeler , The Times, 17 December 1971, C.A.
Reg. v. Madden [1975]1 W.L.R. 1379;[1975]3 All E.R.
155, C.A.
Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B & Q (Retail) Ltd. [1984]A.C. 754;[1984]2 W.L.R. 929;[1984]2 All E.R.
332, H.L. (E.)
Sturges v. Bridgman (1879) 11 Ch.D. 852, C.A.
Tate & Lyle Food and Distribution Ltd. v. Greater London Council [1983]2 A.C. 509;[1983]2 W.L.R. 649;[1983]1 All E.R.
1159, H.L. (E.)
Thorpe v. Brumfitt (1873) L.R. 8 Ch.App. 650
Torfaen Borough Council v. B & Q Plc.
(Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19;[1990]2 W.L.R. 1330;[1990]1 All E.R.
129, E.C.J.
Vanderpant v. Mayfair Hotel Co.
Ltd. [1930]1 Ch. 138
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Anger v. Northern Construction Co. [1938]4 D.L.R. 738
Attorney-General v. Cole & Son [1901]1 Ch. 205
Attorney-General v. Stone (1895) 12 T.L.R. 76
Attorney-General v. Tod Heatley [1897]1 Ch. 560, C.A.
Attorney-General v. W. H. Smith & Son (1910) 26 T.L.R. 482
Bantwick v. Rogers (1891) 7 T.L.R. 542, D.C.
Barker v. Herbert [1911]2 K.B.
633, C.A.
Baxter v. Stockton-on-Tees Corporation [1959]1 Q.B.
441;[1958]3 W.L.R. 275;[1958]2 All E.R.
675, C.A.
Bellamy v. Wells (1890) 60 L.J.Ch. 156
Benjamin v. Storr (1874) L.R. 9 C.P. 400
Billericay Rural District Council v. Guardians of the Poor of the Popular Poor Law Union [1911]2 K.B.
801, C.A.
Birmingham and Midland Motor Omnibus Co.
Ltd. v. Worcestershire County Council [1967]1 W.L.R. 409;[1967]1 All E.R.
544, Stamp J. and C.A.
Brand v. Hammersmith and City Railway Co. (1867) L.R. 2 Q.B.
223
Browne v. Flower [1911]1 Ch. 219
Campbell v. Paddington Corporation [1911]1 K.B.
869
Commission of the European Communities v. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Case 60/86)[1989]R.T.R. 190, E.C.J.
Crabb v. Arun District Council [1976]Ch. 179;[1975]3 W.L.R. 847;[1975]3 All E.R.
865, C.A.
Dwyer v. Mansfield [1946]K.B.
437;[1946]2 All E.R.
247
Dymond v. Pearce [1972]1 Q.B.
496;[1972]2 W.L.R. 633;[1972]1 All E.R.
1142, C.A.
Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd. v. Southport Corporation [1956]A.C. 218;[1956]2 W.L.R. 81;[1955]3 All E.R.
864, H.L. (E.)
Fletcher v. Rylands (1886) L.R. 1 Exch. 265; 3 H. & C. 774
Galer v. Rawson (1890) 6 T.L.R. 17, C.A.
Gayler and Pope Ltd. v. B. Davies and Son Ltd. [1924]2 K.B.
75
Gunter v. James (1908) 72 J.P.
448, D.C.
Hammersmith and City Railway Co. v. Brand (1869) L.R. 4 H.L. 171, H.L. (E.)
Harrison v. Duke of Rutland [1893]1 Q.B.
142, C.A.
Harrison v. Good (1871) L.R. 11 Eq.
338
Harrison v. Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co. [1891]2 Ch. 409
Henry Butt and Co.
Ltd. v. Weston-Super-Mare Urban District Council [1922]1 A.C. 340, H.L. (E.)
Hickman v. Maisey [1900]1 Q.B.
752, C.A.
Hill v. Thomas [1893]2 Q.B.
333, C.A.
Hilton v. James Smith & Sons (Norwood) Ltd. (1979) 251 E.G. 1063, C.A.
Hoveringham Gravels Ltd. v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1975]Q.B.
754;[1975]2 W.L.R. 897;[1975]2 All E.R.
931, C.A.
Imperial Gas Light and Coke Co. v. Broadbent (1859) 7 H.L.Cas. 600, H.L. (E.)
Jacobs v. London County Council [1950]A.C. 361;[1950]1 All E.R.
737, H.L. (E.)
Jeffery v. St. Pancras Vestry (1894) 63 L.J.Q.B. 618, D.C.
Kennaway v. Thompson [1981]Q.B.
88;[1980]3 W.L.R. 361;[1980]3 All E.R.
329, C.A.
Lewis, Ex parte (1888) 21 Q.B.D. 191
London Brighton and South Coast Railway Co. v. Truman (1886) L.R. 11 App.Cas. 45, H.L. (E.)
Manchester Corporation v. Farnworth [1930]A.C. 171, H.L. (E.)
Miller v. Jackson [1977]Q.B.
966;[1977]3 W.L.R. 20;[1977]3 All E.R.
338, C.A.
National Coal Board v. Gamble [1959]1 Q.B.
11;[1958]3 W.L.R. 434;[1958]3 All E.R.
203, D.C.
Oebel (Sergius), Summary proceedings against (Case 155/80)[1981]E.C.R. 1993, E.C.J.
O'Leary v. Islington London Borough Council (1983) 9 H.L.R. 81, C.A.
Overseas Tankship (U.K.) Ltd. v. Miller Steamship Co.
Pty.[1967]1 A.C. 617;[1966]3 W.L.R. 498;[1966]2 All E.R.
709, P.C.
Powell v. Fall (1880) 5 Q.B.D. 597, C.A.
Procureur du Roi v. Dassonville (Case 8/74)[1974]E.C.R. 837, E.C.J.
Provender Millers (Winchester) Ltd. v. Southampton County Council [1940]Ch. 131;[1939]4 All E.R.
157, C.A.
Rapier v. London Tramways Co. [1893]2 Ch. 588, Kekewich J. and C.A.
Reg. v. Clark (No. 2)[1964]2 Q.B.
315;[1963]3 W.L.R. 1067;[1963]3 All E.R.
884, C.C.A.
Reg. v. Gillingham Borough Council, Ex parte Parham Ltd. [1988]1 P.L.R. 7
Reg. v. London Boroughs Transport Committee, Ex parte Freight Transport Association Ltd. [1990]R.T.R. 190, D.C.
Rex v. Pease (1832) 4 B. & Ad. 30
Rex v. White and Ward (1757) 1 Burr.
333
River Wear Commissioners v. Adamson (1877) 2 App.Cas. 743, H.L. (E.)
Robinson v. London General Omnibus Co.
Ltd. (1910) 74 J.P.
161
Rushmer v. Polsue & Alfieri Ltd. [1906]1 Ch. 234, C.A.
Sadler v. South Staffordshire and Birmingham District Steam Tramways Co. (1889) 23 Q.B.D. 17, C.A.
Sedleigh-Denfield v. O'Callaghan [1940]A.C. 880;[1940]3 All E.R.
349, H.L. (E.)
Shelfer v. City of London Electric Lighting Co. [1895]1 Ch. 287, C.A.
Smith v. Scott [1973]Ch. 314;[1972]3 W.L.R. 783;[1972]3 All E.R.
645
Southend-on-Sea Corporation v. Hodgson (Wickford) Ltd. [1962]1 Q.B.
416;[1961]2 W.L.R. 806;[1961]2 All E.R.
46, D.C.
Southport Corporation v. Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd. [1953]3 W.L.R. 773;[1952]2 All E.R.
1204;[1954]2 Q.B.
182;[1954]3 W.L.R. 200;[1954]2 All E.R.
561, C.A.
Stollmeyer v. Petroleum Development Co.
Ltd.
(Note)[1918]A.C. 498, P.C.
Tarry v. Ashton (1876) 1 Q.B.D. 314, D.C.
Vaughan v. Taff Vale Railway Co. (1860) 5 H. & N. 679
Walsh v. Lonsdale (1882) 21 Ch.D. 9, Fry J. and C.A.
Western Fish Products Ltd. v. Penwith District Council (1978) 77 L.G.R. 185, C.A.
Westminster Bank Ltd. v. Beverley Borough Council [1971]A.C. 508;[1970]2 W.L.R. 645;[1970]1 All E.R.
734, H.L. (E.)
Wilkins v. Day (1883) 12 Q.B.D. 110
Wing v. London General Omnibus Co. [1909]2 K.B.
652, C.A.
Action
By a writ issued on 20 July 1988, amended on 10 April 1989 pursuant to the order of Master Turner of 4 April 1989, and a statement of claim served on 20 July 1988, amended and reserved on 10 April 1989 the plaintiff, Gillingham Borough Council, acting under section 222 of the Local Government Act 1972 to promote the interests of the inhabitants in its area, brought an action in public nuisance against, inter alios, the first defendant, Medway (Chatham) Dock Co.
Ltd. (‘the dock company’) as the company responsible for the operation of the port, which had formerly been part of the Chatham Royal Dockyard, and the fourth and fifth defendants, Crescent Wharves Ltd. and Ship Link Terminals Ltd., as occupiers of berths and land in the port from which they carried on their businesses.
The dock company, being responsible for the port's facilities had control of the Gillingham Gate, the only access to the port and, therefore, all vehicles going to and from the port had to use Bridge Road and Medway Road.
The plaintiff sought a declaration that the use of Bridge Road and the section of Medway Road between Bridge Road and its junction up to its junction with Mill Road by heavy goods vehicles coming to and from the premises of the fourth and fifth defendants at the Chatham Dockyard between the hours of 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. constituted a public nuisance; an injunction prohibiting the fourth and fifth defendants from causing or permitting heavy goods vehicles coming to or from their premises at Chatham Dockyard to use those roads between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m.; an injunction prohibiting the dock company from permitting heavy goods vehicles to enter or leave the Chatham Dockyard by the Gillingham Gate between those hours; and a mandatory injunction requiring the dock company to take all steps within its power to prevent the use of those roads by heavy goods vehicles of the fourth and fifth defendants between those hours.
The plaintiff had originally brought the action also against other defendants, seeking relief in the same terms as against the fourth and fifth defendants, but before action came to trial those defendants Norfolk Line Ltd., Kent Line Ltd., Transit Freights Ltd. and Britholdings Ltd., ceased to be parties to the action.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
David Widdicombe Q.C.
and Gregory Stone for the plaintiff.
Piers Ashworth Q.C.
and Michael Douglas for the defendants.
31 July.
The following judgment was handed down.
BUCKLEY J. The plaintiff, Gillingham Borough Council, brings this action pursuant to section 222 of the Local Government Act 1972 ‘to promote or protect the interests of the inhabitants in its area.’
The inhabitants in question are the residents of Medway Road and Bridge Road, Gillingham.
These roads lead to that part of the old Chatham Royal Naval Dockyard which is now leased to the first defendant, Medway (Chatham) Dock Co.
Ltd. (‘the dock company’), which operates it as a commercial port.
The only access to the port is through the Gillingham Gate which is at the north end of Bridge Road.
All the port traffic, in particular heavy goods vehicles, uses the Gillingham Gate and thus Medway and Bridge Roads.
It is alleged by the plaintiff that the use of these roads by numerous heavy goods vehicles at night amounts to a public nuisance for which the defendants are responsible: the dock company because it controls the Gillingham Gate and by its operation of the gate and the port in general causes or permits the heavy goods vehicles to go in and out of it at all hours, and the fourth and fifth defendants, Crescent Wharves Ltd. and Ship Link Terminals Ltd. respectively, because as sublessees of the dock company they or their customers send heavy goods vehicles in and out of the port and cause or materially contribute to the alleged nuisance.
Background
The Chatham Royal Naval Dockyard on the River Medway was first established in the 16th century.
By 1982 it covered some 500 acres.
It includes three large water basins which separate the main dockyard from St. Mary's Island.
In 1982 the Government announced the closure of the dockyard and it was divided into three parts.
The Chatham Historic Dockyard Trust was established to administer the western portion, which includes a concentration of historic buildings, and to promote knowledge of its archaeological, historical and architectural significance.
The next portion, now known as Chatham Maritime, was made over to English Industrial Estates Corporation.
Its functions and powers are set out in the Act of 1981 of that name.
Its main task is to stimulate economic activity and create jobs.
It trades under the name English Estates.
The easternmost area of the site covers 144 acres, includes one of the water basins and the locks, and was taken over by the Medway Ports Authority (‘the ports authority’).
This authority was set up under the Medway Ports Authority Scheme of 1968 and the Medway Ports Authority Act 1973.
Included amongst its duties is a duty to ‘maintain, operate and improve port facilities.’
It has successfully developed and operated a port at Sheerness in Kent and drew on this experience in deciding to develop a commercial port in the easternmost portion of the old dockyard.
It decided to do this through the dock company, a wholly owned subsidiary which was incorporated on 24 March 1982.
The dock company in due course took a long lease of the area in question from the Secretary of State for Defence, although the ports authority insisted that the necessary planning consent be obtained before the lease was signed.
Planning permission was granted on 15 February 1983 subject to three conditions.
The only one of relevance is condition 2 which is as follows:
‘Not later than 31 December 1985 or prior to the determination of a planning application for the development of land south of the other two dockyard basins with access via Pembroke Gate, whichever is the sooner, vehicular access to the site hereby permitted shall be reviewed.
Upon alternative access for heavy vehicles to a public highway being made available to the satisfaction of the local planning authority the use of Gillingham Gate for heavy vehicles shall be discontinued or reduced in accordance with details which shall have been submitted to and approved by the local planning authority.
The dock company went into occupation on 1 January 1984 and thereafter commenced operations.
On the evidence I have heard, it is reasonably clear that the old naval dockyard generated comparatively little heavy goods vehicle traffic and in the main it used the Pembroke Gate entrance.
Plenty of motor cars went in and out through the Pembroke and Gillingham Gates but it has not been suggested that there was any real night-time disturbance from traffic using the dockyard.
Pembroke Gate is on English Estates' portion, Chatham Maritime, leaving the Gillingham Gate as the only access to the dock company's undertaking.
Bridge Road runs into Medway Road and thus all traffic, in particular any heavy goods vehicles using the dock company's facilities, must use these roads.
This was foreseen by the local residents who objected and petitioned at the time planning permission was under consideration.
They made the obvious point that a commercial port is a 24-hour operation and would attract heavy goods vehicles up and down Bridge and Medway Roads at all hours.
Although these roads must always have provided access to the dockyard at the Gillingham Gate they had not carried heavy goods vehicles to any extent in the past.
They are substantially residential roads.
The worst fears of the residents were realised as the port was an immediate commercial success and heavy traffic quickly built up.
The dock company had made no secret of the fact that this would occur and the council was fully aware of this during its consideration of the dock company's planning application.
Condition 2 above is itself some evidence of this, but, in particular, the minutes of a meeting held on 13 January 1983 between representatives of Kent County Council, Gillingham Borough Council and the ports authority record that an estimate of three to four hundred lorries per day was given.
All are now agreed that that proved to be a remarkably accurate estimate.
I would have been satisfied in any event that all interested parties must have anticipated that the operation of a commercial port would not be limited to the day time, but would carry on throughout the 24 hours of every day.
However, apart from references to this by the local residents, an internal memorandum from the borough engineer dated 26 January 1983 expressly refers to 24-hour operation.
The memorandum also refers to the ‘anticipated damage to the pleasant enjoyment of their present environment’ in respect of the residents of Bridge Road and surrounding streets.
This was also adverted to by the county surveyor in a letter dated 7 February 1983 to Mr. Page, the borough engineer.
He stated:
‘but I should comment that there would be an adverse environment effect on properties adjacent to the roads used by the large number of heavy goods vehicles, in particular the properties fronting Bridge Road.
Further council documents show that the appropriate department and the council itself had in mind the ‘effect of traffic attraction to the site upon the environment in the approach roads,’ but also had in mind ‘the employment potential of the use proposed in the planning application.’
The recommendation to the council from the borough engineer/borough architect's and planning department was that approval should be given subject to access for heavy lorries being reviewed after three years.
There is a reference in this same paper under the heading ‘Traffic-Safety and Freeflow,’ to the dock gates being opened at 6.30 a.m. in the morning and the working day extending to 6 p.m., but not later than 9 p.m.
No one has been able to explain how this erroneous information appeared in that paper.
It is only reference to the gates being closed in the evening.
Mr. Cooper, the chairman of the dock company and the ports authority, gave evidence before me and stated unequivocally that it did not come from him, nor to his knowledge from any of his subordinates.
It is extremely unlikely that it would have done so because everyone at the ports authority had always envisaged a 24-hour operation.
Mr. Cooper was at the meeting on 13 January 1983 to which I have referred.
I am satisfied that this reference did not emanate from anyone representing the ports authority or the dock company.
The evidence does not explain it.
I can only assume that it stemmed from wishful thinking or a misunderstanding on the part of one of the council employees or officers.
The paper dated 15 February 1983 before the works committee which resolved on that date to grant permission, contains a reference to the number of lorries anticipated at the Gillingham Gate daily and under the same heading ‘Traffic-Safety and Freeflow’ has a different entry from the one I have referred to.
This paper refers to lorries being allowed into the dock area overnight and ‘in the long term there could be 24 hour operation.’
This paper under the heading ‘Employment’ lays stress on the attraction of the operation.
It reads:
‘Although the applicants would employ only a fraction of the present dock labour force, the proposal would provide an active economic use at an early date following the closure of the yard.
It would maintain the water regime in the other two basins, for which no other alternative was at present in prospect, create jobs in supporting services and maintain servicing allied to the port use and further enhance the locational advantages of the Medway Towns for business.
The impression I have from such documents as I have seen is that the obvious hardship to the residents of Bridge and Medway Roads was somewhat played down and the employment and general economic benefits were underlined.
Perhaps this is understandable in view of the blow to local employment and morale as a result of the closure of the Royal Naval Dockyard.
On 25 July 1985 the dock company put in a planning application for the construction of a Roll on — Roll off (‘Ro-Ro’) terminal in the River Medway.
Permission was refused, there was an appeal and an inquiry by an inspector whose recommendations the Secretary of State for the Environment accepted.
The appeal was dismissed.
The main consideration was undoubtedly the increase in heavy goods vehicles that would be generated by the new development and the consequent increase in noise levels, in particular night-time levels in Medway Road and Bridge Road.
These environmental objections were considered to be serious enough to outweigh the economic benefits of allowing the proposal.
It was this development and in particular the evidence given at the Ro-Ro inquiry which in due course prompted the council to bring the present proceedings.
In March 1988 the council passed the necessary resolution and the writ was issued on 20 July 1988.
Public nuisance — the evidence
The plaintiff seeks a declaration that the use of Bridge Road and part of Medway Road by heavy goods vehicles using the port between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. amounts to a public nuisance.
It also seeks injunctions aimed at preventing such use.
The basis of the claim is that the movement of heavy goods vehicles along these roads at night materially interferes with the reasonable comfort and convenience of residents and is a public nuisance.
Factually the case is serious.
By January 1985 almost 300 heavy goods vehicle movements per 24 hours were recorded; by 1988 the figure had risen to about 750.
Sufficient of these were at night for there to be, on average, one movement every few minutes.
Between 5 a.m. and 7 a.m. two movements every 3 minutes were recorded.
Nothing turns on the precise figures.
I have heard evidence from noise experts and from many of the residents.
Most houses in Bridge Road have sound insulation, as do some in Medway Road.
Despite it, I am quite satisfied that their evenings, their sleep and their general comfort were greatly disturbed.
Some of them had abandoned front rooms and virtually none opened front windows.
I should have said that these houses are all close to the road, perhaps a few paces from the pavement.
There were various other complaints including vibration, dust and fumes.
The residents described feeling tired through lack of an undisturbed night's sleep.
None of this evidence was seriously challenged on behalf of the defendants and Mr. Ashworth, for the defendants made two admissions during the course of the hearing.
First, that the conditions I have described constituted a substantial interference with the residents' enjoyment of their property up to June 1990; second, that enough residents were affected to constitute a public nuisance if it were not for his other defences.
The relevance of June 1990 is that Norfolk Line Ltd. then transferred its operations to, I believe, Dartford.
It had been operating a Ro-Ro service from inside the locks and undoubtedly was responsible for the major part of the heavy goods vehicle traffic.
The parties' best current estimate of night traffic is that it has dropped from 190 to 29 movements per night since Norfolk Line's departure.
However, 29 is still a lot of heavy goods vehicle movements for residents to tolerate in these roads between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m.
Additionally, the junction of Bridge Road and Medway Road, an incline there, and the fact that Bridge Road is only about 150 metres long, means that low gears are engaged and greater noise generated.
I have heard evidence from experts who described the area and measured traffic flows and produced numerous tables recording their findings.
I also heard from experts in noise and vibration who gave information about how noise levels are measured and the units used.
They produced tables of figures, diagrams and graphs illustrating their measurements and recording their findings.
I was helped by these witnesses and they provide a useful check on the evidence of the residents.
Happily I do not need to go into any great detail because on the central issues there was no great conflict between them.
Dr. Walker, for the plaintiffs, was of opinion that the disturbance now, that is after the departure of Norfolk Line, is quite unacceptable.
A supplement to his main report states at paragraph 2.2:
‘I am still of the view that the degree of lorry noise at night is quite unacceptable.
It would be inconceivable that persons subject to the frequent but irregular peaks would not be disturbed by them.
Mr. Ratcliffe, the defendants' expert, was also helpful.
He tended to concentrate more on various types of average noise levels and concluded that 20 per cent.
of the population of Britain is subjected to similar average levels to those in Bridge and Medway Roads.
But, I am sure that for the purpose of this case Dr. Walker's emphasis on peaks, that is the noise of an individual heavy goods vehicle, is more relevant.
Mr. Ratcliffe told me he could not say that an average person would not be woken by a heavy goods vehicle passing by his window and, to his credit, whilst making the very best of his brief he did not suggest that the present position is not disturbing.
Mr. Ratcliffe produced a chart depicting the level of common sounds measured in decibels, the dB(A) scale.
This was agreed.
It is interesting to note that a quiet bedroom is about 35 on the scale, at 55 communication starts to become difficult, a car travelling at a steady 60 k.p.h. at seven metres distance is just over 70, a heavy diesel lorry at 40 k.p.h. at seven metres is 85, a pneumatic drill at seven metres is 95 and 120 is the threshold of pain.
Dr. Walker put a normal television programme with music at about 60.
Many lorries' peaks were recorded on Dr. Walker's graphs at about 80.
However, he explained without challenge that the true peaks were in excess of this measurement but were recorded at 80 because of the restrictions of the equipment used to compile the graph.
His maximum reading by alternative direct measurement was over 100 dB(A).
He also made the point that lorries, particularly in low gear, generate low frequency sound which, even inside a house with double glazing, would be 60 dB(A) or more.
A busy general office is 60 dB(A) according to Mr. Ratcliffe's chart.
In all I am entirely satisfied that the present position, though much improved from the dreadful pre-June 1990 era, remains one in which the residents suffer a considerable disturbance from heavy goods vehicles.
That is judging by ordinary residential standards.
As Mr. Ratcliffe pointed out, others suffer similarly and he gave as a worse example a village called Iwade, situated on the main road to Sheerness Docks.
Other examples were mentioned in argument.
The question remains whether in all the circumstances of this case the level of disturbance mentioned is one which the residents must be called upon to accept.
Public nuisance — the law
I hope it is fair to say that the main thrust of the defence to this claim was based on law.
The first submission by Mr. Ashworth was that a public nuisance cannot arise out of a lawful act, whatever its consequences, and as what is complained of here, namely heavy goods vehicles being driven along Medway and Bridge Roads, is a lawful act, no public nuisance can arise.
He relied upon the definition of public nuisance in Stephen's Digest of the Criminal Law , 9th ed. (1950), at p. 179:
‘an act not warranted by law or an omission to discharge a legal duty, which act or omission obstructs or causes inconvenience or damage to the public in the exercise of rights common to all His Majesty's subjects.
This is adopted in Halsbury's Laws of England , 4th ed., vol. 34 (1980), para. 301 and Clerk & Lindsell on Torts , 16th ed. (1989), paras.
24.02 and 24.03.
Mr. Ashworth cited numerous cases in which the acts complained of were in themselves unlawful and in which there are many references to unlawful acts in the context of public nuisance.
The sheer weight of dicta amassed was intimidating, but Mr. Ashworth conceded he could find no authority actually binding on me.
It is not surprising that in many or most of the cases, particularly the more modern ones, the act itself is unlawful.
That is because a large number of cases on public nuisance arise out of some misuse of the highway (inherently unlawful) and due to the growth of statutory offences touching such matters as health and environment.
However, I have always assumed that public nuisance was primarily concerned with the effect of the act complained of as opposed to its inherent lawfulness or unlawfulness.
There are cases in which prosecutions failed because the nuisance did not interfere with a sufficient number of the public.
That suggests that there was no other unlawful act involved.
I am greatly indebted to J. R. Spencer for a most interesting article, ‘Public Nuisance — A Critical Examination’(1989) 48 C.L.J. 55.
As is there stated, at p. 76:
‘In the days before there was much legislation on public health matters, public nuisance was the only offence for which it was possible to prosecute those who stank out the neighbourhood with fumes from glassworks, tanneries and smelters, or who kept pigs in the streets, or kept explosives in dangerous places…
Later in the article three specific cases are mentioned in which the conduct complained of was not, at the time, an offence, other than public nuisance:Reg. v. Wheeler , The Times, 17 December 1971;Reg. v. Madden [1975]1 W.L.R. 1379 and Reg. v. Holme [1984]C.L.Y.
2471.
Finally, there is the type of public nuisance arising out of private nuisance which affects a sufficiently large number of people that it would not be reasonable to expect one person to take proceedings on his own responsibility: see Denning L.J.
in Attorney-General v. P.Y.A. Quarries Ltd. [1957]2 Q.B.
169, 191.
The main judgment given by Romer L.J.
lends no support to Mr. Ashworth's contention.
Private nuisance need not be based on an unlawful act.
I therefore reject the submission that a public nuisance requires an unlawful act.
If it is correct, in general, that a public nuisance cannot arise out of the lawful use of a highway, as Mr. Ashworth submitted, it is not, in my judgment, because there is no unlawful act.
It is because a consideration of the neighbourhood in the vicinity of the highway will lead to the conclusion that the noise or fumes are not an actionable wrong in all the circumstances of the case.
In other words, those who live close by public highways must accept the inevitable disturbance for the greater good of the public.
Certainly this principle applies in private nuisance —Sturges v. Bridgman (1879) 11 Ch.D. 852, 856 — and I can see no reason for a different approach in public nuisance, at least of the kind alleged in this case.
Also many types of road which might otherwise give rise to noise nuisance will have been constructed pursuant to statutory powers after all relevant planning procedures have been complied with and compensation paid where appropriate.
Actions in nuisance, if successful, would make a nonsense of the whole scheme.
The private right must usually yield to the greater public interest.
It is not necessary for me to hold that otherwise lawful use of a highway can never amount to a public nuisance, whatever the circumstances and however excessive the use.
Extreme circumstances may arise when it could be right so to hold: see Halsey v. Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd. [1961]1 W.L.R. 683.
The question is whether the facts in this case amount to a nuisance.
Mr. Widdicombe, for the plaintiff, referred to various cases, including Halsey's case,Vanderpant v. Mayfair Hotel Co.
Ltd. [1931]1 Ch. 138 and Bartlett v. Marshall (1896) 44 W.R. 251, in support of his assertion that noise from vehicles on the highway can amount to public and private nuisance.
Halsey's case [1961]1 W.L.R. 683, is particularly in point because part of the claim was based on the noise of oil tankers, not just in the defendant's depot, but as they were driven along the road past the plaintiff's house: see pp. 700–701.
Veale J. there referred to Lord Cranworth L.C. in Attorney-General v. Sheffield Gas Consumers Co. (1853) 3 De G.M. & G. 304, 339–340 in support of his reliance upon a test of reasonable user.
Mr. Ashworth submitted that Halsey's case [1961]1 W.L.R. 683, was wrongly decided, at least on nuisance from the highway.
I am not prepared to accede to that submission.
Public nuisance and planning permission
The dock company operates the port and keeps the Gillingham Gate open 24 hours a day.
It is said, therefore, that it directly causes or permits the nuisance to continue, as happened in Halsey's case.
If it shut the gate at night, the traffic would cease.
This brings me to perhaps the most important and interesting aspect of the case.
The dock company obtained planning permission to operate the dock as a commercial port, which cannot sensibly be done other than on a 24-hour basis.
In any event, the plaintiff, as I have found, knew that 24-hour operation was anticipated and no condition curtailing such use was attached to the permission.
Medway and Bridge Roads were the only approach roads to the Gillingham Gate.
The dock company's estimate of heavy goods vehicle traffic has proved remarkably accurate.
It is not suggested that it is negligent in any way.
It is operating the site in accordance with the planning permission.
All that has happened, as Mr. Ault, the plaintiff's development officer, confirmed in evidence, is that planning priorities have moved on.
A major consideration in 1983 was to fill the void left by the closure of the old dockyard.
Adverse effects on the environment in Medway and Bridge Roads were an acceptable price for the perceived economic and job benefits from the dock company's operation.
Now things have changed.
English Estates are moving ahead with the development of Chatham Maritime and although Mr. Ault assured me that the plaintiff did not wish to drive the dock company away, its operation is clearly less of a godsend than in 1983 and the desire is to curtail it.
For various reasons it has proved impractical to find or create any alternative access to the port and that is likely to remain the position at least until the third Medway crossing and northern link road project comes to pass.
I cannot say whether or not it will, but, if so, it is certain to take at least four or five years.
I have not been referred to any case which has directly considered the interplay between planning permission and the law of nuisance.
Many cases, of course, have considered statutory authority as a defence to nuisance.
There are the old railway cases and more recently Allen v. Gulf Oil Refining Ltd. [1981]A.C. 1001 and Tate & Lyle Food and Distribution Ltd. v. Greater London Council [1983]2 A.C. 509.
Lord Templeman in the Tate & Lyle case said, at p. 538:
‘The defence of statutory authority to an action for nuisance was summarised in the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Wilberforce, in Allen v. Gulf Oil Refining Ltd. [1981]A.C. 1001, 1011 as follows: ‘It is now well settled that where Parliament by express direction or by necessary implication has authorised the construction and use of an undertaking or works, that carries with it an authority to do what is authorised with immunity from any action based on nuisance.
The right of action is taken away;…
To this there is made the qualification, or condition, that the statutory powers are exercised without ‘negligence’— that word here being used in a special sense so as to require the undertaker, as a condition of obtaining immunity from action, to carry out the work and conduct of the operation with all reasonable regard and care for the interests of other persons;…’
Doubtless one of the reasons for this approach is that Parliament is presumed to have considered the interests of those who will be affected by the undertaking or works and decided that benefits from them should outweigh any necessary adverse side effects.
I believe that principle should be utilised in respect of planning permission.
Parliament has set up a statutory framework and delegated the task of balancing the interests of the community against those of individuals and of holding the scales between individuals, to the local planning authority.
There is the right to object to any proposed grant, provision for appeals and inquiries, and ultimately the minister decides.
There is the added safeguard of judicial review.
If a planning authority grants permission for a particular construction or use in its area it is almost certain that some local inhabitants will be prejudiced in the quiet enjoyment of their properties.
Can they defeat the scheme simply by bringing an action in nuisance?
If not, why not?
It has been said, no doubt correctly, that planning permission is not a licence to commit nuisance and that a planning authority has no jurisdiction to authorise nuisance.
However, a planning authority can, through its development plans and decisions, alter the character of a neighbourhood.
That may have the effect of rendering innocent activities which prior to the change would have been an actionable nuisance:Allen v. Gulf Oil Refining Ltd. [1980]Q.B.
156, 174,per Cumming-Bruce L.J., referred to in the speech of Lord Wilberforce [1981]A.C. 1001, 1013–1014.
The point arises in this case.
Prior to January 1984 Medway and Bridge Roads had been relatively quiet residential roads.
True, they led to the old Naval Dockyard but that did not generate many heavy goods vehicles and probably none at night.
For obvious reasons sites for naval bases were not chosen for their land communications.
It seems to me that I must judge the present claim in nuisance by reference to the present character of the neighbourhood pursuant to the planning permission for use of the dockyard as a commercial port.
Thus, these roads are now in the neighbourhood of and lead immediately to a commercial port which operates 24 hours per day.
In those circumstances I hold that the undoubted disturbance to the residents is not actionable.
Mr. Widdicombe urged that even adopting this approach, I should find that the operation of the port was unreasonable and without proper regard for the interests of the residents.
He submitted that the Norfolk Line Ro-Ro was a bonus, not necessary to the reasonable operation of the port and that an injunction should go, at least to prevent a return to the pre-June 1990 state of affairs.
This argument has its attractions, and I note by way of analogy with the statutory authority cases that it is only a nuisance inevitably resulting from the authorised works on which immunity is conferred.
However, the planning permission here was to operate a commercial port in a precisely delineated area.
It was not merely permissive as in the sense of the general power conferred by the Metropolitan Poor Act 1867 (30 Vict. c. 6), considered in Metropolitan Asylum District v. Hill (1881) 6 App.
Cas. 193, 201, where Lord Selborne L.C. said:
‘The result is:(1) That this Act does not necessarily require anything to be done under it which might not be done without causing a nuisance;(2) That as to those things which may or may not be under it, there is no evidence on the face of the Act that the legislature supposed it to be impossible for any of them to be done (if they were done at all) somewhere and under some circumstances, without creating a nuisance; and (3) That the legislature has manifested no intention that any of these optional powers, as to asylums, should be exercised at the expense of, or so as to interfere with, any man's private rights.
The only sense in which the legislature can be properly said to have authorised these things to be done is that it has enabled the Poor Law Board to order, and the managers to do them, if, and when, and where, they can obtain by free bargain and contract the means of doing so.
…and no place, or limit of space, is defined within which the establishment of such an asylum is made lawful.
Lord Watson laid the same emphasis in his speech, at p. 212.
The dock company could not operate a commercial port at the dockyard without disturbing nearby residents.
The aim of any commercial undertaking is to operate to the best advantage or in other words to do as much trade as it can.
It would be quite unrealistic to attempt to draw a line in the dock company's operation to limit the amount of trade it can permit at the port.
It would be a task for which a court would be ill-equipped, involving as it would the need to consider the interests of the locality as a whole and the plaintiff's and county council's plans in respect of it.
In some cases even the national interest would have to be considered.
These are matters to be decided by the planning authority and, if necessary, the minister and should be subject only to judicial review.
I do not find the dock company has operated or operates the port other than as a normal commercial undertaking.
The plaintiff can now impose conditions upon or even revoke the permission it has granted.
It can (with the consent of the Kent County Council) make traffic regulations controlling the use of these and other roads in the immediate vicinity of the port.
Mr. Ault frankly admitted to me that the plaintiff had brought these proceedings instead, in order to avoid paying compensation under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 if it altered or withdrew the consent.
Further, the county council has not yet given its consent to the imposition of any traffic regulations.
These matters confirm me in the view already expressed that the disturbance complained of in this case is not actionable.
Alternatively, they are matters together with those specifically mentioned below which would influence me against granting an injunction.
I do not believe that my views are inconsistent with cases such as Halsey v. Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd. [1961]1 W.L.R. 683 or Attorney-General v. P.Y.A. Quarries Ltd. [1957]2 Q.B.
169.
There may well have been planning permission for the activities in question in those cases.
Certainly there was in the P.Y.A. Quarries case, but the complaints there related to unreasonable uses.
The depot and the quarry in those cases could have been operated commercially in accordance with the planning permission without causing the damage or disturbance complained of.
In short, where planning consent is given for a development or change of use, the question of nuisance will thereafter fall to be decided by reference to a neighbourhood with that development or use and not as it was previously.
Various other lines of defence to this action were raised by Mr. Ashworth and I will now consider those in case I am wrong on what I regard as the central issue.
Discretion/estoppel
Mr. Ashworth at first sought to rely upon a strict estoppel arising out of an assurance which the plaintiff gave to the dock company/port authority in respect of condition 2 of the planning permission.
It gave rise, he said, to an estoppel by convention of the type recognised in Amalgamated Investment & Property Co.
Ltd. v. Texas Commerce International Bank Ltd. [1982]Q.B.
84.
As the argument developed, I understood him to submit that as the remedy sought by the plaintiff was itself an equitable one, talk of strict estoppel was inappropriate, and he was content to put forward the alleged assurance and other matters to be considered in the exercise of my discretion.
I agree with him.
On receiving the planning permission in February 1983 Mr. Cooper, to whom I have already referred, was concerned by condition 2.
In a letter to the chief executive of the plaintiff dated 14 March 1983 he wrote:
‘However, we are extremely concerned about condition 2.
I am sure that your council will understand that the company cannot commit itself to the long term investment programme, or expose itself to the commercial risks involved in the project, unless the facilities can be planned in a climate of security.
This is so necessary for port facilities and absolutely vital if we are to attract the long term users necessary for the prosperity and long term employment prospects of the port.
The company cannot proceed without the position being established beyond doubt.
Can your council assure my company that when carrying out the proposed review under condition 2, it will not adopt any additional or alternative access, nor curtail the use of Gillingham Gate without the agreement of my company?
That letter was placed before a planning sub-committee on 17 March 1983, when it was resolved that the matter should be referred to the works committee.
On 29 March 1983 the works committee resolved ‘the Medway (Chatham) Co.
Ltd. be given the assurance requested.’
This was communicated to Mr. Cooper by letter dated 31 March 1983 in these terms:
‘[The works committee]have agreed to give you an assurance that the council will consult with you in the review of highway access to the area around number three basin, in accordance with the terms of the planning permission granted, and will not simply impose upon you without your agreement an entirely new point of access and exterior routing that could have an extremely detrimental effect upon the viability of your scheme.
Mr. Cooper replied by letter on 9 May 1983, in which he pointed out the absolute necessity that tenants of the dock company should not be disturbed at a later date and seeking clarification that the council would not seek in the terms of their letter of 31 March to draw a distinction between ‘extremely detrimental’ and detrimental.
That matter was resolved.
I think there would have been various difficulties in Mr. Ashworth's path had he sought to pursue an argument based on strict estoppel.
However, I do believe that this exchange together with the evidence I heard illustrates the understandable concern of the dock company to ensure that it would have unrestricted access to the port for itself and its sublessees who would operate there.
That was a commercial prerequisite as the plaintiff well knew.
Without it, as Mr. Cooper stated in evidence, the whole scheme would not have proceeded.
Mr. Ashworth further submitted that the plaintiff's decision to bring these proceedings was flawed and unreasonable.
It was flawed because the council never formally considered its options under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
Mr. Ault in evidence confirmed that.
He said he believed the planning option was considered informally, but rejected because of the liability to pay compensation.
Mr. Ashworth relied upon the passage in Lord Templeman's speech in Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B & Q (Retail) Ltd. [1984]A.C. 754, 775:
‘Any exercise by the local authority of this statutory power [Local Government Act 1972, section 222]is subject to the control of judicial review and the application of the principles enunciated in Associated Provincial Picturehouses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948]1 K.B.
223.
In considering the exercise of their powers the local authority must take into account matters which they ought to take into account, ignore matters which they ought not to take into account and then reach a decision which is not so unreasonable that no reasonable local authority could have come to it.
Where the local authority seeks an injunction, the court will consider whether the power was rightly exercised and whether in all the circumstances at the date the application for an injunction is considered by the court, the equitable and discretionary remedy of an injunction should be granted.
Although the matter was not explored further in evidence, I should be very surprised if the decision to bring these proceedings would have been different had the plaintiff's attention been drawn formally to its powers under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
I think it extremely likely that the plaintiff would have followed the inevitable recommendation from its officers which would have been to proceed with this action in order to avoid paying compensation.
Thus, I doubt whether any attempt to review the plaintiff's decision on the ground that it had failed to consider the planning option would have succeeded.
I do not propose to speculate as to the decision of a reviewing court on the question of reasonableness.
Nevertheless, I am entitled to take all these circumstances into account in attempting to arrive at a just decision concerning injunctive relief.
I find that the plaintiff has changed its priorities, as it is entitled to do.
But, having given permission and encouraged the port authority and dock company to move in and operate a port, which is a major long term undertaking, it is hardly reasonable to seek to stop or materially limit it without compensation and when the dock company is doing no more than making a success of that for which permission was granted.
I find on the evidence that the dock company would never have undertaken the venture on the basis of 12 hours per day operation.
If that was now imposed on it, it would very seriously damage its business.
For so long as the Northern Link Road is in prospect with improved access to the port, the company would limp on, despite an injunction, or possibly mothball its operation.
If that prospect goes, the port operation would probably cease.
As to the fourth and fifth defendants, I believe that their position is similar.
Chatham has attractions and I think they would try and carry on, but the impact of the injunction sought on their businesses would be very significant and the probability must be that they would have to cease operations.
Their customers, the shippers and receivers, want their goods on demand.
I was told, and I accept, that a port limited to 12 hours per day operation would not be commercially viable.
The council is the plaintiff, but it has brought this action to protect the interests of the residents.
Had I been called upon to exercise my discretion, I would have given particular consideration to the great disturbance that I have found the residents suffer.
I have every sympathy for them.
Unfortunately I regard it as clear that although the consequences to them of operating a commercial port were reasonably plain from the beginning, insufficient thought was given to the question of access to the port before planning permission was granted.
However, in all the circumstances, I would have felt bound to refuse relief.
The council is the planning authority.
It has all necessary powers to look again at the problem it has created and decide whether it is in the overall interest of the locality to have a commercial port.
If it is, I can only hope it will work with all concerned to see whether a solution can be found to the problem of access.
It is a planning problem, not a question for the courts.
Statutory authority
Mr. Ashworth put forward a specific defence of statutory authority based upon section 5 of the Medway Ports Authority Act 1973.
Whilst it is true that the port authority may carry out its functions through another person such as the dock company, it does not follow that in the absence of statutory authority it can itself transfer any statutory immunities to the entity through which it chooses to operate.
In my view the dock company is not entitled to any statutory immunities which may attach to the port authority.
This matter was not pursued in great detail and I remained unconvinced that this defence could be made out.
The defendants
Mr. Ashworth made further submissions on the position of the defendants individually.
As to the dock company, he pointed out that no nuisance was alleged to emanate directly from its premises, that other traffic besides heavy goods vehicles uses Medway and Bridge Roads on port business and that the dock company could only be liable for any nuisance caused by the fourth or fifth defendants if it aided and abetted it.
If I had held that the disturbance to residents in those roads was otherwise actionable in nuisance, I should not have acceded to those submissions.
The situation would have been analogous in this respect to Halsey v. Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd. [1961]1 W.L.R. 683.
Factually, it is the operation of the port and opening of the Gillingham Gate throughout 24 hours which is calculated to attract the vehicles up and down those roads in the immediate vicinity of the port.
As to Crescent Wharves Ltd. and Ship Link Terminals Ltd., it was pointed out that most of the heavy goods vehicles are not theirs but belong to their customers or carriers and that in any event it would be wrong to aggregate their respective contributions in the circumstances of this case.
In support of aggregation, Mr. Widdicombe referred me to Thorpe v. Brumfitt (1873) L.R. 8 Ch.App. 650;Lambton v. Mellish [1894]3 Ch. 163 and Pride of Derby and Derbyshire Angling Association Ltd. and Earl of Harrington v. British Celanese Ltd. [1952]1 All E.R.
1326, 1333;[1953]Ch. 149.
I respectfully believe that those cases were rightly decided on their facts, but I would not adopt the principle of aggregation on the facts here.
Even assuming that A's excessive use of a particular highway could amount to a public nuisance, that could not mean that B, C or D could not use the highway, however reasonably, for fear of committing public nuisance.
As to the point of ownership of lorries, that would not in itself have provided a defence.
Crescent Wharves Ltd. and Ship Link Terminals Ltd., just as the dock company, operate their businesses in a way which causes the heavy goods vehicle traffic.
Finally on this aspect of the matter, I was not persuaded that any of the defendants was unable to prevent the nuisance.
Leases and contracts have been entered into, but I have seen nothing which would prevent the regulation of operating hours.
Indeed the witnesses did not suggest that they could not regulate their operations, but rather that if they did, their respective undertakings would cease to be viable.
For what it may be worth, if I am wrong in my application of the neighbourhood test so that the disturbance has to be judged by pre-planning permission standards, I would have found that the heavy goods vehicles going to and from each of the fourth and fifth defendant's operations constituted a material disturbance to the residents at night.
European law
Mr. Ashworth submitted that if all else failed, Community law would come to his rescue.
As all else has not failed, I propose to deal with this aspect of the matter shortly.
The submission is based on article 30 of the E.E.C.
Treaty:
‘Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having an equivalent shall, without prejudice to the following provisions, be prohibited.
This article is of direct effect:Iannelli & Volpi S.p.A.
v. Ditta Paolo Meroni (Case 74/76)[1977]E.C.R. 557.
It therefore takes precedence over national law:Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v. Simmenthal S.p.A.
(Case 106/77)[1978]E.C.R. 629.
‘All measures having equivalent effect’ has been very broadly interpreted and is wide enough to cover an injunction granted in a case such as this:Torfaen Borough Council v. B & Q Plc.
(Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19.
Mr. Ashworth simply submits that any restriction on operating hours at the port is bound to interfere with trade and/or the free movement of goods, and thus contravenes article 30.
The plaintiff must therefore establish an exemption or justification for such a measure.
The two possibilities are, first, article 36:
‘The provisions of articles 30 to 34 shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports, or goods in transit justified on the grounds of…public policy…the protection of health and life of humans;…
Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguise to restriction on trade between member states.
This article is to be strictly construed:W. J. G. Bauhuis v. The Netherlands State (Case 46/76)[1977]E.C.R. 5.
Secondly, the ‘rule of reason.’
It is accepted that Community case law has developed such a principle under which, on policy grounds compatible with Community law, restrictions on trade may be justified.
Again, reference to the Torfaen case [1990]2 Q.B.
19, is made and it is suggested that the plaintiff cannot utilise this exception because the measure sought is not ‘indistinctly applicable.’
That is, it does not apply equally to domestic and imported goods.
An injunction here would, in effect, apply almost entirely to imported goods.
For those reasons and the fact that the injunction sought would go further than is necessary to meet the situation complained of and would thus offend the principle of proportionality, Mr. Ashworth submits that the injunction should not go.
I cannot accept those submissions.
I am prepared to assume, as was Mr. Ashworth, that prima facie an injunction in the present case could amount to a ‘measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction of imports.’
However, I do not believe that an injunction granted bona fide for the protection of residents against a public nuisance would offend article 30.
It would not be granted if the court felt it went further than necessary to meet the complaint.
The injunction would not be designed to govern the patterns of trade between member states.
It would be in pursuit of a valid policy of protecting the public or a class of the public from unwarranted disturbance to the quiet enjoyment of their homes.
Such a disturbance, particularly at night, could even have an adverse effect on health.
That can be justified as being consistent with the objectives of public interest and article 30 would not apply.
It also seems to me to be consistent with the approach of the court in the Torfaen case [1990]2 Q.B.
19.
If I am wrong, I should be surprised and disappointed if the so called‘rule of reason’ and the purposive approach displayed by the Court of Justice of the European Communities in its application of such articles as 30 and 36 did not achieve the same answer.
Action dismissed with costs.
Solicitors: Sharpe Pritchard; Brachers, Maidstone; Freshfields; Martin Tolhurst Partnership, Strood.
[Reported by Mrs. Gurinder Gosal, Barrister]