

[QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION]
REGINA v. POPLAR CORONER AND ANOTHER, Ex parte THOMAS
1992 March 18;
April 13
Watkins L.J.
and Tudor Evans J.
Coroner — Inquest — Duty to hold — Deceased having severe asthma attack — Deceased suffering cardiac arrest while waiting for ambulance — Post mortem showing death by natural causes — Possibility of delay in arrival of ambulance contributing to death — Whether reason to suspect that death ‘unnatural’— Whether coroner's duty to investigate death conflicting with rule against determining civil liability — Coroners Act 1988 (c. 13), ss. 8(1), 11(5) — Coroners Rules 1984 (S.I.
1984 No. 552), r. 42
The deceased, who was aged 17 and a life-long asthmatic, had a severe attack of asthma.
A neighbour who made an emergency telephone call for an ambulance between 1 a.m. and 1.15 a.m. was connected to a recorded message asking her to wait until someone was available to answer her call.
It was decided to take the deceased to hospital by car, but on the way she collapsed and a police officer from a local police station made an emergency call urgently requesting an ambulance.
In response to a further telephone call from the police station at 1.17 a.m. the ambulance services said that an ambulance would be at the scene in five to seven minutes.
Shortly before the ambulance's arrival at 1.33 a.m., the deceased stopped breathing and subsequent efforts in hospital to revive her failed.
There was medical evidence that her life could have been saved had she arrived at hospital earlier.
The coroner was informed and directed that a post mortem examination be carried out.
The pathologist found that death was due to natural causes and that the cause of death was status asthmaticus.
The coroner refused to hold an inquest under section 8(1) of the Coroners Act 1988 on the ground that death was due to natural causes.
On an application by the deceased's mother for judicial review of the coroner's decision not to hold an inquest:—
Held , granting the application, that the coroner had wrongly precluded himself from considering whether the cause of death had been aggravated by lack of care; that where the medical cause of death was accompanied by concurrent events which themselves might be a cause of death, there was a case for considering the death ‘unnatural’ within the meaning of section 8(1) (a ) of the Coroners Act 1988, and an inquest should be held; that the statutory duty imposed by section 11(5) of the Act of 1988 to investigate how death occurred prevailed in any conflict with the provision in rule 42 of the Coroners Rules 1984 that verdicts should not be framed so as to appear to decide any issue of civil liability; that it was in the public interest to investigate by means of an inquest whether the deceased's death might have been avoided had an ambulance been available earlier; and that, accordingly, the coroner's decision not to hold an inquest would be quashed and an order of mandamus granted for an inquest to be held (post, pp. 491E, H, 493C–D, E–F).
Reg v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987]1 W.L.R. 1624, D.C. considered.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Tudor Evans J.:
Cozens v. Brutus [1973]A.C. 854;[1972]3 W.L.R. 521;[1972]2 All E.R.
1297, H.L. (E.)
Rapier, decd., In re [1988]Q.B.
26;[1986]3 W.L.R. 830;[1986]3 All E.R.
726, D.C.
Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987]1 W.L.R. 1624;[1987]2 All E.R.
140, D.C.
Reg. v. Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982]Q.B.
661;[1982]2 W.L.R. 626;[1982]2 All E.R.
545, D.C.
The following additional case was cited in argument:
Reg. v. Price (1884) 12 Q.B.D. 247
APPLICATION for judicial review.
Pursuant to leave granted by Webster J. on 25 October 1990, the applicant, Mrs. Doris Thomas, applied for judicial review by way of an order of mandamus to compel Her Majesty's Coroner for Poplar, Mr. Douglas Robert Chambers, to hold an inquest into the death of her daughter, Mavis Thomas.
She sought a declaration that the coroner had a duty to hold an inquest into the death.
She also sought an order of certiorari to quash the decision of the Attorney-General of 3 July 1990 refusing to give his authority under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for an application that the High Court make an order that a fresh inquest be held and a declaration that the Attorney-General had wrongly withheld his authority under section 13 of the Act of 1988.
The applicant sought relief on the grounds that (1) at the time the coroner took his original decision there was considerable evidence before him that the death would not have occurred but for delays experienced by the deceased's family in contacting the ambulance service and later delays by the ambulance service in responding to repeated calls by the police for an ambulance to come to take the deceased to hospital as a matter of urgency;(2) in reaching the conclusion that an inquest was unnecessary the coroner had misdirected himself in law for the reasons, inter alia, that (i) section 8(1) (a ) of the Coroners Act 1988 required a coroner to hold an inquest where there was ‘reasonable cause to suspect’ that the deceased had died a ‘violent or unnatural death;’(ii) there had been clear and uncontradicted evidence before the coroner that avoidable and culpable delays by the ambulance service might have been the reason why the deceased's asthma attack, which could have been treated in hospital, proved fatal, giving rise to a ‘reasonable cause to suspect’that the cause of the deceased's death was ‘unnatural;’and (iii) against that background, the coroner had erred in law in treating the pathologist's conclusion as conclusive and had either misdirected himself as to the meaning of ‘unnatural death’in section 8 of the Coroners Act 1988 or failed to apply the law properly to the facts of the case.
By consent, the Attorney-General withdrew from the proceedings at the start of the hearing.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Tudor Evans J. 
Edward Fitzgerald for the applicant.
Terence Coghlan for the coroner.
13 April.
TUDOR EVANS J. read the following judgment.
This is an application by Mrs. Doris Thomas with leave of the single judge for an order of mandamus to compel Mr. Douglas Robert Chambers, Her Majesty's Coroner for Poplar, to hold an inquest into the death of her daughter, Miss Mavis Thomas.
The Attorney-General was joined as a respondent to the application because he had declined to grant his fiat under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, but at the hearing he was released from the proceedings with the consent of all parties.
It was accepted that, notwithstanding the absence of a fiat, this court has a supervisory jurisdiction over the exercise of a coroner's duties pursuant to its powers under section 33(2) (b ) of the Act of 1988: see In re Rapier, decd .
[1988]Q.B.
26, 28–29.
There is no dispute as to the facts.
Miss Thomas was a life-long sufferer from asthma.
She had been advised by her doctor to seek admission to hospital in the event of a severe attack.
In the early hours of 9 April 1989 she developed such an attack.
Between 1.00 and 1.15 a.m. she asked her sister to summon an ambulance.
A neighbour who had a telephone dialled ‘999.’
She asked for the ambulance service.
A recorded message from the service told her: ‘There is no one here at present.
Please hold on and we will answer your call as soon as we can.’
This answer was repeated several times while the neighbour waited.
It was then decided to take Miss Thomas to hospital by car.
On the way she collapsed.
The car was stopped.
Miss Thomas was laid out on a pavement and the police were summoned from a nearby police station.
Miss Thomas was alive but unconscious.
While attempts were made to revive her, an officer in the street dialled ‘999,’ urgently requesting an ambulance.
This was probably at about 1.14 or 1.15 a.m.
There was a computer system at the police station for recording the times of telephone calls: the time of the call was logged at 1.16 a.m.
It would have taken a minute or so to operate the computer.
The ambulance did not attend.
The computer operator in the station made another call to the ambulance service telling them that the situation was very serious and asking for the estimated time of arrival of the ambulance.
This call was logged at 1.17 a.m.
The operator was told to expect the ambulance in five to seven minutes.
Another call was made at 1.32 a.m.
Meanwhile, Miss Thomas was breathing and a pulse was still discernible but, according to a statement from an inspector at the station, she stopped breathing a minute or so before an ambulance arrived at 1.33 a.m.
Miss Thomas was taken to the London Hospital arriving at 1.40 a.m. at which time there was no pulse and no respiratory effort.
Immediate attempts were made to resuscitate her; at one stage some electrical activity was restored to the heart but it proved of no avail.
There was no cardiac output and resuscitation was abandoned at 1.55 a.m.
According to a report dated 3 July 1989 from Mr. Alistair Wilson who was the accident and emergency consultant in charge at the hospital, there was a note made by the police that cardiac arrest occurred ‘at 12.21 a.m.’
This is clearly a mistake for 1.21 a.m. which is itself earlier than the time stated by the inspector.
In his report Mr. Wilson states:
‘There is no doubt that had Mavis Thomas arrived in the department prior to her cardiac arrest, then it is likely that she would not have died.
Had she arrived in the department within some five minutes of her cardiac arrest, it is much more likely that she would have been resuscitated…
It should be said that the fact that electrical activity was possible indicates that Miss Thomas had experienced the cardiac arrest a relatively short time prior to her arrival in the department and that at least some of the resuscitative effort performed by the police had been effective.
Annexed to the affidavit of the applicant's solicitor dated 17 March 1992 is a report from a consultant physician and cardiologist, Dr. Roy Davies.
He expresses the opinion that had Miss Thomas arrived at hospital before 1.32 a.m. she would almost certainly have been saved.
But the report from Dr. Davies is not agreed.
The coroner was informed of the death on 9 April 1989.
He had to decide whether or not to hold an inquest.
It is convenient at this stage of the narrative to set out what were the coroner's powers and duties.
They are contained in sections 8 and 19 of the Coroners Act 1988.
Section 8 provides:
‘(1) Where a coroner is informed that the body of a person (‘the deceased’) is lying within his district and there is reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased —(a ) has died a violent or an unnatural death;(b ) has died a sudden death of which the cause is unknown; or (c ) has died in prison or in such a place or in such circumstances as to require an inquest under any other Act, then…the coroner shall as soon as practicable hold an inquest into the death of the deceased either with or, subject to subsection (3) below, without a jury.
Section 19 provides:
‘(1) Where…there is reasonable cause to suspect that the person had died a sudden death of which the cause is unknown, the coroner may, if he is of opinion that a post-mortem examination may prove an inquest to be unnecessary —(a ) direct any legally qualified medical practitioner…to make a post mortem examination of the body and to report the result of the examination to the coroner in writing.
Section 19(4) preserves the duty in section 8(1) in these terms:
‘Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorising the coroner to dispense with an inquest in any case where there is reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased —(a ) has died a violent or an unnatural death; or (b ) has died in prison or in such a place or in such circumstances as to require an inquest under any other Act.
The coroner decided to exercise his powers under section 19(1).
The pathologist who carried out the post mortem reported that death was due to natural causes and that the cause of death was status asthmaticus which is a medical term for a prolonged asthmatic attack.
The coroner explains in paragraph 3 of his affidavit:
‘…
I was in complete agreement with the pathologist's view…that death resulting from status asthmaticus is death due to‘natural causes;’ and since there was nothing to suggest, in my opinion (then and now), that the death was ‘violent or unnatural,’or that it otherwise fell within the provisions of section 19(4) of the Act [of 1988], I was satisfied, in all the circumstances, that an inquest was unnecessary.
The coroner sent a copy of the pathologist's report to the deceased's family.
On 4 August 1989 solicitors acting on behalf of the relatives wrote to the coroner repeating the facts as I have summarised them and requesting that an inquest be held to inquire whether or not the death had been caused or aggravated by failures of the emergency services to respond to the calls and to attend in proper time.
On 11 August 1989 the coroner replied, declining to hold an inquest.
He wrote:
‘I have considered all the facts that you describe relating to the circumstances and they are substantially as in my officer's report to me about the death.
In my view they cannot alter the fact that the cause of death was status asthmaticus, a well known complication of asthma and sadly sometimes, as here, fatal.
As the pathologist's report describes, it is natural.
It follows from this letter that the facts are not in dispute.
On behalf of the applicant, Mr. Fitzgerald submitted that a death due to‘natural causes’ in the sense that it was caused by some naturally occurring disease, nevertheless becomes ‘an unnatural death’within the meaning of section 8(1) (a ) when it could and should have been prevented by the performance by some other person or authority of a duty owed by them to the deceased.
In such a case a coroner has a mandatory obligation to hold an inquest.
The crux of the applicant's argument is contained in a sentence from Thurston, Coronership , 3rd ed. (1985), at p. 82:
‘Whenever a death occurs as a result of a breach of another's duty of care to the deceased, the death is unnatural and the coroner is under a duty to investigate.
In support of his submission, Mr. Fitzgerald relied on the known verdict that a death by natural causes was aggravated by lack of care: see, for example,Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987]1 W.L.R. 1624.
Counsel maintained that in any situation where the facts, as here, would give rise to such a verdict, the death should be regarded as ‘unnatural’ within the meaning of section 8.
In paragraph 8(b) of his affidavit the coroner states that a verdict of natural causes aggravated by lack of care is relevant only if an inquest is held and that here he was concerned with the antecedent question whether an inquest should be held at all.
In paragraph 8(c) the coroner explained his reason for deciding that the death was by natural causes.
He said:
‘Whether or not the death was unnatural can often be a very difficult question to determine; but, in my view, in cases where the cause of death is status asthmaticus it is less difficult than in many other situations.
For, in the case of this condition, despite the advance of medical science, fatalities still continue to occur…
It is a condition, therefore, which has a considerable natural mortality.
In my view death resulting from it is a death by natural causes.
To illustrate this point further I should like to make the following points.
(i) As a result of the progress of medical science certain conditions are now so easily diagnosable and treatable, that, although they once carried a mortality, it can no longer be said that they do, unless that mortality is brought on as a result of some wholly unexpected and exceptional circumstance, for example gross negligence on the part of the doctor treating the patient.
Examples of such conditions, in the appropriate circumstances, would be strangulated herniae and ectopic pregnancies.
In the event of death occurring in such a case I would accept that it could be an unnatural death.
It follows from these passages from the coroner's affidavit that he did not consider whether it was appropriate to hold an inquest to investigate whether this was a case in which the cause of death was aggravated by lack of care.
Once he had obtained a post mortem report identifying the medical cause of death, that was taken to be the sole cause of death: the coroner reached the conclusion that there could be no other cause and so he precluded himself from considering lack of care as a cause.
It follows that the approach of the coroner was: whatever other facts there may be, whatever the impact on the cause of death of any extraneous supervening or concurrent event, the death must be regarded as ‘natural’ and an inquest will not be held, unless it qualifies, in the opinion of the coroner, as something equivalent to gross negligence, that is to say in effect, manslaughter either by act or by neglect.
Before I consider whether this is a valid approach and whether in this case the coroner applied the correct test when he decided, as he undoubtedly did, that any omission by the ambulance service was not relevant to the cause of death, I must refer to the submissions of Mr. Coghlan, counsel for the coroner.
Mr. Coghlan submitted that in cases of sudden death of which the cause is unknown, there are two stages in a coroner's investigation.
If he considers that an inquest may not be necessary, he may act under section 19(1).
On the other hand, if he has cause to suspect an unnatural death, he must hold an inquest under section 19(4) and section 8 then comes into play.
Providing a coroner has considered the result of a post mortem examination and he is satisfied that there is no reasonable cause to suspect an unnatural death, then he is entitled to proceed under section 19(1) and to decline to hold an inquest.
Counsel submitted that the question here is whether on the material before the coroner, including the post mortem report, there was reasonable suspicion of unnatural death.
Mr. Coghlan accepted that a verdict of death by natural causes aggravated by lack of care can be returned in accordance with Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987]1 W.L.R. 1624, but he submitted that section 19 of the Act of 1988 does not require a coroner to hold an inquest where he foresees that such a verdict is possible.
The result of this submission together with the passages from the coroner's affidavit which I have read is, he says, to permit a coroner to ignore other evidence as a possible concurrent cause of death unless, as I have said, such evidence is of an exceptional nature.
It was further submitted by Mr. Coghlan that it is important in this field that the law should be clear and simple: it is for a coroner to ask himself on any given state of fact whether he would describe the death as unnatural or not.
In answering this question, the coroner must use the ordinary and ‘natural’ meaning of the word and act accordingly.
Thus it is a question of fact for the coroner to decide whether a death is natural or not natural and it is therefore for him to decide whether an inquest should be held.
Mr. Fitzgerald submitted that the meaning of the word ‘unnatural’ is a question of law.
In his skeleton argument, although of course we did not hear it developed, the Attorney-General contended that it is a mixed question of law and fact.
In support of his argument, Mr. Coghlan relied on Cozens v. Brutus [1973]A.C. 854, a case in which it was held in the House of Lords that the meaning of the word ‘insulting’ used in section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936 was not a matter of law but a matter of fact.
Lord Reid said, at p. 861:
‘The meaning of an ordinary word of the English language is not a question of law.
The proper construction of a statute is a question of law.
If the context shows that a word is used in an unusual sense the court will determine in other words what that unusual sense is.
But here there is in my opinion no question of the word ‘insulting’ being used in any unusual sense.
It appears to me, for reasons which I shall give later, to be intended to have its ordinary meaning.
It is for the tribunal which decides the case to consider, not as law but as fact, whether in the whole circumstances the words of the statute do or do not as a matter of ordinary usage of the English language cover or apply to the facts which have been proved.
If it is alleged that the tribunal has reached a wrong decision then there can be a question of law but only of a limited character.
The question would normally be whether their decision was unreasonable in the sense that no tribunal acquainted with the ordinary use of language could reasonably reach that decision.
Thus it was submitted that the question whether the death was in this case natural or unnatural was a matter exclusively for the coroner whose decision can be reviewed only on the basis that no coroner could reasonably have reached the conclusion arrived at here.
In my opinion the approach adopted by the coroner to the question whether an inquest should be held in this case was not correct.
He did not ask himself, as in my view he ought, whether on the undisputed evidence this might be a case for a verdict of death aggravated by lack of care.
He was, in my opinion, in error to exclude the possibility of holding an inquest by concentrating on the medical cause of death to the exclusion of all other evidence.
It was submitted by Mr. Coghlan that the coroner had no jurisdiction to hold an inquest unless the death could be described as ‘an unnatural death.’
It was contended that the decision in Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987]1 W.L.R. 1624 does not assist.
That was a case involving a death in prison and an inquest had to be held by reason of section 3(1) of the Coroners Act 1887 (50 & 51 Vict. c. 71).
In other words it is said that a verdict of death aggravated by lack of care may be appropriate once there is an inquest but the availability of such a verdict does not determine the question whether or not there should be an inquest.
Whether there should be an inquest turns solely on whether the death was ‘unnatural.’
In my opinion, where the medical cause of death is accompanied by concurrent events which themselves may be a cause of death, then there is a case for considering that the death is ‘unnatural’ and an inquest should be held.
The coroner himself conceded that the intervention of a wholly unexpected and exceptional circumstance might make the death ‘unnatural.’
He therefore accepts that non-medical causes may turn a ‘natural’ death into an ‘unnatural’one.
But the forms of inquisition themselves envisage that an inquest might be held where a possible verdict is one of ‘natural causes aggravated by lack of care.’
In Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987]1 W.L.R. 1624, Croom-Johnson L.J.
pointed out, at p. 1632:
‘In the Schedule to the Act of 1887 there are found, for the first time in a statute, suggested forms of inquisition or verdict.
One deals with ‘lack of care’ in that a failure to fence a pond resulted in a verdict of such negligence as to justify a verdict of manslaughter.
This form is preserved in Schedule 4 to the Coroners Rules 1984.
In the notes to Form 22 in the Schedule, which deals with inquisitions, it is suggested that in cases, inter alia, of death from natural causes, where appropriate the words ‘and the cause of death was aggravated by lack of care’ may be added.
Thus a verdict at an inquest of natural causes aggravated by lack of care has been available for many years.
Form 22 itself indicates that it is appropriate to hold an inquest in a case of death by natural causes.
The recommendations in Form 22 lack legal force but they are a part of a long-standing history in which such verdicts have been recorded.
In Jervis on Coroners , 10th ed. (1986), p. 196 under the title ‘Self-neglect or lack of care’ there are collected in a footnote a number of modern cases in which verdicts ‘aggravated by lack of care’have been returned.
In the Hicks case [1987]1 W.L.R. 1624 the court held that a verdict of lack of care was permissible.
Croom-Johnson L.J.
said, at pp. 1633–1634:
‘Mr. Fitzgerald… submitted that the lack of care which could form the basis of the verdict could be a legitimate method used by the jury of expressing a view that there was a culpable breach by someone of a legal or moral duty to take care of the deceased which would be distinct from the general duty of care on which the modern law of negligence is based.
…There is no need to presuppose the existence of such a range of duties.
What the verdict of ‘lack of care’ presupposes is that some other persons had at least the opportunity of rendering care (in the narrow sense of that word) which would have prevented the death.
There is no need to go beyond that, although in many circumstances such persons would have had a duty, either legal or moral.
The opportunity should have been a real opportunity of doing something effective.
Moreover, it is clear that a verdict of death aggravated by the lack of care may be a ‘free-standing’ verdict.
In the Hicks case Croom-Johnson L.J.
speaking of verdicts of lack of care said, at p. 1634:
‘It may be a ‘free-standing’ verdict, on its own.
Self-neglect is, after all, a free-standing verdict: see Reg. v. Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982]Q.B.
661, 676.
For the reasons I have given and subject to one or two further points, I would let mandamus go and order the coroner to hold an inquest.
It is a matter for the coroner to decide whether the inquest should be held with a jury: section 19(3) (d ) of the Act of 1988 might suggest that a jury is appropriate in this case.
In paragraph 8(d) (i) and (ii) of his affidavit, the coroner expresses an understandable anxiety that inquests should not be used as a medium for testing out evidence for subsequent civil litigation.
He states:
‘There was every reason for me to suspect that the present was just such a case: the medical cause of the death was perfectly well known to the family — indeed I had sent them a copy of the pathologist's report.
Equally they were as well placed as anyone to know about the extent of the delays by the emergency services.
They were therefore in possession of all the necessary material facts to enable them to make a complaint a civil claim if they so wished.
To insist upon the inquest in these circumstances could only have been for the purpose of procuring a rapping over the knuckles in public of that authority and/or a convenient means of obtaining evidence for a subsequent claim against it.
I do not consider those to be proper reasons for the holding of an inquest.
The evidence shows that this may well be a case in which failures by the ambulance service to provide an ambulance more quickly to a person who was in extremis was a cause of the death which might have been avoidable if the ambulance had been available earlier.
In my view, in these circumstances, there is a clear public interest that the facts should be investigated by means of an inquest.
Moreover, there is a statutory duty to investigate ‘how’ the death occurred.
Section 11(5) of the Act of 1988 provides:
‘An inquisition…(b ) shall set out, so far as such particulars have been proved —(i) who the deceased was; and (ii) how, when and where the deceased came by his death…
The language of rule 36 of the Coroners Rules 1984 is to the same effect.
It is, for the reasons I have given, not sufficient in this case to point to the medical cause of death alone when considering the question ‘how.’
It is true that rule 42 of the Rules provides: ‘No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question of —…(b ) civil liability.’
But any conflict between this rule and the duty to inquire ‘how’ the deceased came by his death must be decided in favour of the  statutory duty.
In Reg. v. Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982]Q.B.
661, 676, Watkins L.J.
said:
‘Such conflict as may in any given circumstance appear to arise between rule 33’— of the Coroners Rules 1953, the equivalent of the present rule 42 —‘and the duty to inquire ‘how’ must be resolved in favour of the statutory duty to inquire whatever the consequences of this may be.
In Campbell 's case, at p. 676, Watkins L.J.
quoted with approval a passage in Jervis on Coroners , 9th ed. (1957), p. 179, now to be found in the 10th ed. p. 197, that any conflict between a verdict of lack of care and rule 33 of the Coroners Rules 1953, now rule 42 of the Rules of 1984, can be obviated by making sure that the verdict does not state that the death was aggravated by the lack of care of any particular person or persons but merely states that it was aggravated by lack of care.
Watkins L.J.
said, at p. 676:
‘We agree with this comment.
A verdict of ‘lack of care by another or others’ without more is clearly one which a jury is competent to find if the evidence warrants it without transgressing rule 33.
The final question which arises is whether, in the exercise of our discretion, we should let mandamus go bearing in mind that the events with which we are concerned occurred as long ago as 1989 and then occupied no more than perhaps three quarters of an hour.
In paragraph 12 of his affidavit, the coroner doubts whether it is now possible to hold a fair and useful inquest.
In my view, despite the passage of time, the evidence is not likely to have run cold.
There are police records of the times and frequency of the calls to the ambulance service.
There are likely to be ambulance records.
The deceased's sister and the neighbour who made the telephone calls were present throughout and they made statements to the police.
There are statements from police officers who were involved.
In these circumstances I consider that a fair and useful inquest can be held.
For the reasons I have given I would grant the application.
WATKINS L.J.
I agree.
Application granted.
Solicitors: Deighton Guedalla; Hempsons.
[Reported by JOHN SPENCER ESQ., Barrister]