

[COURT OF APPEAL]
In re A. (MINORS)(ABDUCTION: CUSTODY RIGHTS)(No. 2)
1992 May 11
Sir Stephen Brown P., Staughton and Scott L.JJ.
Children — Custody — Enforcement — Mother removing children from Australia without father's knowledge in breach of joint custody rights — Father acquiescing in children's removal — Father's subsequent application for children's return — Judge refusing to make order in interests of children — Whether children's interests to be considered in court's exercise of discretion — Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985 (c. 60), Sch.
1, art.
13(a)
The parties, who had left the United Kingdom to settle in Australia, married there and had two children.
They separated and, on their joint application for divorce, the Family Court of Australia granted a decree nisi and expressed itself satisfied that proper arrangements had been made for the children's welfare, namely, that they would live with their mother during the week and be supervised by the father at weekends.
After the decree absolute had been granted, the mother, contrary to article 3 of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction set out in Schedule 1 to the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985, removed the children to England without the father's knowledge.
In proceedings under the Convention for the return of the children to Australia, the court ordered that the children be returned but, on appeal, the Court of Appeal held that the father had acquiesced in the removal of the children within the meaning of article 13 (a ) and remitted the case to the Family Division.
Booth J., in exercising her discretion under article 13, considered the interests of the children and refused to order their return to Australia.
On appeal by the father:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that once the father had acquiesced in the removal of the children within the meaning of article 13 (a ), the court in the exercise of its discretion under that article was entitled to take into account the interests of the children even though there was no grave risk to them if they were returned to their place of residence within the meaning of article 13 (b ); but that, under article 13 (a ), the children's interests were not paramount and had to be balanced against the purpose of the Convention, which was the return of children wrongfully removed within the meaning of article 3; and that, accordingly, the judge had rightly considered the children's interests when exercising her discretion under article 13 (post, pp. 546G — 547E, F–G, 548G — 549A).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Sir Stephen Brown P.:
A. (Minors)(Abduction: Custody Rights), In re [1992]Fam. 106;[1992]2 W.L.R. 536;[1992]1 All E.R.
929, C.A.
H. (Minors)(Abduction: Custody Rights), In re [1991]2 A.C. 476;[1991]3 W.L.R. 68;[1991]3 All E.R.
230, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
C. v. C. (Abduction: Rights of Custody)[1989]1 W.L.R. 654;[1989]2 All E.R.
465, C.A.
F. (A Minor)(Abduction: Custody Rights), In re [1991]Fam. 25;[1990]3 W.L.R. 1272;[1990]3 All E.R.
97, C.A.
S. (A Minor)(Abduction), In re [1991]2 F.L.R. 1, C.A.
APPEAL from Booth J.
On 5 December 1991 the father applied for an order that his two children be returned to the jurisdiction of the State of Victoria, Australia, on the ground that the mother had taken them without his consent in breach of the joint custodial rights vested in him under the Australian Family Law Act 1975.
On 21 December 1991 Thorpe J. made the order sought.
The mother appealed.
The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal on the ground that the father had acquiesced in the removal or retention of the children by the mother within the meaning of article 13 of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction contained in Schedule 1 to the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985.
The Court of Appeal remitted the matter to a judge of the Family Division: see In re A. (Minors)(Abduction: Custody Rights)[1992]Fam. 106.
On 3 April 1992, following a hearing in chambers, Booth J. refused to order the children's return to the State of Victoria.
By notice of appeal dated 22 April 1992 the father appealed on the grounds, inter alia, that (1) the judge was wrong in law to reject the submission that any consideration of the children's welfare in the context of a judicial discretion under article 13 (a ) of the Convention was relevant only as a material factor if it met the test of placing the children in an ‘intolerable situation’ under article 13 (b );(2) the judge should have limited considerations of welfare to the criteria for welfare laid down by the Convention itself;(3) the judge was wrong in law to reject the submission that in the context of the exercise of the discretion permitted by article 13 (a ) the court was limited to a consideration of the nature and quality of the father's acquiescence (as found by the Court of Appeal);(4) in the premises, despite her acknowledgment that the exercise of her discretion had to be seen in the context of the Convention, the judge exercised a discretion based on a welfare test appropriate to wardship proceedings;(5) the judge was further in error as a matter of law in not perceiving as the starting point for the exercise of her discretion the proposition that under the Convention the future of the children should be decided in the courts of the state from which they had been wrongfully removed;(6) the judge, having found that on the ability to determine the issue between the parents there was little to choose between the Family Court of Australia and the High Court of England, was wrong not to conclude that as a consequence the mother had failed to displace the fundamental premise of the Convention that the future of the children should be decided in the courts of the country from which they had been wrongfully removed;(7) the judge also misdirected herself when considering which court should decide the future of the children (a) by applying considerations more appropriate to the doctrine of forum conveniens and (b) by having regard to the likely outcome of the hearing in that court contrary to the principles set out in In re F. (A Minor)(Abduction: Custody Rights)[1991]Fam. 25;(8) in the alternative, if the judge was right to apply the forum conveniens approach, she failed to have regard to the following facts and matters:(a) that the parties were married in Australia;(b) that the parties had spent the majority of their married life in Australia;(c) that the children were born in Australia and were Australian citizens;(d) that the children had spent the majority of their lives in Australia;(e) the matters referred to in ground (9);(9) in any event on the facts the judge was wrong to find that there was little to choose between the Family Court of Australia and the High Court of England as fora for deciding the children's future;(11) the judge was wrong on the facts to find that there had been a change in the circumstances to which the mother would be returning in Australia given the findings made by Thorpe J. that (a) the former matrimonial home was to be sold;(b) it would be unavailable for occupation by the mother and the children after 7 February 1992; and (c) there would be no financial support for the mother other than state benefits: matters which neither Thorpe J. nor the Court of Appeal found amounted to ‘an intolerable situation.’
The facts are stated in the judgment of Sir Stephen Brown P. 
Nicholas Wall Q.C.
and Mark Everall for the father.
Ian Karsten Q.C.
and Lord Meston for the mother.
SIR STEPHEN BROWN P. This is an appeal from a decision of Booth J. of 3 April 1992.
She then dismissed an originating summons under the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985, Schedule 1 (the Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction), declining to order that two children, who had been wrongfully removed from Australia to this country by their mother, should be returned to the jurisdiction of the State of Victoria, Australia.
The case has a somewhat unusual history, for this is the second hearing in this court concerning this case.
The two children are boys who were living with their parents in Australia until September 1991.
The mother was born in England, but subsequently acquired Australian citizenship.
The father was born in Northern Ireland and he also has now acquired Australian citizenship.
After the parents met they eventually emigrated to Australia, and were married there in 1983.
The elder boy was born on 2 September 1985 and the younger on 28 February 1987.
They are therefore now aged six years and five years respectively.
In February 1988 the mother came to England for a holiday with the children.
She informed the father after she had reached England that she wished to remain in England with the children permanently.
The husband came to England to seek to persuade her to return but did not then succeed.
Although she subsequently indicated that she intended to institute divorce proceedings, the mother subsequently returned to Australia after the husband had paid a second visit to England.
In fact they returned together in September 1989.
They then acquired a matrimonial home with a mortgage, but finally separated in July 1990.
The father meanwhile commenced an association with another woman, and the mother formed the intention of leaving Australia to return to England when it should be possible.
In July 1991 the mother and father made a joint application for divorce in Australia.
In her petition the mother stated that she considered Australia to be her permanent home.
A decree nisi of divorce was pronounced in the Family Court of Australia in August 1991 and the decree was made absolute on 13 September 1991.
By agreement between the parties the mother had the care of the boys.
That was not a matter of dispute.
The father exercised regular access and on the weekend before the mother left Australia he had the normal access to the children.
On 18 September 1991 the mother wrongfully removed the children from Australia and brought them to England.
It was never in dispute that her action in removing them from Australia was unlawful in the context of article 3 of the Convention.
On 23 September 1991 the father wrote a letter to the mother.
In February 1992 the Court of Appeal held that the terms of this letter constituted ‘acquiescence’ by the father within the meaning of article 13 of the Convention.
Subsequently, and very shortly after having written that letter, the father sought legal advice in Australia and then took the steps which eventually led to the issue of this originating summons.
The Attorney-General's Department in Australia (the central authority of that country) submitted a request for the return of the children to the central authority of the United Kingdom, and the originating summons was duly issued on 5 December 1991.
By the originating summons the father sought the immediate return of the children to Australia.
Before the originating summons was served upon the mother the father had not made her aware of his intention to ‘go back’ upon his letter of 23 September 1991 in which he had said that he did not intend to seek to have the children returned to Australia.
In the meanwhile she took steps to settle in this country and the children were sent to school here.
The matter came before Thorpe J. on 20 December 1991.
The father sought the return of the children to the jurisdiction of Australia under the provisions of the Convention.
It was conceded that their removal by the mother was wrongful within the terms of article 3 and accordingly the court had to consider the terms of article 12 which provides:
‘Where a child has been wrongfully removed or retained in terms of article 3 and, at the date of the commencement of the proceedings before the judicial or administrative authority of the contracting state where the child is, a period of less than one year has elapsed from the date of the wrongful removal or retention, the authority concerned shall order the return of the child forthwith.
The mother sought to rely upon the ‘exception’ which is contained within article 13.
Article 13 provides:
‘Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding article, the judicial or administrative authority of the requested state is not bound to order the return of the child if the person, institution or other body which opposes its return establishes that —(a ) the person, institution or other body having the care of the person of the child was not actually exercising the custody rights at the time of removal or retention, or had consented to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or retention; or (b ) there is a grave risk that his or her return would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.…
The mother sought to establish that the father had ‘subsequently acquiesced’ in the removal of the children by her to England and their retention in England.
She relied upon the terms of his letter of 23 September 1991.
I need not recite the terms of that letter, which is set out in full in the judgment of Balcombe L.J.
Fam. 106, 111–112 at the previous hearing of this case in the Court of Appeal: see [1992].
The judge also had to consider a submission made by the mother that the return of the children (if ordered) would expose them to a ‘grave risk of physical or psychological harm or place them in an intolerable situation’ within the terms of paragraph (b ) of article 13.
Thorpe J. decided that the mother had not established that the father had acquiesced in the removal or retention of the children.
He further decided that she had not established a grave risk that the return of the children would expose them to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place them in an intolerable situation, and he ordered their return to Australia pursuant to the provisions of article 12 of the Hague Convention.
The mother appealed to the Court of Appeal, submitting that the judge was in error in having found that the father had not subsequently acquiesced in the removal or subsequent retention of the children within the meaning of article 13 (a ) of the Convention.
She sought also to argue that he was in error in failing to decide that she had established a grave risk that they would be exposed to physical or psychological harm or otherwise placed in an intolerable situation if their return were to be ordered.
The Court of Appeal by a majority (Balcombe L.J.
dissenting) held that the evidence established that the father had subsequently acquiesced in the wrongful removal or retention of the children in this country by the mother, and ordered that the case should be remitted to a judge of the High Court for consideration of the exercise of the discretion which accordingly arose under article 13 as to whether he should decline to order that they be returned to the jurisdiction of the Australian court.
It was in these circumstances that the matter came before Booth J. on 3 April 1992.
In a reserved judgment Booth J. decided in the exercise of her discretion that she would decline to order the return of the children to Australia.
In her judgment Booth J. said:
‘In my judgment the interests of the children are now to be taken into account and to be considered in relation to all the circumstances of the case including in relation to the general desirability that children wrongfully removed from their place of habitual residence should be returned.
It is clearly for the mother in this case to establish to the court that the interests of the children lie in their remaining in England, and that their future can appropriately be determined here so that it would be proper to allow those matters to prevail over the purpose and philosophy of the Convention.
But I do not accept the submission of Mr. Everall’— who appeared for the father —‘that she should go so far as to establish that by their return they would be exposed to a grave risk of harm to bring them within the ambit of article 13 (b ).
Once the discretion arises it is for the court to conduct the necessary balancing exercise between what would otherwise be required by the Convention and the interests of the children, but only where it can clearly be shown that the interests of the children require it should the court refuse to order their return.
In all the circumstances of this case I have come to the conclusion that on balance the children's interests are better served by their being allowed to remain in England pending a determination by the High Court, in the exercise of its wardship jurisdiction, as to their future and whether it be in England or Australia.
I therefore dismiss the father's application.
It is against that decision that the father now appeals.
In his notice of appeal he contends that the judge was wrong in law to reject the submission made on his behalf that any consideration of the welfare of the children in the context of the exercise of a judicial discretion under article 13 (a ) of the Convention was only relevant as a material factor if it meant placing the children in an intolerable situation under article 13 (b ).
He further contends by ground (2) of his notice of appeal that the failure of the judge to perceive the limitations imposed on her discretion in the context of the Convention led her to reject the proposition that the elements necessary to the exercise of that discretion have to exist within the framework laid down by the Convention itself.
Thus her conclusion that ‘Once the discretion arises it is for the court to conduct the necessary balancing exercise between what would otherwise be required by the Convention and the interests of the children’ is wrong in law and fatal to a proper exercise of a discretion under the Convention because it predicates that matters relating to the welfare of children falling outside the ambit of the criteria laid down by the Convention itself are relevant to the exercise of the discretion.
Accordingly the judge should have limited considerations of welfare to the criteria for ‘welfare’ laid down by the Convention itself.
In his well argued submissions Mr. Wall submitted that the discretion conferred on the court by article 13 (a ) of the Convention is a discretion to be exercised (a) within the context of the purpose and principles laid down by the Convention and (b) by applying the criteria contained within the Convention itself, and that it is accordingly not a discretion to exercise the inherent jurisdiction of the court in wardship or under the Children Act 1989 so as to act in what the court perceives to be the best interests of the child.
He argued that the exercise of the discretion must be considered in relation to, and in the context of, the scope and purpose of the Convention, which is set out in article 1 of the Convention.
He referred to the citation of article 1 by Lord Brandon of Oakbrook in his speech in In re H. (Minors)(Abduction: Custody Rights)[1991]2 A.C. 476, 494:
‘The objects of the present Convention are —(a) to secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in any contracting state; and (b) to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the law of one contracting state are effectively respected in the other contracting states.
Mr. Wall argued that the exercise of the discretion which arises as a result of the finding of ‘acquiescence’ made by the Court of Appeal, is limited to considering the nature and quality of the acquiescence itself and would not entitle the court to take into account ‘welfare’considerations relating specifically to the children unless the court were able to find that there had been established a grave risk that the return of the children would expose them to an intolerable situation under article 13 (b ).
Mr. Wall submitted that the judge was therefore wrong to take into account circumstances appertaining to the ‘welfare’ of the children.
The interests of the children in the welfare context, he said, were irrelevant to the consideration of the exercise of discretion by the judge.
He emphasised the purpose of the Convention as cited by Lord Brandon of Oakbrook.
He submits that the court is simply not entitled to do what Booth J. did — that is to say, to consider the interests of the children in relation to all the circumstances of the case.
He referred to a passage in the judgment of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. in the earlier appeal [1992]Fam. 106, 122–123.
Lord Donaldson M.R. said:
‘In the comparatively rare case in which such a judicial discretion falls to be exercised, there will be two distinct and wholly different issues confronting the court.
(1) In all the circumstances is it more appropriate that a court of the country to which a child has been wrongfully removed or in which it is being wrongfully retained (country B)’— in this case one can say England —‘should reach decisions and make orders with a view to its welfare or is it more appropriate that this should be done by a court of the country from which it was removed or to which its return has been wrongfully prevented ([Australia])?(2) If, but only if, the answer to the first question is that the court of [England]is the more appropriate court, should that court give any consideration whatsoever to what further orders should be made other than for the immediate return of the child to [Australia]and for ensuring its welfare pending the resumption or assumption of jurisdiction by the courts of that country?
‘In considering the first issue, the court of [England]should approach the matter by giving the fullest force to the policy which clearly underlies the Convention and the Act, namely that wrongful removal or retention shall not confer any benefit or advantage on the person (usually a parent) who has committed the wrongful act.
It is only if the interests of the child render it appropriate that the courts of [England]rather than[Australia]shall determine its future that there can be any exception to an order for its return.
This is something quite different from a consideration of whether the best interests of the child will be served by its living in [England]rather than[Australia].
That is not the issue unless paragraph (b ) of article 13 applies.
The issue is whether decisions in the best interests of the child shall be taken by one court rather than another.
If, as usually should be the case, the courts of [England]decide to return the child to the jurisdiction of the courts of [Australia], the latter courts will be in no way inhibited from giving permission for the child to return to [England]or indeed becoming settled there and so subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of that country.
But that will be a matter for the courts of [Australia].
Mr. Wall prays in aid that passage in the judgment of Lord Donaldson M.R. in support of his submission that it is only in the event of the court in this country finding that article 13 (b ) is applicable to the case that it can properly consider the ‘welfare interests’ of the child in deciding whether to decline to order the return of the child to Australia.
This court has been told that unfortunately there had been no argument about that particular matter in the course of the hearing of the first appeal.
Mr. Karsten submits that on the face of it that passage in the judgment of Lord Donaldson M.R. should be considered as obiter, but in any event he submits that it does not bear the meaning contended for by Mr. Wall.
Mr. Karsten submitted that once the mandatory effect of article 12 has been relaxed by a finding under article 13, either under sub-paragraph (a ) or sub-paragraph (b ), this gives rise to the exercise of a discretion by the court.
The court is then entitled to take into consideration all relevant matters.
He submitted that whilst it is relevant that the overall purpose and philosophy of the Convention should be borne in mind, nevertheless it is appropriate for the court to consider matters relating to the interests of the children.
Once acquiescence has been established, it is not appropriate to restrict the court's discretion to consideration of the degree of the acquiescence.
Once the door has been ‘unlocked,’ he submits the court should be obliged to consider whether it is appropriate in all the circumstances to decline to order the return of the children to the country from which they have been wrongfully removed.
In this case I am satisfied that Booth J. did have a discretion to take into account the interests of the children.
Support for that view is to be found in the final paragraph of article 13:
‘In considering the circumstances referred to in this article, the judicial and administrative authorities shall take into account the information relating to the social background of the child provided by the central authority or other competent authority and the child's habitual residence.
That paragraph suggests that it is appropriate for the court to consider the welfare interests of the child or children.
In this case Booth J. considered the circumstances which followed the receipt of the letter of 23 September 1991 from the father, which the Court of Appeal held constituted acquiescence by him in the removal or retention of the children.
Booth J. said:
‘Since the judgment of Thorpe J., the former matrimonial home in Victoria has been sold leaving the parents with a financial shortfall.
The mother would have to rent a property for herself and the boys if she were not to accept the offer of rent-free accommodation for a month with a friend of the father.
Nor is the father, who is currently unemployed, able to offer any maintenance or other form of support, so that she and the boys would be dependent upon state benefits.
While in the long term the mother may well be able to obtain employment in Australia, as she has done in the past, understandably it would not be her wish or intention to do so in the short-term.
She further said:
‘…
I accept [counsel's]submission that it is relevant for this court to have regard to the fact that in Australia there is no longer any home or any financial support for the mother and for the boys, a situation for which the mother bears no greater responsibility than the father.
‘I turn to consider which court would be the most appropriate to make long-term decisions as to the future of the children.
In the event that the children were to return, the issue before the Family Court in Australia would arise upon the mother's application for leave to remove them permanently from the State of Victoria to bring them back to live with her in this country.
The same issue would be before the English court.
It is not the father's wish or intention to seek the care of the children provided that they live with the mother in Australia.
He seeks to restore the status quo as it was between July 1990 and September 1991 and as it was confirmed by the Australian court in the divorce proceedings.
The father does not challenge the mother's parenting abilities or impugn her capacity as a good mother.
But he wishes the children, both of whom were born in Australia, to be brought up in that country where he will be content with access to them.
It is their long-term removal to England to which he objects.
‘As to the ability to determine that issue between the parents, it appears to me that there is little to choose between the family court in England and that in Australia.
There is no contentious issue between the parties as to the suitability of the mother to look after the children or as to the suitability of the father to have contact with them.
There is also no suggestion in any of the evidence that the mother would forego her responsibilities as a mother and would be prepared to leave the children in Australia and come to England without them.
It is simply her case that they would be better off with her in England rather than without her in Australia.
The circumstances in England as to housing and education can be made known to the Australian court as can those circumstances in Australia be made known to the English court without the necessity in either case of calling oral evidence.
In either case welfare reports could be made available through the international service.
In Australia the mother would be entitled to legal aid, as in England the father would be so entitled.
It appears that the mother would be eligible for financial assistance in returning with the children to Australia, whereas the father and the lady with whom he now lives would have to fund their own travel arrangements to England and to that extent the father would be disadvantaged.
Difficult though it would undoubtedly be for him I do not understand it to be said on his behalf that it would be impossible.
I am satisfied, therefore, that the issue which arises for determination, that is whether it is in the children's interests that the mother should be permitted to live with them in England or whether they should be brought up in Australia where they could have more frequent contact with their father, may properly be determined in either court.
‘If this matter rested solely upon the question of the best interests of the children I should have no doubt whatever that their welfare would be better served by their remaining in England in order that their future be determined by the High Court here.
They have already had many changes of home in their comparatively short lives and it would unquestionably confuse and disturb them to leave England now only to return again in a matter of months should the Australian Family Court consider it right that they should make their home here.
The uncertainty brought about by further litigation in Australia would now be compounded by the fact that they no longer have any home there to which to return.
‘But in exercising discretion under article 13 (a ) of the Convention, I have to balance my findings as to the interests of the children and the detriment which I am satisfied would befall them were I to order their return, against the fundamental purpose of the Convention which is to ensure as far as possible that children wrongfully removed from the place of their habitual residence are returned there as soon as possible…
She concluded by saying:
‘In my judgment the interests of the children are now to be taken into account and to be considered in relation to all the circumstances of the case including in relation to the general desirability that children wrongfully removed from their place of habitual residence should be returned.
It is clearly for the mother in this case to establish to the court that the interests of the children lie in their remaining in England, and that their future can appropriately be determined here so that it would be proper to allow those matters to prevail over the purpose and philosophy of the Convention.
In my judgment the judge was fully entitled to take into account the matters which she there expressed.
She carried out the balancing exercise.
She took into account the overall purpose and philosophy of the Convention.
In my judgment she was entitled to consider the welfare interests of the children after the court had found that there had been acquiescence on the part of the father within the meaning of article 13 (a ).
I do not believe that Mr. Wall's submission that the welfare of the children could only be taken into account if the terms of article 13 (b ) had been established is a correct analysis of the position.
In this case the finding that the father had acquiesced in the removal and/or retention of the children in England made it appropriate for the court to consider whether to decline to order the return of the children.
In my judgment it was appropriate for the judge to take into account the interests of the children.
I believe that on the evidence before her she came to a conclusion which was well within her discretion.
I do not consider that it has been shown that she exercised her discretion inappropriately or wrongly.
Accordingly I would dismiss this appeal.
STAUGHTON L.J.
I agree that the discretion under article 13 (a ) is not limited in the way that Mr. Wall submits.
If there had been no question of acquiescence in this case, these children would have been returned to Australia pursuant to the order of Thorpe J. shortly after it was made on 20 December 1991.
Because there was acquiescence, they are still here today on 11 May 1992.
They have, no doubt, been adapting themselves to their new home, to a different country and to their new school.
These children, aged six and five, have already had four major moves in their lives, first from Australia to England, then from England to Australia, then from the matrimonial home in Frankston to the mothers' unit in Mornington, and finally from there back to England again.
The judge was entitled to conclude, as she did, that it would be wrong for the court to order that they should be moved once more to Australia with the possibility of yet a further move back again.
That, as it seems to me, was an important feature in the judge's judgment; and I think that she was right to attach importance to it.
I would dismiss this appeal.
SCOTT L.J.
I too agree.
This appeal turns on a short point of principle arising under the Convention, the terms of which are set out in Schedule 1 to the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985.
It is common ground that the mother's removal of the two boys from Australia to England on 18 September 1991 was a wrongful removal for the purposes of article 3 of the Convention.
It has been established by the judgment of this court given on 3 February 1992 that by a letter to the mother, dated 23 September 1991, the father expressed his acquiescence in the removal.
Article 12 of the Convention requires, prima facie, the mandatory return forthwith of a child who has been wrongfully removed, but article 13, by reason of the Court of Appeal decision to which I have referred, also applies in this case.
So it is common ground that the question whether or not the boys should be returned to Australia depends upon the discretion of the court.
Their return is not mandatory.
The discretion was exercised by Booth J. She took into account various matters relating to the interests of the boys and concluded that she should not order their return to Australia.
The father appeals.
He contends, by Mr. Wall, that Booth J. in taking into account various matters regarding the boys' welfare, misdirected herself.
He submits that matters regarding their welfare can only be taken into account on the exercise of discretion under article 13 if they establish the criterion to be found in article 13 (b ), i.e., that there is a grave risk that their return would expose them to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place them in an intolerable situation.
In my judgment this submission cannot be accepted.
Paragraphs (a ) and (b ) of article 13 are alternative, not cumulative.
Either paragraph, if satisfied, suffices to open the door to an exercise of discretion as to whether or not to order the return of the child in question.
In exercising the discretion contemplated by article 13, and contemplated by the Convention itself, it is right, in my opinion, for the judge to bear in mind that the object of the Convention is to discourage and prevent the abduction of children.
In the present case Booth J. did take that into account.
But she placed in the balance also the interests of the children.
She said in her judgment:
‘in exercising discretion under article 13 (a ) of the Convention, I have to balance my findings as to the interests of the children and the detriment which I am satisfied would befall them were I to order their return, against the fundamental purpose of the Convention which is to ensure as far as possible that children wrongfully removed from the place of their habitual residence are returned there as soon as possible, and the fact that the Australian court has already been seized with their welfare in the context of the divorce proceedings.
She found that, in the case before her, the balance came down against ordering the return of the children to Australia.
I need not cite the passage that contains that finding because Sir Stephen Brown P. has already cited it.
But the above passage constitutes, in my judgment, an approach to the exercise of discretion which cannot be faulted.
The question for the court in any case where the discretion falls to be exercised, one or other of the gateways provided by article 13 having been opened, is whether or not the child or children should be returned to the jurisdiction from which they have been wrongfully removed.
It is impossible, in my judgment, in answering that question, whether the gateway is paragraph (a ) or whether it is paragraph (b ), to exclude consideration of the interests of the children.
The final paragraph of article 13 shows conclusively, in my judgment, that that is so.
It requires to be taken into account ‘information relating to the social background of the child.’
The taking into account of the interests of the children need not, for article 13 purposes, treat their interests or welfare as the paramount consideration, as would be necessary under section 1 of the Children Act 1989.
But to contend, as does Mr. Wall, that the consideration of their interests cannot be taken into account at all unless the criterion to be found in paragraph (b ) of article 13 is satisfied is, in my judgment, unwarranted by anything in the language of the Convention and unwarranted in principle.
The interests of the children, although not necessarily the paramount consideration, must, in my opinion, always be taken into account and will always be important.
The judge's approach was, in my judgment, correct in law.
So I would dismiss this appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
No order for costs save legal aid taxation.
Leave to appeal refused.
Solicitors: Collyer-Bristow; Reynolds Porter Chamberlain.