

[COURT OF APPEAL]In re A BARRISTER (WASTED COSTS ORDER)(No. 1 of 1991) 1992 April 9; 15
Watkins L.J., Macpherson of Cluny and Judge JJ.
Crime — Costs — Wasted costs order — Judge disallowing unspecified part of counsel's brief fee — Whether order rightly made — Procedure to be followed — Whether costs payable out of central funds to successful appellant — Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (c. 23), s. 19A (as inserted by Courts and Legal Servces Act 1990 (c. 41), s. 111)
A court contemplating a wasted costs order under section 19A of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 should formulate concisely the complaint and the grounds upon which the order may be sought.
The court should inquire whether there has been an improper, unreasonable or negligent act or omission, whether costs have been incurred as a result, and, if so, whether the discretion to make an order should be exercised.
Proposals for a settlement are inappropriate, and the court must specify the sum to be disallowed (post, pp. 667G — 668D).
Where, therefore, a barrister appealed against an order disallowing an unspecified part of his brief fee:—
Held , allowing the appeal and quashing the order, that the judge had failed to specify the fees to be disallowed and had adopted an inappropriate procedure; and that, in any event, there had been no unreasonable act or omission capable of founding an order under section 19A of the Act (post, pp. 665G — 666B, G).
Per curiam .
Consideration should be given to the lack of jurisdiction to make an order for the payment of costs from central funds, since otherwise a successful appellant will have to bear his own costs (post, p. 668E–F, H).
Holden & Co. v. Crown Prosecution Service (No. 2)[1992]1 W.L.R. 407, C.A. distinguished.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Holden & Co. v. Crown Prosecution Service (No. 2)[1992]1 W.L.R. 407;[1992]2 All E.R.
642, C.A.
Practice Direction (Crime: Costs)[1991]1 W.L.R. 498;[1991]2 All E.R.
924
No additional cases were cited in argument.
Appeal against wasted costs order.
On 16 October 1991, after a hearing in chambers to consider wasted costs after the jury in a criminal trial had been discharged and a retrial ordered, Judge MacRae made an order against the appellant, H., a barrister who had acted as defence counsel at the trial, disallowing ‘such part of the brief fee which would otherwise have been payable on the initial trial as exceeds what would be the proper enhanced refresher for the retrial…’ under the provisions of section 19A(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, as inserted by section 111 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
The appellant appealed pursuant to section 19A(2) of the Act on the grounds, inter alia, that (1) the judge failed to consider a wide range of relevant factors in deciding whether to make the order;(2) the judge applied the wrong test as to whether the appellant had acted unreasonably;(3) the judge failed to give reasons for the making of the order and neither ascertained the amount of wasted costs incurred, nor what party had incurred the wasted costs; and (4) had wrongly used the section 19A procedure to punish the appellant.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Anthony Thornton Q.C.
and Alison Levitt for the appellant.
Stephen Richards for the Lord Chancellor's Department.
15 April.
Macpherson of Cluny J. read the following judgment of the court.
This is an appeal against a wasted costs order made on 16 October 1991 by Judge MacRae, sitting in the Crown Court at Kingston-upon-Thames.
The appeal is allowed, in the circumstances which follow.
It is the first such appeal, and it is made under the provisions of section 19A of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, which section was incorporated into that Act by section 111 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
The relevant parts of this section read:
‘19A(1) In any criminal proceedings —(a ) the Court of Appeal;(b ) the Crown Court; or (c ) a magistrates' court may disallow, or (as the case may be) order the legal or other representative concerned to meet, the whole of any wasted costs or such part of them as may be determined in accordance with regulations.
(2) Regulations shall provide that a legal or other representative against whom action is taken by a magistrates' court under subsection (1) may appeal to the Crown Court and that a legal or other representative against whom action is taken by the Crown Court under subsection (1) may appeal to the Court of Appeal.
(3)…‘wasted costs' means any costs incurred by a party —(a ) as a result of any improper, unreasonable or negligent act or omission on the part of any representative or any employee of a representative; or (b ) which, in the light of any such act or omission occurring after they were incurred, the court considers it is unreasonable to expect that party to pay.
Thus a new uniform personal costs order régime is prescribed.
All courtroom advocates of all kinds are susceptible to wasted costs orders.
The ‘legal representative’ concerned in this case is a barrister, who was instructed (with legal aid), to defend a woman called Princess Tucker at Kingston-upon-Thames Crown Court in September 1991.
She was indicted with her son, Johannes Fowler, on two alternative counts under section 18 and 20 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861.
On 6 September 1991 Miss Tucker gave evidence and was cross-examined.
We have seen the transcript of the relevant part of the trial.
Miss Tucker had made a statement to the police admitting that she had hit the alleged victim, Mr. Reiche, with a baseball bat.
But at trial she said that this admission had been falsely made in order to protect her son.
At trial she also said that any fighting done by her was done in self-defence.
More than once in cross-examination Miss Tucker said that she had since the police interview changed her statement, and had made ‘a new one.’
She never said to whom that fresh statement was made, but it was apparent to the jury that she was saying that she had made a statement contrary to that incriminating one, and she was suggesting that the second statement set out her case as she was putting it in the witness box.
The inference was that the fresh statement was made to her own solicitors.
When her evidence was over the jury sent a note to the judge in which they asked to see ‘the second statement of Princess Tucker.’
There is unfortunately no transcript of what then immediately happened.
The shorthand writer arrived a little late, and so a vital part of the exchange that took place is not recorded.
But it appears that the jury's note was shown to Miss Tucker's barrister in the presence of the jury, and almost at once the judge said to the barrister ‘I don't require you to say anything Mr. H.,’ and (turning to the jury), ‘The short answer members of the jury is, ‘No.’
There are a number of reasons for this, not the least of which is that the statement is protected by professional privilege.’
That is the barrister's version of what was said, and there is no challenge to his recollection.
Very shortly after that the barrister said (also in the presence of the jury), ‘I am sorry that it is not possible to comply with the jury's request, but I accept your Honour's ruling and the thinking that lies behind it.’
That remark sparked off all that followed.
And the transcript does record what then happened.
The judge at once reacted, saying, ‘What did you try to achieve, Mr. H.?’
By this time the jury had been sent out.
There followed a lengthy exchange.
It is purposeless to try to summarise what was said.
The judge regarded the barrister's remarks as ‘grossly improper,’ and ‘outrageous.’
A long and somewhat rambling discussion followed during which the judge effectively tried to persuade the barrister that he must get up before the jury in order to say, ‘in terms that the remark that you made was a remark which should not have been made and apologise, and you can say in terms that one of the reasons why it was a remark which should not have been made was that you had never seen the document; you did not know what it contained.’
The actual absence of any such second statement gave an added twist to the tale.
It appeared during the discussion that there was in fact no such document in Miss Tucker's lawyers' possession at all.
When the barrister made his remark he was not aware that no such document existed, although he believed that it did because of what his client had said in evidence.
Not surprisingly, in our judgment, the barrister would not make such an apology or explanation to the jury.
And eventually the judge took it upon himself to discharge the jury.
As a matter of history the case was retried later.
The barrister did not act for Miss Tucker at the retrial.
Both accused were acquitted.
The barrister asked that a transcript of what had happened should be ordered.
The judge refused to order a transcript, but said that, ‘In regard to the question of costs, I will deal with the question of costs after the trial has been concluded.’
Naturally the barrister was most concerned about what had happened and after consulting colleagues he wrote a letter to the judge on 10 September 1991.
The letter is short and courteous.
The barrister explained (as he had done in court) that he:
‘thought that, following your direction, the jury might think that there was something in the statement which the defence wanted to hide, using the cloak of privilege.
As a result, I reacted in front of the jury in a way which may have made them think that, in fact, the defence had nothing to lose by disclosure of the statement.
Being wise after the event, I realise now that what I should have done was to ask the jury to retire so that a formula could have been discussed and agreed upon, which would have disposed of the matter satisfactorily.
I had no intention of misleading the jury.
I am sorry about what happened…
He told the judge that he would not be instructed for the retrial.
It should be added that the barrister also apologised for what had happened during the exchanges in court before the judge discharged the jury.
The judge did not answer the letter, but he required the barrister to appear before him in chambers on 16 October 1991.
Those proceedings, if they can be so described, are recorded in full in a transcript.
The judge started to discuss figures as to the wasted costs.
The barrister at once said that he was ‘less concerned about the amount that could be ordered as to whether any order should be made at all.’
There followed what appears to have been over two hours of discussion.
The whole transcript must be read in order that the full flavour of the ‘meeting’ can be appreciated.
The barrister behaved impeccably, and indicated repeatedly that he was not prepared to concede that he had ‘offended against [section 19A of the Act of 1985]in a way that would entitle your Honour to make an order.’
The judge ranged widely.
He inquired about the barrister's state of health on the days in question, because of one or more other remarks made by the barrister of which he disapproved.
There was some discussion about the possibility of disciplinary proceedings before the General Council of the Bar.
And the judge tried effectively to ‘settle’ the matter by dealing with it through the ordinary channels of taxation.
The barrister, wholly correctly in our judgment, would have none of that.
Eventually, when this somewhat bizarre meeting ended, the judge made an order by which he purported to ‘disallow such part of the brief fee which would otherwise have been payable on the [partial]trial as exceeds what would be the proper enhanced refresher for the retrial.’
He held that the barrister was guilty of an ‘unreasonable act or omission.’
Against that order the barrister appeals.
The court is disturbed by the case, and by the procedure, or lack of procedure, by which the judge reached his decision.
We have been assisted by argument on the barrister's behalf, from Mr. Thornton, and by Mr. Richards, on behalf of the Lord Chancellor's Department.
Mr. Richards rightly does not deal with the judge's decision as such, but he is unable to uphold the judge's ruling for two reasons which can be stated at once.
1.
The judge failed to make an order within the relevant regulations, namely the Costs in Criminal Cases (General)(Amendment) Regulations 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 789).
Regulation 3B(1) requires that a wasted costs order ‘may provide for the whole or any part of the wasted costs to be disallowed or ordered to be paid and the court shall specify the amount of such costs.’
Unless the amount is specified the order is, says Mr. Richards, ultra vires.
For this reason alone the judge's order is fatally flawed.
We agree.
2.
Mr. Richards also accepts that the procedure adopted by the judge on 16 October 1991, and in particular his long and involved attempt to dispose of the matter otherwise than by an order, was inappropriate, and the judge was wrong to link the question of a wasted costs order with the question of a disciplinary complaint to the General Council of the Bar.
Those two matters are, in our judgment, separate, and they should never have been mingled and confused as they were by the judge.
It is plain that the hearing, or meeting, on 16 October was, to say the least, discursive.
It was wholly inappropriate to deal with the matter as the judge did.
Any conclusion reached after such discussion or debate is likely to be flawed and unsatisfactory.
For this reason also Mr. Richards accepts that the judge's order cannot stand.
Again we agree.
But there are other even more fundamental reasons for allowing this appeal, and they are concerned with the judge's actions and decisions which led up to his discharge of the jury.
When the jury handed in their note the judge should have asked the jury to retire.
The matter would then have been dealt with in the ordinary way, after all counsel involved had been consulted.
The references to the ‘second statement’ arose ex improviso.
The jury's note should have alerted the judge to problems that might occur.
If the usual course had been followed it would have been discovered that there was no second statement, or at least none in Miss Tucker's present lawyers' possession.
And no doubt a sensible formula would have been devised in order to tell the jury that which was in the circumstances agreed to be appropriate.
But the judge, wrongly in our judgment, seized the reins, and made unnecessary reference to the possibility of the protection of professional privilege.
He himself did not know then whether there was any such statement in existence and reference to ‘privilege’ was potentially misleading.
The real objection to the use of the statement may in any event have been that it was self-serving rather than that it was protected by privilege, which could have been waived by the defendant.
The court is not surprised that the barrister reacted as he did.
Both the barrister, and this court, accept with hindsight that his intervention was perhaps inapt or unfortunate.
It might have been better if the barrister had not said what he did.
But the intervention was a reaction to the judge's own remark, and the court understands why the barrister intervened.
If the judge thought that the remark was wrong or even unprofessional he should have asked the jury to leave court and dealt with the matter by perhaps a reprimand or a verbal rap over the knuckles, followed by sensible discussion as to what should be done.
Either the whole matter could have been left to disappear in limbo, as it might well have done, or counsel and the judge could have discussed how any harm done could be cured in the summing up.
The evidence was of course not even complete when this incident occurred.
In our judgment it is impossible to say that the barrister acted unreasonably.
To put the matter in its statutory form, we do not accept that the barrister was in the circumstances guilty of any such unreasonable act or omission which could found a wasted costs order.
Furthermore it was in our judgment wrong to have discharged the jury.
Such a course was wholly unnecessary.
The matter could and should have been dealt with as set out above.
Costs were duplicated or wasted in fact because of the judge's decision.
And it is to be noted that the initial mistake was that of the judge who made his ruling and his reference to the second statement without argument and in unfortunate terms.
The barrister reacted to a situation created by the judge; he felt that he must try to convey at once to the jury that his client was not being obstructive or reticent about disclosing a statement.
If the judge had thought that he could not deal with the matter himself it was also of course open to him to report the barrister to the General Council of the Bar.
Although if he had done so we doubt whether that committee would have thought it necessary to take any proceedings against the barrister.
Nothing that we have said detracts from counsel's duty in ordinary circumstances to accept a judge's order or ruling made in the course of trial.
If a decision about a document or as to some point of evidence is made the right course, having put the relevant argument, is to accept the ruling and then to consider an appeal should circumstances so demand.
But the ordinary and correct course was not followed in the present case, with the unfortunate results that the case itself demonstrates.
That then is the end of the appeal itself.
The judge's wasted costs order must be quashed.
There are however further questions which we are asked to consider.
Indeed at an early stage we were asked to consider, for example, some analysis of the words in section 19A(3) (a )‘any improper, unreasonable or negligent act or omission,’ and some more general aspects of wasted costs orders.
That we declined to do.
But we are prepared to give some guidelines or pointers as to the practice and procedure to be adopted when a hearing as to a wasted costs order takes place.
As Mr. Richards says, much of the procedure stems from the relevant statutes and regulations, and much can be gleaned from A Guide to the Award of Costs in Criminal Proceedings (R.C.J. (1991) H.M.S.O.), which contains a section (Section 6) on ‘Wasted Costs and Orders…
’ That section sets out some of the principles to be applied, and, for example, points out an alternative course which can be followed by judges where the extent of wasted costs is not clear: see section 6.7, p. 20 of the guide.
Again, for example, at appendix 2, the relevant regulations are set out, including the requirement under regulation 3B(2) that ‘Before making a wasted costs order the court shall allow the legal or other representative and any party to the proceedings to make representations.’
Similarly we note the further particular regulations as to appeals and notification of this court's hearing and decisions to interested parties, and so on: regulation 3C.
The guidance that we give below, under six headings, is therefore to be considered together with all the statutory and other rules and recommendations set out by Parliament, or in the 1991 guide, which takes the form of a practice direction as to costs in criminal proceedings, and which also includes, at appendix 3, the formal Practice Direction of 3 May 1991 as to costs in criminal proceedings:Practice Direction (Crime: Costs)[1991]1 W.L.R. 498.
The following matters should, we believe, be noted.
1.
There is a clear need for any judge or court intending to exercise the wasted costs jurisdiction to formulate carefully and concisely the complaint and grounds upon which such an order may be sought.
These measures are draconian, and, as in contempt proceedings, the grounds must be clear and particular.
2.
Where necessary a transcript of the relevant part of the proceedings under discussion should be available.
And, in accordance with the rules, a transcript of any wasted costs hearing must be made.
3.
A defendant involved in a case where such proceedings are contemplated should be present if, after discussion with counsel, it is thought that his interests may be affected.
And he should certainly be present and represented if the matter might affect the course of his trial.
Regulation 3B(2) of the Costs in Criminal Cases (General)(Amendment) Regulations 1991 furthermore requires that before a wasted costs order is made ‘the court shall allow the legal or other representative and any party to the proceedings to make representations.’
There may be cases where it may be appropriate for counsel for the Crown to be present.
4.
A three-stage test or approach is recommended when a wasted costs order is contemplated.
(i) Has there been an improper, unreasonable or negligent act or omission?(ii) As a result have any costs been incurred by a party?(iii) If the answers to (i) and (ii) are ‘Yes;’ should the court exercise its discretion to disallow or order the representative to meet the whole or any part of the relevant costs, and if so what specific sum is involved?
5.
It is inappropriate to propose any deal or settlement, such as was suggested in the present case, that the representative might forgo fees.
The judge should formally state his complaint, in chambers, and invite the representative to make his own comments.
After any other party has been heard the judge should give his formal ruling.
Discursive conversations such as took place in the present case may be unfair, and should certainly not take place.
6.
As is indicated above the judge must specify the sum to be disallowed or ordered.
Alternatively the relevant available procedure should be substituted, should it be impossible to fix the sum: see p. 20 of the 1991 guide, para. 6.7.
These suggested guidelines are of course not comprehensive.
We feel however that they may be useful in future.
Courts and judges must be alert to the problems which may arise in connection with wasted costs hearings and orders.
Such matters must only be conducted in accordance with the statutory rules and regulations and in accordance with the provisions of the 1991 guide and Practice Direction (Crime: Costs)[1991]1 W.L.R. 498, all of which require careful study before such hearings are conducted or orders are made.
Finally we turn to the question of the possible payment of costs from central funds of this appeal, and of such appeals generally.
In our judgment there is simply no jurisdiction to make an order for the payment of the appellant's costs from central funds.
In Holden & Co. v. Crown Prosecution Service (No. 2)[1992]1 W.L.R. 407, the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) was able to make such orders under the provisions of section 51 of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
But that Act cannot apply in a case such as the present which is considered by the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division).
We do not believe that there is an inherent power in this court to make such an order.
Nor can such a power be inferred from, for example, regulation 3C(6) of the 1991 Regulations to which we were  referred .
That regulation empowers this court to ‘affirm, vary or revoke the order as it thinks fit…’ but it is silent as to costs.
We recommend that consideration should be given to this matter, since otherwise a successful appellant will have to bear his own costs, and this seems to be unjust.
This appeal is allowed, but no order for costs can be made.
Appeal allowed.
Solicitors: Allison & Humphreys; Treasury Solicitor.
[Reported by Mrs. Clare Barsby, Barrister]
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, s. 19A (as inserted): see post, p. 663D–F.