

[COURT OF APPEAL]
M. v. P. AND OTHERS (CONTEMPT OF COURT: COMMITTAL ORDER)
BUTLER v. BUTLER
1992 July 9; 23
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R., Nolan and Scott L.JJ.
Contempt of Court — Committal order — Civil contempt — Failure to serve committal orders on contemnors in compliance with proper procedures — Whether irregularity invalidating committals — Whether orders to be set aside — Administration of Justice Act 1960 (8 & 9 Eliz. 2, c. 65), s. 13(3)County Court Rules 1981 (S.I.
1981 No. 1687 (L. 20)), Ord. 29, r. 1(5) (as substituted by County Court (Amendment) Rules 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 525 (L. 1)), r. 5)
In the first appeal a local authority applied to commit the contemnor to prison for contempt of court following outbursts of violence during wardship proceedings in which they were both parties.
The contemnor attended the hearing of the motion to commit, at which he was represented.
The judge found the allegations proved and committed him to prison for six months.
The committal order was drawn up by court staff, signed by the judge, sealed and sent to the solicitors representing the contemnor and the local authority.
Subsequently the contemnor complained to the local authority that they had not served the committal order on him personally and had failed to comply with the instruction issued by the Clerk of the Rules, that ‘in all cases the applicant's solicitors are responsible for serving the committal order’ and that in consequence the order should be set aside.
In the second appeal the contemnor had been prohibited by injunctive orders, issued with an attached power of arrest under the Domestic Violence and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1976, from assaulting, molesting or harassing his wife or from entering the premises where she lived.
Following repeated breaches of the orders the judge, in the contemnor's presence, found him guilty of contempt of court and committed him to prison for eight months.
The committal warrant was signed by the judge but the contemnor complained that, contrary to Ord. 29, r. 1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981, no copy of the committal order had been served on him and that in any event the order had been drawn on the wrong county court form.
He claimed that such irregularities invalidated the order and that it should accordingly be set aside.
On the contemnors' appeals:—
Held , dismissing the appeals, that failure to observe the proper procedures for service was not necessarily fatal to the lawfulness of a committal order; that the court, in exercising its discretion under section 13(3) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960, had to take into account the interests not only of the contemnor but also of those affected by the contempt and the need to maintain its authority, and that where an irregularity caused the contemnor no injustice the committal order should not be set aside; that since, in the first appeal, there was no requirement for personal service of a committal order so that the only irregularity was that the court, rather than the local authority had served a copy of the order on the contemnor's solicitors, the contemnor had suffered no injustice and the order would stand; and that, in the second appeal, since the husband was fully aware of the findings of contempt and had not sought to challenge them or the sentence imposed, he had suffered no injustice and it was appropriate in the circumstances to affirm the order despite the irregularities which had occurred (post, pp. 822B–C, F — 823B, 823C–E, 824B–D, F, 825C–D, 826D–F).
Linnett v. Coles [1987]Q.B.
555, C.A. considered.
Clarke v. Clarke [1990]2 F.L.R. 115, C.A.;B. v. B. (Contempt Committal)[1991]2 F.L.R. 588, C.A. and Howes v. Howes (1992) 142 N.L.J. 753, C.A. not followed.
Per curiam .
(i) Consideration should be given to changes in the procedures of the High Court.
The sealing of committal orders should have the highest priority, taking place preferably on the day of committal and certainly as soon as practicable thereafter.
The form of the committal order should be amended to draw the contemnor's attention to his right to apply to purge his contempt.
There should be personal service of a copy of the committal order on the contemnor by the court itself acting by one of its officers (post, pp. 823G–H, 824F, 826F).
(ii) County court staff should be again reminded of the urgency with which the documentation of contempt cases should be undertaken and of the need to comply strictly with the rules and that service of committal orders should always be made personally on the contemnor.
Either County Court Form N111 should be resurrected and amended to include a reminder that there is a right to apply to purge contempt or County Court Form N79 should be revised to take account of the fact that proceedings may begin with an arrest under a power of arrest attached to an injunction issued under the Act of 1976 (post, pp. 824D–F, F, 826F).
Decision of Sir Stephen Brown P. affirmed.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R.:
B. v. B. (Contempt: Committal)[1991]2 F.L.R. 588, C.A.
Chiltern District Council v. Keane [1985]1 W.L.R. 619;[1985]2 All E.R. 118, C.A.
Clarke v. Clarke [1990]2 F.L.R. 115, C.A.
Duo v. Osborne (formerly Duo)[1992]1 W.L.R. 611;[1992]3 All E.R.
121, C.A.
Howes v. Howes (1992) 142 N.L.J. 753, C.A.
Lewis v. King (unreported), 12 February 1992; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 101 of 1992, C.A.
Linnett v. Coles [1987]Q.B.
555;[1986]3 W.L.R. 843;[1986]3 All E.R. 652, C.A.
Morelle Ltd. v. Wakeling [1955]2 Q.B.
379;[1955]2 W.L.R. 672;[1955]1 All E.R. 708, C.A.
Smith v. Smith,The Times, 27 January 1992; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 19 of 1992, C.A.
Williams v. Fawcett [1986]Q.B.
604;[1985]1 W.L.R. 501;[1985]1 All E.R. 787, C.A.
The following additional case was cited in argument:
Linkleter v. Linkleter [1988]1 F.L.R. 360, C.A.
The following cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton arguments:
C. (A Minor)(Contempt), In re [1986]1 F.L.R. 578, C.A.
C.B.S.(U.K.) Ltd. v. Manoli (1985) 135 N.L.J. 555, C.A.
M. (Minors)(Access: Contempt Committal), In re [1991]1 F.L.R. 355, C.A.
M. v. P. AND OTHERS (CONTEMPT OF COURT: COMMITTAL ORDER)
APPEAL from Sir Stephen Brown P.
By an order dated 5 June 1992 made on the application of Brent London Borough Council, the second defendant in wardship proceedings, the judge committed M., the plaintiff in the proceedings, to prison for a period of six months for, inter alia, assaulting an employee of the local authority in court and for damaging property within the precincts of the Royal Courts of Justice.
On 11 June 1992 the committal order was sealed and copies were sent by the court to solicitors for M. and for the local authority.
By a notice of appeal dated 1 July 1992 M. appealed on the ground that at no time had he been personally served with either the committal order or a copy and that accordingly the order should be set aside.
At the conclusion of argument Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. announced that the appeal in M. v. P. would be dismissed for reasons to be given later.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R.
APPEAL from Judge Woodford sitting at Ipswich County Court.
On 11 May 1992 the wife, Frances Butler, gave notice to the husband, Robert Butler, to show cause why he should not be committed to prison for contempt of court for breaches of an order dated 12 September 1991 prohibiting him from entering or visiting premises where she lived and from assaulting, molesting or harassing her.
By an order dated 12 May 1992 the judge found the husband guilty of contempt of court in respect of two offences, and sentenced him to four weeks' imprisonment for the first offence and to three months' imprisonment for the second, the sentences to run consecutively and be suspended for 18 months.
The judge imposed a further injunctive order in similar terms to that of 12 September 1991.
On 11 June 1992 the husband was arrested at the wife's house and on 12 June Judge Woodford, finding him guilty of breaches of the injunctions of 12 September 1991 and 12 May 1992, sentenced him to eight months' imprisonment for contempt of court.
By a notice of appeal dated 7 July 1992 the husband appealed on the ground that a copy of the committal order had not been served on him either before or at the time of the execution of the warrant as required by Ord. 29, r. 1(5) (a ) of the County Court Rules 1981 (as amended) and that in consequence the order was invalid and/or defective and should be set aside.
The appeals were heard consecutively.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. 
Eleanor Platt Q.C.
and R. J. Mitchell for the contemnor in the first appeal.
Richard Harper for the local authority.
Robin Barda for the minors' guardian ad litem.
Eva Joyce for the contemnor in the second appeal.
Edward Irving for the wife.
23 July.
The following judgments were handed down.
LORD DONALDSON OF LYMINGTON M.R. These appeals, which we heard consecutively, have a common factor.
In each case the appellant has been found guilty of contempt of court and has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment.
In neither case is any complaint made as to the way in which the hearing was conducted, as to the finding that the appellant was in contempt of court or as to the severity of the sentence.
In each case it is submitted that the sentences have to be quashed because there was unreasonable delay in giving the appellant a copy of the committal order, which in each case contained particulars of the facts found as constituting a contempt of court.
The facts of M.'s case
On 8 May 1992 in the High Court, Judge Monier-Williams, sitting as a judge of the Family Division, had taken his seat in court in order to hear a wardship summons in proceedings in which M. was the plaintiff.
A social worker who was involved in the suit was seated in court.
Without any provocation or excuse, M. struck her violently in the face with a rolled up newspaper.
Later in the day he climbed to the roof of the Royal Courts of Justice and hurled slates and other objects into the courtyard below.
Brent London Borough Council, by which the social worker was employed and which was a party to the proceedings, took the initiative in seeking M.'s committal for contempt of court, but if it had not done so some other initiative by or on behalf of the court itself would have been necessary.
That the court can take such an initiative is well settled and indeed it has been done on several occasions in the past.
On 5 June 1992 Sir Stephen Brown P. found these facts proved, held that they were contempts of court and that M.'s conduct both within the courtroom and on the roof of the court building came within the category of ‘contempt in the face of the court’ and, as such, was particularly grave.
He sentenced M. to six months' imprisonment.
M. was present in court and heard the President make his findings of fact and give the reasons for his decision.
He was represented by solicitors and counsel.
The President signed the committal warrant which was given to the tipstaff as his authority for conveying M. to prison and the governor's authority for receiving and detaining M. The drawing up of the formal order that M. be committed to prison was left to the court staff.
This formal order, which was signed by the President and recited his findings in relation to the two incidents, was sealed on 11 June 1992, copies being then sent to M.'s solicitors, the solicitors for the other parties and to the governor of the prison.
On 30 June Brent London Borough Council's solicitors were put on notice that M. was complaining that he had not been served personally by them with a copy of the formal order and arranged that he be so served on 3 July.
The facts of Butler's case
Since August 1991 Mr. Butler has been the subject of no less than five injunctive orders designed to prevent him assaulting, threatening, harassing or molesting Mrs. Butler.
Two of these orders were made under the Domestic Violence and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1976 and had a power of arrest attached.
Mrs. Butler lived at 8, Corneth Crescent, Great Cornard, Sudbury, Suffolk.
On 12 September 1991 Mr. Butler was ordered not to enter, re-enter or visit these premises.
On 12 May 1992 Mr. Butler was by order excluded from an area which included these premises and a power of arrest was attached.
On 14 October 1991 Mr. Butler had been found guilty of contempt of court by breaching the injunction granted on 12 September 1991 and was sentenced to four weeks in prison, the sentence being suspended for six months.
The order for committal was in County Court Form N79.
On 12 May 1992 Mr. Butler was again found to be in contempt of court by cutting telephone wires at Mrs. Butler's house and assaulting her in a public house.
He was sentenced to four weeks' imprisonment for the first contempt and to three months' imprisonment for the second contempt, the two sentences to run consecutively.
Both were suspended for 18 months.
On 11 June 1992, Mr. Butler went to Mrs. Butler's house in breach of the injunctive orders of 12 September 1991 and 12 May 1992 and was arrested.
Next morning he appeared before Judge Woodford at Ipswich County Court, represented by solicitors and counsel.
There could be no dispute as to the breach, since Mr. Butler had been arrested at Mrs. Butler's house and the judge so found.
Mr. Butler was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment.
This sentence was not suspended.
The judge signed the committal warrant and the police conveyed Mr. Butler to prison, giving the warrant to the governor.
There is no evidence of when the committal order was drawn up, although Mrs. Butler's solicitors were assured that this would happen in sufficient time for them to receive copies by fax later that afternoon.
There is some evidence that an officer of the county court has said that a committal order on Form N111 (not Form N79) was signed and given to the police officers escorting Mr. Butler to prison.
I do not think that this did occur, there being confusion between the committal warrant and the committal order .
There is evidence that a senior prison official received a copy of the committal order on Form N111 on 3 July 1992.
Mr. Butler alleges that he has never been served with such an order.
Requirements as to forms and service of committal orders
The obligations as to service of committal orders are not the same in the High Court and the county court.
(a)The High Court .
By R.S.C., Ord. 1, r. 9 ‘the forms in the Appendices shall be used where applicable with such variations as the circumstances of the particular case require.’
The form of order used in M.'s case does not appear as such in The Supreme Court Practice 1991 , but is a standard modernised version of Form No. 85 headed ‘Order of Committal (Contemnor Present)’ and there is no doubt that it complied with the rules.
Its use is required by an instruction issued by the Clerk of the Rules with the approval of the President of the Family Division.
That document also states: ‘Service of High Court order .
In all cases the applicant's solicitors are responsible for serving the committal order.’
The Rules of the Supreme Court appear to be silent on this topic.
(b)The County Court .
There appear to be no special forms or procedures which are required to be adopted in the county court where someone is found guilty of contempt in the face of the court and committed to prison under section 118 of the County Courts Act 1984, although no doubt, if such an event were to occur, the court would follow the general approach required by Ord. 29, r.1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981 (as amended) which applies in the case of committal for breach of injunctions.
It provides:
‘If a committal order is made, the order shall be for the issue of a warrant of committal and, unless the judge otherwise orders —(a ) a copy of the order shall be served on the person to be committed either before or at the time of the execution of the warrant; or (b ) where the warrant has been signed by the judge, the order for issue of the warrant may be served on the person to be committed at any time within 36 hours after the execution of the warrant.
In both the 1991 and 1992 editions of The County Court Practice , the prescribed form of committal order under this sub-rule is Form N79.
However, in the 1991 edition there is a special form N111 for use where the order for committal is under the Domestic Violence and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1976, and the alleged contemnor has been arrested under a power of arrest attached to an injunction.
It is more appropriate to such a case than is Form N79 but, unlike Form N79, does not inform the contemnor that he can apply to the court to purge his contempt and ask for release.
It refers on its face to Ord. 47, r. 8 of the County Court Rules 1981.
That rule dealt with originating applications under the Act and provided by subrule (7) that the contemnor might be punished notwithstanding that a copy of the injunction had not been served on him in accordance with Ord. 29, r. 1(2) and that no notice had been issued or served upon him under Ord. 29, r. 1(4) — a notice to show cause why there should not be a committal.
Otherwise it is silent as to the requirements of Ord. 29, r. 1.
The County Court Practice 1992 records the revocation of Ord. 47, r. 8 on the coming into force of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991, on 14 October 1991.
Rule 3.9 (which appears on p. 1409) seems to be in all material respects identical with the old Ord. 47, r. 8.
However, Form N111 is stated, on p. 619, to be obsolete.
‘Obsolescent’ might be a better term as Ipswich County Court undoubtedly had a supply of the form and used it in Mr. Butler's case.
The appeals
In each appeal reliance was placed upon a series of cases in which it has been affirmed that where the liberty of the subject is in issue, the proper procedures must be strictly observed.
These include procedures designed to ensure that:(1) no alleged contemnor shall be in any doubt as to the charges which are made against him;(2) he shall be given a proper opportunity of showing cause why he should not be held in contempt of court;(3) if an order of committal is made, the accused (a) knows precisely in what respects he has been found to have offended and (b) is given a written record of those findings and of the sentence passed upon him.
In these appeals we have only been concerned with the obligation to give the contemnor this written record, but in most of the reported cases there have been other breaches of procedures in addition to a breach of this nature.
The authorities relied upon in these appeals were as follows.
Chiltern District Council v. Keane [1985]1 W.L.R. 619 was an appeal from the High Court in which it was held that (1) the notice of motion to commit lacked sufficient particularity to enable the alleged contemnor to meet the charge,(2) there had been no personal service of notice of an adjourned hearing date and (3) the committal order failed to give particulars of the facts found to constitute the contempt.
In giving judgment I recorded, at p. 623, that there appeared to be no requirement under the rules and no practice to give such particulars in the committal order and called for a revision of the practice which has, I believe, now taken place generally and was certainly followed in M.'s case.
The court set aside the committal ‘on all those three grounds’(see p. 624), but did not have to consider what would have been the position if only the third ground had been substantiated.
Clarke v. Clarke [1990]2 F.L.R. 115, was an appeal from a county court, in which Form N79 as served on the contemnor contained no particulars of the findings upon which the committal was based and was only served on the contemnor 13 days after his committal.
In addition the judge used intemperate language which could have led to the view being formed that the contemnor had not had a fair trial.
I said, at p. 119:
‘A failure to inform a citizen in writing and at the earliest practicable moment of precisely why he is being deprived of his liberty constitutes a fundamental breach of his rights and, where that failure is never remedied, as was the case here…
I have no doubt that the committal order cannot stand.
Farquharson L.J.
said, at pp. 117–118:
‘Are these defects fatal to the lawfulness of the committal?
In Hegarty v. O'Sullivan (1985) 135 N.L.J. 557 it was observed by this court that, as a matter of practice, the requirements of service of a copy of the court's order upon the contemnor was seldom effected at the time provided in the order.
However that may be, it is essential that he should be served promptly so that he is able to consider whether he should exercise his right of appeal.
As Mr. McCue puts it, he has a right when he is in prison to know why he is there.
The second omission is equally serious.
It is essential that the order of committal sets out the court's findings, otherwise the contemnor does not have any basis upon which he can challenge them.
True it is, in the present case, that the respondent had received a copy of schedule B when he was served with Form N78, and Form N79 contained a comprehensive finding that the contents of schedule B were proved.
But the omission was, none the less, a serious one.
This court has extensive powers under section 13(3) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 to reverse or vary the order or decision of the court below and make such other order as may be just.
This enables the court to correct errors in orders made by the lower courts.
(See also R.S.C., Ord. 59, r. 10(3)).
In cases of contempt, however, these powers will be used only in exceptional cases: see Linkleter v. Linkleter [1988]1 F.L.R. 360.
While the court will not permit technical infringement of the rules to defeat the ends of justice, where a requirement affecting the essential rights of a contemnor has not been complied with, this court will not use its powers to correct the order.
Where the line between these categories should be drawn may vary according to the facts of individual cases.
So far as the present case is concerned, both the failure to serve Form N79 upon the respondent for 13 days and the failure to attach to it the schedule containing the facts found proved by the court are, in my judgment, fatal to the legality of this order, and the appeal should be allowed and the respondent discharged from custody.
It was rightly pointed out in argument that Farquharson L.J.
must have been referring to R.S.C., Ord. 59, r. 10(3) rather than to the Act of 1960 when he said that ‘in cases of contempt, however, these powers will be used only in exceptional cases’ because section 13 is solely concerned with appeals in cases of contempt.
Howes v. Howes (1992) 142 N.L.J. 753 was an appeal from a county court case in which Form N79 was never served on the contemnor.
Farquharson L.J.
giving the judgment of the court, of which I and Stocker L.J.
were the other members, said:
‘The importance of Ord. 29, r. 1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981 and the serious consequences of a failure to observe it have been remarked upon in a number of decisions of this court.
In Clarke v. Clarke [1990]2 F.L.R. 115, 119 Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. said: ‘A failure to inform a citizen in writing and at the earliest practicable moment of precisely why he is being deprived of his liberty constitutes a fundamental breach of his rights and, where that failure is never remedied [the committal order]cannot stand.’
In similar vein in B. v. B. [1991]2 F.L.R. 588, 591 Purchas L.J.
said: ‘This court has on numerous occasions held that the effect of Ord. 29, r. 1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981 is that the contemnor must be personally served with a properly drafted notice which recites in clear and unambiguous detail the following:(1) the order of the court or undertaking given to the court in respect of which he has been found in breach;(2) the respects in which it is alleged that he has been in breach;(3) the findings of the judge as to the alleged breaches;(4) the period of committal to which he has been sentenced and (5) that he may apply to the court to purge his contempt and seek his release.
The liberty of the individual and the requirements of natural justice demand that the provisions of this rule must be obeyed strictly.’
‘The document which must be served upon the contemnor pursuant to the rule is Form N79.
Its purpose, as explained by Purchas L.J., is to inform the contemnor of the precise reason for his committal to prison.
It enables him to consider, no doubt on advice, whether there are grounds for challenging the findings made by the judge who made the order.
The notice also informs the contemnor of his right to apply to the court to purge his contempt and ask for release.
In the present proceedings, as counsel has pointed out, the respondent's chances of purging his contempt at an early stage were not high, even if he had been properly informed of his right to make the attempt, but that is to confuse the existence of a right with its strength.
In many cases the necessity for a contemnor to be informed of his rights is of the highest importance.
We are informed that the court has not yet served Form N79 upon the respondent.
It is clear from the authorities that for these reasons a failure to comply with the requirements of Ord. 29, r. 1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981 is fatal to the lawfulness of the committal.
I was a party to all these decisions other than B. v. B. (Contempt Committal)[1991]2 F.L.R. 588 cited and relied upon in Howes v. Howes , 142 N.L.J. 753 but I should also refer to two recent decisions to which I was not a party, but to one of which Scott L.J.
was.
That case was Smith v. Smith , The Times, 27 January 1992; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 19 of 1992 where the other member of the court was Nourse L.J.
In that case Form N79 listed the five allegations of breach of the order of the court which were in fact admitted, but listed them as allegations.
The part of the form for particulars of the judge's finding was left blank.
Some consideration was given to whether the defect in Form N79 could be cured by this court under section 13 of the Act of 1960 or under R.S.C., Ord. 59, r. 10(3), but it was held that this could not be done.
The court held that on the authorities it was bound to quash the sentence of three months' imprisonment, Scott L.J.
doing so ‘with regret.’
The other case is Lewis v. King (unreported), 12 February 1992; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 101 of 1992, the court consisting of Nourse L.J.
and Thorpe J. No complaint was made by the appellant that Form N79 did not specify the findings of fact, the appellant having been in court and well aware of the position.
The court itself took the point that the committal was invalid and quashed a sentence of 18 months' imprisonment.
In Williams v. Fawcett [1986]Q.B.
604 this court was faced with the curious situation that by a series of decisions, each moving almost imperceptibly further forward than the last, it had created a rule of law for which, if one stood back and looked at the matter afresh, there was absolutely no justification.
This was also in the field of contempt of court and the rule which had been evolved was that Form N78 (Notice to show cause why there should not be a committal to prison) had to be signed by ‘the proper officer’ of the county court and that unless this was done, it was an invalid notice.
On pp. 615–617, I considered whether it was a breach of the rule of stare decisis to retrace our steps, having reached the conclusion, to quote the words of Sir Raymond Evershed M.R. in Morelle Ltd. v. Wakeling [1955]2 Q.B.
379, 406, ‘Here was a manifest slip or error.’
I concluded that it was not.
To my personal embarrassment to the extent that I was a party to the majority of the decisions to which I have referred, I have to say that I think that this court again finds itself in the same position.
The rule of law which seems to have evolved, or at least to be evolving, is that ‘a failure to comply with the requirements of Ord. 29, r. 1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981 is fatal to the lawfulness of the committal’(see Howes v. Howes , 142 N.L.J. 753) and that in contempt cases the court's powers under section 13(3) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 will be used only in exceptional cases.
Section 13, the sidenote to which reads ‘Appeal in cases of contempt of court,’ is in the following terms:
‘(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an appeal shall lie under this section from any order or decision of a court in the exercise of jurisdiction to punish for contempt of court (including criminal contempt); and in relation to any such order or decision the provisions of this section shall have effect in substitution for any other enactment relating to appeals in civil or criminal proceedings.…
(3) The court to which an appeal is brought under this section may reverse or vary the order or decision of the court below, and make such other order as may be just; and without prejudice to the inherent powers of any court referred to in subsection (2) of this section, provisions may be made by rules of court for authorising the release on bail of an appellant under this section.
One has only to read these two subsections to appreciate that in appeals in respect of contempt, the court has a complete discretion fettered only by the need to do justice.
In Linnett v. Coles [1987]Q.B.
555, 560, Lawton L.J.
said:
‘I accept, of course, that judges must be vigilant concerning the liberty of the subject; but, if Parliament gives them discretionary powers, as section 13 of the Act of 1960 seems to do, it is not competent for them to refuse to exercise those powers.
It would be a misuse of powers for a judge to say: ‘I know Parliament has given me a discretion to vary orders in contempt appeals and make just ones, but I'm never going to use them.
Such is my concern for the liberty of the subject that I am prepared to allow a contemnor who ought to be punished for contempt to go unpunished; and that is so, notwithstanding that Parliament envisages that I could consider imposing a just punishment.’
None of the cases in this court to which Mr. Munby has invited our attention are binding on us because seemingly the court never considered what powers it had to make a suitable order under section 13 of the Act of 1960.
It seems to me that Lawton L.J.
identified the ‘manifest slip or error’ into which this court is, or is in danger of, falling in its consideration of the consequences of procedural irregularities in contempt cases, such as failure to serve the committal order or serving it late.
In all contempt cases, justice requires the court to take account of the interests of at least three categories of person, namely,(a) the contemnor,(b) the ‘victim’ of the contempt and (c) other users of the court for whom the maintenance of the authority of the court is of supreme importance.
The interests of the alleged contemnor require that he should have the right to be informed of the charges which he has to meet, to be advised and represented if he so wishes (subject to his being eligible for legal aid or otherwise able to finance his defence), to be given a full and fair opportunity of meeting those charges and, if found guilty of contempt of court, to be informed in sufficiently clear terms of what has been found against him.
In all these cases the court has been concerned to ensure that these fundamental requirements are met in the way in which, particularly in the case of the county courts, they are intended to be and should be met.
However, we have tended to overlook the fact that they may in some circumstances be met in other ways.
Whilst this court should always be quick to identify and condemn any departure from the proper procedures, the interests of the victim and of maintaining the authority of the courts require that in deciding what use to make of its powers under section 13(3) of the Act of 1960, this court should ask itself whether, notwithstanding such a departure, the contemnor has suffered any injustice.
It does not follow that he has.
Nor does it follow that the proper course is to quash the order.
If he has not suffered any injustice, the committal order should stand, subject, if necessary, to variation of the order to take account of any technical or procedural defects.
In other cases it may be possible to do justice between the parties by exercising the court's power under section 13(3) by making ‘such other order as may be just.’
If the circumstances are such that justice requires the committal order to be quashed amongst the options available is that of ordering a retrial: see Duo v. Osborne (formerly Duo)[1992]1 W.L.R. 611.
Against this background I return to a consideration of the two appeals.
M.'s case
The Rules of the Supreme Court make no specific provision for a contemnor being served with a copy of the committal order, but as I have mentioned an instruction has been issued by the Clerk of the Rules with the approval of the President of the Family Division which makes it the duty of the applicant's solicitor to serve the committal order, but does not require personal service.
In the event M.'s solicitors received a copy of the committal order as soon as it had been sealed and, in addition, a copy was sent to the prison governor.
The only departure from the established procedure lay in the fact that the copy of the order seems to have been served upon or issued to M.'s solicitors by the court rather than being served by the applicant's solicitor.
In fact, had the recognised procedure been followed, there might have been some slight additional delay.
In these circumstances it is impossible to detect any element of injustice to M. and accordingly we indicated at the conclusion of the argument that his appeal would be dismissed.
The purpose of serving a contemnor with a copy of the committal order is to enable him to have a written record of the findings made by the court and of the sentence and to provide him with the materials necessary to enable him to decide whether or not he wishes to appeal.
It should also inform him of his right to apply to the court to purge his contempt.
This the High Court form of committal order does not in fact do.
It is desirable that the committal order be served as a matter of urgency although in a case which merited a sentence of six months' imprisonment — and the contrary was not argued on M.'s behalf — there is much less urgency than in the case of a short sentence of imprisonment.
We think that consideration should be given to three changes in the procedures of the High Court.
(1) The sealing of committal orders should have the highest priority and should take place preferably on the day of committal and certainly as soon as practicable thereafter.
(2) The form of committal order should be amended to draw the contemnor's attention to his right to apply to the court to purge his contempt.
(3) There should be personal service of a copy of the committal order on the contemnor by the court itself acting by one of its officers, probably the tipstaff.
Butler's case
Mr. Butler makes two complaints.
The first is that Form N111 was used as a committal order rather than Form N79.
The second is that this form was not served on him, although it was undoubtedly served on the governor of the prison where he was detained on 3 July and should have been given to Mr. Butler.
The use of Form N111, even if it has become ‘obsolete,’ was in fact more appropriate than the use of Form N79, although it suffers from the same defect as the High Court form in that it does not draw the attention of the contemnor to his right to apply to the court to purge his contempt.
So far as service is concerned, this, in the county court, is the responsibility of the court itself and the judge should satisfy himself that service has been promptly effected.
There was regrettable delay in serving it and it should have been served personally on Mr. Butler in prison.
That said, I can detect no injustice suffered by Mr. Butler.
He had been present in court when sentence was passed and the fact of his contempt was never in issue.
He was familiar with his own record of defying the court and it has never been suggested on his behalf that the sentence was other than fully justified.
There was no possibility of his being able to purge his contempt within a short time of his committal.
In addition, his solicitors were continuing to act for him and could, if they had wished, have obtained a copy of the committal order from the court.
In the circumstances of this case, although it might be otherwise if, for example, a contemnor was sentenced in his absence, the grounds of appeal are based upon the purest technicality.
Justice for Mrs. Butler and the interests of other litigants in maintaining the authority of the court demand that we affirm the judge's order.
Consideration should be given by those responsible for procedures in the county court to the following matters.
(1) Court staff should once again be reminded of the urgency with which the documentation of contempt cases should be undertaken and of the need to comply strictly with the rules.
(2) Service of committal orders should always be made personally on the contemnor. (3) Either Form N111 should be resurrected and amended to include a reminder that there is a right to apply to purge a contempt or Form N79 should be revised to take account of the fact that the proceedings may begin with an arrest under a power of arrest attached to an injunction issued under the Domestic Violence and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1976.
I would dismiss this appeal.
NOLAN J. I agree.
SCOTT L.J.
The particular question which arises in each of these appeals is whether delay in giving the contemnor a copy of the committal order requires the order to be set aside and the sentence of imprisonment quashed.
There also arises a more general question, which is whether it is open to this court to exercise the statutory discretion conferred by section 13(3) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960, or R.S.C., Ord. 59, r. 10(3), so as to perfect an invalid order of committal and thereby to continue the imprisonment of a contemnor currently in prison under an invalid order.
In each of these appeals it has been rightly accepted by counsel for the contemnor that the hearing below of the committal application was impeccable, that the sentence imposed for the contempts of court found proved cannot be criticised and the committal order properly specified each of the contempts for which the contemnor had been sentenced.
The only procedural defect alleged in M.'s appeal is that the committal order was not served on M. personally, or, alternatively, that he was not served until 3 July, nearly a month after he had been committed to prison.
In Butler's appeal there were two procedural defects that were relied on.
First, the committal order was not served on Mr. Butler within 36 hours after the execution of the committal warrant.
This was a breach of Ord. 29, r. 1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981.
Second, the committal order was in Form N111 rather than Form N79 and contained no reference to the right of the contemnor to apply to the court to purge his contempt and ask to be released.
In each of the appeals the first question is whether a procedural irregularity has occurred.
If it has, the second question is whether the irregularity must lead to the committal order being set aside and the release of the contemnor.
The M. appeal
In my judgment, the facts of the case reveal no procedural irregularity.
The hearing below took place on 5 June 1992.
The committal order was sealed on 11 June 1992 and copies were then sent to M.'s solicitors and to the governor of the prison in which M. was held.
These steps complied with the requirements of the instruction issued by the Clerk of the Rules to which Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. has referred.
No breach of any of the Rules of the Supreme Court was committed nor was there any element of unfairness to M. in the post-committal procedure that was followed.
The Butler appeal
Butler's appeal does at least have the merit of being based on an admitted breach of the County Court Rules.
There was a breach of Ord. 29, r. 1(5) in that the committal order was not served on Mr. Butler until well after the expiration of the 36 hour period therein prescribed.
It is said that, in addition, the use of Form N111 instead of Form N79 was a procedural impropriety.
I do not agree.
I can see nothing the matter with the use of Form N111 although I agree that the form would be improved by a reference to the contemnor's right to try to purge his contempt.
An appeal against a committal order based upon a failure to serve the committal order on the contemnor presents somewhat of a paradox.
If the procedure employed up to the foot of the hearing of the committal application cannot be criticised and the committal order has been correctly drawn, it is difficult to see how there can be an appeal against the committal order.
How can an administrative failure to serve an unimpeachable committal order invalidate the committal order?
The answer to the problem is, I think, that the whole process whereby a contemnor is dealt with for contempt of court is under the control of the court and, in particular, of the judge before whom the committal application comes.
A failure in respect of any part of that process is a judicial failure suitable to be dealt with by the process of an appeal to this court.
This analysis prompts one or two comments.
First, there is, to my mind, a sharp distinction between an error invalidating the committal order itself and a procedural impropriety following the making of an impeccable committal order.
An error of the former sort can, subject to relief under the slip rule, only be dealt with by process of appeal.
The first instance judge will, so far as the committal order is concerned, have become functus.
But a procedural error that has followed the making of an order — a failure to serve the order is the obvious example but there may be others — can, in my opinion, be dealt with by the judge who made the order.
It is accepted procedure that an imprisoned contemnor can apply to the first instance court to purge his contempt and be released from prison.
In general a failure to serve a committal order in due time would not be expected to lead to the quashing of the sentence of imprisonment.
But it is possible that the length of the delay in service of the order, coupled with the other circumstances of a particular case, might justify the conclusion that it would be an injustice to the contemnor to continue his incarceration.
I can see nothing in principle to prevent a contemnor applying to the first instance court to be released from custody on the ground that the failure to serve him with the committal order has kept him in ignorance of the contempts for which he has been imprisoned and that, in the circumstances, justice requires his release.
It would, in my opinion, in many ways be more logical for an application to be released from custody on the ground of non-service or delayed service of a committal notice to be made to a first instance judge rather than direct to this court.
I would accept, however, that this court's appellate jurisdiction is wide enough to enable it to entertain such an application.
The procedural impropriety, namely, the breach of Ord. 29, r. 1(5) of the County Court Rules 1981 on which Butler's appeal is based, is admitted.
It is plain, however, that Mr. Butler has suffered no injustice whatever.
He knew very well for what contempts he had been committed.
The late service on him of the committal order did not hinder any appeal or application for release that he might otherwise have made.
The procedural impropriety does not, in the circumstances of this case, warrant the setting aside of the committal order or Mr. Butler's release from prison.
I agree that this appeal should be dismissed.
On the general question regarding the exercise by this court of the statutory discretion conferred by section 13(3) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 and by R.S.C., Ord. 59, r. 10(3), I have nothing I can add to what Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. has said, with which I am in respectful and complete agreement.
Appeals dismissed.
Local authority's application for costs adjourned.
Legal aid taxation of contemnors' costs.
Leave to appeal refused.
Solicitors: Powell Spencer & Partners; Head of Legal Services, Brent London Borough Council; Official Solicitor; Tomlinson & Dickinson, Sudbury; Bates Wells & Braithwaite, Sudbury.