

[QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION]
BARCLAYS BANK PLC. v. GLASGOW CITY COUNCIL
KLEINWORT BENSON LTD. v. SAME
1992 Feb. 19, 20; 27
Hirst J.
Conflict of Laws — Jurisdiction — Restitution — Banks conducting speculative financial transactions on behalf of local authorities — Transactions declared void ab initio— Banks' claims for restitution against Scottish authority brought in England — Motion by Scottish authority to strike out for want of jurisdiction — Whether special jurisdiction in English court — Whether matter ‘relating to a contract’— Whether ‘relating to tort’— Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 (c. 27), Sch.
4, arts.
5(1) (3), 6(1)
The plaintiff banks conducted interest rate swap transactions on behalf of local authorities.
The transactions were subsequently held by the House of Lords to have been ultra vires.
The plaintiffs sought recovery of sums paid under such agreements by means of claims for restitution against the defendants, a Scottish local authority.
The actions were begun in England.
Separate actions were commenced by other banks against a number of English local authorities.
The English actions were not combined in a single trial but subject to an order of Steyn J. which provided for the selection of lead cases to ensure determination of the major points of law and to avoid multiplicity of litigation.
The defendants applied to have the plaintiffs' actions struck out on the ground that the proper forum for any claim against them was Scotland and that the special jurisdiction laid down in articles 5 and 6 of the Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters 1968, scheduled to the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982did not apply so as to permit the defendants to be sued in England, notwithstanding that they were domiciled in Scotland.
On the defendants' application:—
Held , allowing the application, that the provision in article 5(1) of the 1968 Convention conferring special jurisdiction in respect of‘matters relating to a contract’ required the existence of either a contractual relationship between the parties giving rise to actual contractual obligations, or a consensual relationship closely akin to a contract and with comparable obligations; and that, since the transactions between the plaintiffs and defendants had been void ab initio , no contracts existed within the meaning of article 5(1); that the jurisdiction under article 5(3) was restricted to claims based on tort, delict or quasi-delict and did not extend to claims for restitution; that article 6(1) was not applicable since under the terms of the order of Steyn J. the restitution claims would not be heard and determined together and, in any event, any irreconcilable judgments would be subject to a final decision of the House of Lords, binding in both England and Scotland; and that, accordingly, there were no grounds for invoking the special jurisdiction to allow the defendants to be sued in England (post, pp. 836F, 837B–D, 838E, 840B–D, 842H — 843B, G, G–H).
Martin Peters Bauunternehmung G.m.b.H. v. Zuid Nederlandse Aannemers Vereniging (Case 34/82)[1983]E.C.R. 987, E.C.J. and Arcado S.P.R.L. v. Haviland S.A. (Case 9/87)[1988]E.C.R. 1539, E.C.J. applied.
Kalfelis v. Bankhaus Schrôder, Mûnchmeyer, Hengst and Co.
(Case 189/87)[1988]E.C.R. 5565, E.C.J. considered.
The following cases are referred to in the judgments:
Arcado S.P.R.L. v. Haviland S.A. (Case 9/87)[1988]E.C.R. 1539, E.C.J.
Effer S.p.A. v. Kantner (Case 38/81)[1982]E.C.R. 825, E.C.J.
Engdiv Ltd. v. G. Percy Trentham Ltd. , 1990 S.L.T. 617
Ets.
A. de Bloos S.P.R.L. v. Société en commandite par actions Bouyer (Case 14/76)[1976]E.C.R. 1497, E.C.J.
Gubisch Maschinenfabrik K.G. v. Palumbo (Case 144/86)[1987]E.C.R. 4861, E.C.J.
Hazell v. Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council [1992]2 A.C. 1;[1991]2 W.L.R. 372;[1991]1 All E.R.
545, H.L. (E.)
Ivenel v. Schwab (Case 133/81)[1982]E.C.R. 1891, E.C.J.
Kalfelis v. Bankhaus Schrôder, Mûnchmeyer, Hengst and Co.
(Case 189/87)[1988]E.C.R. 5565, E.C.J.
Martin Peters Bauunternehmung G.m.b.H. v. Zuid Nederlandse Aannemers Vereniging (Case 34/82)[1983]E.C.R. 987, E.C.J.
Tesam Distribution Ltd. v. Schuh Mode Team G.m.b.H.[1990]I.L.Pr. 149, C.A.
Union Transport Plc. v. Continental Lines S.A. [1992]1 W.L.R. 15;[1991]1 All E.R.
161, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases, supplied by courtesy of counsel, were cited in argument:
Arab Bank Ltd. v. Barclays Bank [1954]A.C. 495;[1954]2 W.L.R. 1022;[1954]2 All E.R.
226, H.L. (E.)
Bank of Scotland v. Seitz , 1990 S.L.T. 584
Duval (Charles) & Co.
Ltd. v. Gans [1904]2 K.B.
685, C.A.
Eider, The [1893]P. 119, C.A.
Gascoine v. Pyrah,The Times, 26 November 1991
Handelskwerkerij G.S. Bier v. Mines de Potasse d'Alsace S.A. (Case 21/76)[1976]E.C.R. 1735, E.C.J.
Industrie Tessili Italiana Como v. Dunlop A.G. (Case 12/76)[1976]E.C.R. 1473, E.C.J.
Lipkin Gorman (a Firm) v. Karpnale Ltd. [1987]1 W.L.R. 987;[1989]1 W.L.R. 1340, C.A.;[1991]2 A.C. 540;[1991]3 W.L.R. 10, H.L. (E.)
Mercury Publicity Ltd. v. Wolfgang Loerke G.m.b.H.,
The Times, 21 October 1991; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 1036 of 1991, C.A.
Rich (Marc) & Co.
A.G. v. Societa Italiana Impianti P.A. [1989]1 Lloyd's Rep. 548, Hirst J. and C.A.
Shenavai v. Kreischer (Case 266/85)[1987]E.C.R. 239, E.C.J.
Shevill v. Presse Alliance S.A. [1992]2 W.L.R. 1;[1992]1 All E.R.
409, C.A.
Somafer S.A. v. Saar-Ferngas A.G. (Case 33/78)[1978]E.C.R. 2183, E.C.J.
SUMMONSES
By writ dated 6 August 1991 the plaintiffs in the first action, Barclays Bank Plc. claimed £389,431 from the defendants, Glasgow City Council, being moneys had and received to the plaintiffs' use as having been paid under void contracts; or contracts for which the consideration had totally failed; which were traceable by the plaintiffs into the hands of the defendants, the retention of which would be unconscionable; which would cause the defendants to be unjustly enriched; or which the defendants held upon an implied or resulting or constructive trust in favour of the plaintiffs; or to which the plaintiffs were entitled on the grounds that the defendants had spent the money on their lawful activities or applied them towards the discharge of their liabilities.
By writ dated 6 September 1991 the plaintiffs in the second action, Kleinwort Benson Ltd., claimed restitution of sums totalling £807,230.31, alleged to have been paid to the defendants in respect of similar agreements between 7 and 15 September 1982, and to trace the said sums.
By summonses dated 16 October, against each plaintiff, the defendants sought a declaration that in the circumstances the English court had no jurisdiction over the defendants in respect of the subject matter of the claim or the relief or remedy sought and an order that the action be dismissed on the grounds that the defendants were domiciled in Scotland for the purposes of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 and that Schedule 4 to the Act provided that the defendants should, subject to exceptions which were not applicable, be sued in the courts of Scotland.
The hearing was in chambers and judgment was delivered in open court.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Jonathan Tecks for the defendants.
Thomas Beazley for the plaintiffs.
27 February.
HIRST J. read the following judgment.
The applicants in these two summonses, the City of Glasgow District Council (‘Glasgow’), have been sued in two separate actions by Barclays Bank Plc. and Kleinwort Benson Ltd. respectively (‘the banks’), in the case of Barclays for £389,431 in relation to sums paid under one single interest rate swap agreement, and in the case of Kleinwort Benson for £807,230.31 in relation to sums paid under seven interest rate swap agreements.
Following the decision of the House of Lords in Hazell v. Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council [1992]2 A.C. 1 that all such transactions were ultra vires the local authority concerned and void ab initio, the banks claim the return of the above-mentioned sums on a restitutionary basis on the footing that the consideration for which the respective agreements were concluded has wholly failed; that the payments were made under a mistake of fact so that it is unjust and unconscionable that Glasgow should be entitled to retain them; that the sums are money had and received for the use of the banks; that the sums are held by Glasgow on implied or resulting or constructive trusts of the bank; and that the banks are entitled to trace them.
In the present summonses Glasgow seeks declarations that the court has no jurisdiction over it in respect of these claims, and asks the court to order that the actions be dismissed.
These are two of a very large number of similar actions brought by various banks against various local authorities, in respect of which a lead action order has been made to which I refer below.
I am giving this judgment in open court at the request of all parties.
Rules governing the court's jurisdiction
Section 16(1) of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 stipulates:
‘(1) The provisions set out in Schedule 4 (which contains a modified version of Title II of the 1968 Convention) shall have effect for determining, for each part of the United Kingdom, whether the courts of law of that part, or any particular court of law in that part, have or has jurisdiction in proceedings where —(a ) the subject matter of the proceedings is within the scope of the 1968 Convention as determined by article 1 (whether or not the Convention has effect in relation to the proceedings); and (b ) the defendant or defender is domiciled in the United Kingdom or the proceedings are of a kind mentioned in article 16 (exclusive jurisdiction regardless of domicile).
It is common ground between the parties that these two actions were both within the ambit of article 1, which of course comprises ‘civil and commercial matters,’ and that Schedule 4 therefore applies to determine the court's jurisdiction.
Article 2 of Schedule 4 provides: ‘Subject to the provisions of this Title, persons domiciled in a part of the United Kingdom shall…be sued in the courts of that part.’
It is therefore also common ground that prima facie Glasgow must be sued in Scotland because of course it is domiciled in Scotland, and that the banks are only entitled to sue in England if they can bring themselves within the special jurisdiction laid down in articles 5 and 6 of Schedule 4.
These articles, so far as relevant, provide:
‘Special jurisdiction.5.
A person domiciled in a part of the United Kingdom may, in another part of the United Kingdom, be sued:(1) in matters relating to a contract, in the courts for the place of performance of the obligation in question;…(3) in matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict, in the courts for the place where the harmful event occurred or in the case of a threatened wrong is likely to occur;…(8) in proceedings —(a ) concerning a debt secured on immovable property; or (b ) which are brought to assert, declare or determine proprietary or possessory rights, or rights of security, in or over movable property, or to obtain authority to dispose of movable property, in the courts of the part of the United Kingdom in which the property is situated.
‘6.
A person domiciled in part of the United Kingdom may, in another part of the United Kingdom, also be sued:(1) where he is one of a number of defendants, in the courts for the place where any of them is domiciled;…
Section 16(3) (a ) of the Act of 1982 provides:
‘In determining any question as to the meaning or effect of any provision contained in Schedule 4 —(a ) regard shall be had to any relevant principles laid down by the European Court in connection with Title II of the 1968 Convention and to any relevant decision of that court as to the meaning or effect of any provision of that Title;…
Article 5(1): the rival submissions
The decision on this paragraph turns on the proper construction of the crucial words ‘in matters relating to a contract,’ it not being disputed that the place of performance of the obligation in question (if it exists) was England.
Mr. Tecks submitted that the European Court of Justice authorities, cited below, show that the crucial words refer to obligations which have their basis in contract or in a closely similar nexus such as that existing between an association and its members, so that the matters in question must be contractual or closely akin to contractual.
In the present case, he submitted, the House of Lords has now conclusively ruled that there is not and never was a contract, and it is thus apparent on the plain words of article 5(1) itself that these restitutionary claims cannot possibly be properly classified as matters relating to a contract.
This principle, he submitted, is further exemplified by the line of the Court of Justice authority which shows that the jurisdiction of the court may be invoked under this article where there is a dispute between the parties as to whether a contract in fact exists, but only if that dispute is real and genuine.
Mr. Beazley submitted:(i) the Court of Justice authorities have laid down that the wording of the Schedule is to be given an independent interpretation and is not to be construed in accordance with national law.
(ii) There is a general overriding principle that the Schedule must be interpreted by reference principally to the system and objectives of the Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters signed at Brussels on 27 September 1968 in order to ensure that it is fully effective; in order to strengthen in the Community the legal protection of persons therein established; and in order to contribute to the proper administration of justice within the Community by preventing parallel proceedings before the courts of different contracting states, and avoiding conflict between decisions which might result from permitting such parallel proceedings to continue.
(iii) So far as article 5(1) itself is concerned, he submitted that it is clearly established by Court of Justice decisions that it reflects the close links created by the contract between the parties thereto, and the need to resolve all difficulties which may arise in connection with the contract in the same court in a country which has a close connection with the case, i.e. the court in the country where the obligation in question has to be performed.
(iv) Although the claims in these actions are not made for the performance of the obligations under the contracts or as a result of their breach, they do concern matters relating to a contract, since the court is determining the consequences of the nullity of the contracts, particularly with regard to the contractual matters of total failure of consideration and payments under a mistake.
In support of his interpretation of article 5(1) Mr. Beazley relied on the following additional points.
(a) The provision of article 10(1) (e ) in the Convention on the Law applicable to Contractual Obligations 1980 (‘the Rome Convention’), enacted into English law by the Contracts (Applicable Law) Act 1990, that the law applicable to a contract shall govern, inter alia, ‘the consequences of nullity of the contract,’ supports the view that on the proper independent interpretation of article 5(1) the consequences of nullity must be treated as within the scope of the phrase ‘matters relating to a contract.’
(b) In English law the choice of law rules governing claims for restitution are influenced by the claim being connected with a contract, having regard to the English conflict of laws rule that the proper law of the obligation to restore a benefit, if the obligation arises in connection with a contract, is the proper law of the contract:Dicey & Morris, The Conflict of Laws , 11th ed. (1987), p. 1350, r. 203. (c) Quasi-contractual claims, at least where there is a contract involved, should probably fall per se under article 5(1): see the opinion of the editors of Dicey & Morris , at p. 341, to this effect, and the decision of the Scottish courts that a statutory claim to contribution falls within the article in Engdiv Ltd. v. G. Percy Trentham Ltd. , 1990 S.L.T. 617, 621. (d) In the case of a claim for the return of moneys paid under an ineffective contract, there is no artificiality in deducing an implied promise to pay, even though the old theory that restitution was based on the concept of such an implied promise is now largely discredited.
The European Court cases and the Rome Convention
In Martin Peters Bauunternehmung G.m.b.H. v. Zuid Nederlandse Aannemers Vereniging (Case 34/82)[1983]E.C.R. 987, 991 the Supreme Court of The Netherlands referred to the Court of Justice the following question:
‘Does article 5(1) of the [Brussels]Convention apply to claims which are made by an association constituted under private law possessing legal personality against one of its members in a matter relating to obligations in regard to the payment of a sum of money and which have their basis in the relationship between the parties by virtue of membership, such relationship arising from the defendant party's joining the association as a member by virtue of a legal transaction entered into for that purpose?
The court's decision, so far as relevant, was, at pp. 1002–1003:
‘9.
Thus the concept of matters relating to a contract serves as a criterion to define the scope of one of the rules of special jurisdiction available to the plaintiff.
Having regard to the objectives and the general scheme of the Convention, that it is important that, in order to ensure as far as possible the equality and uniformity of the rights and obligations arising out of the Convention for the contracting states and the persons concerned, that concept should not be interpreted simply as referring to the national law of one or other of the states concerned.
‘10.
Therefore, and as the court ruled on similar grounds in relation to the words, ‘the operation of a branch, agency or other establishment’ referred in article 5(5) of the Convention (judgment of 22 November 1978 in Somafer v. Saar-Ferngas A.G. (Case 33/78)[1978]E.C.R. 2183), the concept of matters relating to a contract should be regarded as an independent concept which, for the purpose of the application of the Convention, must be interpreted by reference chiefly to the system and objectives of the Convention, in order to ensure it is fully effective.
‘11.
In this regard it should be pointed out that although article 5 makes provision in a number of cases for a special jurisdiction which the plaintiff may choose, this is because of the existence, in certain clearly-defined situations, of a particularly close connecting factor between a dispute and the court which may be called upon to hear it, with a view to the efficacious conduct of the proceedings.
‘12.
In that context, the designation by article 5(1) of the Convention of the courts for the place of performance of the obligation in question expresses the concern that, because of the close links created by a contract between the parties thereto, it should be possible for all the difficulties which may arise on the occasion of the performance of a contractual obligation to be brought before the same court: that for the place of performance of the obligation.
‘13.
In that regard it appears that membership of an association creates between the members close links of the same kind as those which are created between the parties to a contract and that consequently the obligations to which the national court refers may be regarded as contractual for the purpose of the application of article 5(1) of the Convention.
‘14.
Since under national legal systems it is usually stipulated that the place in which the association is established is to be the place of performance of obligations arising out of the act of becoming a member, the application of article 5(1) of the Convention also has practical advantages: the court for the place in which the association has its seat is in fact usually the best fitted to understand the documents of constitution, rules and decisions of the association, and also the circumstances out of which the dispute arose.
In Arcado S.P.R.L. v. Haviland S.A. (Case 9/87)[1988]E.C.R. 1539, 1541, the Cour D'Appel in Brussels referred the following question to the Court of Justice:
‘Are proceedings relating to the wrongful repudiation of an (independent) commercial agency agreement and the payment of commission due under such an agreement proceedings in matters relating to a contract within the meaning of article 5(1) of the Brussels Convention of 27 September 1968?
The court's decision, so far as relevant, was, at pp. 1554–1555:
‘10.
As the court held in its judgment of 22 March 1983 in Martin Peters Bauunternehmung G.m.b.H. v. Zuid Nederlandse Aannemers Vereniging (Case 34/82)[1983]E.C.R. 987 the concept of ‘matters relating to a contract’ serves as a criterion to define the scope of one of the rules of special jurisdiction available to the plaintiff.
Having regard to the objective and the general scheme of the Convention, it is important that, in order to ensure as far as possible the equality and uniformity of the rights and obligations arising out of the Convention for the contracting states and the persons concerned, that concept should not be interpreted simply as referring to the national law of one or other of the states concerned.
‘11.
Consequently, the concept of ‘matters relating to a contract’ is to be regarded as an independent concept which, for the purpose of the application of the Convention, must be interpreted by reference principally to the system and objectives of the Convention in order to ensure that it is fully effective.
‘12.
There is no doubt that a claim for the payment of commission due under an independent commercial agency agreement finds its very basis in that agreement and consequently constitutes a matter relating to a contract within the meaning of article 5(1) of the Convention.
‘13.
The same view must be taken of a claim for compensation for the wrongful repudiation of such an agreement as the basis for such compensation is the failure to comply with a contractual obligation.
‘14.
As regards, more particularly, the right of a self-employed commercial agent to notice, its contractual nature and therefore the contractual nature of the compensation in lieu of notice were recognised in articles 15 and 17 of Council Directive 86/653 of 18 December 1986 on the coordination of the laws of the member states relating to self-employed commercial agents (Official Journal 1986 No.
L. 382, p. 17).
‘15.
In addition, article 10 of the (Rome) Convention on the Law applicable to Contractual Obligations of 19 June 1980 (Official Journal 1980 No.
L. 266, p. 1) confirms the contractual nature of judicial proceedings such as those in point inasmuch as it provides that the law applicable to the contract governs the consequences of a total or partial failure to comply with obligations arising under it and consequently the contractual liability of the party responsible for such breach.
In Union Transport Plc. v. Continental Lines S.A. [1992]1 W.L.R. 15 the House of Lords held that under article 5(1) of the Brussels Convention the court's jurisdiction was to be determined by the place of performance of the principal obligation in the contract, applying the Court of Justice decision in Ets. A. de Bloos S.P.R.L. v. Société en commandite par actions Bouyer (Case 14/76)[1976]E.C.R. 1497 described in the speech of Lord Goff of Chieveley [1992]1 W.L.R. 15, 19:
‘That case was concerned with an exclusive distribution agreement, under which Bouyer, a French company, conferred on de Bloos, a Belgian company, exclusive distribution rights for Bouyer's products in Belgium, Luxembourg and Zaire.
De Bloos commenced proceedings against Bouyer in Tournai in Belgium claiming, on the ground that Bouyer had committed a unilateral breach of the contract, an order for the dissolution of the agreement and damages.
Bouyer invoked the Convention.
The court held that the place where the goods were to be delivered and where bills were payable was Bouyer's registered office in France, and on that basis the court declined jurisdiction.
On appeal, the Court of Appeal at Mons referred the matter to the (European) Court of Justice.
The Court of Justice held that the word ‘obligation’ in article 5(1) refers to the contractual obligation forming the basis of the legal proceedings; and that, in a case such as de Bloos , where the plaintiff asserts the right to be paid damages and seeks dissolution of the contract on the ground of the wrongful conduct of the other party, the obligation referred to in article 5(1) is still that which arises under the contract, the non-performance of which is relied upon to support such claims.
It followed that regard must be had to the contractual obligation under consideration, and not to the contract as a whole.
In Gubisch Maschinenfabrik K.G. v. Palumbo (Case 144/86)[1987]E.C.R. 4861, which Mr. Beazley relied on as laying down the broad general principles which should be applicable, and which concerned the interpretation of article 21 of the Brussels Convention, the Court of Justice stated, at p. 4874:
‘8.
According to its preamble, which incorporates in part the terms of article 220, the Convention seeks in particular to facilitate the recognition and enforcement of judgments of courts or tribunals and to strengthen in the Community the legal protection of persons therein established.
Article 21, together with article 22 on related actions, is contained in section 8 of Title II of the Convention; that section is intended, in the interests of the proper administration of justice within the Community, to prevent parallel proceedings before the courts of different contracting states and to avoid conflicts between decisions which might result therefrom.
Those rules are therefore designed to preclude, in so far as is possible and from the outset, the possibility of a situation arising such as that referred to in article 27(3), that is to say the non-recognition of a judgment on account of its irreconcilability with a judgment given in a dispute between the same parties in the state in which recognition is sought.
In Effer S.p.A.
v. Kantner (Case 38/81)[1982]E.C.R. 825 the Court of Justice held that a plaintiff may invoke the jurisdiction of the courts of the place of performance of a contract in accordance with article 5(1) even where the existence of the contract on which the claim is based is in dispute between the parties.
In Tesam Distribution Ltd. v. Schuh Mode Team G.m.b.H.[1990]I.L.Pr. 149, the Court of Appeal had to apply Effer S.p.A.
v. Kantner in a case where the plaintiff produced evidence, controverted by the defendant, that a contract existed.
Stocker L.J.
interpreted the Effer case as follows, at p. 165:
‘If in order to decide the question of jurisdiction it is necessary to determine finally whether a contract exists or not it would seem to follow that if the conclusion arrived at was that no contract existed then ex hypothesi the conditions of article 5(1) would not be met and the court would have no jurisdiction.
It would seem to follow from that that the unsuccessful plaintiff can sue again in the court of the defendant's domicile.
I do not read the decision in Effer v. Kantner as having that effect which would be contrary to the form in which the question posed was answered in that decision.
Moreover, vide the comments cited in Schlosser (Official Journal 1979 No.
C. 59, p. 71) and perhaps inferentially from the Effer decision on an interlocutory application the U.K. court would be bound to decide the jurisdiction issue as a preliminary one on the information placed before it.
In my view the effect of the Effer v. Kantner decision is that a court other than a court of the defendant's country of domicile cannot accept the jurisdiction on the mere assertion or pleading of the plaintiff.
There must be evidence adduced from which a conclusion can properly and genuinely be drawn that a contract existed and that the place of performance was the country in which the action was brought.
Once jurisdiction can properly be established on this basis then the effect of article 5(1) in the light of the Effer v. Kantner decision is that the court has jurisdiction finally to determine the issues between the parties.
If after full trial the conclusion is that no contract existed then since the court had jurisdiction to try the issue that determination is final and binding upon the parties.
Nicholls L.J.
expressed a similar view, at p. 158, and O'Connor L.J.
agreed.
In the Rome Convention, article 10(1) provides:
‘Scope of the applicable law .
1.
The law applicable to a contract by virtue of articles 3 to 6 and 12 of this Convention shall govern in particular:(a ) interpretation;(b ) performance;(c ) within the limits of the powers conferred on the court by its procedural law, the consequences of breach, including the assessment of damages in so far as it is governed by rules of law;(d ) the various ways of extinguishing obligations, and prescription and limitations of actions;(e ) the consequences of nullity of the contract.
The report of Professor Giuliano and Professor Lagarde.
(Official Journal 1980 No.
C. 282, p. 1), and which by virtue of section 3(3) of the Act of 1990 may be considered in ascertaining the meaning or effect of any provision of the Rome Convention, explains the genesis of sub-paragraph (e ), at p. 33:
‘Sub-paragraph (e ) also makes the consequences of nullity subject to the applicable law.
The working party's principal objective in introducing this provision was to make the refunds which the parties have to pay each other subsequent to a finding of nullity of the contract subject to the applicable law.
Some delegations have indicated their opposition to this approach on the grounds that, under their legal systems, the consequences of nullity of the contract are non-contractual in nature.
The majority of delegations have nevertheless said they are in favour of including such consequences within the scope of the law of contracts, but in order to take account of the opposition expressed provision has been made for any contracting state to enter a reservation on this matter: article 22(1) (b ).
A reservation to this effect is contained in section 2(2) of the Act of 1990, which provides that, inter alia, paragraph 10(1) (e ) of the Rome Convention shall not have the force of law in the United Kingdom.
Analysis and conclusions
The House of Lords having held that the swap transactions were void ab initio, the suggestion that the restitutionary claims in these actions are in matters relating to a contract seems to me to be placing a very severe strain indeed on the language of article 5(1).
I can find nothing either in the Peters case [1983]E.C.R. 987 or in the Arcado case [1988]E.C.R. 1539 to support such a conclusion.
Mr. Beazley relied particularly on the Peters case, which he submitted shows that there does not have to be an actual contract in order to bring the case within article 5(1); but the relationship in that case between the association and its members was a consensual relationship which was manifestly very closely akin to an actual contract and in no way comparable, in my judgment, to the position here where there is no contract.
Mr. Beazley also relied on the general statements of principle in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Peters case [1983]E.C.R. 987 quoted above, which he submitted echoed the general principles laid down in the Gubisch case [1987]E.C.R. 4861; these are important principles, to which full weight must be given, but they cannot in my judgment warrant the court placing a construction on the words of article 5(1) which they can not reasonably bear, and moreover they must be balanced against another general principle, laid down for example in Kalfelis v. Bankhaus Schrôder, Mûnchmeyer, Hengst and Co.
(Case 189/87)[1988]E.C.R. 5565, 5585, that the special jurisdictions enumerated in articles 5 and 6 of the Convention constitute derogations from the principle that jurisdiction is vested in the courts of the state where the defendant is domiciled, and as such must be interpreted restrictively: see also para. 8 of the same judgment.
In the Arcado case [1988]E.C.R. 1539 a commercial agency agreement was in existence, and the ratio of the Court of Justice was that a claim for compensation for wrongful repudiation found its very basis in that contract and hence was within the scope of article 5(1).
This does not assist Mr. Beazley.
In my judgment, the Peters case [1983]E.C.R. 987 and the Arcado case are both consistent with Mr. Tecks' proposition that there must be either a contractual relationship giving rise to actual contractual obligations, or a consensual obligation similar to a contract (as in the Peters case) giving rise to a comparable obligation, for the case to fall within the crucial test in article 5(1).
This conclusion is, I think, reinforced by the de Bloos [1976]E.C.R. 1497 and Union Transport [1992]1 W.L.R. 15 cases, showing that the word ‘obligation’ in article 5(1) refers to the contractual obligation forming the basis of the legal proceedings; and also by the interpretation by the Court of Appeal of the Effer case [1982]E.C.R. 825 in the Tesam case [1990]I.L.Pr. 149, showing that where there is no evidence of the existence of a contract, and therefore no real dispute as to its existence, the court has no jurisdiction under article 5(1).
So far as the Rome Convention is concerned, I of course accept that it is legitimate and appropriate to take its provisions into account in construing article 5(1): the Arcado case [1988]E.C.R. 1539, 1555, and see, also,Ivenel v. Schwab (Case 133/81)[1982]E.C.R. 1891, 1900.
However, the Rome Convention cannot properly be treated as determinative of the construction of article 5(1).
Moreover, in the present case, as Mr. Tecks submitted, the court is in my judgment entitled, in construing Schedule 4 to the Act of 1982, which is dealing with jurisdictions within the United Kingdom, to take into account the fact that the United Kingdom has derogated from the Rome Convention by excluding article 10(1) (e ) from the law of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Beazley suggested that to do this would be adopting an isolationist attitude, but I am unable to accept this submission, particularly since Schedule 4 itself is a modified version of its counterpart in the Brussels Convention, which has been adapted in substantive respects to fit United Kingdom requirements, e.g., by the addition of the last 12 words to article 5(3), and by the insertion of the entirely new article 5(8) on which Mr. Beazley relies in the present case.
In my judgment, when dealing with the Rome Convention in relation to persons of United Kingdom domicile under Schedule 4, as in the present case, the court can and should likewise take into account substantive derogations from the Rome Convention in the law of the United Kingdom, especially one so directly apposite as that presently in question.
Furthermore, looking at the question of the wider European context, I am not satisfied that article 10(1) (e ) of the Rome Convention is a good guide to the interpretation of the crucial words in article 5(1) of Schedule 4.
It was no doubt proper and necessary for the Rome Convention to stipulate a proper law applicable to the consequences of nullity of the contract in order to embody a comprehensive conflicts of law code; but it by no means follows that the consequences of nullity are matters relating to a contract, since ex hypothesi no contract existed; nor is article 10(1) (e ) comparable with article 10(1) (c )(which is the sub-paragraph cited in the Arcado case [1988]E.C.R. 1539) or indeed with sub-paragraphs (a ),(b ) and (d ) of article 10(1), since in all these instances there is a contract in existence.
So far as Mr. Beazley's other points are concerned:(a) I do not accept that the English choice of law rule is relevant, since we are not here dealing with a choice of law problem.
(b) I do not accept that quasi-contractual claims, even where a contract is involved, are properly to be treated as falling per se within article 5(1), having regard both to the general considerations I have already advanced in my analysis of the cases such as Peters [1983]E.C.R. 987, and also because it is difficult to locate a place of performance for a quasi-contractual obligation.
It is noteworthy that the text book writers are not unanimous on this point: see Kaye, Civil Jurisdiction and Enforcement of Foreign Judgments ,(1987), p. 490, where the author doubts whether actions in quasi-contract on the ground of unjust enrichment fall within article 5(1), and cites in the footnote German and French authorities expressing conflicting views.
(c) I do not think the Engdiv case, 1990 S.L.T. 617 assists Mr. Beazley, since both the pursuers seeking contribution and the defenders resisting it were parties to the building contract at issue in the case, so that it was difficult to resist the submission that the claim for contribution in that case was in a matter relating to a contract.
(d) I do not think Mr. Beazley can draw any comfort from the old implied contract theory in restitution cases, since as he himself recognises that theory is now discredited.
For all these reasons, I have come to the conclusion, and I hold, that the banks have failed to bring themselves within article 5(1).
Article 5(3)
At first sight it would seem difficult to bring a restitutionary claim within this article, and Mr. Beazley's case depends entirely on the construction which he seeks to put on the Court of Justice decision in Kalfelis v. Bankhaus Schrôder, Mûnchmeyer, Hengst and Co.
(Case 189/87)[1988]E.C.R. 5565.
In that case, the Bundesgerichtshof referred, at p. 5569, two questions to the Court of Justice, the first of which is relevant to article 6(1) below, and the second of which is presently relevant and was in the following terms:
‘(2)(a) Must the term ‘tort’ in article 5(3) of the E.E.C.
Convention be construed independently of the Convention or must it be construed according to the law applicable in the individual case (lex causae), which is determined by the private international law of the court applied to?(b) Does article 5(3) of the E.E.C.
Convention confer, in respect of an action based on claims in tort and contract and for unjust enrichment, accessory jurisdiction on account of factual connection even in respect of the claims not based on tort?
The reference arose out of an action brought by the plaintiff against a number of banks and other defendants, based on contractual liability, tort, and unjust enrichment.
The decision of the Court of Justice, so far as relevant, was, at pp. 5584–5586:
‘15.
With respect to the first part of the question, it must be observed that the concept of ‘matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict’ serves as a criterion for defining the scope of one of the rules concerning the special jurisdictions available to the plaintiff.
As the court held with respect to the expression ‘matters relating to a contract’ used in article 5(1) (see the judgments of 22 March 1983 in Peters [1983]E.C.R. 987, and of 8 March 1988 in Arcado [1988]E.C.R. 1539), having regard to the objectives and general scheme of the Convention, it is important that, in order to ensure as far as possible the equality and uniformity of the rights and obligations arising out of the Convention of the contracting states and the persons concerned, that concept should not be interpreted simply as referring to the national law of one or other of the states concerned.
‘16.
Accordingly, the concept of matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict must be regarded as an autonomous concept which is to be interpreted, for the application of the Convention, principally by reference to the scheme and objectives of the Convention in order to ensure that the latter is given full effect.
‘17.
In order to ensure uniformity in all the member states, it must be recognised that the concept of ‘matters relating to tort, delict and quasi-delict’ covers all actions which seek to establish the liability of a defendant and which are not related to a ‘contract’within the meaning of article 5(1).
‘18.
It must therefore be stated in reply to the first part of the second question that the term ‘matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict’ within the meaning of article 5(3) of the Convention must be regarded as an independent concept covering all actions which seek to establish the liability of a defendant and which are not related to a ‘contract’within the meaning of article 5(1).
‘19.
With respect to the second part of the question, it must be observed, as already indicated above, that the ‘special jurisdictions' enumerated in articles 5 and 6 of the Convention constitute derogations from the principle that jurisdiction is vested in the courts of the State where the defendant is domiciled and as such must be interpreted restrictively.
It must therefore be recognised that a court which has jurisdiction under article 5(3) over an action in so far as it is based on tort or delict does not have jurisdiction over that action in so far as it is not so based.
‘20.
Whilst it is true that disadvantages arise from different aspects of the same dispute being adjudicated upon by different courts, it must be pointed out, on the one hand, that a plaintiff is always entitled to bring his action in its entirety before the courts for the domicile of the defendant and, on the other, that article 22 of the Convention allows the first court seised, in certain  circumstances , to hear the case in its entirety provided that there is a connection between the actions brought before the different courts.
Mr. Beazley submitted that the court's decision in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the judgment, which is also reflected in the answer given to the question in the court's ruling, is conclusive in his favour and determinative of the construction of article 5(3); and that in consequence articles 5(1) and 5(3) are to be construed as mutually exclusive, but as all-embracing so far as actions to establish any kind of liability of the defendants are concerned.
I am unable to accept this interpretation of the judgment.
It seems to me that the judgment must be read as a whole, and that paragraphs 19 to 20, dealing with question 2(b) are completely inconsistent with Mr. Beazley's construction, seeing that if he were right article 5(3) would become a ‘catch-all’ provision, and liability not based on tort, delict or quasi-delict would fall within it, notwithstanding the explicit statement to the contrary in the last two lines of paragraph 19.
In my judgment, the word ‘liability’ in paragraphs 17 and 18 must be interpreted as connoting liability within the scope of the article 5(3) categories, i.e. liability in tort, delict or quasi-delict.
On this construction, which I do not think does violence to paragraphs 17 and 18, the judgment as a whole is completely consistent.
I should add that the court's answer in paragraph 19 to question 2(b), which referred to claims in ‘tort and contract and for unjust enrichment ’(emphasis added) would seem to have the effect of ruling out the third heading since it is a restitutionary claim not based on tort.
This construction of article 5(3) is, I think, reinforced, as Mr. Tecks submitted, by the consideration that the words, ‘harmful event,’ while completely appropriate for claims in tort or delict or quasi-delict, seem most inappropriate for restitutionary claims.
For these reasons I have come to the conclusion and I hold, that the banks have failed to bring their case within article 5(3).
Article 6(1)
The issues under this sub-paragraph turn on the Court of Justice's answer to the first question in the Kalfelis case [1989]E.C.R. 5565, 5569, which was:
‘(1)(a) Must article 6(1) of the E.E.C.
Convention be interpreted as meaning that there must be a connection between the actions against the various defendants?(b) If question (a) must be answered in the affirmative, does the necessary connection between the actions against the various defendants exist if the actions are essentially the same in fact and law (einfache Streitgenossenschaft), or must a connection be assumed to exist only if it is expedient to hear and determine them together to avoid the risk of irreconcilable judgments resulting from separate proceedings (for example, in cases of ‘notwengide Streitgenossenschaft’(compulsory joinder))?
The court's judgment so far as relevant on this question was, at pp. 5583–5584:
‘8.
The principle laid down in the Convention is that jurisdiction is vested in the courts of the state of the defendant's domicile and that the jurisdiction provided for in article 6(1) is an exception to that principle.
It follows that an exception of that kind must be treated in such a manner that there is no possibility of the very existence of that principle being called in question.
‘9.
That possibility might arise if a plaintiff were at liberty to make a claim against a number of defendants with the sole object of ousting the jurisdiction of the courts of the state where one of the defendants is domiciled.
As is stated in the report prepared by the committee of experts which drafted the Convention (Official Journal 1979 No.
C. 59, p. 1), such a possibility must be excluded.
For that purpose, there must be a connection between the claims made against each of the defendants.
‘10.
In order to ensure, as far as possible, the equality and uniformity of the rights and obligations under the Convention of the contracting states and of the persons concerned, the nature of that connection must be  determined independently.
‘11.
In that regard, it must be noted that the above-mentioned report prepared by the committee of experts referred expressly, in its explanation of article 6(1), to the concern to avoid the risk in the contracting states of judgments which are incompatible with each other.
Furthermore, account was taken of that preoccupation in the Convention itself, article 22 of which governs cases of related actions brought before courts in different contracting states.
‘12.
The rule laid down in article 6(1) therefore applies where the actions brought against the various defendants are related when the proceedings are instituted, that is to say where it is expedient to hear and determine them together in order to avoid the risk of irreconcilable judgments resulting from separate proceedings.
It is for the national court to verify in each individual case whether that condition is satisfied.
In the present swap litigation there are a very large number of separate actions, in all of which banks are plaintiffs, and in nearly all of which English local authorities are defendants.
They are not combined together in a single trial but are regulated by an order of Steyn J. on 31 July 1991:
‘1.
The parties listed in schedule 2 hereto shall be the lead actions in the rate swaps litigation.
2. (1) All other rate swap actions (whether or not presently constituted), including any third party proceedings in such actions (whether against local authorities, brokers or otherwise) shall be stayed generally after the close of pleadings in each action or third party proceeding (as the case may be) save for third party proceedings in lead actions against third parties.
(2) For the purposes of this order ‘rate swaps action’ shall mean an action arising out or in connection with any of the kinds of transaction described in appendix A to the judgment of the Divisional Court in Hazell v. Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council [1990]2 Q.B.
697, 739–740, involving a local authority and one or more other parties (whether or not including a local authority).
3.
Parties in actions other than the lead actions shall be at liberty to incorporate in their pleadings such part or parts of the pleadings in the lead actions as they may wish to adopt.
Schedule 2, listing the lead cases, is in the following terms:
‘Interest rate swaps litigation.
Lead cases: 1.
Barclays v. Hammersmith and Fulham (1991/318); Hammersmith and Fulham v. B.Z.W. (1991/654).
2.
Chemical v. Hammersmith and Fulham (1991/205).
3.
Citicorp v. Sandwell (1991/454).
4.
Midland v. Birmingham (1991/440).
Samuel Montagu v. Birmingham (1991/422).
5.
Samuel Montagu v. Welwyn Hatfield (1991/423).
6.
N.C.N.B. National Bank of North Carolina v. Hammersmith and Fulham (1991/434).
Cases 1 and 4 have recently been settled, but the other four cases are still continuing.
As a result, as at present planned there will be two separate lead action trials, the first, combining cases 3 and 5, starting next Monday, 2 March, followed by the other comprising cases 2 and 6 probably starting after Easter.
The selection of the lead cases was aimed to ensure that the great majority of the very important points of law which are at issue in all cases are authoritatively decided, and it is hoped that, as a result, clear guidance will be given to the large number of remaining cases which are stayed, leading to settlements (or at least the elimination of some issues common to the lead cases) and the avoidance of a multiplicity of litigation.
However, the lead actions are not strictly test cases, and while there is a reasonable prospect that the above aspiration will be fulfilled, there may well be individual issues arising in some of the other cases which will in any event need to be litigated, eg., an individual local authority defendant's particular case on change of position giving rise to an estoppel.
In the first group of lead actions the position is as follows:(1) there are a very large number of major points of law which have to be decided on the manifold issues which arise under the various heads of restitutionary claim;(2) there appear to be no or no significant disputes on the common issues of fact affecting the swaps cases generally, and indeed those matters covered by an agreed general statement of fact which has been placed before the court;(3) there are discrete factual issues arising in individual cases, eg., on change of position, since individual local authorities dealt with the money received under swap transactions in several different ways, which are variously relied upon as furnishing a change of position defence.
The same is likely to apply to the second group.
Mr. Beazley invites me to give a very broad interpretation to paragraph 12 of the Kalfelis [1988]E.C.R. 5565 judgment and to say that all these swap actions fall broadly within the test that it is expedient to hear and determine them together; he argues that the use of the plural in that paragraph shows that the principle there laid down covers several defendants in groups of actions as well as several defendants in an individual action; and he submits that there is a risk here of irreconcilable judgments, seeing that both at first instance and thereafter, if the cases proceed up to the appellate process, different decisions may be reached in England and Scotland respectively, on the questions of English law which arise (there is no suggestion that Scottish law applies to these actions).
I very much doubt, though it is unnecessary for me to decide the point, that the use of the plural in paragraph 12 was intended to connote different defendants in several different unconsolidated actions, since there was only one single action in being in the Kalfelis case, and paragraph 13 (not quoted above) would seem to envisage a claim by the same plaintiff, unlike the present litigation where there are a very large number of different plaintiff banks in different actions.
But leaving that aside, as I have already explained, the court will not be ‘hearing and determining the swap cases together’ and I do not think those words can be stretched so as to include the present procedural arrangements.
Furthermore, I am not satisfied that there is a risk of irreconcilable decisions.
As already noted, there is no question of there being conflicting decisions on the common issues of facts which arise.
So far as the issues of English law are concerned, it is, as Mr. Beazley fairly recognised, almost inevitable that these cases, in view of the very difficult legal problems and of the very large sums of money at stake, will, unless settled, proceed in the end, as did the Hazell case, to the highest court; thus even if there was a prospect of irreconcilable decisions at first instance or on intermediate appeal, which I do not think is likely, the final arbiters in the House of Lords will be able to give one single decision which will be binding in both England and Scotland, and with no possibility of irreconcilability.
For these reasons I have come to the conclusion, and I hold, that the banks have failed to bring themselves within article 6(1).
Article 5(8)
I can deal with this very shortly.
In order to come within this paragraph, Mr. Beazley must satisfy the court at least that he has an arguable case that the property which the banks seek to trace is situated in England.
He submits that he can do this, seeing that, as is common ground, the money was originally paid into one of Glasgow's bank accounts in London, but otherwise he is unable to produce any evidence in support of this contention.
The evidence from Glasgow on the other hand, contained in an affidavit of Julieanne Wight, who is a solicitor of the Supreme Court, and who has the conduct of these cases on behalf of Glasgow is:
‘The bank account in question has existed for at least 40 years.
It was set up for the administrative convenience of the London banks and the defendant and has been used principally in connection with the buying and selling of stocks and shares on the London market.
The account is and has been no more than a conduit, the defendant holding its funds with a Scottish bank in Glasgow.
As a matter of practice, moneys paid into the account would be transferred from it to the account in Scotland if not immediately, then certainly within a matter of days, for amalgamation with the general fund.
Accordingly, there is no possibility that any moneys paid into the account by Barclays Bank Plc. or Kleinwort Benson Ltd. would still be there now, the last payments made by those parties pursuant to the interest rate swaps transactions having been made in September 1989 and September 1987 respectively.
I accept this evidence, and it follows that there is no arguable case that the moneys sought to be traced are now situated in England.
It follows, and I hold, that the banks are unable to bring themselves within article 5(8).
Conclusion
The banks having failed to bring themselves within any of the special jurisdictions laid down in article 5 or 6, article 2 prevails, and Glasgow must be sued in their court of domicile in Scotland.
I am therefore prepared to grant the relief sought by Glasgow and will hear counsel as to the exact terms of the declarations.
I cannot part from this case without expressing my profound gratitude to both counsel for their very clear, able and concise arguments.
Application granted with costs.
Solicitors: William Sturges & Co.; Clifford Chance.
[Reported by David Barraclough Esq., Barrister]
Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982, Sch.
4, art.
5(1) (3): see post, p. 830E.
Art.
6(1): see, post, p. 830F–G.